






















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Serbia: Competitive Agriculture Project (CAP) (P167634) 

 
 

  
Jan 08, 2019 Page 1 of 13  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Jun-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSC25635 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Serbia P167634  Serbia: Competitive 
Agriculture Project 
(SCAP) (P167634) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA Sep 02, 2019 Nov 21, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Agriculture, 
Forestry and Water 
Management 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Improve market access for small and medium agricultural producers in Serbia 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 50.00 

Total Financing 50.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 50.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 50.00 

   
 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Moderate  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
Other Decision (as needed) 

 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. Following years of recession and slow growth, the Serbian economy expanded by 1.8 percent, on average, over 
the previous three years (2015–2017), while a stronger growth of 3.5 percent was estimated for 2018. Over the previous 
three years, growth started to recover on the back of higher investment (average annual growth of 8.3 percent) and strong 
growth of exports (up 10.7 percent annually in real terms). Consumption recovered as well, but at a slower pace (at 1 
percent annually in real terms). Growth of the industry and services sectors contributed most to the overall growth of the 
economy over the previous three years, while agriculture had a negative contribution to growth in 2015 and 2017. For 
2018, growth was broad-based with all three major sectors growing faster than last year. As a result, the growth in 2018 
reached 4.2 percent. The medium-term growth projections depend crucially on deeper and timelier structural reforms 
and progress with European Union (EU) accession. 
 
2. The Government of Serbia (GOS) has implemented a successful fiscal adjustment but economic vulnerabilities 
remain. In 2014, the GOS adopted an ambitious fiscal consolidation and structural reform program supported by the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank. In the short term, the program focused on the control of 
aggregate wage and pension expenditures, improvements in tax administration, and reductions in subsidies to state 
owned enterprises. The implementation of these measures led to the reduction of budget deficits in 2015–2016 and 
budget surplus of 1.2 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2017 and 0.5 percent of GDP in 2018, underpinned by 
strong revenue collection and lower than planned public spending ensuing, among others, from the interest payment 
savings and under-execution of public investment. As a result of prudent fiscal policies, public debt continues to decline 
and stood at 54.3 percent of GDP (at the end of December 2018), and is expected to continue declining during 2019, albeit 
at a slower pace. However, the country remains vulnerable to spillovers from regional developments and market volatility, 
thus ensuring fiscal sustainability and supporting private sector development, growth, and formal employment are 
important for Serbia’s economic performance in the long term. 
 
3. Over this same period, the prospects for accession to the EU provided an impetus for a broad spectrum of 
reforms. In November 2007, Serbia initiated a Stabilization and Association Agreement with the EU. In 2012, it was granted 
an EU candidate status. Since the formal start of the accession negotiations in 2014, progress has evolved largely following 
its predicted trajectory. As of December 2018, Serbia opened 16 out of 35 chapters of the EU’s Acquis Communautaire, of 
which two are provisionally closed. 
 
4. Regional disparities of living standards are evident. There is a high degree of variability of living standards within 
the country, with 25 percent of the population of Serbia (close to 1.8 million people) being at risk of poverty. Municipalities 
in the Southern and Eastern part of Serbia have high poverty incidence as compared to the rest of the country, with risk 
of poverty rates ranging between 13 and 63 percent within these regions. Better understanding of these geographic 
disparities can help the Government of Serbia design and target policies and programs to support growth, jobs, poverty 
reduction and social inclusion.   
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context1 
 
5. Agriculture plays an important role in the economy of Serbia. Agriculture is the third largest sector, accounting 
for around 6 percent of GDP and 19 percent of formal employment, and the most important export sector, representing 
23 percent of total exports. The impressive growth of exports of both primary and processed food products provides 
evidence of the competitiveness of Serbian production in international markets and of significant potential to further 
leverage the sector’s growth to create jobs and income. From 2005 to 2016, the country’s exports of primary food and 
beverage products increased 148 percent and of processed food products increased 83 percent. In 2016, Serbia 
accumulated an agricultural trade surplus of US$650 million in primary products and of US$525 million in processed food 
and beverage products. 
 
6. Agriculture is undergoing a process of structural transformation towards a modern agri-food system. Primary 
agriculture, an important source of income and employment in the past, has diminished its contribution to the rapidly 
diversifying economy of Serbia. The declining share of primary agriculture in GDP and employment signals a process of 
transformation that provides ample opportunities for developing a modern, dynamic and more competitive agri-food 
system, able to generate better jobs up and downstream and improve income and livelihoods in the rural space. 
Improvements in labor and land productivity have contributed towards the expansion of agricultural output in Serbia. This 
is important as it leads to an increase in the supply of raw materials at lower costs to agri-processors, which in turn 
supports a much larger scale of operation, promotes horizontal integration, and reduces overall costs, all factors that 
increase the competitiveness of the whole agri-food system, as the country prepares for EU accession. Improving 
productivity is more than just raising yields and decreasing costs; it is also about raising food quality, moving into higher 
value products by using improved technology and practices2. 
 
7. Sector growth is geographically differentiated and narrow based in terms of composition of production. Growth 
patterns in agriculture are influenced by regional disparities in sector performance and composition, with a positive sector 
growth in the Northwestern parts of the country and contraction of production in Southeastern Serbia. The autonomous 
province of Vojvodina, in the North, is the key driver of agricultural output in Serbia, with 43 percent contribution to 
national agricultural GDP (in 2014) with large scale production of commodities. Between 2003 and 2013, crop output in 
Serbia expanded, mainly due to increased production in Vojvodina, as the other three regions recorded only a marginal 
expansion or even a decline (South and East Serbia). Livestock output declined over the same period, with all regions, 
except Vojvodina, recording contraction rates between 24 percent (Sumadija and West Serbia) and 33 percent (South and 
East Serbia). In the same period, livestock output in Vojvodina increased by around 13 percent.  
 
8. Despite regional comparative advantages, structural factors underpin the regional disparities. There are 
important structural limitations to agriculture in Serbia - very small and fragmented land holdings, ageing and declining 
farm labor force, low efficiency and productivity, low use of technology, high labor intensity, low financial liquidity and 
capital availability for investment (especially for smallholders) and outdated production management practices. Despite 
all of these, economic opportunities exist in rural areas. Cereals, vegetable oils and edible fruit have historically driven 
growth of agricultural production and exports, with Vojvodina’s larger producers benefiting the most. Only one percent 
of the farms in Serbia have 50 hectares or more of land and most of them are in Vojvodina3, while farmers who own less 

                                            
1 This section borrows from the World Bank Group Sector Study “New Opportunities and Old Constraints: The Context for Agriculture Sector 
Development in Serbia” by Garry Christensen (2016) as well as from a recently completed Agriculture Public Expenditure Review by Demetris 
Psaltopoulos and Svetlana Edmeades. 
2 World Bank. 2019. Harvesting Prosperity: Technology and productivity Growth in Agriculture”.  
3 Only one percent of farms in South Serbia cultivate more than 50ha of land, while in Vojvodina, 10 percent of farms cultivate more than 50ha of 
land.  



than 5 hectares of land account for 78 percent of all holdings and 25 percent of the total cultivated area in Serbia and are 
concentrated in the South and East Serbia.  
 
9. Broadening the scope for sector growth to include small and medium scale producers may be key to sector 
transformation. Although fragmented farm structures are often perceived as a challenge to scale economies and 
competitiveness, with high transaction costs preventing the many small producers from engaging in markets, in the case 
of Serbia, recent public expenditure analysis shows that smallholders4 are the most technically efficient producers in the 
country and hence, supporting their development can improve sector growth. Hence, consolidation at the product level, 
through aggregation and economic clusters, may hold the key to development, enabling the specialization of small 
efficient units and their integration into broader value chains. Middle size farms, which are often seen as the drivers of 
growth in the sector, are found to be the worst performers in terms of technical efficiency in Serbia, posing a question on 
the adequacy of the enabling environment for their agricultural development. These producer segments also specialize in 
agricultural products that are not scale intensive yet can hold important value proposition and drive the generation of 
jobs and growth in rural areas. Improving the enabling environment to support the productive inclusion of small and 
medium scale producers can drive the process of structural transformation of agri-food systems in Serbia.  
 
10. Rethinking and redirecting policy instruments and incentives can increase the speed of sector transformation. 
Agricultural budget support has been aligned with the EU budget support framework, and a Directorate for Agrarian 
Payments has been established to administer national direct payments (subsidies) and rural development investments 
(both national and EU Instrument for Pre-Accession and Assistance for Rural Development (IPARD) grants). Subsidies and 
transfers dominate agricultural spending (2011-2017) and, on average, account for 82 percent of sector expenditure. They 
are found to negatively affect sector productivity and efficiency and are thought to contribute towards freezing the current 
dual farm structure. Emphasis on area and headage payments5 reduce the incentives to increase productivity, preserve 
farm structures dominated by smaller farms and do not contribute to the acceleration of the structural transformation 
process6. Further, coupled output subsidies distort the allocation of productive resources. When the above are combined 
with the low (at least until 2017) level of funds dedicated to rural development, including the provision of public goods 
(agricultural infrastructure, R&D, advisory services, etc.), it creates a policy framework which constrains farm restructuring 
and the potential of smaller and medium-sized farms, that currently dominate Serbian agriculture, to increase their size, 
modernize production systems, benefit from expanding markets and contribute to a competitive agri-food sector and to 
a vibrant rural economy. 
 
11. Despite ample EU resources, productive investments, through rural development grants, are underutilized. 
IPARD funds in the amount of EUR230 million (including national co-financing) have been allocated to Serbia for the 
programming period of 2014-2020 in annual instalments. Serbia has received accreditation for 2 of the 11 IPARD 
measures7. Although the scope of these measures is broad, actual number of beneficiaries is limited, with most small and 
medium scale producers not being able to take advantage of this productive support due to the complex application 
process and the requirement for upfront financing. A key constraint in the uptake of IPARD grant support is the complexity 
of the application process, due to the numerous requirements which applicants often can’t fulfill, added to limited capacity 
in the Directorate for Agrarian Payments for review and approval. In addition, a limiting factor is the requirement of an 
upfront payment of the full grant amount by the applicant, which assumes availability of financial resources, with 

                                            
4 In the context of Serbia, small producers are those with an economic size of up to 8,000 euros; medium producers are those with an economic size 
between 8,000 and 25,000 euros. 
5 Criticized for not relying on objective and valid baseline indicators, as well as the poor definition of eligibility criteria (Bogdanov et al., 2017) 
6 It is noted that leased agricultural land is excluded from farm support (Bogdanov, 2016). 
7 Accredited measures in 2018 are Investments in Physical Assets of Agricultural Holdings and Investments in Physical Assets for Processing and 
Marketing of Agriculture and Fisheries Products; 2 more are planned for accreditation in 2019 - Farm diversification and business development and 
Technical assistance; and 2 additional ones for 2020 – LIDER program for local development and organic production.  



reimbursement of 50 percent after all investment criteria have been fulfilled, ex post. This requirement alone makes IPARD 
grants difficult to access for the majority of small and medium scale producers in Serbia. 
 
12. National program resources can shift the sector equilibrium from low productivity to high value for small and 
medium scale producers in Serbia and encourage convergence of the National and EU programs over time. For rural 
development grants, boundaries are established between eligible beneficiaries of the national rural development program 
and those eligible to apply for IPARD support, based on either size or production potential. All producers not eligible for 
IPARD support, are eligible for national program support. Reaching out with national investment funds to the small and 
medium producers of Serbia, especially in the South and Southeast of Serbia, can improve these producers’ productive 
inclusion and competitiveness, and enable them to actively participate in the process of structural transformation of 
agriculture in Serbia and preparing them for EU accession.  
 
13. Improving financial inclusion for productive investments can stimulate broader private sector participation. 
While around two thirds of adults in rural areas in Serbia have accounts with financial institutions, only 14% of them have 
loans to operate, start or expand farm and small business activities. Most medium and larger farmers and medium/larger 
SMEs have access to finance as banks have the right expertise, systems and products to serve these agricultural segments 
profitably. However, smaller farmers have very limited access to bank financing and mostly rely on off takers and input 
suppliers to finance their inputs. This type of value chain financing does not cover longer term funding for equipment, 
machinery and is currently decreasing as these players try to re-focus on their core business. The long-term goal is the 
development of efficient, competitive markets, producing to EU standards which requires better inclusion of small-scale 
producers (among them women and youth) in modern supply chains, an increase in investments in machinery, equipment 
and knowledge as well as the modernization of processing and marketing. For this to be achieved, however, public funds 
are not sufficient resources and bank financing can play a catalyst role in the further development and competitiveness 
of the sector. 
 
14. A combination of targeted public incentives and private financing can improve sector productivity and 
competitiveness. A policy mix that focuses on the improvement of competitiveness and value addition capacity of the 
agri-food system in Serbia can have important sectoral and economy-wide growth effects by inducing positive spillovers 
to other economic sectors and contributing to employment, poverty reduction and economic prosperity of rural areas. 
The public expenditure analysis has shown that direct payments do not promote technical efficiency and productivity 
growth and slow down the structural transformation in Serbian agriculture. Reducing the direct payments envelope and 
significantly increasing the rural development one (including advisory and farm extension services and R&D) is therefore 
paramount for improving the performance of the sector. To enable that, a different set of financial mechanisms may be 
required, to enable small and medium scale producers to access finance and participate in productive decisions, such as 
matching grants8 and public guarantee funds that reduce the risk to producers and other financial institutions, hence 
stimulating financial and productive inclusion. At present, small farmers do not have financial records, do not have 
business plans, they find bank requirements challenging and, most importantly, they lack collateral. Matching grants and 
technical assistance (TA) can create the conditions for banks to finance investments of farmers that are not their typical 
clients. Matching grants can create the required equity for the banks and TA can ensure bankability of the business plan 

                                            
8 Matching grants are an instrument aimed at promoting private sector development which has been used extensively over the past years, in 
particular for agriculture development. A matching grant is defined as a one-off, non-reimbursable transfer to project beneficiaries, for a specific 
purpose, based on the condition that the recipient makes a contribution for the same purpose. These grants can be used for a variety of activities 
including technical assistance, investment in assets or financing of working capital. Total grant financing dedicated to agriculture reaches 650 million 
USD or almost twice the volume of those outside of agriculture. In addition, the proportion of matching grants projects supporting agriculture has 
significantly increased in the 2000s. Recent interest for this instrument to support agriculture might be due to growing concerns about other forms 
of support which distort financial markets such as interest rate subsidies, as well to the compatibility of such agricultural subsidies with World Trade 
Organization requirements.  




and prepare the client to approach the bank. Finally, if commercial banks require additional safeguards for their 
investments, they will be able to access credit guarantees to be soon provided by the Development Credit Authority 
(USAID Guarantee Program) and European Investment Fund (EIF) including risk sharing through a new IFC project. 
 
15. Greater resilience to climate and market risks can further boost the overall sector performance. The reliance on 
agricultural commodities increases Serbia’s exposure to price volatility, which added to the increasing number of extreme 
climatic events in Serbia (droughts and floods) further exacerbates agricultural growth volatility. Projected increases in 
temperatures and declines in precipitation will affect rainfed crops, which dominate Serbian agriculture. Production is 
concentrated in the north (Vojvodina), where crops are vulnerable to decreasing precipitation and increasing 
temperatures, primarily during the summer growing season. Rainfed maize may decline by as much as 58 percent due to 
reduced rainfall and higher temperatures in summer. Increases in temperature have already brought about increases in 
fungal diseases and pests that reduce crop production. Cereals and fruits are the most important agricultural products in 
terms of production area and economic output; fruit production is particularly vulnerable to spring frost, hail, extremely 
low winter temperatures, low precipitation and/or heavy rainfall events9. Hence, diversifying the sector base has 
important climate mitigation (reducing risks) and climate adaption (improving resilience) implications for the country.  
 
16. As Serbia advances in the process of sector transformation and alignment to EU acquis, the effectiveness of 
public service delivery becomes critical to improving sector performance. Serbia has committed to align its national 
agricultural policy to the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) of the EU by the date of accession. To this end, the country is 
required to have all the necessary systems in place to manage and receive funds from the EU and to make payments to 
beneficiaries in Serbia in accordance with EU rules and procedures. An Integrated Administration and Control System 
(IACS), along with other tools, are necessary for the efficient utilization and monitoring of support funds. Systems for 
monitoring results (and not only expenditures) will also be required by the reformed CAP, starting in 2020. EU membership 
unlocks significant financial assistance to farmers under the EU’s CAP, yet it also imposes stricter food safety and other 
trade-related requirements to agricultural production. Enhancements in digital approaches can improve targeting, 
efficiency of spending, food safety monitoring, as well as support the governance structure of the sector.  The innovation 
environment in Serbia would need to be strengthened and uptake of emerging digital technologies by farmers improved 
to help lower transaction costs and facilitate information access about best farming practices, inputs, prices, access to 
credit and markets. This will improve transparency, reduce innovation hurdles and support an enabling environment for 
productive and financial inclusion of agricultural producers in Serbia. 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 
17. The proposed project is consistent with the Serbia Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for the period of FY16-
20. While the SCD identified agriculture as a priority sector for the twin goals, the CPF did not originally envisage an 
operation because of counterpart readiness. However, engagement with a new team at the MAFWM demonstrates a new 
strategic drive and opportunity to make an impact. Therefore, as part of the program update permitted under the PLR, 
the Bank decided to re-engage in this sector. Through productive investments targeting small and medium scale producers 
and strengthening the information systems of the agricultural sector, the project aims at increasing sector 
competitiveness, while providing economic opportunities in rural areas, as the country moves closer to EU membership. 
The Performance and Learning Review (PLR) of the CPF identifies agriculture as one of the high priorities for the 
Government with an important dimension of shared prosperity. The project is also aligned with the strategic goals of the 
National Agricultural and Rural Development (NARD) strategy for 2014-2024: i) growth of production and income stability; 
ii) growth of competitiveness with adjustments to domestic and foreign markets requirements and technical-technological 


promotion of the sector; iii) sustainable management of resources and environment protection; iv) promotion of quality 
of life in rural areas and poverty reduction; v) efficient management of public policies and promotion of institutional 
framework for development of agriculture and rural development. 
 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
18. To improve access to markets and information systems for agricultural producers in Serbia.  
 
This will be achieved through a) improving productivity of small and medium scale farmers by strengthening advisory 
and technical support; b) supporting market access of small and medium scale farmers (including finance and business 
planning capacity); c) improving government systems to strengthen the enabling environment for all agricultural 
producers (including capacity building for the Ministry, information systems, data platform). 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 
 

19. The project will achieve the following results: 
 

(i) Productivity10: Increase in gross value added per utilized agricultural area 
 

(ii) Competitiveness11: Increase in the share of production sold by project beneficiaries 
 

(iii) Financial inclusion12: Number of beneficiaries accessing commercial bank loans for their productive 
investments (disaggregated by gender)  
 

(iv) Use of information systems13: Number of unique users of the integrated information platform (disaggregated 
by gender) 

 
D. Concept Description 

 
A. Concept 
 
20. Scope: The project will support the Government of Serbia with the implementation of the National Agriculture 
and Rural Development Program. This will complement Serbia’s on-going efforts to align its national programs to the EU 
CAP programs. In particular, the project will provide financial and technical support to all productive investments in 
agriculture in Serbia through the national rural development program14 and will not participate in the financing of direct 
payments (subsidies). This delimits the scope of project interventions outside of all IPARD measures that the country has 
been accredited for or plans to be accredited for and puts it in the center of national rural development program.  
 

                                            
10 Improved on-farm productivity (use of better management practices, climate smart agriculture, etc.) 
11 Improved linkages between producers and buyers/markets (volume, quality and uniformity of production, value and volume of sales, market 
segmentation strategies, etc.; building entrepreneurial capacity of the production units) 
12 Improved access to finance to drive the process of value-addition on and off-farm (enable investments in equipment, small infrastructure, technical 
assistance, and other services that improve the competitiveness of the production units) 
13 Improved information systems for decision making at the level of the Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and Water Management (MAFWM) and 
information flow with agricultural producers 
14 In 2018, the program received 8,000 applications from small and medium scale producers.  

21. Beneficiaries: Small and medium scale agricultural production units (including producers, producer groups, 
agribusinesses/agro-processors that can provide direct link to smallholder farmers) that have or can have commercial 
focus and are not covered by accredited IPARD measures. Although large producers will not be directly targeted, the 
project will also benefit them with the enabling environment it will create through the improvements in information 
systems and the financial services provided. Small and medium size producers are defined by the economic size of holding 
expressed in euros of standard output. For the purposes of this project and the context of Serbia, small producers are 
those with an economic size of up to 8,000 euros; medium producers are those with an economic size between 8,000 and 
25,000 euros. 
 

 
Description 
 
22. The project activities are structured into three Components. Component 1 will focus on improving the productive 
and entrepreneurial capacity of small and medium farmers by supporting business and financial planning for productive 
investments, as well as supporting market access and strengthening sector competitiveness. Component 2 will focus on 
improving the capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Water Management (MAFWM) to provide core public 
goods for improving sector performance. This includes establishing and information system aligned with EU CAP 
requirements to enable evidence-based policy making and monitoring of results, enhance market information for 
stakeholders and build capacity for regulatory roles aligned with EU CAP. Component 3 will focus on project management. 
 
23. By addressing sector needs at the level of producers (Component 1) and the MAFWM (Component 2), the project 
will support a broader policy reform process in the agriculture sector through: i) improved targeting of policy instruments 
to different typologies of producers, ii) strengthened enabling environment for investment for small and medium 
agricultural producers, by improving the delivery of services to these productive segments (advisory, financial, 
information, etc.), iii) improving the monitoring of public resources and their utilization, as well as sector performance. It 
is expected that this will bring about a significant shift in the utilization of public resources in agriculture from subsidies 
(direct payments) to rural development investments.  
 
 
Component 1: Improving the value-added of agriculture (US$35 million) 
 
24. The objective of this component is to improve the economic performance of small and medium agricultural 
producers in Serbia on- and off-farm. The component will support the building of entrepreneurial capacity of agricultural 
producers through the integration of production decisions with market requirements and technical and financial services. 
Activities will focus on improving land and labor productivity, broaden access to productive assets, technology, 
information, and credit, diversification of agricultural products, and access to markets, including traceability and 
differentiation strategies. Unlocking agricultural finance for productive investments, strengthening productive and 
entrepreneurial capacity of producers, developing short value chains and market linkages will stimulate economic 
activities in rural areas and can lead to the creation of jobs. It will also create capacity for better absorption of IPARD funds 
for improving the rural development of Serbia, while also strengthening alignment to EU CAP. 
 
25. The component is structured into two sub-components: (i) Improving entrepreneurial capacity – focusing on 
capacity building activities required to formulate business plans, investment decisions and financial support, from public 
and private sources; (ii) Improving productivity and competitiveness – comprising investments in equipment and technical 
assistance to support their implementation. The detailed description of the sub-components is provided below.  
 



Sub-component 1.1: Improving productive and entrepreneurial capacity (US$5 million) 
 
26. This sub-component will focus on technical assistance to producers, producer groups and agri-businesses for the 
formulation of business plans that normally bundle three key elements: i) investment in equipment, ii) working capital, 
and iii) technical assitance for productivity improvement and entrepreneurial capacity. The sub-component will finance 
the preparation and implementation of business plans for proposed investments, including: (i) business skills and 
organizational training for small-scale producers; (ii) preparation of subprojects, including information on financial cash 
flow as per bank requirements, including the formulation of matching grants15 for capital investments in equipment, 
machinery, processing units16, packaging, storage, etc., (iii) specific technical studies and consultancies that would 
contribute to the implementation and the execution of approved business plans; (iv) a communication strategy designed 
to raise awareness of and stimulate participation of the SME agribusinesses in the project; (v) support banks with 
developing methodologies suitable for assessing credit for the types of investments and beneficiaries of the project.  
 
27. The scope of the business plan will depend on the capacity of producers and the complexity of the sought 
investment. Activities will take place on- and off-farm. To enable greater participation of potential beneficiaries, emphasis 
will be placed on improving the entrepreneurial capacity of producers by providing technical assistance and seed capital 
for analysis of investment options. The business plans will also include public good/ compliance elemtns (environemntal 
and social aspects, food dafety compliance, etc.). Strict eligibility criteria will be set forth to enable the participation of 
small and medium producers. The selection and eligibility criteria and the governance and management aspects of the 
matching grants will be detailed in a Grant Operational Manual to be formulated during project prepration.  
 
Sub-component 1.2: Improving productivity and competitiveness (US$30 million) 
 
28. This sub-component will focus on improving the productivity and competitiveness of project beneficiaries through 
specific investments, as defined in the business plans and implemented through matching grants (defined in Component 
1). The total cost of the business plan depends on the type of investment, the amount of working capital and the scope of 
the technical assistance. This cost also varies by the productive activity and the typology of the producers. For example, 
in Montenegro (under the MIDAS project), the total cost for agricultural producers ranges between 10,000 and 70,000 
euros, while for agricultural processors it ranges between 50,000 and 250,000 euros. In Kosovo, the range for producers 
ranges between 10,000 and 100,000 euros, while for processors it is between 30,000 and 400,000 euros. The project will 
finance only a share of this cost (through a marching grant of typically 50%), as a one time incentive to leverage private 
investment, including own resources and/or credit. 
 
29. The sub-component will finance i) the use of good environmental and agricultural practices to improve on-farm 
productivity, ii) in on-farm inputs and equipment required for the optimizatoin of production and/or diversification, as 
well as technical advice for the use inputs, technologies, alternatives, etc., iii) support digital agriculture approaches to 
improve productivity on-farm and enhance linkages between producers and markets, iv) support compliance with food 
safety standards, traceability, geographic denomination of origin and other market-related activities as part of the 
improvement of the competitive position of beneficiaries; v) carry out market demand assessments to identify differential 
market potential for products; vi) support beneficiary participation in trade fairs and other events; vii) support the 
commercialization of agricultural products by improving access to medium-term finance, providing start-up capital for 

                                            
15 There is a strong public good argument for using matching grants – stimulate cross compliance (improving enviornmental outcomes), stimulate 
use of innovations, new technologies, development of skills, modernization, horizontal integration, financial inclusion. Through the project, capacity 
for the use of matching grants will be improved in the sector, which can lead to a consecutive better absorption of IPARD grants. 
16 Under IPARD grants, investment grants for processing facilities is only provided for new structures; national rural development program can provide 
investments for rehabilitation and upgrade of existent facilities.  



     

small- and medium-sized farms involved in productive partnerships, and by ensuring the availability of financing for value 
chain support. Considering the high risk of lending to small producers, the project will support the enabling environment 
for de-risking by working with existent public credit guarantee funds. There are various guarantee schemes applicable to 
Serbian agriculture and, in particular, the EIF and DCA17, which the project seeks to leverage as a risk mitigating mechanism 
for crowing-in private investment through lending by commercial banks.  
 
 
Component 2: Improving the capacity of MAFWM to support modern agriculture (US$10 million) 
 
30. The objective of this component is to improve capacity of MAFWM and related agencies to facilitate the enabling 
environment for improved sector performance through evidence-based policy making and provision of public goods, such 
as information systems and open data platforms. A digital platform for decision making18 will benefit all agricultural 
producers of Serbia, whether they apply for support through IPARD or national program or don’t. A unique registry 
system19 would be required to support decision making and to also support pension reform efforts in the country.   
 
Sub-component 2.1: Improving information systems 
 
31. This sub-component will support the Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and Water Management (MAFWM) to 
modernize its information systems and strengthen its decision-making capacity, through the improvement of hardware, 
software and human capacity for information support to the sector. Modernizing the information systems is critical in the 
process of alignment to EU CAP, including sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) delivery and monitoring, advisory information, 
land parceling (LPIS), paying agency data management, etc. In addition, the project will support a digital producer 
identification card (“one card”) to enable the better monitoring of the access to resources, support services and 
information by all farmers in the country. The project will finance the following: i) technical assistance to improve the 
coordination within and across existing information systems across Directorates and enhance delivery of information for 
decision making at different levels; ii) acquisition of hardware and software to improve the scope, functionality and 
compatibility of information systems and establish digital data collection and processing of current paper-based processes. 
 
32. The project will also assist the Ministry of Agriculture Forestry and Water Management (MAFWM) with technical 
assistance to develop capacity to assess the demand, structure, and modalities for agricultural Guarantee agency in Serbia, 
similar to these in other neighboring and EU countries, with the potential of establishing in the medium term such a 
guarantee agency (state-owned or PPP). Options to capitalize the guarantees would also be part of the assessment. 
 
 
Sub-component 2.2: Open data platform 
 
33. This sub-component will establish an open, public information platform where key information is accessible to all 
agriculture stakeholders. The project will finance the software, hardware and technical assistance required for the set-up 

                                            
17 Two public donor guarantee schemes with agricultural windows are expected to be available in early 2020 – European Investment Fund (EIF) 
(backed by EU funding) and the DCA (guarantee facility of USAID), still under negotiations with MAFWM – and can be tapped on by commercial banks 
in the first couple of years of project implementation. IFC is already engaged with the EIF. Although a public guarantee fund exists in Serbia (the 
Serbian Development Fund, SDF), it is weak and does not cater to agriculture. Hence, a capacity building (through a TA) activity may be warranted 
under the project to provide guidance on future needs by the public sector for unlocking private investment in agriculture. 
18 A PHRD grant on strengthening M&E capacity of MAFWM, implemented in parallel to this project, will support this platform thro ugh capacity 
building within the Ministry and technical assistance, as needed. 
19 For example, only farm household applying for IPARD grants are registered in the national farm registry (around 335,000), excluding a large number 
of agricultural producers. 


and functionality of the platform. Access to important production and market information, including weather variables, 
prices of key products, etc. is critical for on and off-farm decisions. This platform can also be a support system for advisory 
services in Serbia and can link to digital approaches on farm, ensuring a two-way communication on plan and animal 
health, and other risks that can constrain agricultural competitiveness. Maintaining the content and enabling public access 
to this platform is a key role that the Ministry can play in the enabling environment for agricultural sector transformation.  
 
34. A digital information platform can play an important role for the spatial tracking and connectivity of production 
and market demand, thus contributing to improved positioning of products, sales and overall competitiveness. In addition, 
by including weather and climate information modeling, the project could contribute to early warning systems, helping 
producers to better prepare and adapt to changing climatic conditions. The project will use existing digital agriculture tools 
and will collaborate with private sector IT companies for finetuning electronic delivery mechanisms for monitoring 
production, access to technical information, traceability of goods and identification of market opportunities.  
 
Component 3: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$5 million) 
 
35. This component will support the establishment of a project management team (PMT) in the Directorate of 
Agrarian Payments (DAP) and capacity needs related to project implementation, as well as project monitoring, including 
a comprehensive baseline, mid-term review and a final impact assessment of project investments.  
 
    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

 
The project is classified as Moderate Risk taking in account the low risk nature of the interventions, the limitations on 
implementation capacity, the application of environmentally friendly practices and new technologies, and the difficulty 
of enforcing workers’ rights in multiple SME agribusinesses. No adverse impacts such as involuntary land acquisition, 
impacts on community health and safety, on cultural heritage, are expected. Some of the project funded activities may 
include support to small scale community agriculture that is undertaken within areas under some level of environmental 
protection. The project will introduce new technologies and support improvement of technical knowledge and skills of 
beneficiaries on, amongst other, water and energy efficiency, pollution prevention and best practice use of herbicides 
and pesticides. The project’s anticipated social impacts are predominantly positive, such as increased income and 
employment in the agricultural sector as well as protection from climate related economic losses for farmers through the 
introduction of an early warning system. As labor informality is prevalent in the agricultural sector, the Borrower will 
prepare Labor Management Procedures to manage risks related to workers’ rights in project supported agribusinesses. 
The environmental and social screening criteria developed for the agricultural grant schemes and the credit guarantee 
fund will screen for relevant risks and apply mitigation hierarchy. 

 

 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Odisha Integrated Irrigation Project for Climate Resilient Agriculture (P163533) 

 
 

  
Sep 11, 2018 Page 1 of 14  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Oct-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23298 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

India P163533  Odisha Integrated 
Irrigation Project for 
Climate Resilient 
Agriculture (P163533) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA Nov 13, 2018 Jan 28, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of India Odisha Community Tank 
Development and 
Management Society 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Project Development Objective is to intensify and diversify agricultural production, enhance climate resilience and 
improve water productivity in selected cascades of Odisha. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 235.74 

Total Financing 235.74 

of which IBRD/IDA 164.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 164.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 71.74 

          Borrower 71.74 

   


 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1. Over the past ten years, India has seen strong economic growth - exceeding 7 percent per annum - driven primarily 
by robust private consumption, a resilient services sector, and a revival in some industrial activities. The reduced 
momentum in investment and exports notwithstanding, annual growth rates are still projected to average 7.5 percent per 
annum in coming years because of the diversity in the country’s drivers of growth and the vast scope for improvement in 
many areas.   

2. Alongside this growth, India has achieved significant progress in reducing extreme poverty - from 46 percent in 1993 
to 21 percent in 2011 (using the international poverty line of $1.90 per person per day in 2011 purchasing power parity). 
World Bank estimates point to continued reduction in poverty in more recent years, indicating that the country is on track 
to eliminating extreme poverty by 2030. Urban growth and rising labor earnings due to movement of labor from agriculture 
to non-farm work, an unprecedented rise in wages for unskilled labor, and demographic changes (e.g. a declining 
dependency ratio), underlie the rapid poverty decline.  

3. Over the past three decades, the economy has undergone a structural shift from agriculture as the dominant sector, 
to services and industry. Even then, agriculture continues to be essential for achieving India’s development goals, as the 
sector employs about 59 percent of the country’s total workforce, is a source of livelihood for 70 percent of India’s rural 
households, and is the main source of economic linkages in rural areas. In 2017, the sector contributed about 17 percent 
to the national Gross Domestic Product (GDP). While its contribution to the economy is likely to keep declining, agriculture 
will continue being the single largest contributor to employment and income of the rural population in the foreseeable 
future. 

4. Because of a complex web of policies and institutions that limit the performance of agricultural markets, diminishing 
returns to technologies that once sparked the green revolution, and suboptimal diversification among others, the 
agriculture sector continues to perform below its potential. Long-term agricultural growth has averaged about 3 percent 
per year1 and generally lags the growth rate for the larger economy. Sector growth is subject to large annual shocks, which 
as projected, are expected to be exacerbated by climate change. In addition, India’s agriculture has, for long, been based 
on an unsustainable resource-intensive model, predominantly characterized by inefficient use of water and land 
resources, and as an imperative, will have to shift to higher levels of resource use efficiency, given the country’s low per 
capita natural resource endowments2 and the projected impacts of climate change.  

                                            
1 With decelerating productivity growth of food grains. 
2 With annual per capita water availability of only about 1,000 m3, India is one of the most water-stressed countries in the world. 



     

5. Moving away from its long-running policy focus on raising agricultural output and improving food security, the 
Government of India has now prioritized the doubling of farmers’ incomes by 2022 and through a number of interventions 
e.g. the Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana (PMKSY) is also committed to accord high priority to improving water use 
efficiency - more crop per drop - in a focused manner3. 

 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
6.  Odisha ranks among the fastest growing economies in India, consistently growing at rates higher than the national 
average. Mirroring the national level, Odisha’s economic growth has been mainly driven by services (43.5 percent of GDP) 
and industry (36.6 percent of GDP). Between 2012 and 2017, per capita incomes in the State increased by 30 percent 
(from Rs. 47,632 to Rs. 61,678) and poverty reduced at an annual rate of 3.5 percent. Despite this good progress, Odisha’s 
per capita income still stands at only 75 percent of the national average.  

7. While Odisha’s economy has transformed from a predominantly agro-based economy, agriculture remains a key 
sector, providing employment and livelihoods to more than 62 percent of the State’s workforce, and contributing close to 
20 percent to its GDP. Indeed, a strong correlation exists between agriculture sector performance and overall state GDP, 
pointing to strong linkages between agriculture and other sectors. 

8. Like much of India, Odisha’s agriculture sector performance, relative to potential, is low. The officially reported 
compound annual average growth rate of 2.8 percent for the sector for the period 2011-17, is below the national average, 
and masks the highly volatile sector performance, which in reality is characterized by significant negative growth every 
alternative year. Consequently, because of low sector performance, Odisha ranks at the bottom in terms of annual farmer 
income (i.e. Rs. 16,884 per family), only outperforming West Bengal, where the average farmer income stands at Rs. 
11,748 per annum.4 

9. Among others, key constraints to the improved performance of Odisha’s agriculture sector include: (i) low 
productivity; (ii) limited diversification; (iii) high exposure and vulnerability to extreme weather events; (iv) access to 
reliable irrigation; and (v) dysfunctional or non-existing value chains for important crops. First off, average yields for major 
crops in Odisha still lag both those in neighboring states with comparable factor endowments and the national averages 
(Table 1), and are far below their potential5.   

 Table 1. Average Yields, 2016-2017 

Crop  

------------------------------Crop Yields (ton/ha)------------------------------ 

Odisha 
Andra 

Pradesh 
Madhya 
Pradesh 

Telangana West Bengal 
India 

Paddy 1.49 3.47 1.75 2.91 2.89 2.40 
Pulses 0.55 0.30 0.94 0.77 0.97 0.79 
Wheat 1.33 na 2.98 1.40 2.68 3.20 
Potato 12.00 14.92 20.07 25.96 26.16 21.51 

10. According to the findings of a State-level NITI Aayog Task Force on Agriculture6, these low farm-level yields are 
largely due to limited adoption of productivity enhancing technologies (including the use of improved germplasm), a 

                                            
3 PMKSY seeks to achieve convergence of investments in irrigation at the field level, expand cultivable area under assured irrigation, improve 
on-farm water use efficiency, enhance adoption of precision-irrigation and other water saving technologies (more crop per drop), etc. 
4 National Sample Survey Organization, 2013.  Situation Assessment Survey of Agricultural Households, All India Debt and Investment & Land 
and Livestock Holdings in India (January – December 2013) 
5 World Bank. 2014. Republic of India: Accelerating Agricultural Productivity Growth. Washington, DC.   
6 Government of Odisha, 2016. Rejuvenation of Agriculture: Recommendations of State NITI Aayog Task Force. 



 
The World Bank  
Odisha Integrated Irrigation Project for Climate Resilient Agriculture (P163533) 

 
 

  
Sep 11, 2018 Page 5 of 14  

     

degrading natural resource base, inadequate and mostly unreliable irrigation7,8, and weaknesses in the extension system.  

11. Due to several factors9, Odisha’s progress with respect to diversification – an important vehicle for agricultural 
growth - has been mixed at best, even against a backdrop of real shifts in consumer demand towards more diversified 
food baskets. While the net area devoted to rice showed some reduction between 2006 and 2015, the latest year for 
which comprehensive data sets exist, the total area devoted to food grains has been increasing. In fact, according to the 
Odisha Economic Survey of 2017-18 example, the areas under spices, vegetables, fruits, and floriculture - a proxy for 
diversification - declined by 20 percent, 6 percent, 9 percent and 12 percent, respectively, between 2014 and 201710. 

12. In addition, extreme weather events, largely droughts, and to a lesser extent, floods and cyclones, also continue to 
undermine Odisha’s agriculture performance and have been the principal driver of the volatility in sector growth. Figure 
1 for example, shows percent annual growth in rice production-the major crop - over five decades, and attests to the 
vulnerability of the State’s agriculture to the debilitating impacts of extreme weather events, which seem to occur with 
almost predictable periodicity.   

Figure 1: Percent annual  growth in rice production, 1962-201411 

 

 

13. While Odisha has a long history with the menace of drought – going all the way to the drought of 186612 - recent 
trends point to an increasing frequency13 as well as more agricultural areas coming under the ambit of droughts. As 
pointed out in the Odisha Climate Change Action Plan, this trend will be further amplified in the future due to climate 

                                            
7 About 2/3 of the State’s gross cropped area is rain-fed and depends on monsoon – a vast reliance on nature in an environment with highly 
skewed annual rainfall availability.  
8 Of the total cultivable area of 8.7 million ha in the State, irrigation potential has been developed for 2.96 million ha in Kharif and 1.48 million 
ha in Rabi season.  
9 A comprehensive understanding of which will be developed during preparation. 
10 Government of Odisha, 2018: Odisha Economic Survey of 2017-18. 
11 Data source: Government of Odisha, Status of Agriculture in Odisha, 2014-2015.  
12 Reputed to have caused the death of one third of Odisha’s population due to famine. 
13 From 1 in 5 years to 1 in 2 years since 2009. 


change14. With 2/3 of its gross cropped area under rainfed production and an insignificant use of groundwater, the State 
has few and inadequate instruments to mitigate against climate change-induced weather vagaries.  

14. Moreover, even when Odisha has relatively more water resources than many States in India, Irrigation 
development is low and below the national average.  Of the total cultivated area of 8.7 million ha, only 1.9 million ha (21 
percent) is under irrigation. Only 34 percent of the total irrigation potential of 5.5 million ha has been developed and 
groundwater use is negligible. With limited irrigation development and seasonally skewed rainfall, Odisha is not making 
the most out of every drop of water. In fact, estimates indicate that about 40-50 percent of available rainfall is lost as non-
beneficial evapotranspiration, a loss higher than the neighboring states. In addition, many of the irrigation systems have 
become victim to a vicious cycle of the build-neglect-rebuild. Operation and Maintenance (O&M) is not conduced 
systematically as a result of insufficient funds, the quality of irrigation services degrades and further undermines farmers’ 
willingness and capacity to pay for services. Arrangements for irrigation management have not been adapted to the 
requirements of recent developments, including the use of groundwater, adoption of more individual irrigation 
technologies, and the need to adopt a cascade perspective on irrigation management. 

15. Furthermore, remunerative and reliable markets in Odisha, a precondition for sustained agricultural growth are 
limited, mainly due to poorly functioning value chains. For example, supply chains for otherwise high-value commodities 
(e.g. spices, vegetables) are fragmented and uncoordinated, often involving multiple layers of intermediaries in some 
places, and completely no players in many other places. 

16. The Government of Odisha (GoO) has identified increasing production and productivity, reducing the vulnerability 
of agriculture to climate change, diversification towards high-value crops, rainwater harvesting and improving efficiency 
of water use, improved produce marketing, and addressing absentee landlordism inter alia, as important issues to be 
addressed to improve the performance of the agricultural sector and raise farmer incomes. The proposed project 
contributes to these efforts. The proposal is to support higher agriculture growth, more efficient water use, better quality 
and reliability of irrigation service delivery, and strengthen the resilience to climate change of production systems in six 
districts (see Table 2) in Odisha.  

17. Characterized by highly skewed and variable rainfall patterns15, a lack of perennial rivers, these districts depend on 
a cycle of dry seasons alternating with increasingly uneven and erratic monsoons for water. On average, they suffer from 
marginal drought one in three to five years, moderate drought in six to eight years, and severe drought one in thirty years. 
Among other reasons, the undulating physiography and the predominantly small-sized land holdings limit the technically 
and economically efficient development of centralized major and medium irrigation systems (reservoirs and canals) to 
serve these areas and, they therefore, generally have comparatively lower irrigation coverage than other parts of the State 
(Table 2).  

    Table 2. Irrigation potential created as a ratio of cultivated land 

Project District Ratio of irrigation potential created to total cultivated area 
Kharif Rabi 

Ganjam 0.74 0.29 
Kandhamal 0.30 0.38 
Kalahandi 0.55 0.70 
Nuapada 0.42 0.58 
Mayurbhanji 0.55 1.15 
Keonjhar 0.37 0.51 

                                            
14 Climate projections indicate that drier areas will become drier and flood prone areas will be subject to more flooding. Other problems such 
as pest and disease outbreaks are also likely to increase due to climate change. 
15 When it rains, eighty six percent of the rains fall in the monsoon period (June-October), while the remaining 14 percent occurs during the 
other 7 months of the year, from November to May. 



State average 0.62 0.72 

 
18. The districts therefore, have historically relied on water, stored in cascades of impoundments (tanks) for agricultural 
production and as a buffer against droughts. The tanks support livelihoods of over 300,000 households, most of whom 
are in the poorest quintile. Besides sustaining agricultural livelihoods, the network of tanks in these areas also serves other 
important purposes such as controlling and reducing the impacts of floods - when they occur-and recharging the 
groundwater table. Investing in these districts will also help meet a key policy objective of the GoO to more evenly spread 
the benefits of irrigation - currently confined to a few districts in the form of major and medium irrigation projects16.   

19. Specifically, the project will support sustainable and resilient intensification, judicious diversification17 to high-value 
commodities (especially during the Rabi season and for some areas under upland rice in Kharif), improved produce 
marketing and also incentivize and improve the quality of irrigation service delivery and the reliability of water supply to 
ensure a more efficient, productive and equitable distribution of water to beneficiary farmers throughout the year that is 
more responsive to the more demanding higher value crops. The project builds on the successes of an earlier Bank-
financed Odisha Community Tanks Management Project in bridging the gap between the then existing irrigation potential 
and actual irrigation coverage of selected tanks and expands the engagement further into institutional reforms and 
capacity strengthening for improved system performance, diversification and marketing of farmer produce. 

 

Relationship to CPF 
 

20. The India CPF (2018-2022) argues that for the country to maintain its trajectory of high growth and poverty 
reduction, it must: (i) embrace much more efficient use of the country’s resources, particularly water and land and address 
the impacts of climate change; (ii) foster inclusiveness both for poverty reduction and as a key condition for sustaining 
high rates of economic growth; and (iii) strengthen the agility, performance and responsiveness of public sector 
institutions. One of the three CPF focus areas (Focus Area 1) proposed for Bank engagement is “resource efficient growth” 
where one of the Objectives is promotion of a more resource-efficient, inclusive and diversified growth in the rural sector. 
The proposed project dovetails and is consistent with Bank support (to include inter alia, support to sustainable 
productivity gains, CSA practices, diversification, investments in irrigation and drainage for improved water use efficiency, 
value chains etc.) that is envisaged under this Objective.  

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
21. The Project Development Objective is to intensify and diversify agricultural production, enhance climate resilience 
and improve water productivity in selected cascades of Odisha. Project beneficiaries include small and marginal farmers, 
Water Users’ Associations (Pani Panchayats), farmer producer organizations, and other agro-entrepreneurs. Targeted 
investments will be undertaken to address any gender gaps as well as benefit other vulnerable groups. 

Key Results (From PCN) 
 

22. The project is expected to lead to increased average yields, increases in the range, volume and value of marketed 
agricultural output, more productive and efficient use of scarce water resources, a more reliable supply and a better 
quality of irrigation service delivery, and improvements in farmers’ capacity to adapt to climate change. Proposed key 
outcome level performance indicators include the following: (i) increase in productivity of selected agricultural 

                                            
16 Government of Odisha, 2013. State Agriculture Policy, Department of Agriculture, Bhubaneswar. 
17 Diversification in this context is defined as reducing the emphasis on food grains and increasing the share of high-value 
agriculture. This would be done taking cognizance of the overall country policy intent to shift rice production towards relatively 
more water abundant states like Odisha. 


commodities supported by the project (t/ha); (ii) farmers adopting improved agricultural technology (number); (iii) share 
of non-rice products in total production in project areas(percent); (iv) water users provided with new/improved irrigation 
and drainage services (number); (v) acreage under crops that are less water demanding (ha); (vi) productivity of water use 
(kg/m3), and (vii) number of direct project beneficiaries (disaggregated by gender).  

 
D. Concept Description 

 
23. Agricultural production system improvements (e.g. improving productivity, system resilience to climate change and 
resource use efficiency) and market development are known to reinforce each other and are therefore better pursued 
and accomplished together. The proposed project primarily seeks to improve and diversify farmer yields and production, 
improve water productivity and efficiency, build resilience to climate change risks, and improve market access for farmers 
who can generate a marketable surplus in selected districts in Odisha. Producing higher value and more diverse crops puts 
a high premium on the quality and reliability of irrigation service delivery, as they leave no room for water supply errors 
and the higher use of farm inputs significantly increases the stakes. Higher value horticulture crops generally use less 
water as compared to wheat, paddy, sugarcane and cotton. The conceptual framework underlying the proposed design 
therefore links efforts to promote adoption of CSA practices18, diversification and productivity increases, with 
improvements in incentives for technology adoption, quality of water service delivery and water resource management. 
The project will comprise three components as described below: 

Component 1: Climate-Smart Intensification and Diversification of Agriculture 

24. The objective of this component is to increase agricultural productivity, strengthen the capacity of organized farmer 
groups to cope or adapt to climate change stresses affecting crop production, and diversify production in Rabi in response 
to effective demand as expressed by pre-identified commercial off-takers or gleaned from other reliable market signals. 
Support under this component is proposed to be organized around two mutually inclusive, overlapping and reinforcing 
subcomponents. 

Subcomponent 1.1: Support to Improved Productivity and Resilience 

25. This subcomponent aims at supporting and incentivizing farmer adoption of technologies and practices that 
demonstrably deliver the triple-wins of increased productivity, improved resilience to climate shocks and reduced GHG 
emissions, as a co-benefit. The exact nature of technology support will be: (i) a function of the specificities of production 
environments and unique climate vulnerabilities19 in individual cascade; (ii) scaled to farmer capacities and endowments 
and (iii) based on the principles of response to market demand, good choice of improved germplasm, adequate plant 
nutrition, and effective pest and disease management. 

26. In this respect, project support is envisaged to go towards organizing farmers for technology transfer purposes (e.g. 
through farmer field schools), technology sourcing and demonstration, farmer training, improving availability and access 
to productivity enhancing and resilient germplasm by strengthening key segments in the State’s seed production and 
distribution system, and strengthening advisory service provision, currently plagued by weaknesses in the extension 
system - such as inadequate manpower and limited knowledge and skills.   

Subcomponent 1.2: Support to Diversification and Produce Marketing 

27. The objective of this subcomponent is twofold: (i) support farmers to reduce the current emphasis on food grains 

                                            
18 In this context, CSA practices are defined as practices that sustainably increase productivity and farmers’ income and build resilience to 
climate change, while reducing GHG emissions where possible and appropriate 
19 To be mapped for the target districts following approaches developed through a World Bank Non- Lending Technical Assistance to Support 
Implementation of Odisha State Climate Change Action Plan. 


(especially rice and wheat) while increasing the share of high-value agriculture (e.g. fruits, spices and vegetables) in their 
overall production structure; and (ii) improve produce marketing to increase incomes and reduce price risks associated 
with diversification. A successful shift in favor of more diversified production would not only generate faster productivity 
and superior incomes for targeted farmers, but will also result into improved nutrition security, help reduce the water 
footprint of paddy, foster biodiversity, and strengthen resilience of the production systems to climate change.  

28. Project support to diversification and improved marketing is proposed to follow productive alliance approaches, 
which bring together organized farmers, produce buyers, technical service providers and leverage private sector financing 
to address market imperfections and build competitive value chains for select commodities. In this respect, the project 
could provide funding for several activities, including but not limited to: (i) awareness creation of diversification among 
farmers; (ii) identification of competitive value chains; (iii) farmer experimentation with new crops and 
training/demonstration of relevant production technology; (iv) strengthening of farmers for collective action (including in 
production, aggregation, technology transfer, among others); (v) business plan development; and (vi) selected productive 
investments - as would be identified in the business plans. Project support to crop diversification will be based on 
agronomic/agro-ecological suitability, comparative advantage of specific cascades, and local, national or international 
market opportunities. To further diversify farmer income streams (a key adaptation strategy) and maximize the utility and 
productivity of water stored in the tanks, during preparation, the project will explore the feasibility of using the tanks for 
seasonal aquaculture.  

Component 2: Improving Access to Irrigation and Water Productivity  

29. Access to reliable irrigation is generally critical to enhancing crop productivity, building resilience to climate change, 
promoting diversification and access to markets. It is doubly important in the targeted project areas that are characterized 
by frequent droughts and highly variable rainfall availability. Bridging increasingly longer dry spells during Kharif and 
producing more demanding higher value and more diverse crops during Rabi when the stakes are higher and when there 
is no margin for water supply errors, puts a high premium on the quality of irrigation services.   

30. Among others, reliability of irrigation services and a more productive use of water resources in the project areas is 
weighed down by: (i) the poor condition of hydraulic assets- mainly due to deferred maintenance; (ii) limited knowledge 
and skills in water management - often inadequate to provide supplemental irrigation during Kharif season, and to cover 
water-stress conditions during Rabi; and (iii) weak arrangements for O&M. Additionally, most of the tank irrigation 
systems have been developed for rice cultivation and need to be adapted for a more diversified and more demanding 
cropping system.  

31. The proposed project aims to improve the performance of irrigation throughout the year and across cascades of 
selected tank irrigation systems through modernization of hydraulic assets, institutional reforms, and capacity 
strengthening. The objective is to use water more efficiently, reduce water losses and save water during Kharif season, 
and transfer these savings to Rabi season. Capacities for irrigation management (including the introduction of asset 
management) will be strengthened to provide higher quality services. In addition, the project will promote sustainable 
groundwater use to supplement scanty rainfall and mitigate increasing rainfall variability. Key outcome indicators include 
the productivity of water use ($/m3) and the number of water users provided with new/improved irrigation and drainage 
services (number). 

Subcomponent 2.1: Irrigation Modernization 

32. The project will invest in the modernization of hydraulic assets. To that end, a comprehensive water assessment will 
be conducted in the Project cascades to identify opportunities for reducing water losses and for transferring the savings 
to Rabi season. For each of these opportunities, the implications on downstream water use will be identified through 
preparation of a pre- and post-project cascade-wide water balance. Investments include strengthening of canal bunds, 
modernizing hydraulic canal structures, installation of field channels and sub-surface pressurized pipes, and developing 

groundwater extraction. The project will also help farmers access subsidies at central and state level for the promotion of 
pressurized irrigation at chak level. In line with GoO’s intention, where feasible, the project will finance investments 
through DBOTs on a Hybrid Annuity Basis. 

Subcomponent 2.2: Irrigation Management 

33. Crop diversification and intensification require a higher quality of irrigation service delivery to meet the 
requirements of more demanding crops. Traditional arrangements for irrigation management often lack the capacities 
and incentives to deliver these improved services. The project will pursue institutional reforms and pilot the use of private 
(publicly funded) operators that will be incentivized to deliver high performing irrigation and O&M services through DBOT 
contracts on a Hybrid Annuity basis – in conformity with GoO’s intentions.  

34. The Project will promote conjunctive management and sustainable use of both ground- and surface water resources 
by improving groundwater monitoring linking these with irrigation scheduling decisions. The Project will also establish a 
surface and groundwater monitoring and benchmarking system and will (i) link these data to decision making on irrigation 
scheduling, and (ii) significantly improve citizen engagement in the management of irrigation systems.  

35. The project will strengthen capacities of farmers and Pani Panchayats through Farmers’ Field Schools and 
demonstrations, among others in modern irrigation technologies, improving irrigation efficiency and rational hydraulic 
asset management. The project will also introduce the allocation of investment resources on the basis of scheme 
performance (including abidance by agreed water allocation, meeting efficiency targets and cost recovery). Capacities will 
also be strengthened to improve the management and maintenance of hydraulic assets. 

Component 3: Project Management 

36. This component will strengthen capacities for project management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) (including, 
inter alia, the areas of procurement and financial management) through the provision of goods, consultant services, 
training, and financing of incremental operating costs. This component will also develop a comprehensive management 
information and data collection and reporting system on key performance outputs and impact indicators through baseline 
surveys, participatory assessments, mid-term reviews and final evaluations. Staffing of the PMU will include a number of 
technical, financial management, M&E and safeguards (social and environmental) experts. Detailed implementation 
arrangements will be spelled out in the Project Operational Manual. (POM). Regular training of PMU staff will be organized 
to strengthen their capacities to implement the project. 

 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Odisha is located on the east coast of India along the Bay of the Bengal. The state has coastal line of about 450 km, and a 

geographical area of 155,707 sq. km which accounts for 4.87% of the total area of India. The state of Odisha can be 
divided into five agro-ecological zones: (1) The coastal plains, (2) The middle mountainous range – part of Eastern Ghats 
mountain range, (3) The rolling uplands, (4) river valleys, and (5) subdued plateaus. While the state has a wide network of 
river basins and sub-basins, it is mainly associated with 3 major river basins; Brahamani, Mahanadi and Vansadhara. 
Despite such diverse natural resource base, it’s agriculture sector has been performing well below its potential. Among 
key constraints to the improved performance of Odisha’s agriculture sector include: (i) low productivity; (ii) limited 
diversification; (iii) high exposure and vulnerability to extreme weather events; and (iv) dysfunctional or non-existing 
value chains for important crops. 
  


To address these concerns, the project will invest on repair and rehabilitation of about 600 tanks spread across the state 
to revive small holder farming. The interventions will include: improving the efficiency of water assets, modernizing the 
irrigation systems, enhancing agriculture productivity, promoting adaptive agriculture practices, enhancing fishery 
production,  and promotion of climate friendly agri-business practices. 
  
 
 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
Government of Odisha has recently completed a project of this nature, reflecting that the implementation capacity has 

already been established to address environment and social safeguard implications. The PMU is already in place, and the 
consultancy services for conducting ESMF, IPNM and TDP are already in place. Safeguard compliance tools needed are 
already available with the Government of Odisha to be used during the proposed project. 
 

 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Gopalaswamy Srihari, Social Specialist 
Anupam Joshi, Environmental Specialist 
Sharlene Jehanbux Chichgar, Environmental Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The physical investments under the project would 
include rehabilitation of existing water assets such as 
strengthening of canal bunds, modernizing hydraulic 
canal structures, installation of field channels, etc. 
where improper construction could result in adverse 
impacts. The investments under the climate resilient 
agriculture practices could result in positive impacts 
on the environment with effective planning and 
implementation. The project has been categorized as 
category B. There is no large scale, significant and/or 
irreversible impacts envisaged due to the proposed 
project interventions. An Environmental and Social 
Assessment (ESA) will be undertaken to identify 
environment and social issues of significance. Based 
on ESA, an Environmental and Social and Management 
Framework (ESMF) will be prepared toadress the 
requirements of a category B project, to manage risks 
and maximize environmental and social opportunities. 
Both the ESA and ESMF will take into account 
experiences and lessons from the previous project. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No No impact is expected due to project interventions. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The rehabilitation and modernization of the tank 
system is likely to improve the water storage capacity 
and wetlands in the upper catchment. As the 
rehabilitation of tanks may impact natural resources 
including wetlands (if any). The ESA that  will help 
ascertain such impacts, and will develop a screening 
mechanisms that will help identify and avoid impacts 
on sensitive environmental habitats and important 
ecosystems. As details of the exact sites of the 
proposed investments are yet to be finalized, the 
ESMF would include all adequate measures for any 
negative effects on natural habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No No activities impacting on forests will be undertaken 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will not directly finance pesticides, but 
improved irrigation efficiency and subsequent increase 
in crop productivity and diversification may induce 
pesticide use. The project will strictly use IPNM 
(Integrated Pest and Nutrition Management) 
approach. In addition, the ESMF will have a detailed 
local specific IPNM strategy for the project. This will 
reduce the reliance on chemical pesticides, include all 
measure for labour health and safety for pesticide 
application and usage, and guidance on training and 
demonstrations, that will be provided so that there is 
no significant adverse impact on the environment and 
public health. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No No impact is expected due to project interventions. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The state has a sizeable tribal population - 22.5% of 
the total population. In fact, Odisha is unique in having 
distinct tribal areas enshrined under the 5th Schedule 
of the Indian Constitution. At this stage, investment 
plans and locations are not known, and therefore, a 
Tribal Peoples Planning Framework (TPPF) will be 
prepared. Subsequently, sub-project specific Tribal 
Development Plans will be developed as and when 
sub-project locations are finalized. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No 

The project does not anticipate any form of land 
acquisition or involuntary resettlement impacts as it 
would cover the existing  tank with a focus on repair 
and rehabilitation only. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 
No new dam construction will be  supported under the 
project. The project will rehabilitate and modernize 
the existing rainwater harvesting structures (known as 

Tanks and each having more than 40 Ha of command 
areas). Some of them would be having earthen 
embankments above 10 meters high, hence the 
project is triggered. 
This policy was triggered during the previous project, 
and a Dam Safety panel was put in place. The same 
Dam Safety panel will continue for this project under 
the technical guidance from the Chief Engineer, 
Central Designs Organization. The project will seek 
better coordination with the Dam Safety panel and 
support safety enhancement of the tank system as 
part of the tank rehabilitation. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
There is no evidence that the project would impact on 
any international water ways 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No Project areas do not fall in any disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Mar 31, 2019 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The Borrower has already engaged consultants who shall commence preparation of the safeguards instruments soon. 

They shall undertake ESA to prepare Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Tribal Peoples Planning 
Framework (TPPF), Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) / Integrated Nutrient Management Plan (IPNM). These 
instruments are expected to be ready by March 31, 2019, or before appraisal and will be publically disclosed.  
The ESMF will provide essential baseline data, confirm policies that are triggered, assess likely impacts of the project 

interventions. The ESMF will also propose mitigation measures for any adverse impacts that may be envisaged through 
the design and construction phases of various interventions. Recommendations for strengthening institutional capacity, 
and estimate the budget required for the implementation will also be included. Assessments will be participatory with 
extensive consultations with all the stakeholders. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Khyber Pakhthunkhwa Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Project (P163474) 

 
 

  
Jul 31, 2017 Page 1 of 21  

     

 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 30-Apr-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC21925 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Pakistan P163474  Khyber Pakhthunkhwa 
Irrigated Agriculture 
Improvement Project 
(P163474) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA Oct 31, 2018 Feb 20, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing The Islamic Republic of 
Pakistan 

Department of Agriculture, 
Government of Khyber 
Pukhthukhwa, Department 
of Irrigation, Government of 
Khyber Pukhthunkhwa 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To enhance water management, productivity and climate resilience of irrigated agriculture in project areas 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-NewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 183.00 

Total Financing 183.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 165.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 165.00 

          IDA Credit 165.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 18.00 



 
The World Bank  
Khyber Pakhthunkhwa Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Project (P163474) 

 
 

  
Jul 31, 2017 Page 3 of 21  

     

          LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 18.00 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

A - Full Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 

  Other Decision (as needed) 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1. Pakistan, the world’s sixth most populous country, is a lower-middle-income country 
which has made significant progress towards macroeconomic and financial stability. Pakistan’s 
per capita income has almost doubled and the share of the population living in poverty has 
decreased by two-thirds over the last decade. Gross domestic product (GDP) growth reached 4.7 
percent in 2016 and is expected to reach 5 percent in 2017, supported by construction and 
manufacturing activities, increased private sector credit growth, increased reserves, low 
inflation, continuing strong remittances, and an upturn in foreign direct investment related to 
the China-Pakistan Economic Corridor.  

2. Nevertheless, Pakistan faces serious development challenges, mostly in rural areas. 
GDP growth has been slower than needed to provide for the level of jobs required for a young 
and growing population. Inadequacy in the private sector environment, public sector 
management, and implementation capacity will continue to hamper service delivery 
performance. Thus, human development indicators continue to lag. In fact, Pakistan did not meet 
the targets of most of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) by 2015. Rural poverty remains 
about double the urban poverty (35 percent versus 18 percent in 2014) and decreases less 
rapidly, given low growth of the agriculture sector, inadequate rural infrastructure and 
connectivity to markets, weak governance and institutions, and limited access to finance. 

3. Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) has faced a number of crises in the past decade. With 
geographical proximity and community-level ties to Afghanistan, KP has suffered from the fallout 
of the conflict in Afghanistan, which has given rise to a precarious security situation as well as 
prolonged political and social instability. Related hostilities and extremist violence have caused 
far-reaching disruption to economic activity and inflicted extensive damage on private property, 
livelihoods, and public infrastructure.  


4. KP is also one of Pakistan’s less developed regions, with some economic and social 
development indicators lagging behind the national averages. The province of KP accounts for 
an estimated 10.5 percent of the country’s GDP and about 14.6 percent of the population 
(approximately 30.5 million). The per capita income in KP is estimated to be 33 percent below 
the national average, and despite a sharp and consistent decline in poverty, 27 percent of 
households are estimated to be living below the national poverty line. Another relevant indicator 
is the household size, which is strongly correlated with poverty in Pakistan. KP households 
comprise 7.2 members on average, well above the national average of 6.3 members. Most of 
KP’s population (85 percent) also lives in rural areas, where access to public services and income 
generation opportunities is lower than in urban centers. 

5. Climate change is expected to exacerbate extreme weather events in KP, thereby 
increasing the vulnerability of people and assets to climate induced disasters. Since 2010 
extreme events such as cloudburst over the catchment areas of Indus and its tributaries, have 
frequently occurred during the annual monsoon season. This often leads to flash floods and 
landslides, causing damages across several sectors, including agriculture, livelihoods, 
infrastructure, transport and communications, and housing. Since 2010, KP has been facing 
extreme precipitation events, in the Indus catchment areas, particularly during the annual 
monsoon season. This results in swelling of rivers, causing localized and major floods in low-lying 
areas. KP is also facing an increased number of glacial lake outburst floods (GLOF) due to 
increased temperatures and intense precipitation. Being an upper riparian province in Pakistan, 
KP receives the shortest lead times for early warnings on climate induced hydro-meteorological 
disasters. As a result of the 2010 floods, KP suffered US$ 1.1 billion in damages, which included 
damages and losses of US$ 96 million1 to the agriculture sector in the province. 

B. Sectoral and Institutional Context 

6. Agriculture is important for Pakistan and the Government has placed agriculture 
development and water efficiency at the forefront of its development agenda. Agriculture2 
remains the second largest economic sector in Pakistan, contributing about 21 percent to the 
national GDP and employing approximately 42 percent of the labor force. The sector is also the 
largest contributor to export revenues with about 75 percent share from exports of primary and 
processed (mostly cotton textile) goods. The Government acknowledges that sustaining an 
annual GDP growth rate of 6 percent or more will require greater focus on agriculture and 
improved water resources planning, governance, and resilience. The Government is pursuing 
multiple initiatives to boost efforts to increase agricultural and water productivity, promote 
efficient use of its scarce water and precious land resources, and incentivize private sector 
investment in these areas for economic growth and shared prosperity.  

7. The contribution of agriculture in the KP economy, however, is less prominent, although 
it employs a high percentage of its labor force. KP’s contribution to the country agriculture GDP 

 

is the smallest of all provinces at 7 percent, compared to its share in total GDP of 11 percent. Also 
within KP, agriculture accounts for only 14 percent of the provincial GDP, representing the 
smallest share of all provinces. The sector accounts for 37 percent of labor force employment3 
and 11 percent of the total household income. The total cultivated area of the province is 1.6 
million ha (7 percent of the country’s total), half of which is rain fed. It produces about 5 percent 
of the country’s total wheat, 2 percent of rice, 17 percent of maize, 8 percent of sugarcane, 16 
percent of barley, 4 percent of gram, 3 percent of rapeseed and mustard, and 75 percent of 
tobacco. Its share in the country’s total livestock population is about 6 percent in cattle, 2.5 
percent in buffalo, 2 percent in sheep, and 8 percent in goats. KP is currently facing a food deficit 
and depends heavily on imports from other provinces, especially from Punjab, for important 
commodities like wheat (64 percent), rice (74 percent), milk, meat, sugar (80 percent), and 
vegetables (90 percent) to complement its production. The answer to this conundrum of 
agriculture may lie in the under exploitation of its natural resources, as the sector grew at a 
decent rate of 3.1 percent to 7.3 percent in the 2010–2015 five-year period, especially after the 
active insurgency period ended. 

8. KP’s land and water resources are under exploited. Of the total culturable4 land of 2 m 
ha., 1/3rd is irrigated, 1/3rd is rainfed and 1/3rd is culturable waste. Water allocated to KP under 
the National Water Apportionment Accord (WAA) of 1991 is 8.78 million acre feet (MAF) but due 
to current carrying capacity of the aging infrastructure and lack of new infrastructure the 
province is only able to withdraw about 68 percent (5.97 MAF) of its share. Also, 14 percent in 
floodwater, under the accord, is not fully used. Additionally, all water resources freed up from 
the WAA’s ambit, for the province, are not yet fully used. These include waters from schemes not 
exceeding 5,000 acres above elevation of 1200 ft. (Survey of Pakistan Datum [SPD]) and waters 
from Kurum/Gomal/kohat basins located in the highly-underserved areas of Kohat, Hangu, Karak, 
Bannu, Lakki Marwat, and D.I. Khan Districts. Thus, one-third of KP’s arable land depends on 
rainfall in a climate that is semiarid to arid. Another one-third (1.08 million ha) of KP’s arable 
land, called culturable waste land, is out of cultivation due either to water logging, non-
availability of irrigation water, salinity, unlevel land, lack of manpower, funds shortages, and so 
on. Thus, more land and water resource development is desperately needed for KP’s food 
security, import substitution, and economic development especially of the lagging areas. That’s 
why feasibility studies are included in the project design to prepare future investments in water 
resources development. 

9. The irrigation infrastructure in KP suffers from deferred maintenance5. KP canals are 
aging. Some are older than 100 years. As an upper riparian province with hilly terrains and steep 
slopes, KP’s canals suffer from frequent bank breaches, bed erosion and scouring due to floods, 

 
3 28 percent of male and 77 percent of female (mostly rural); 44 percent of rural and 6 percent of urban labor force is engaged 
in agriculture. The labor force participation is 80 percent male and 20 percent female (21 percent in rural and 12 percent in 
urban areas). 
4 According to bureau of statistics-Pakistan, culturable land includes cultivated and culturable waste lands and 

cultivated area includes rainfed and irrigated lands. 
5 De-siltation; oiling & greasing; repairing leakages, damaged sections of canal prism, cross drainage structure and outlets 



sliding and high velocities in addition to the normal wear and tear of a canal. Due to the poor 
condition of the canals, the system’s delivery performance is poor and the leakages/wastages 
(estimated at 25%) are causing water logging. Unlike Punjab, the reliance on ground water is 
minimal in irrigated areas, therefore water lost would be wasted and even would cause water 
logging and salinity. The silt deposition raises the level of the command area for which canal bed 
needs to be raised to continue providing the required volumes of water. 

Besides the canals, there are some 4,000-km long surface and subsurface drainage system in KP 
that was built to flush out the excess water to keep the fertile land in production in the central 
districts. However due to lack of funds, this infrastructure is also suffering and, the carrying 
capacity of the drainage system has diminished and large tracts of precious fertile lands are 
becoming water logged and saline again.  

To keep pace with the exceptional level of O & M needs of the KP irrigation and drainage system, 
larger amounts of funds are needed. However, according to the KP Irrigation Department, only 
1/3rd (PkR 500 m vs PkR. 12,00 m for the last 10 years) of the needs are provided. Water charges 
(Abiana) collections in the province has been low at 30% of the total assessed, mainly because of 
the limited paying capacity of the large number of small landholders and low flat rates - PKR 
300/year/acre. Besides, its own system, the department also must, at times, shoulder the 
rehabilitation of civil canals which are community owned and do not pay any water charges. 

This practice of ‘build neglect rebuild’ costs the exchequer dearly6 which are oftentimes met from 
the development budget. 

Removing this backlog of rehabilitation as well as modernization is important to improve the 
system service capability, reduce water wastages/leakages and water logging and safeguard the 
system sustainability.  

10. In KP, as reported by the Irrigation Department, 10-15 percent of the canal outlets are 
tampered and /or illegal. This creates in-equity among growers in the system and affects the 
productivity of the farmers mainly at the tail end. An understanding has been reached with the 
Department to resolve such in-equities during the rehabilitation of the system. 

11. Historically, the collaboration between Irrigation and Agriculture Departments, in KP, is 
weak. Irrigation Department is responsible for development of dams, canals and drains, its 
functionality and O&M; delivering water to farmers at the outlet/farmgate (in watercourses); and 
assessment and collections of water charges. The Agriculture Department is responsible for 
development and rehabilitation of watercourses, promoting water conservation technologies 
and training farmers in good agriculture practices. Due to poor coordination, the benefits of up 
and down stream investment do not consolidate at the farm level. The Baizai Irrigation scheme 
is a good example. The Irrigation Department constructed the upstream delivery system with 
capacity for 25,000 acres but since no provision was made in the scheme budget for the 

 
6 According to a global estimate, a dollar deferred maintenance costs US$7 in repair/rehabilitation 


construction of watercourses, the agriculture department could not do so and after more than 2 
years the farmers are unable to utilize the water fully. This collaboration has started to improve 
in some very new schemes and this project will contribute to improving this collaboration further. 

12. In KP, as in the rest of the country, O & M of the watercourses, that brings water from 
canals to the farms, is a challenge on the daily basis. These are earthen structures owned and 
managed by farmers. The average length of a watercourse (including branches) is about 3 km, 
serving an average area of 150 acres with an average number of 75 shareholder farmers. Every 
farmer has a turn, once a week, to take his share in proportion to his landholding from the 
watercourse. Every time a farmer diverts his/her share, loose earth/mud and stone mixture are 
gathered from the surrounding fields to plug and unplug the farm gate and watercourse at the 
turnouts. Preventing leakage from these structure is a continuous battle for the farmer. Since 
this channel must pass near each farm, there are many turns and branches through which water 
passes. This is an important cause of spillage and leakage for water. Being earthen, many 
different weeds/shrubs/trees start growing on the banks of the watercourse. These often 
become a source of blockage due to its own biomass and capturing silt load causing the water to 
overflow and causing ponding near the watercourse-sometimes becoming mosquito breading 
points. Another source of damage are rodents and grazing animals. This necessitates recurrent 
seasonal cleaning by farmers. Since farmers are poor and cannot afford to hire labour, they do it 
mostly themselves. This O & M of the watercourse draws heavily on the farmers’ time and labour 
-and also cause wastage of his precious water estimated up to 40%. Being earthen, it is easier to 
cut and steal other farmer’s share that can become source of heavy rifts in relations. Therefore, 
it is important to support farmer with watercourse improvement i.e. lining of 507% length, 
installing all turnout structures, construction of crossing culverts, washing pads, and animal 
drinking wallows. It is estimated that this investment helps the farmer save 75% labour time, 15 
percentage point of water wastage, water travel time by 50%, in-equity, theft control which 
results in 15-20% crop yield increase, 30% cropping intensity and ultimately increased net 
incomes. In addition to these benefits it also helps in saving energy costs and precious ground 
water on tube-well water courses. 

13. Field application of water is highly in-efficient in KP as in other parts of the country. Due 
to the widespread practice of flood irrigation and insufficient knowledge of good irrigation 
agronomy practices, water losses are highest at the field level where application efficiency is as 
low as 65–70 percent. Resultantly, crop yields and cropping intensities are low. Investments to 
promote water conservation technologies such as high-efficiency irrigation systems (HEIS) and 
laser-based precision land leveling (PLL) on-farm are of paramount importance for saving losses 
on-farm. HEIS is estimated to increase field application efficiency by 25 percentage points to 95% 
and PLL helps save water by about 30% resulting in increased yields and incomes. 

14. In KP, farmers’ productivity is generally low. Most crop yields in KP are low compared to 
other provinces and progressive growers. This could be attributed to large number of (80%) small 

 
7 So far the department lined 30% but the new findings and demand from the farmers suggest to increase it to 50% 



landholdings lacking scale and purchasing power; labour shortage due to out migration to cities 
and abroad and insufficient mechanization to off-set this shortage; shortage of skilled labour; 
insufficient private sector participation and services; lack of financial services; weak public sector 
research and extension services. 

15. KP has pockets with unique agro-climatic conditions, ideal for horticulture production. 
These include, among others, citrus, dates, pome fruits, potato, tomato, and onions. However, 
the current share of the subsector in the total cropped area is only 6 percent. With improved 
access roads to the main domestic markets and neighboring Afghanistan and air links to the Gulf 
and Central Asian countries, KP could potentially further capitalize on this comparative 
advantage.  

16. Postharvest losses are high. Lack of postharvest technology and management and 
modern cool chain infrastructure and inappropriate storage, packaging, and transportation 
facilities are major bottlenecks specially for perishable commodities in KP. Postharvest losses of 
35 percent to 40 percent for fruits and vegetables remain one of the most pressing problems, 
mostly given the lack of farmer’s awareness about scientific handling of farm produce. 
Inappropriate storage facilities, both in the public and private sector, register the highest losses 
during handling operations. Horticulture products are mostly stored in shallow pits covered with 
farm wastes without ventilation, without proper sanitation, and without preventive measures for 
insect and disease control. The concept of a cool chain network is in its infancy and integrated 
cool chain networks are mostly lacking. The existing cold storage facilities are unevenly 
distributed across the country with Punjab dominating with 512 units, while KP only had 16 units 
in 2009 (Planning Commission 2009). The cold storage facilities are based on old technology that 
do not differentiate for unique temperature requirements of crop species. Moreover, most of 
the existing packing facilities do not measure up to international standards. The types of 
containers used for transporting and storing products vary from place to place, but a common 
practice is to use whatever container is available. This causes the produce to be pressed hard in 
the crates or carried in oversized containers, causing huge loss.  

17. In addition, the agricultural marketing infrastructure and system is inadequate and 
lacks market responsiveness. Many wholesale markets (mandis) were built years ago, and are 
unable to cope efficiently with increased transactions. Serious traffic congestion, insufficient 
space for efficient movement of products in and out, inadequate storage, and improper 
management are some of the major factors for increased marketing costs and physical losses of 
farm products. Hygiene conditions, particularly in the case of fruits, vegetables, and livestock, are 
quite dismal. Excessive domination of commission agents, lack of physical and allied facilities, 
non-involvement of growers and consumers in market committees, and an ineffective market 
information system are some of the inherent problems of these markets and are putting farmers 
at a disadvantageous situation while selling their produce. In addition, the lack of planning and 
communication between demand and supply result in gluts at one time and shortages at other 
times, causing severe price fluctuations and loss of farmer incomes.  



18. The level of processing and value addition of agricultural products is very low in 
Pakistan. Only 3 percent of the total production of fruits and vegetable and less than 10 percent 
of milk are processed in the country (Planning Commission 2009). There exists enormous 
potential of adding value to various fruits and vegetable, such as freezing, drying, dehydrating, 
or crushing into powder, juice, pulp, oil, paste, sauce, chips, pickles, chutney, and jam. The culture 
of value addition through processing and diversification is still at infant stages in Pakistan. This 
small amount of processing leaves large opportunities and could also absorb some of the 
seasonal glut and extend the life of the raw material. 

19. The new government has increased the budget allocation to the sector and shifted its 
policy from higher productivity to higher profitability for smallholder farmers. The KP 
Government increased the budget for its annual development plans to US$62 million for 
agriculture and US$71 million for irrigation in FY17, which is still well below the needs. Key 
priority areas of the new government, as highlighted in the KP Integrated Development Strategy 
of 2014–18 and the KP Agriculture Policy and Strategy—a ten-year perspective (2014–24), are 
improving, among others, production, processing, and marketing, thus improving extension 
services; diversification into high-value agriculture (horticulture, livestock, dairy, and 
aquaculture); adaptation to climate change; on-farm water management (OFWM); development 
of new water resources; rehabilitation/modernization of the existing irrigation and drainage 
infrastructure; and governance. 

20. The World Bank’s last engagement with KP in the sector was for about six years from 
2001 to 2007 for a total of US$21 million made mainly in restoration/rehabilitation of the 
irrigation network from the secondary to the tertiary level. Major efforts were also made, in 
support of the national drainage program (NDP), in devolving the management to farmers, with 
powers to collect water charges and keep 40 percent for managing the operation and 
maintenance of the system from the secondary level downward. However, this outcome could 
not be sustained for long and has been rolled back by the Government. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

21. To enhance water management, productivity and climate resilience of irrigated 
agriculture in project areas. 

Key Results (From PCN) 

22. The project outcomes will be measured with the following indicators: 

a) Area provided with improved irrigation and drainage services; 

b) Increase in agriculture productivity (yield); 

c) Increase in areas cultivated for High-Value Agriculture; 

d) Area under climate-resilient technologies and practices (resilience); 

e) Total number of project beneficiaries (including number of female beneficiaries) 


D. Concept Description 

23. The project will contribute to the development of the agriculture sector by working on (a) 
water as an important input and limiting factor to productivity and overall production (b) training 
and technology for improving productivity, post-harvest management and value addition. More 
specifically, it will support six key priority areas of the government strategy for the sector, that 
is, improving performance/functionality of the delivery system and reducing water wastages; 
making water allocation/distribution equitable; increasing financial sustainability of the irrigation 
system management; increasing climate resilience; increasing productivity and promoting high 
value agriculture (production, processing and marketing); and strengthening the department for 
improved service delivery and governance.  

24. To consolidate the benefits of the project, priority will be given to schemes where all the 
three components’ interventions can happen together. In this way, the two departments of 
agriculture and irrigation will work in close collaboration, hitherto weak.  

25. The project will provide climate change co-benefits derived from: (a) adaptation, by changing 
irrigation management systems and practices to reduce vulnerability to climate change, by 
reducing water wastages and its negative externalities during delivery and by reducing losses 
during field application and crop growth stages; and by promoting innovative resource 
management practices to increase resilience, expanding the use of crops and crop 
mixes/rotations less vulnerable to climate variability, and expanding the use of protected 
agriculture and drought/heat resistant varieties; and (b) mitigation, by promoting sustainable 
water management practices that promote water use efficiency and by promoting agricultural 
intensification using higher yielding varieties, carbon sequestration species and cropping 
patterns, and replacing traditional sources of energy. 

26. Woman will be particularly encouraged and targeted to derive maximum benefits of the 
project and play role in the implementation of the project. The project will also ensure to 
safeguard the interest and needs of woman and marginalized groups e.g. providing for protected 
washing pads and animal drinking willows, and avoiding technologies and practices that increases 
drudgery for woman. Further, contractors, consulting firms and implementing partners of the 
project will be sensitized on gender issues and encouraged to achieve gender balance in their 
teams. The operational manual will spell out gender aspects and protocols for mainstreaming 
gender within project interventions.  

27. The project will be open to the entire province and will be completed in six years. The 
project will have the following components: 

Component A: Irrigation System Management (IDA $52 m US) 

This component will have the following three sub-components. 



28. Sub-compoenent-A1: Rehabilitation and reduction in in-equities: This sub-component 
would support the Irrigation Department to overcome the backlog of rehabilitation to fully 
restore the functionality/performance of the irrigation system; reduce the excessive and wasteful 
losses estimated at 25% by 7 percentage points; and increase economic/service life by at least 
10-15 years. This will include support to both the government and civil (community owned) 
canals systems. The government has prepared a prioritized list of 22 schemes, costing about 
USD140 million, for rehabilitation. The project, during the preparation, will conduct a diagnosis 
of the KP irrigation system, including the list provided by the government to, identify the schemes 
to be support by the project. The criteria for selection would include: vulnerability to climate 
change impacts; acreage and number of beneficiaries; potential for high value agriculture; 
poverty levels in the area served; and cost effectiveness (cost per unit area served). A Project 
Preparation Facility (PPF) has been discussed with the client for preparing detail designs and 
bidding documents for the selected schemes. The rehabilitation works would, usually, include 
flood eroded beds and banks; sunken earth filled sections; and damaged hydraulic structures like 
100ft up and down stream of the fall structures, off-taking points of minors and sub-minors, 
footings of overhead bridges; passages through settlements and deep cut areas; and catchwater 
drains for flushing flood water. Before rehabilitation work begins, any outlets tampered and/or 
illegally installed will be removed. 

29. Sub-component-A2: Institutional strengthening & Reform: To avoid buildup of further 
backlog, an understanding with the GoKP will be developed to increase allocation of recurrent 
budget for the O&M of the system by lifting the current cap that is in place for the last 10 years. 
This could be informed by conducting a study on the cost of neglecting (under funding) the O&M 
of the system. However, to make it sustainable in the long run, support will be provided to the 
department to improve its revenue generation capacity by improving collection of the water 
charges. The investments of component C, should help increase the farmers’ capacity to pay 
water charges by improving their crop productivity and switching to high value crops.  

Further support will be provided for training of staff; developing asset management plan; and 
developing water budgets and water balances estimates for the six-major government canal 
systems.  

The KP government has planned to develop the Provincial Integrated Water Resources 
Management Policy with support from the Bank managed MDTF funded Governance and Policy 
Support project. Support under this sub-component will be re-aligned with the directives of this 
policy.  

30. Sub-compoenent-A3: Future investments preparation: To increase availability of water for 
irrigation, households and livestock; support ground water recharge; reduce intensity of floods, 
siltation downstream by tapping hill torrents and splash floods in the rainfed areas, the project 
will finance preparation of feasibilities, detailed designs, and bidding documents for selected 
dams and irrigation schemes. The scheme selection will be based on criteria of number of farmers 
and acreage benefiting and cost effectiveness and poverty levels in the area served. 


Component B: On-farm Water Management (IDA $51 m US) 
This component will enable the Agriculture Department to support farmers including woman, to 
rehabilitate/improve existing and construct new watercourses; adopt water conservation 
technologies on their farms; and in training its staff. The component design benefits from lessons 
drawn from Sindh and Punjab Irrigated Agriculture Improvement projects. These include a) 
developing good database of watercourses with information for length, no. of shareholders, legal 
status; inclusion of tube-well watercourse; lining 50% length and all turnouts; seasonal work 
windows; monitoring dashboards; estimation of average costs; openness to the entire province 
b) empowerment of the farmers to select and negotiate price of the HEIS and PLL equipements 
with suppliers; training of farmers in crop agronomy; fixing maximum cap on project support per 
unit, c) ensuring geographical spread for laser land leveling promotion etc. The component will 
also finance the extended presence of consultants/firm for engineering supervision of activities 
to be implemented by the field teams of the Department. This component will have the four sub-
components, as follows; 
31. Sub-component-B1: Rehabilitation of existing watercourses: The rehabilitation/improvement 
works will be done on existing watercourses on government and civil canals; springs and tube-
well irrigated areas. This work will include lining of 50% length from the offtake point including 
selected critical sections; alignment; desilting; re-sectioning; installing all turn out structures; 
crossing culverts, washing pads and animal drinking willows. Farmers will contribute 20% of the 
total cost in the shape of skilled and unskilled labour and form themselves into water users’ 
associations with at least 70% farmers’ representation.  

32. Sub-component-B2: Construction of watercourses network: Construction of new 
watercourses network will be done in some new schemes areas where the Irrigation Department 
has already completed the upstream irrigation infrastructure but not the watercourses due to 
which farmers are unable to utilize water. The project support will include farmer’s mobilization 
and their formation of WUAs; engineering design, BOQ & cost estimates for construction of the 
full length of earthen watercourse; lining of 50% length preferably from the off-taking point and 
other critical sections; construction of all turn out structures, crossing culverts, washing pads and 
animal drinking points. Here again farmers will contribute 20% of the total cost in the shape of 
skilled and unskilled labour and form themselves into a water users’ association where at least 
70% farmers become members. 

33. Sub-component-B3: Promote water conservation technologies: To promote on-farm 
water conservation, technologies like HEIS and precision laser land leveling (PLL) will be 
supported on a cost sharing basis. These technologies will particularly suit at the tail end and 
tube-well irrigated areas. Farmers will be trained in growing high value crops under HEIS to make 
the use of technology economically viable. 

34. Sub-component-B4: Capacity building & institutional strengthening: The project will 
finance training of staff in new improved methods of on-farm water management and data and 
studies on the watercourses network. 


Component C: Agriculture Productivity Enhancement and Value-Addition (IDA 
$50 m US)  
The objective of this component is to improve the productivity, diversification, harvest and post- 
harvest management and processing & value addition in agriculture (crops, horticulture, fisheries 
and livestock sub-sectors). This objective will be achieved by i) strengthening public sector 
institutions (e.g., research and extension institutions) to solidify the foundation for sustained 
sectoral growth; i) investing in capacity building and iii) introducing modern technologies to 
farmers; and iv) support agribusinesses/ag-entrepreneurs for higher value addition through agro-
processing and commercialization services. This component addresses the climate change 
vulnerabilities to the agriculture sector, as set out in the project’s vulnerability context. All the 
activities under the Component will adequately reflect important CSA areas of productivity, 
adaptation and mitigation as highlighted in Pakistan CSA profile important for agriculture in 
Northern Pakistan. Considering that more than 70% of Pakistan’s female workforce is employed 
in agriculture, there is a special need to ensure all services provided by the Component will be 
more gender sensitive. The lessons drawn from similar projects, for example, the Sindh 
Agriculture Growth Project, have been incorporated to the Component design. The component 
will also finance the extended presence of technical consultants/firm to assist with planning and 
management of the Component. 

35. Subcomponent C.1: Modernizing public extension service and agricultural research (US$14 m). 
The sub-component will finance modernizing and rehabilitating extension and research facilities 
which have been identified as critical for the KP agriculture sector, such as the agricultural 
research centers, training centers and laboratory facilities etc. The subcomponent will also 
finance information and communication (ICT)-based technologies and services for delivery of 
agricultural extension and marketing for farmers and value chains, such as developing mobile 
phone APPs and other ICT tools (e.g., 24/7 call center, interactive websites, mobile training and 
demonstration centers etc.). The subcomponent will also support studies and data on the sector 
and training of staff. 

36. Subcomponent C.2: Capacity building of farmers (US$6 million).  The project will finance 
training and capacity building for famers, which will be based on training needs assessment 
carried out by the departments and their technical assistance providers. Training topics will 
include, but not limited to, good agricultural practices (including those specifically related to 
CSA), agribusiness management, negotiating in the market, basic accounting, and business plan 
development skills, etc. This will be done through demonstration plots, public information 
campaign, face-to-face training (farmers field school), domestic study tours and exposure visits 
etc.  Special attention will be given to climate smart agriculture related knowledge.    

37. Subcomponent C.3: Introducing modern technologies to farmers (US$20 million).  The project 
will finance investments to increase productivity, climate resilience and on-farm pre-and post-
harvest management of crops, horticulture, fisheries and livestock sub-sectors through 
technology (e.g., farm machinery, equipements, seeds, breeds, and infrastructure etc.).  This 



support will be provided on a cost sharing basis with 70% paid by the Project and 30% by 
beneficiaries on a first come first serve basis, with ensuring regional equity. 

38. Subcomponent C.4: Support agribusinesses (US$10 million). This sub-component will support 
agribusinesses (SMEs)/agro-entrepreneurs for improved services, commercialization and 
processing & value addition. This will include businesses like seed companies, nursery growers, 
fish hatcheries, animal semen producers, farm machinery & equipements providers; reefer 
transporters, chillers, ventilated & cold storages, pack-houses including graders, sorter; slaughter 
houses, pulpers, oil extractors, de-hydrators, tanners; trading centers like rehabilitation of fruit, 
vegetable, livestock and grain wholesale markets; introducing digital trading platforms and 
contract growing etc. The project will provide a competitive grant program with a transparent 
and efficient review and selection process. The grant size will be up to US$100,000, with 30% 
matching fund from applicants. The grant will be released in three tranches based on verified 
progress of proposal implementation. 

39. The component will provide climate change co-benefits derived from: (a) adaptation, by 
promoting innovative resource management practices to increase resilience, expanding the use 
of crops and crop mixes/rotations less vulnerable to climate variability, and expanding the use of 
protected agriculture and drought/heat resistant varieties; and (b) mitigation, by promoting 
agricultural intensification using higher yielding varieties, carbon sequestration species and 
cropping patterns, and replacing traditional sources of energy.. 

Component D: Project Management and Implementation Support (IDA US$12 
million) 

40. This component will support the establishment of the project management structure. This 
will include project administration, human resources including woman staff, procurement, and 
financial management; monitoring and evaluation (M&E); communications management; social 
and environmental safeguards management; and grievance redress and community feedback 
mechanisms particularly channeling the voices of woman beneficiaries.  

41. Citizen Engagement (CE): The populations targeted in the citizen engagement mechanism 
of the proposed project will be farmers and agribusiness owners receiving support to increase 
their yield/productivity and the commercialization of their products. The CE mechanism will 
assist the extension service and government officials in making more informed decisions about 
resource allocations, training and technology needs of farmers and agribusiness owners. Overall, 
the CE mechanism will enhance the successful implementation of the project, and guide the 
government in preparing better programs for farmers. A detailed citizen engagement mechanism 
and grievance redressal mechanism will be elaborated during the preparation phase of the 
project, and will be included in the project implementation manual. 

42. Gender. The project design and approach will reflect the need for taking account of the 
gender dimension and risks associated with knowledge and technology transfer. Project will be 
designed to ensure that it provides equal opportunities for women to participate in project 



activities. Climate-resilient agricultural technologies will be screened to ensure that they are 
gender-neutral. A comprehensive social assessment has been initiated as part of project 
preparation and is expected to result, among others, in a Gender Action Plan. 

   

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project will be implemented in various districts of KP. The land cover of KP changes from north to south. The 

Province sits primarily on the Iranian plateau and comprises the junction where the slopes of the Hindu Kush mountains 
on the Eurasian plate give way to the Indus-watered hills approaching South Asia. Geographically, the province could be 
divided into four agro-ecological zones on the basis climatic conditions covering temperature, rainfall, altitude and 
topography as developed by Environmental Protection Agency of KP:  
(a) Zone A – Northern Mountains covering districts of Buner, Shangla, Upper and Lower Dir, Swat and Chitral.  
(b) Zone B – Sub Humid Mountain covering districts of Haripur, Batagram, Mansehra, Abbottabad, Kohistan and 

Torghar.    
(c) Zone C – Central Valley Plains covering districts of Peshawar, Mardan, Charshada and Nowshera. 
(d) Zone D – Piedmont Plains (including Suleiman) covering districts of Bannu, karak, Lakki Marwat, Tank and DI Khan.  
The snowcapped mountains of Chitral and Swat have low vegetative cover above 4,000 meters. Mountains having 

altitude less than 4,000 meters have alpine forests (up to 3,300 meters). Altitudes between 3,000 meters to 1,500 meters 
have conifer and between 1,500 up to 900 meters have sub-tropical forests. These forests and plains provide habitat to 
98 species of mammals and birds including endangered species of snow leopard, brown bear, ibex, etc. The protected 
areas notified in KP includes 6 national parks, three wildlife sanctuaries, 38 game reserves, 90 community game reserves, 
16 private game reserves, 2 wildlife refuges and 8 wildlife parks. The combined area of all protected areas is 666,340 ha. 
The project activities are located in parts of Zone C valley plains and Zone D piedmont plains, which are are mostly used 

for agriculture and livestock grazing. Indus River and its tributaries are the main source of water for agriculture in the 
Province. Other major rivers that crisscross the province are  Kabul, Swat, Kunar, Siran, Panjkora, Bara, Kurram, Dor, Haro, 
Gomal and Zhob. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The KP Government will be the implementing agency. The last time these two departments, Agriculture Department and 

Irrigation Department  implemented a World Bank project was in 2001-2007, and there the Irrigation Department had a 
secondary role. This leaves much desire for familiarity with and improvement in the understanding of the Bank safeguard 
policies. Therefore, safeguards capacity support, handholding and training will be provided throughout the project 
implementation to ensure that they have adequate capacity to respond to project safeguard issues. 
 
A Project Coordination & Management Unit (PCMU)—led by the Agriculture Department, will be established to manage 

implementation and coordination. Project Implementation Units one each in Agriculture (or two in its sub departments) 
and Irrigation Departments will be established to supervise technical implementation in the field. The PCMU will have a 
senior Safeguards Specialist as part of the PCMU Team. PIUs  at the two departments level will be supported by individual 
environment & social safeguards consultants. These consultants will work closely with the engineering supervision 
consultants, and will provide input into the project design as per safeguards instruments (such as ESMF, RPF, RAP, etc.). 
The senior Safeguards Specialist at the PCMU level will be responsible for the overall implementation and performance of 
the safeguards documents, while the day-to-day screening, monitoring and implementation will be the responsibility of 

d specialists at the PIU levels. The project will have a Project Implementation Committee (PIC) co-chaired by 
Secretary Agriculture and Secretary Irrigation and membered by heads of the PIUs, Chiefs of Water, Agriculture & 
Livestock from P & D, to review the progress of project components. The senior Safeguards Specialist at the PCMU level 
will be a part of the PIC. All project implementation and supervision consultant firms will be required to have adequate 
social and environmental safeguards specialists. The contractors for civil works will implement Contractor ESMP, including 
all necessary guidelines on labor health, safety and environment.  
 
Project launch workshop will be organized by the task team once the project becomes effective and will include a 

detailed session on safeguard implementation arrangements. 
 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project activities involve irrigation infrastructure 
improvement, on farm water management schemes 
and production and post-production support to 
farmers and market actors. These activities are 
expected to cause some adverse environmental and 
social impacts. Overall, most of the impacts are 
expected to be during the construction phase and are 
likely to be temporary and reversible. Consequently, 
the policy has been triggered. Since project will also 
finance feasibility studies for dams, the scale and 
capacity of which is currently unknown. Based on 
existing information, the project has been categorized 
as Category A.   
 
The irrigation infrastructure improvement will overall 
improve irrigation efficiencies and help in ensuring 
availability of designed water flows at the tail-end of 
watercourses. However, improved infrastructure will 
not change the designed water allocations.Typical 
negative impacts associated with civil works financed 
by the project include land acquisition and 
resettlement; noise, air, soil and water pollution due 
to dust and exhaust emission and other wastes; 
vegetation clearance; damage to the existing 
infrastructures such as rural road, temporary water 
stoppages for irrigation, community and worker health 
and safety risks, etc. During operation, some potential 



 
The World Bank  
Khyber Pakhthunkhwa Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Project (P163474) 

 
 

  
Jul 31, 2017 Page 17 of 21  

     

adverse impacts are forecasted such as water 
pollution and spreading diseases by human and animal 
wastes, pesticides use potentially causing water and 
soil pollution, excessive application of irrigation water 
causing leaching of soil nutrients and changes in soil 
characteristics, etc.  
Since the exact location of subprojects are not known 
at present and will be identified during project 
preparation and implementation, framework 
approach has been adopted.  Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) along with 
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) 
for the known priority projects will be developed by 
project appraisal. The ESMF will also include 
assessment of regional impacts on water quality, 
analysis of any possible changes in groundwater and 
downstream surface water availability. The ESMF will 
also include Terms of Reference for environmental 
and social impact assessment (ESIA) for the feasibility 
studies of small dams and environmental and social 
screening checklists/procedures for competitive grant 
program (project component C). 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 

Most of physical infrastructure investments financed 
by the project are rehabilitation and improvement of 
the existing infrastructures. Some new construction 
activities such as construction of watercourses in new 
command areas and small-water storage tanks will 
take place on the existing agricultural lands. These 
activities are not expected to convert or degrade 
natural habitat. Therefore, the policy is not triggered.   
It is important to mention here that the project is 
supporting preparation of feasibility studies for 5 small 
dams or irrigation schemes. The studies will include 
EIAs. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The project is not expected to impact forests and 
associated ecosystems as envisaged in the policy. 
Therefore, the policy is not triggered. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will not support purchase of pesticides. 
However, the policy is triggered because the project 
interventions may lead to substantially increased use 
of pesticides and subsequent environmental 
problems. Thus, to mitigate this impact the project will 
apply an IPM approach with an IPMP prepared. 


     

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 TBD 

At this stage, it is not possible to identify potential 
impacts on physical cultural resources (PCRs). 
However, final determination would be made by QER.  
Chance find procedures will be included in ESMF. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The project area extends across KP, including Chitral 
district which is home to the Kalash who are 
recognized as Indigenous People (IP); hence, OP 4.10 is 
triggered. An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework 
(IPPF) for interventions in Chitral district will be 
prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed publicly on 
the client’s website (in-country) and by the Bank prior 
to appraisal. Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs), if 
required, will be prepared for specific project 
locations. 
Given the cultural sensitivity and tribal nature of the 
area, the social assessment will carefully assess 
potential project impacts on IPs and mitigation 
measures including grievance redress mechanism will 
be developed through free prior and informed 
consultation as required under OP4.10. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Small parcels of land will be required for project 
interventions. In most cases land needs will be met 
through Community or Voluntary Land Donations 
(VLD), the procedures for which will be laid out in the 
ESMF. In few cases small parcels may need to be 
acquired e.g. watercourses construction in new 
command areas (e.g. Bazai etc.). Certain interventions 
e.g. rehabilitation of existing water courses, may 
involve minor temporary impacts on livelihoods (due 
to restricted access; temporary dislocation) which 
could require small scale compensation. However, the 
impacts are not expected to be large scale. Hence OP 
4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement has been triggered. 
A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for actual sites that 
may have been identified, will be prepared, consulted 
upon, and disclosed publicly on the client’s website 
(in-country) and by the Bank prior to appraisal. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

The project will not directly finance rehabilitation of 
existing dams or construction of new dams. The 
project activities especially investments for 
improvements in irrigation infrastructure may rely on 
performance of the existing dams such as Warsak Dam 
on Kabul River or Munda dam on Swat River. However, 
the exact location of schemes are not known at 
present. The project will also finance feasibility studies 



     

for dams, scale and capacity of which is currently 
unknown. The policy is therefore triggered to ensure 
due diligence and for adequate coverage of 
environmental and social aspects/impacts. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

The proposed project activities are located in the 
command area of tributaries of Indus river, which is an 
international water way (river). The proposed project 
activities under component 1 and 2 qualify to trigger 
this policy. The task team will consult LEGEN to 
determine whether waiver to notification to riparian is 
applicable. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
There are no disputed areas as defined in the Policy 
where project interventions are to be undertaken and 
therefore this policy is not triggered. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Sep 17, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
1. ESMF by 30 August, 2018 
2. ESMP for first year schemes by 30 August, 2018 
3. IPMP by 30 August, 2018 
4. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared to provide guidelines for project interventions that could 

require land acquisition, and which may lead to resettlement and impact on livelihood. RPF will be completed by 30 
August, 2018. 
5. RAP for first year schemes by 30 August, 2018 
6. Ingenious Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) will be prepared by 30 August, 2018. IPPs (Indigenous Peoples Plans) for 

the first year schemes will be prepared by 30 August, 2018, where required.  
7. Assessment of regional impacts on water quality, groundwater availability and downstream water availability will be a 

part of the overall ESMF, as well as the social assessment. Moreover, given the cultural sensitivity and tribal nature of the 
area, all assessments will carefully assess consultations/GRM/FPIC requirements.  
8. All feasibility studies will include a TOR on E&S screening and social and environmental impacts analyses.   
 
 
 
























































World Bank Document


 

The World Bank  
AP Integrated Irrigation& Agriculture Transformation Project (P160463) 

 

 

  
Feb14, 2017 Page 1 of 17 

 

Project Information Document/ 
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 11-Nov-2016 | Report No: PIDISDSC19733 


  BASIC INFORMATION 
   

  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

India P160463  AP Integrated Irrigation 
& Agriculture 
Transformation Project 
(P160463) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA March 1, 2018 Jul 26, 2018 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Department of Economic 
Affairs 

Government of Andhra 
Pradesh 

 

 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

Borrower   68.08  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development  170.00  

Total Project Cost  238.08  

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  
  

Have the Safeguards oversight and clearance functions been transferred to the Practice Manager? (Will not be 
disclosed) 
No 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

Type here to enter text 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
1. India has sustained economic growth during last decade: India’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP) for 2016-17 is 
estimated at 7.6 percent, higher than the 7.2 percent for the preceding year, but lower than the projected 8.1-8.5 
percent for this year

1
. Sustained economic growth during the last decade, however, has contributed to annual decline in 

poverty by 1.5 percent, but income inequality has continued to persist. Emerging as one of the fastest growing 
economies, there has been significant upturn in key development indicators. Life expectancy at birth increased to 68 

                                            
1
Economic Survey 2016-17 



 
Years in 2014 from a low of 54 in 1980. India's per capita gross national income increased by about 338 percent between 
1980 and 2014, from $1,255 in 1980 to $5,497 in 2014. As a result, India has climbed five notches to 130th rank in 
Human Development Index among 188 countries in 2014

2
.  

2. Reducing poverty and creating jobs can fuel economy: Sustained economic growth notwithstanding, India 
remains home to 263 million poor people (80% of whom reside in rural areas) living on less than US$1.90/day. Expansion 
of the economy in recent decades has largely resulted in jobless growth. For addressing these issues, Govt. of A.P has set 
an ambitious goal of achieving an annual growth rate of 8.2 percent, reducing poverty by 10 percent (poverty in the 
State is on a decline and currently stands at 9.2%, as per Socio-Economic Survey 2016-17), and creating 50 million new 
jobs.. It has been argued that adequate attention to agriculture could fuel growth, create  jobs and reduce poverty. In 
the wake of consecutive low monsoon rainfall and consequent decline in farm productivity, agriculture has served a 
wake-up call, demanding attention from policy makers. 

3. Agriculture sector continues to lag behind: The issues of inclusive growth and gainful employment are major 
challenges in rural areas where two-thirds of the workforce resides. About 66 percent of the labor force is employed in 
agriculture sector which accounts for 14 percent of GDP, and is saddled with problems of uncertain growth. Per capita 
land and water availability is decreasing while high intensity rainfall events and dry spells are increasing. Land and labor 
productivity continues to be low. 

4. Agriculture growth is essential in achieving India’s development goals: During the last 25 years, agriculture 
sector has not achieved the envisaged growth targets. In 1990s and 2000s, the annual agriculture growth rate was 
around 3-3.5 percent and declined to less than 1 percent in the last two years (2014-16) due to technology fatigue, 
degradation of land and water resources, growing water scarcity, exacerbated by two consecutive droughts, floods, 
cyclones, heat waves, and declining international commodity prices. The growth in agriculture sector in 2015-16 has 
continued to be lower than the average of the last decade, mainly due to a second successive year of lower-than-normal 
monsoon. Report from the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare for 2015-16 indicates that the 
production of food-grains and oil-seeds is likely to decrease by 0.5 and 4.1 percent respectively, while that of fruits and 
vegetables is likely to witness a marginal increase. 

5. To fuel the agrarian economy, strategic shifts in agriculture would  be aimed  (based on the Socio-economic 
Survey 2016-17 projections) at: (i) towards high value vegetables, fruits, livestock and fish products; (ii) towards value 
addition in post-harvest segments; (iii) towards diversification and resilience of farming systems to address climate 
change effects; (iv) towards nutrition sensitive agriculture; and (v) finally a shift towards improved water use efficiency. 

6. Many new schemes have been launched to effect the proposed shifts in agriculture: Pradhan Mantri Krishi 
Sinchai Yojana will fast track irrigation coverage and improve water use efficiency in rural areas; Parmparagat Krishi 
Vikas Yojana aims to reduce input costs by promoting organic farming; Pashudhan Sanjivani, Nakul Swasthya Patra, and 
E-Pashudhan Haat have been proposed to improve livestock productivity. There is an enormous potential for harvesting 
gains from transformation of irrigated agriculture as production, consumption and agribusiness shift from traditional 
cereal crops to horticulture, livestock and fish production. India has a comparative advantage in having a very large and 
largely untapped domestic market, which reduces reliance on exports as the principal driver and consumer of agriculture 
growth. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
7. Andhra Pradesh is a leading reforming economy: Bifurcated on June 2, 2014, the present state of Andhra 
Pradesh (AP) is a middle income state with an average per capita annual income of INR 107,532 which is 15 percent 
higher than the national average. The state accounts for 4.95 percent of India’s land mass, 4.09 percent of its population 
and 4.44 percent of its GDP. AP is predominantly a rural state with 70.4 percent population living in villages and 
dependent on agriculture as the main source of livelihood. Despite severe challenges following the division of AP into 
two states in 2014 (AP and Telangana), the state has recorded appreciable progress in terms of the objective of 
achieving inclusive growth with noteworthy performance in both development and welfare sectors. In 2015-16, the 
Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP) grew at the rate of 10.99 percent, compared to corresponding growth rate of 7.2 
percent for the country. 

8. The sector-wise growth rate is equally impressive. At 2011-12 constant prices, agriculture grew by 8.4 percent, 
compared to industry by 11.13 percent and services sector by 11.39 percent. The per capita income of AP at current 
prices registered a growth of 12.38 percent over 2014-15. This has led to decline in the incidence of poverty from 45 
percent in 1993-94 to 9.2 percent in 2015-16

3
. AP is recognized as one of India’s leading reforming states and in the last 

two decades has achieved significant development outcomes through sustained policy and institutional reform 
programs in which the World Bank has been an important development partner. Rich in natural and human resources, 
the state is keen to leverage its strengths through specific growth strategies tailored to achieve double digit growth. 

9. Agriculture sector has performed below capacity: The performance of the state agriculture sector, which 
accounts for 27.6 percent of the state GDP and employs 62 percent of the work force, has been a cause of concern. 
Between 1999-00 and 2013-14 agriculture grew at around 2.1 percent per annum with most of this growth coming from 
livestock, horticulture and fisheries sub-sectors. In 2015-16 these sub-sectors respectively contributed 26, 25 and 15 
percent to the Agriculture State Domestic Product (AgSDP). Land use pattern is critical for agriculture growth, only 38.31 
percent of the state’s geographical area is net sown (6.23 million hectares). Majority of the farmers are small and 
marginal with average landholdings of 1.06 hectare (ha). The main crops are rice, groundnut, sugarcane, cotton, maize 
and Bengal gram. Due to seasonality and scarcity of water supply, cultivation is mostly limited to only one crop per plot 
per year, with a cropping intensity of 126 percent.  

10. The productivity of major crops has remained largely stagnant: The reason for low productivity is because AP is 
one of the severely water stressed states of India with an average annual rainfall of 966 millimeters, and a coastline of 
974 kilometers that is vulnerable to cyclones. Agriculture in AP is highly exposed to extreme weather events like 
droughts, untimely and high intensity rains, floods, cyclones and hailstorms. Increasing erratic weather aberrations and 
climate change are likely to exacerbate vulnerability of agricultural sector. Of the net sown area of 6.23 million ha in the 
state, 3.15 million ha is presently irrigated through a combination of canals, wells, tanks, ponds and other sources. 
Although 40,817 tanks cover a command area of 2.56 million ha, the actual area irrigated by tanks has declined 
significantly from about 1 million ha in 1990 (24% of irrigated area at that time) to 0.26 million ha in 2015 (8.4% of 
irrigated area).  

11. Irrigation is the key to revival of the agriculture sector: Due to deficient maintenance and management of the 
tank systems, as a result of which most tanks are performing well below the capacity, the actual area irrigated to 
potential created varies between 35-55 percent depending on rainfall. Some 35,376 tanks having a command area of 
0.32 million ha have been transferred from Panchayat Raj Department to Minor Irrigation Department. The rapid spread 
of groundwater irrigation has been an additional contributing factor to the decline in tank irrigation, and has also led to 
a serious depletion of groundwater resources across large parts of the state. Since most of the tanks are in rainfed areas 

                                        
 

with limited possibilities of providing other systems of surface irrigation, their decline poses a serious threat to the 
fragile agricultural economy of these areas.  

12. Poorer farmers, often found at the tail-end of dilapidated tank/pond systems (Small Scale Community Based 
Irrigation Systems- SSCBI Systems) and lacking resources to access groundwater irrigation amidst low and falling water 
tables, are particularly affected. In response to the difficulties being faced by the agriculture sector, the State 
Government has substantially expanded capital investments for modernizing irrigation infrastructure since 2006-07.  The 
Government has also taken steps to strengthen participatory irrigation management and AP was the first state in the 
country to adopt participatory irrigation management (PIM) following enactment of the Andhra Pradesh Farmers 
Management of Irrigation Systems (APFMIS) Act in 1997.  About 6,400 Water User Associations (WUAs) were formed 
which collect water taxes for meeting operation and maintenance (O&M) costs of tanks.  

13. Institutional development through capacity building has contributed to the success of PIM, a process that has 
been significantly supported by externally funded projects. The Bank-supported AP Community Based Tank 
Management Project (APCBTMP), which concluded in July 2016, has made significant development impacts in the state 
by rehabilitating 2,157 tanks, which resulted in 32 percent increase in tank command area and contributed to increase in 
paddy, maize and groundnut productivity by 36, 72 and 97 percent, respectively. In addition, tank rehabilitation resulted 
in 388 percent increase in fish productivity. 

14. Agriculture sector is in need of a paradigm shift: The negative consequences of low agriculture yields extend 
from precarious incomes of farmers to large tracts of land locked in low value agriculture, despite growing demands for 
high value products such as fruits, vegetables, and livestock products. According to NSS data4, the average annual 
income of the median farmer net of production costs (of 1 hectare) from cultivation is less than INR 20,000 in 17 states, 
including Andhra Pradesh. Add high cost of cultivation, growing indebtedness, climate uncertainty, ineffective 
procurement, insufficient storage space and market linkages, and it makes agriculture an increasingly uneconomical 
activity.5 The crisis in agriculture sector is evidenced by the ‘Crop holiday’ (farmers abstained from farming) observed by 
farmers of East Godavari district in an area of 85,050 acres in Kharif 2011, which is further reflected in continuing 
suicides by farmers in the state. During 2015, 516 suicides by farmers were recorded in AP

6
. 

15. Primary Sector Mission seeks institutional convergence for maximizing profitability: To pull agriculture from its 
current abysmal condition, AP requires a new paradigm with the following components: increasing productivity by 
getting “more from less” especially in relation to water; prioritizing the cultivation of less water-intensive crops, 
especially pulses and oil-seeds, supported by a favorable price regime that incorporates the full social benefits of 
producing such crops, and backed by a market-linked value chain. To effect a paradigm shift, GoAP has proposed the 
Primary Sector Mission to converge independently operating sub-sectors viz., agriculture, horticulture, fishery, and 
agribusiness into an integrated farming system for maximizing profitability of small and marginal farmers from a unit of 
arable land. The proposed project will showcase an alternate approach for leveraging capacities of relevant departments 
to improve farm incomes, and make agriculture resilient to climate change.  For a clear understanding at the highest 
level of authority in the state to prevent further deterioration of the socio-economic fabric in rural areas (exodus, farmer 
suicides), a more comprehensive, longer term approach based around adaptive management in agriculture is required – 
particularly given the climate projections and their impact on the agriculture and water sectors in AP. The GoAP has 
evaluated the results of different initiatives taken during the previous years to develop a comprehensive long term 
strategy aimed at making agriculture in the state productive, profitable, sustainable and climate resilient. The state has 

also realized that a mono-cropping production system based on capital intensive irrigation infrastructure and 
technologies has its limitations under the present circumstances with climate variables.    

16. To unlock the full potential of agriculture sector growth, AP has stressed a strong need for policies and programs 
to focus on: (i) improvement of water use efficiency; (ii) intensification of cropping systems and diversification to high 
value crops and commodities; (iii) enhancement of post-harvest management and value addition; and (iv) improvement 
of the resilience of agriculture system in order to deal with increasing threats of climate change. By reorganizing PIM 
with regular administrative systems, AP envisions realizing the full potential of its water sector reforms by achieving a 20 
percent increase in water use efficiency over the next five years. 

Relationship to CPF 
 
17. The proposed project is fully consistent with the India Country Partnership Strategy (CPS): The proposed 
project is fully consistent with the India Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for FY 2013–17 to support poverty reduction 
and shared prosperity in India. The proposed project is aligned with two key pillars of CPS – ‘transformation’ and 
‘inclusion’. In line with ‘transformation’, the project aims to promote inclusive rural growth, development and 
dissemination of new agricultural and water management technologies, climate-resilient agriculture, enhanced market 
linkages for small and marginal farmers, and improved water and natural resource management (CPS Outcome 2.4). The 
proposed project will have positive impact in terms of environmental protection, and reduced greenhouse gas emissions 
by disseminating high efficiency irrigation systems, and promoting diversification to pulses and high value crops, which 
significantly reduce water and carbon footprint of agriculture (CPS Outcomes 2.5/2.6). 

18. The project is aligned with the Bank’s transformative and inclusive criteria:  With respect to ‘inclusion’, the 
project aims to enhance the livelihoods of small and marginal farmers through crop diversification, enhanced market 
access (CPS Outcome 3.6), and also by improving disaster management abilities of GoAP and local communities through 
enhanced design and restoration of smallholder irrigation infrastructure with better drought proofing and flood 
protection features (CPS Outcome 3.8).  

19. The proposed project will directly contribute to the achievement of 5 out of 17 United Nations’ Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDG), namely:  

Goal 2 – End hunger, achieve food security and improved nutrition and ote sustainable agriculture, by enhancing 
income, food security, and nutrition of large number of rural population, where majority of AP’s poor reside. 

Goal 6 – Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all by investing in irrigation 
infrastructure, promoting a whole range of water saving technologies for irrigated agriculture, which uses 
about 75 percent of all water in the state. 

Goal 8 – Promote sustained, inclusive and sustainable economic growth, full and productive employment and decent 
work for all by promoting a broad-based agriculture growth and employment in rural areas, where more than 
two-third of country’s population are employed. 

Goal 9 – Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization and foster innovation by 
rehabilitating and modernizing irrigation infrastructure (supply canals, water tanks) with enhanced resilience 
features of flood protection in about 1,211 tanks. 

Goal 13 – Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts and reduce GHG effects of agriculture production 
by promoting a wide range of water saving technologies and agricultural practices (SRI, micro-irrigation), 
expanding areas under pulses and high value crops, which consume less water, and also by enhancing 
awareness-raising, human and institutional capacity on climate change mitigation, adaptation, and impact 
reduction. 

 
20. The project will also coordinate with other Bank-supported projects in Andhra Pradesh and at national level 
including Assam Agriculture project, Maharashtra Agricultural Competitiveness Project, Andhra Pradesh-Telangana 
Water Sector Improvement Project, National Hydrology Project, and National Groundwater Improvement Project to 
ensure synergy and enhance long-term project impact. 

 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)     
 

The Project Development Objective is to enhance agricultural productivity, profitability and resilience of Small Scale 
Community Based Irrigation Systems (SSCBI Systems)

7
in selected districts of Andhra Pradesh.  

 
21. The project beneficiaries will include small and marginal farmers, water users associations, farmer producer 
organizations, and other agro-entrepreneurs. During project preparation, specific target areas will be identified and 
specific interventions will be designed to benefit women and other vulnerable groups.  

 
 

Key Results (From PCN) 
 

22.  The following 5 Key Performance Indicators (KPI) are proposed to measure key outcomes of the project: 

(i) KP#1: Number of Farmers / farmer groups adopting resilient technologies and practices –(such as  Agriculture Technology,  

water  productivity/efficiency)  (Corporate Result Indicator) 

(ii) KP#2: Percentage increase in irrigation supply in the project area / selected tank command area  

(iii) KP#3: Percentage increase in productivity (for selected crops, vegetables and fisheries), and  percentage increase in 

returns from two selected agriculture commodities over the baseline value through development of supply chain 

(iv) KP#4: Number of farmers benefitted through increased access to agricultural assets and services – disaggregated by 

gender   

(v) KP#5: GHG: Change in incremental value to various Carbon stock assessments in selected plots (Corporate Result 

Indicator) 

D. Concept Description 
 

. Description 
 
23. Project Rationale: The proposed project is seized of GoAP initiatives in ameliorating the current distress in the 
state farm sector. The biggest challenge for the state is to pull farmers out of the current crises. To achieve food and 
nutritional security, the issues related to growing water scarcity, degrading land resources, high cost of cultivation, 
stagnant farm productivity, and the impacts of climate change need to be systematically addressed. AP with 13 districts 
and 6 agro-climate zones has great potential for growth and profitability in agriculture and allied sectors (fisheries & 
horticulture). This is what the project seeks to realize by providing transformative direction to the agriculture sector by 
packaging and up-scaling relevant technologies and appropriate practices, and by supporting reforms (Primary Sector 
Mission) that could support more effective policies and management practices to improve the productivity of 
agriculture, animal husbandry, and fisheries to increase net benefits, and improve equity and livelihoods 

24. Alternative considered:  

25. In line with the Government of India’s policy imperative on getting ‘more from less’, especially in relation to 
water, the project proposes to improve SSCBI for realizing underutilized potential of decentralised irrigation system for 
benefitting small and marginal farmers for producing less water-intensive crops, especially pulses and oil-seeds, and 
creating a favorable procurement ecosystem towards improved profitability under emerging specter of climate change. 
 

 
 

 
26. Innovative design: The project design is consequently built on the key lessons learnt from the APCBTMP 
and from similar projects in other States (Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra), clubbed with the emerging need of 
integrating with climate variables, and value addition to the SSCBI Systems for reducing farm-level water footprints, 
and for enhancing carbon stock in farmers’ fields in providing a strategic direction to develop climate-resilient 
sustainable production systems. The innovative aspects will include improved designs of smallholder irrigation 
infrastructure for efficient capture, storage and delivery of rain water, strong focus on improving water-use 
efficiency, recent advances in intensification and diversification of agriculture, agri-entrepreneurship, and 
movement toward climate resilient agriculture with relevant agriculture-water related investments and substantial 
improvements of participatory irrigation management practices.  
 
27. Improved resilience of agriculture production systems is expected to be achieved under the project 
through improving soil organic carbon, higher water use efficiency, reducing crop water footprints through 
diversification, and increased adoption of technologies and practices for optimizing and sustaining productivity. 
Project activities will be complimented by the use of innovative information and communication technology (ICT) for 
enhanced efficiencies and faster turnaround time for delivering services to project beneficiaries, and new media 
technologies for real time reporting and data sharing among project teams working at different levels. 
 
28. The total project cost is expected to be around US$ 238 million, of which the World Bank will finance US$ 
170 million (70 percent of total project cost) and the GoAP will finance US$ 68 million (30 percent of total project 
cost). The project activities will cover the entire state of Andhra Pradesh (its individual components will cover 
different geographic areas) and will be implemented over a six-year period. The project activities would be grouped 
into four main components: (i) Improving Irrigated Agriculture Efficiency at Farm Level; (ii) Promoting Adaptive 
Sustainable Agriculture Practices; (iii) Post-harvest Management, Market and Agribusiness Promotion; and (iv) 
Project Management and Capacity Building. The individual components have been detailed below.  

 
Component A: Improving Irrigated Agriculture Efficiency at Farm level  (approx. US$ 110 million) 

 
29. This component would improve SSCBI systems to strengthen the integrated farming system (in which 
growing crops, agro-forestry and rearing of livestock co-exist) with reduced water footprints. It will consist of four 
inter-related sub-components: (i) institutional strengthening and capacity building (ii) improving Small Scale 
Community Based Irrigation System (SSCBI System) performance and resilience; (iii) improving water productivity 
and efficiency; and (iv) building synergy with the Primary Sector Mission (on agriculture, fishery, horticulture, 
livestock and irrigation). 

 
Sub-component A.1: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building 

 
30. The sub-component would focus on engaging communities through water users’ associations (WUAs) in 
social engineering of project interventions. The Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM) will follow a distinct 
approach where better operation and maintenance (O&M) of rehabilitated smallholder tank systems will be 
dovetailed with irrigation outreach based on reduced water footprints through adaptive agriculture practices 
(Component B) at the farm level.This sub-component will also sensitize water users and ensure that a desired level 
of greenhouse gas (GHG) emission is managed at the tank level. Water use efficiency will be the leitmotif for 
creating a culture for ‘more crops, per drop’ through community based institutions for assuming greater 
responsibility towards making water-conserving crop choices for water conservation and management. The sub-
component will support in strengthening the existing WUAs and establish new WUAs for effectively developing all 
aspects related to efficient in situ water conservation and management practices. The component would enhance 

WUA capacity in grounding the concept at the farm level. 
 
31. In addition, the sub-component would relate to mobilizing water users for collective action through the 
vehicle of WUAs for ensuring local level participation in planning, implementing and managing the SSCBI facilities as 
well as establishing backward and forward farm-linkages with the external government, private sector and non-
government agencies. The proposed project would expand the scope of ‘SSCBI” beyond the ‘crop irrigation’ into 
others - fisheries, animal husbandry and domestic users. The spheres of intervention would include: (i) Policy and 
Governance - educating and enabling enactment of the existing legislative provisions and  exploring new vistas for 
establishing relation between different sets of water users; (ii) Physical and Engineering- creation of assets, 
including capacity building support for designing and implementing construction, as well as managing procurement, 
finance and quality control; (iii) Operation and Maintenance (O&M) involving physical sustainability and improved 
irrigation performance leading to enhanced production/productivity, incomes and food security; (iv) Social 
mobilisation - local level organizational development including leadership building and problem solving approaches, 
empowerment of poor and vulnerable sections such as women, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes etc., and 
provision of capacity support and capacity building including observation and study tours; and (v) Economic - fixing 
and collection of water tariff and building of a corpus to enable further modernization and diversification, market 
penetration to enable establishing backward and forward linkages; and the related book keeping.  

 
Sub-component A.2: Improving  Small Scale Community Based Irrigation (SSCBI) System Performance and 
Resilience 

 
32. This sub-component will modernize irrigation infrastructure, including SSCBI systems and irrigation canals 
within a defined catchment and also use a cascading management approach. The modernization of irrigation 
infrastructure will focus on improving the bulk water delivery to irrigation systems through rehabilitation and 
modernization of approximately 1,211 smallholder irrigation structures. The expected works will include 
modernization of control structures (diversion weirs), supply channels, cross-masonry structures, de-silting

8
 of 

feeder and supply channels, construction of recharge well structures and strengthening and up-gradation of tank 
bunds, installation of flow measurement devices, up-gradation of distribution systems, improvements of irrigation 
and drainage canals, and introduction of modern quality testing devices to determine soil compaction parameters, 
as well as modern quality testing devices for meticulously maintaining specified cover to reinforcement steel in the 
construction of reinforced concrete structures for long term durability.In addition, relevant catchment treatment 
approaches will be considered for reduced siltation, reliable and dependable flow to cascade SSCBI systems. 

 
Sub-component A.3: Improving Water Productivity and Efficiency 
 
33. The objective of this sub-component will be to promote water saving technologies such as drip and 
sprinkler systems, and for implementing Participatory Groundwater Management (PGM) at assessment unit level. 
The investments will include catchment and command area treatment of SSCBI systems, including construction of 
group based mini-irrigation schemes (dug wells, shallow tube wells, water harvesting and groundwater recharging 
systems).For drought proofing and capturing flood waters, cascades will be linked. Robust automation systems will 
be demonstrated, which will enable spatial homogeneity in water delivery in these systems.  
34. Conjunctive use of surface and groundwater will be coordinated with crop planning and water budgeting. 

                                            
8
Considering economic and environmental perspectives, desilting of the tank will be limited only to remove silt from the tank bed to 

use for raising and strengthening tank bund during the rehabilitation of tank bund in such a way that sufficient area upstream of 

sluices is de-silted on priority to ensure free flow of water towards the sluices. 


Water sharing by groundwater users (with surplus water) with those without irrigation source will be promoted; and 
pipelines provided for efficient water distribution (as implemented in APCBTMP). Consolidation and linking of 
groundwater sources piloted in Anantapur district under the World Bank supported AP Drought Adaptation 
Initiative will be encouraged. All development and improvement activities will be included in an Integrated Water 
Resource Conservation and Management Plan (IWRCMP). A basin level ridge to valley treatment for water 
conservation and management in convergence with the activities of all the primary stakeholders and implementing 
departments will be undertaken. 

 
Sub-component A.4: Building Synergy with Primary Sector Mission 

 
35. For effective service delivery to farmers, various departments and entities involved in water, agriculture 
and related sub-sectors need to collaborate. For achieving this GoAP is working towards forming a consortium of 
knowledge stakeholders, including relevant state line departments, knowledge institutions, civil society 
organizations and other relevant national and international organizations to support planning, implementation and 
monitoring the activities of the Primary Sector Mission. The project will provide support to policy and institutional 
reforms for enhancing institutional capacities of relevant departments. The sub-component will provide incentives 
for capital investments, including through unlocking opportunities for crowding-in private sector investments. 
Support will also be provided for guiding, designing and implementing holistic strategy for the Primary Sector 
Mission.  
 

36. As an innovative design feature, the project will use information and communication technology (ICT) 
tools, sensors and remote sensing in two ways – (i) leveraging Internet of Things (IoT) technologies combined with 
sensors to remotely capture data and information on various aspects pertaining to minor irrigation systems such as 
water flows, water quality and (ii) use ICT and remote sensing products for monitoring and evaluation (M&E). 
 
Component B: Promoting Adaptive Sustainable Agriculture Practices (approx. US$ 79 million) 
 
37. This component aims to improve productivity of the tank systems and enhance resilience of agriculture 
production systems for increasing production and managing risks associated with climate variables. This would be 
achieved by diversification of farm production, introduction of climate resilient solutions, improving value 
realization at the farm level through improved post-harvest management, and strengthening farmer-market 
linkages. The component will provide incentives for capital investments by unlocking opportunities for crowding-in 
private sector investments. This component will have three sub-components: (i) Promoting climate smart 
diversified agriculture production systems; (ii) Innovation and technology transfer for fishery production; and (iii) 
Post-harvest management, marketing and agribusiness promotion.  
 
Subcomponent B.1: Climate Smart Diversified Agriculture Production Systems  
 
38. Sustainable intensification and diversification of crop and horticulture production systems will be achieved 
by awareness creation, on-farm demonstrations on new seeds and promising technologies, capacity building and 
training activities; and by leveraging private sector investments in water management and farm mechanization. 
Climate risk resilience will be built in agriculture production systems by promoting crop diversification from rice to 
low water requiring pulses, maize, oilseeds, millets, vegetables and fruits; cultivation of high yielding, short 
duration, drought-, pest- and disease-tolerant crop varieties/hybrids; complementary agronomic practices; and 
building ability to withstand biotic and abiotic stress through a large scale program of demonstrations, and training 
activities as well as investments in farm implements and resource saving technologies like micro irrigation systems 



to enhance water use efficiency and land productivity.  Component interventions will focus on irrigated command 
areas of the project, and   will also cover the rain fed areas in the project villages and cascades. The project will 
support operationalization of web-based integrated weather forecasting and water management system to 
provide real time crop advisories, including water, pest and disease stress, and implementation of mitigation 
measures and contingency plans. A baseline of Green House Gas (GHG) emissions from agriculture production 
systems will be established and would be regularly monitored for changes during the project period.  
 
39. The project will focus on increasing farm productivity by reducing ‘input’ costs and enhancing ‘output’ 
from farming systems on a sustainable basis. This will be achieved by (a) adopting diversified cropping system on 
‘navdanya’

9
 pattern to buffer weather anomalies; (b) promoting comprehensive, crop specific sustainable 

agricultural package of practices; (c) installation of integrated weather forecasting systems to provide weather-
based crop advisories in selected smallholder irrigation cluster areas; and (d) developing a mechanism to quantify 
crop resilience to climate variability, and creating a baseline for quantifying soil organic carbon and GHG emission 
from crop production systems. 
  
Subcomponent B.2: Innovation and Technology Transfer for Fishery Production 
 
40. Fish production has registered an average annual growth rate of 9.92 per cent in AP. Building on this, the 
component aims at improving fish productivity and profitability in the project tanks and ponds which offer high 
economic opportunities and benefits. The GoAP accords top priority to fisheries development in the state, and has 
released the Fisheries Policy and Plan for 2015-2020. Under this policy, the government has approved the fiscal 
benefits covering several sections of the industry, including production, processing, marketing and disease 
management for stimulating development of the fishery sector. 
 
41. The subcomponent will focus on strengthening research-extension linkages in order to improve farmers’ 
access to technology, and support participation of fish farmers in value chains. Project aims to promote innovative, 
climate resilient, and modern technology packages in production, post-harvest management and marketing. The 
project will (i) support multiplication of improved germplasm for quality seed production, (ii) introduce suitably 
formulated fish feed using locally available ingredients; (iii) demonstrate semi-intensive and intensive production 
models at appropriate locations in ponds; (iv) promote improved fish production techniques in irrigation tanks 
including innovative technologies such as cage culture in an environmentally sustainable manner; and build 
institutional capacity of the fishery sector. The project will facilitate suitable linkages for better access to markets, 
and support measures for maintaining hygienic conditions throughout the fish value chain. 
 
Component C: Post-harvest Management, Market and Agribusiness Promotion (approx. US$ 32 million) 
 
42. This subcomponent will enhance farmers’ linkages to markets by providing alternate marketing channels 
and promoting farm level aggregation, post-harvest management and value addition. The project will support 
organizing producers into farmer producer organizations (FPOs) and companies (FPCs); develop their capacity and 
skills for accessing wider input and output markets; and investment support to the FPOs for establishing common 
service centers for aggregating grains and horticulture produce. The expected benefits to the FPO members are 
higher prices through a combination of larger critical mass of saleable produce, thereby providing economies of 
scale, savings in transaction costs, and strengthened negotiation positions, coupled with the added value achieved 

                                            
9
‘Navdanya’ means nine seeds (a traditional diversified cropping system which includes cereals, millets, and pulses), a system of 

farming that produces food while enhancing biodiversity, building soil fertility and conserving water. 



through primary grading and packing. The project will support integration of producer organizations in commercial 
value chains of agricultural commodities, and facilitate public-private partnerships to enable direct buying 
arrangements.  Key strategy will be market oriented agricultural production through collective marketing by 
farmer producer organizations. 
 
43. For mitigating price risks the project will support operationalization of Negotiable Warehouse Receipts in 
AP. For promoting agri-business ecosystem in the state, an Agri-Business Promotion Facility (ABPF) will be 
established. The ABPF activities will include conducting market and value chain studies on the identified 
commodities; establishing and operating mentorship programs; scouting new technologies (including climate 
resilient technologies); assisting small and medium private entrepreneurs to prepare business and financial 
proposals; and providing business planning and incubation services to emerging agri-entrepreneurs.  
 
44. The value chain for selected commodities will help to increase the share of farmers in wholesale and retail 
prices of the commodity. Some of the measures to achieve this include farmers’ participation in commodity 
exchanges, establishing storage infrastructure starting from primary, intermediate and transit warehouses for 
value addition. For high value crops, emphasis would be laid on demand based production, post-harvest 
processing, and creating forward linkages for direct marketing. Such a production and marketing system would be 
aimed at encouraging farmers to diversify into high value crops for additional income. 
 

Component D: Project Management and Capacity Building (approx. US$ 16 million) 
 
45. The objective of this component is to ensure smooth implementation of project activities, as well as 
monitoring of, and learning from project processes and outputs. Activities to be financed include: (i) setting up, 
supporting and capacity building of project management unit (PMU) to align with the project components at the 
state and district level; (ii) project monitoring, evaluation and promotion of learning culture at the PMU level; (iii) 
documentation of project processes and experience on a rolling basis, and its dissemination to the wider 
development community for cross-learning and sharing; (iv) hiring services of an external M&E agency as 
consultants for the duration of the project for creating a feed-back loop for improving project thrust and 
implementation; and (v) providing support for emerging needs and innovations during implementation; and 
networking with partner organizations, external professional agencies and the World Bank. 
 

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)     

 
Andhra Pradesh is located on the east coast in peninsular India facing the Bay of Bengal. The State has three 
physiographic zones, the hilly region (having Nallamalai, Erramalai hills and the Eastern Ghats having an altitude of 500 
to 1400 m); the plateau (having an altitude of 100 m to 1000 m) and the deltas of rivers (between the Eastern Ghats 
and the Sea Coast).  It has a coast line of 974 km and its major rivers are   Krishna, Godavari, Tungabhadra. It has about 
21% of the geographical area under forest cover with 6 National Parks and 21 Wildlife Sanctuaries. It has an ancient 
religious/cultural heritage and Tirupati is one of the most popular temples in the country. 
 
The state is drained by three major perennial rivers viz. Godavari, Krishna and Pennar, several other medium and small 
rivers. In total 40 rivers drain into the sea. Rainfall varies from 560 mm in the Rayalaseema region to about 1200 mm in 
the northeastern coastal part of the state. The State receives about 66% of rainfall from south-west monsoon (June-


\and about 25% from north-east monsoon (October-December). The stage of ground water development is 
around 70%. Six Agro-Climatic Zones are recognized – Scarce Rainfall Zone, Southern Zone, North Coastal Zone, 
Godavari Zone, Krishna Zone and High Altitude Zone. The state experiences frequent storms, floods particularly in 
coastal areas and drought in the Rayalseema region 
 
The project activities will involve investing on repair and rehabilitation of about   1200 tanks spread across the  state.  
The interventions will include: improving water assets, modernizing irrigation infrastructure, improving water 
productivity, promoting adaptive sustainable agricultural practices, enhancing fisheries production and climate friendly 
agri business promotion.  Andhra Pradesh (erstwhile undivided) is known to be a leading consumer of agrochemicals in 
the country with 24% share and 21% share in pesticides alone. 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies     

 
Safeguard issues revolve around augmenting and/ or re-engineering the existing minor irrigation tanks along with 
water conveyance system and other associated activities related to enhancing production, productivity and incomes in 
the spheres of agriculture and fisheries.  The key intervention relates ensuring bridging of the gaps between designed 
and actual irrigable area with participation by the local water using communities.  Major challenge thus lies in 
mobilizing the local tank based community towards group action and establishing linkages with other public and 
private sector institutions. This has been addressed successfully under the first project (Andhra Pradesh Community 
Managed Tank Project) with the help of an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). The proposed 
project would build on the same, but taking into account the latest legislative developments and expanded scope of 
the interventions, into agriculture and fisheries. Environment Management Plans (EMP) will be prepared for tanks that 
are known to be rehabilitated by appraisal. In addition, the project will develop a Pest Management Plan (PMP). All this 
points to adequate capacity for safeguards management with the borrower.  
 
The previous project has put in place a robust systems   in place and capacities are developed for managing the social 
and environmental impacts. Adequate number of experienced professionals too have been deployed for managing the 
ESMF.  However, as the follow on project’s scope is enhanced both in terms of the number of tanks and the 
interventions, GOAP has already initiated efforts towards re-visiting the ESMF. The learnings drawn the 
implementation experiences of the first project will be fed into this revision.  

 
D. Policies that might apply     

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The physical investments under the project would be 
largely on rehabilitation of existing water assets 
where improper construction could result in adverse 
impacts. The investments under productivity 
enhancement through sustainable agriculture 
practices could result in positive impacts with 
effective planning an implementation. 


An Environmental and Social Assessment will be 
undertaken and a Social and Environmental 
Management Framework will be developed for 
managing risks and maximizing the environmental 
and social opportunities. These will take into account 
experiences and learnings from the previous phase.  
 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD 
The rehabilitation of tanks may impact natural 
habitats such wetlands, which will be determined 
during EA. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The project interventions are not expected to impact 
the forest areas. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will not directly finance pesticides but the 
improved irrigation and crop diversification may 
result in increased use of pesticides. The project will 
work in synergy with the state primary sector mission 
and focus on climate smart agriculture production 
system which will promote the non-chemical package 
of practices. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be 
prepared for the project. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

No significant adverse impacts on cultural property 
expected, but this issue will be examined during the 
ESA and appropriate measures will be put in place to 
deal with any chance findings. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

AP state has a tribal population of 2.7 million 
amounting to 5.5% of the total population. A few 
pockets in three districts are predominantly inhabited 
by tribals and are covered under the Fifth Schedule of 
the Indian Constitution. So, project areas is likely to 
have tribal population. However,   investment plans 
are currently not known. Hence, to address such 
situations wherein the project is likely to be taken up 
in tribal areas, a Tribal Peoples Planning Framework 
(TPPF) will be prepared. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The project will not and need not resort to 
involuntary acquisition of lands as the existing 
irrigation tanks will focus of repair and rehabilitation. 
However, cases of encroachers on /within the Tanks 
cannot be ruled out. To address this, a Resettlement 
Policy Framework will be prepared. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

Some of the tanks could be large with high 
embankments above 10 m. The heights of the 
embankments will be known by appraisal for 
ensuring that appropriate mitigation measures are 
put in place for addressing any potential adverse 
environmental impact. This policy was also triggered 



 

during the previous phase and arrangements were 
put in place.  Already, a robust mechanism exist in 
the state, which will be further strengthened. Three 
region-wise Dam Safety Panels (DSPs) were 
constituted by the Government to function with 
technical guidance from the Chief Engineer, Central 
Designs Organization. 
The project will seek better coordination with the 
Dam Safety Panel and processes. The project will also 
support safety enhancement of tank systems as part 
of tank rehabilitation. 
 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project does not fall on any international 
waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project is not in any disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan      

 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 

May 31, 2017 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
GoAP will undertake social and environmental assessment so as to revise the existing environmental and social 
management frameworks (ESMF), in conformity with applicable Bank policies as well as the national and state legal 
stipulations. EMPs will be prepared for tanks that are known to be rehabilitated by appraisal. Apart from the 
comprehensive ESMF, the following independent documents-- Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and Tribal People 
Plan Framework (TPPF) – will also be prepared. These are expected to be completed by end August 2017. 

 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Myanmar National Food and Agriculture Systems Project (P164448) 

 
 

  
June 20, 2018 Page 1 of 16  

 

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 14-Jun-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC23462 

 
The World Bank  
Myanmar National Food and Agriculture Systems Project (P164448) 

 
 

  
June 20, 2018 Page 2 of 16  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Myanmar P164448  Myanmar National 
Food and Agriculture 
Systems Project 
(P164448) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC Oct 01, 2019 Apr 22, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing The Republic of the Union of 
Myanmar 

Ministry of Agriuclture, 
Livestock, and Irrigation 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to, “increase productivity of select high value commodities, enhance 
agricultural diversification and competitiveness, and diet diversity in selected agro-ecological zones of Myanmar”.  This 
will be achieved through the provision of key public goods and services that will facilitate and further enhance the 
engagement of (and with) the private sector. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 100.00 

Total Financing 100.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 100.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 100.00 

          IDA Credit 100.00 

   
 
Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

1. The political reforms of 2011-2015 in Myanmar and economic liberalization coincided with strong economic 
growth and macroeconomic stability, followed by a slowing of economic activity since 2015.  After reaching 8.5% annual 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth in 2014/2015, economic activity began to slow down with growth reaching 7% and 
5.9% in 2015/2016 and 2016/2017, respectively, due to (i) a challenging macroeconomic environment characterized by 
high inflation, and a reduction in government spending; (ii) a decline in commodity exports (gas and agriculture); (iii) 
constrained private and public investments; (iv) contraction of the agriculture sector due to the extreme weather shocks 
of the 2015/2016 El Niño–Southern Oscillation (ENSO) event; and (v) a decline in industrial output.  Expectations of strong 
exports, industry and services activities contributed to a positive growth forecast for 2017/2018 at 6.4%, counterweighing 
a slow agricultural recovery1. The agriculture sector continues to be vulnerable to supply shocks and demand fluctuations 
from major trading partners (e.g., China and India) affecting the sector’s potential to significantly and sustainably 
contribute to growth and poverty reduction of Myanmar. 
 
2. Despite a decline in poverty in Myanmar over the last decade, poverty remains high and inequality is increasing.  
Nearly 70% of Myanmar’s population lives in rural areas where poverty is prevalent.  The poverty incidence fell from 48.2% 
in 2004/2005 to 42.4% in 2009/2010 to 32% in 2015, making it today one of the poorest countries in Southeast Asia 2.  The 
decline in poverty was rapid in urban than rural areas with the urban-rural gap being substantial in 2015, i.e., 38.8% of the 
rural population are found to be poor relative to 14.5% of the urban population.  In addition, one in ten households fail to 
meet their basic food needs.  In addition to the 32% of the population identified as poor, 14% are categorized as near-
poor making them vulnerable to shocks from crop failures, natural disasters, and health setbacks.  A sizable proportion of 
Myanmar’s poor rely on agricultural activities as smallholder farmers or casual employment with low income 
diversification and high reliance on paddy production.  Female headed households are not identified as being poorer than 
male headed households irrespective of level of profit making, the poor have limited dietary diversity, and have weaker 
productive and financial asset base.  Although living standards of the poorest in Myanmar improved, greater 
improvements were noted among richer households contributing to inequality increase.  There were no significant 
changes in the welfare of the poorest 10% of the population relative to the obvious welfare changes of the average 
household.  
 

        e variations in poverty incidence across the agro-ecological zones (AEZ)3 of Myanmar.  The poverty 
headcount rate in the Hills & Mountains AEZ is 40%, in the Dry AEZ the rate is 32.1%, in the Delta AEZ, the rate is 26.2%, 
and in the Coastal AEZ, the poverty headcount rate is 43.9%.  The Hills and Mountains and the Coastal AEZs have a lower 
share of the population living in them, yet they comprise 47% of the food poor, and 38% are in the bottom quintile of the 
expenditure distribution.  These two AEZs combined have 40% poverty rate and one in six will struggle to meet their basic 
food needs.  Nearly 65% of the poor reside in the densely populated Dry AEZ and Delta AEZ.  Even though the Delta AEZ 
has the lowest poverty head count rate, the number of poor in this area is significant due to its high population density 
(5.5 million poor which also includes Yangon) relative to the 2 million poor in the Coastal AEZ4. 

 
4. Myanmar’s human development faces numerous challenges.  While net primary education enrollment is high 
(93%), there is substantial student drop-out in enrollment at the secondary level resulting in net total enrollment of 55% 
in 2015.  Gender enrollment gaps have been narrowing over time.  On health outcomes, 41% of children under the age of 
five are stunted, 30% are underweight, and 11% are wasted.  In addition, 40% of the population between ages 5 and above 
are overweight or obese, and close to 1 in 7 infants are born with a low birth weight.  It was estimated that on an annual 
basis, Myanmar loses nearly US$400 million in GDP to Vitamin and mineral deficiencies.5  Overall, Myanmar’s Human 
Development Index (HDI) is 0.556, well below the average for East Asia and Pacific (0.720), ranking it 145 out of 188 
countries.  As a result, Myanmar is on a slow path towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) health 
outcomes. 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
5. Despite Myanmar experiencing rapid structural change over the last decade, it is still an “agri-based” economy.  
Agriculture’s share of GDP declined from 52% to 32% during 2000-2015, while manufacturing share increased from 11% 
to 28%.  Nevertheless, the sector shares of employment remained constant over the last decade.  Agriculture continues 
to be the largest employer with agriculture’s share of jobs registering nearly 52%.  More than one-third of workers (nearly 
8.5 million jobs) identified farming as their primary source of employment through work in own family farms, and 16% 
(equivalent to 2.6 million people) are agricultural laborers.  The employment share in services and industry were 36% and 
12%, respectively.  The formal modern sector in Myanmar contributes to only 11% of the jobs.  
 
6. Agricultural growth relative to other sectors is low and volatile in Myanmar.  In 2011/12, agriculture growth was 
-0.7%, 1.7% in 2012/13, 3.6% in 2013/14, 2.8% in 2014/15, 3.4% in 2015/2016, and 4.3% in 2016/17 respectively.  The 
average sector growth during the period 2011/2012-2016/2017 was 15%, which is substantially lower than the 55% and 
59% growth seen in the industry and services sectors, respectively6.  Hence, contribution of the agriculture sector to the 
growth of Myanmar’s economy over time has been small.   

 
7. Low agricultural growth in Myanmar is attributed to low productivity7 with varying degrees across the agro-
ecological zones.  Paddy land and labor productivities in Myanmar are among the lowest in Asia.  In 2013/2014, the 
average land productivity for paddy was 2.7 tons/ha in Myanmar, 3.9 tons/ha in the Philippines, 2.8 tons/ha in Thailand, 
6.7 tons/ha in China, and 5.8 tons/ha in Vietnam.  Within Myanmar, paddy productivity and profitability are the lowest in 
Ayeyarwady and Sagaing States, and highest in Shan State.  Average paddy yield was 2.7 tons/ha (dry paddy equivalent) 

                                            
3 There are four agro-ecological AEZs in Myanmar: (i) Hills and Mountainous AEZ (covers Chin, Kachin, Kayah, Kayin, and Shan States); (ii) Coastal AEZ 
(covering Rakhine and Taninthayi); (iii) Delta AEZ (covering Ayeyarwady, Bago, Mon, and Yangon); and (iv) Dry AEZ (covering Mandalay, Magwe, Nay 
Pyi Taw, and Sagaing).  
4 “An Analysis of Poverty in Myanmar: Part 02-Poverty Profile”. December 2017. World Bank. 
5 “Nutrition at a Glance”. World Bank. 
6 “Myanmar Agriculture Public Expenditure Review”. 2017. World Bank. 
7 Productivity estimates are derived from the “Myanmar: Analysis of Farm Production Economics”.  

or 3.5 tons/ha (wet paddy equivalent).  This puts Myanmar on the lower end of rice production relative to rice producing 
Asian countries.  Labor productivity for paddy is also low.  For example, in monsoon season, the labor return from one 
day’s work yields 23Kgs of paddy, relative to 62Kgs in Cambodia, 429Kgs in Vietnam, and 547Kgs in Thailand.  Although 
Myanmar’s labor productivity is higher during the dry season, it is still considered very low in comparison with other 
countries.  Paddy production in Myanmar is still labor intensive (farmers in Ayeyarwady spend more than 100 days/ha of 
monsoon paddy relative to 52 says in Cambodia, 22 days in Vietnam, and 11 days in Vietnam).  
 
8. Productivity of non-paddy crops are also low but generally higher than paddy productivity also with varying 
degrees across the agro-ecological areas.  Myanmar’s farming systems are diversified and produce a range of non-paddy 
crops with higher productivity than paddy.  The labor productivity (value of crop per day of labor) of black gram, green 
gram, chickpeas, groundnuts, sesame, and sunflower seeds ranged from $9.29/day to $15.92/day, while for both monsoon 
and dry season paddy labor productivity was $4.75/day and $9.20/day, respectively.  The productivity of non-rice crops 
also varied across the agro-ecological zones depending on the production potential of each area.  For example, the 
productivity of green gram in Ayeyarwady (Delta AEZ) was $13.39/day while in Sagaing (Dry AEZ) productivity was at 
$17.69/day.  
 
9. Low earnings for both paddy and non-paddy production, although earnings from the latter are higher, reflects 
on the low agricultural competitiveness of Myanmar relative to its regional neighbors.  In 2013/2014, the net margin 
($/ha) from producing monsoon paddy averaged $114/ha (ranging from $88/ha in Ayeyarwady to $337/ha in Shan State 
due to proximity to China, resulting in higher farm-gate prices and lower input prices relative to other areas in Myanmar).  
Although the profitability of the dry season paddy was higher at $246/ha, this is still considered low relative to the earning 
of farmers in neighboring Asian countries.  In addition, male-headed households accrue higher profits than female headed 
households for many crops (for few crops the gender differentials in earning is insignificant).  On the other hand, the 
profitability of non-paddy crops (black gram, green gram, chickpeas, groundnuts, sesame, and sunflower seeds) is higher 
and ranged from $141/ha to $581/ha.  The earning differentials between paddy and non-paddy is due to the higher 
production cost of the former crop.  The low earnings raise alarming concerns about the potential of agriculture at its 
current state and a primary focus on paddy alone to achieve agricultural growth and uplift rural households from poverty.   
 
10. The inferior performance of Myanmar’s agriculture sector is first a legacy of past agricultural policies and 
investments centered on rice to attain primarily food security.  This was conducted through input intensification mainly 
for rice.  Public agricultural investments neglected undertaking “Resilient”, “Inclusive”, Competitive”, and 
“Environmentally” (RICE) sustainable investments that takes advantage of Myanmar’s diverse farming systems.   
 
11. The undersupply of quality agricultural public goods plays a significant role in Myanmar’s low agricultural 
productivity and weak support for diversification.  According to the 2017 World Bank Agricultural Public Expenditure 
Review8, the most underfunded function in the sector is agricultural research while there is compelling evidence of high 
returns to investments in core public goods related to technology generation and diffusion, market linkages and 
infrastructure, especially when augmented by policy and institutional reforms.  Undersupply of public goods: first, 
agricultural extension services are limited in number and have weak capacity to provide outreach to farmers.  The ratio of 
extension staff and farm family is very low (nearly 1 to 585)9.  Given the 3,819,1925 acres covering major crops, this means 
on average 1 extension worker covers 5,081 acres.  In addition, extension outreach was geared mostly towards paddy; 
second, farm management is poor.  Farmers have weak knowledge about the appropriate application of production 
technologies such as fertilizers, seed varieties, and pesticides; and third, agricultural research is underfunded, fragmented, 
and suffers from weak human resource capacity.   

                                            
8 World Bank 2017. Myanmar Agricultural Public Expenditure Review. Increasing the impact of public spending on agricultural growth. WB/LIFT.  
9 “Current Status of Agricultural Extension in Myanmar”. 2017. MOALI 



 
12. Private sector engagement in agricultural value chains is low. In addition to the constraints mentioned above, 
several other factors are adversely affecting the private sector’s full participation in agricultural value chain development.  
Infrastructure challenges such as post-harvest storage and cold chain facilities, and testing laboratories restricts them 
from contributing to the downstream side of the value chain.  Poor accreditation of services geared towards the regional 
and global export markets is also a constraint. 
 
13. Climate variability and extreme weather events have also significantly impacted performance of the agricultural 
sector.  In 2012, Myanmar was ranked the country most at-risk to climate shocks within Asia-Pacific, due to the wide range 
of hazards including, floods, cyclones, earthquakes, landslides, and tsunamis.  In addition, it ranks 2 out of 187 countries 
in the Global Climate Risk Index.  However, there are regions and states that are more vulnerable than others.  In 2015-
2016 ENSO event and the accompanying drought in the Central Dry Area decreased production and export of traditional 
crops such as sesame, beans and pulses.  Overall the drought from El Niño affected more than 15 million people in the 
Delta and Dry areas affecting livelihood, food access, decreased productivity and farmer income. 
 
14. Improving nutritional status of Myanmar’s population remains a significant challenge.  Rice continues to be the 
key staple crop consumed in Myanmar.  However, rice lacks nutritional value in terms of the minerals and vitamins typically 
found in a meal with dietary diversity.  A 195-gram serving of long grain cooked brown rice provides 11% of the 
recommended daily calorie value and provides no vitamin A, C or D intake, has only 5% of recommended daily iron value, 
2% of daily calcium and no vitamin B12 value10.  In addition, sufficient knowledge on dietary intake is lacking, especially 
among the rural population.  One way to tackle this challenge is to promote agricultural diversification and increase the 
knowledge of rural households about dietary diversity and importance for improved health outcomes, and productivity. 
 
15. Despite the significant sector challenges, Myanmar’s agriculture has ample potential for growth and rural 
poverty reduction.  Myanmar has abundant natural resources, youthful workforce, and diverse faming systems.  Myanmar 
is the world’s second largest exporter of beans and pulses (after Canada) and the largest exporter in the ASEAN region.  
For example, in 2014, the export earnings from beans and pulses was $835 million (exported to India, Thailand, 
Bangladesh, China, and UAE) which is higher than the export value of rice valued at $630 million during the same year.  In 
addition, urbanization and income growth amongst segments of the population are translating into changing dietary 
preferences and food spending patterns.  All these developments are expected to accelerate and expose enormous 
opportunities for farmers, and private sector across all segments of the value chain, and overall sectoral growth. 
 
16. Leveraging agriculture for sector growth and rural poverty reduction is a top government priority, and this is 
recognized in the 2017 Agriculture Development Strategy (ADS).  The ADS accept limitations of past approaches to ensure 
food security for promoting agricultural transformation and rural poverty reduction.  The strategy identified three priority 
areas requiring support: (i) Governance; (ii) Productivity; and (iii) Market Linkages and Competitiveness.   
 
17. The 2018 Myanmar Sustainable Development Plan (MSDP) recognized the agriculture sector challenges and 
proposed action plans.  The MSDP recognizes the high dependence of Myanmar’s economy on agriculture and its 
significance for poverty reduction, as noted under “Pillar 2: Prosperity & Partnership”. Under this Pillar, “Strategy 3.1: 
Creating a diverse and productive economy with rural development and agriculture as the foundation” stresses on 
addressing Myanmar’s low productivity to support value chain development, increase private sector participation and 
eventually boost agricultural competitiveness.  
 

                                            
10 “Crop Diversification and Nutrition”. 2014. Partners.  



Relationship to CPF 
 
18. The proposed project is aligned to the 2015-2017 World Bank Country Partnership Framework (CPF) and the 
two years extended partnership framework. Rural poverty reduction is outlined as a focus area with several objectives, 
including increased productivity in farming and agribusiness, and addressing critical infrastructure and service gaps for the 
rural poor.  The extended CPF continues its support for rural poverty reduction through rural growth. 
 
19. Furthermore, the proposed project is aligned with the identified pathways for poverty reduction as outlined in 
the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD).  The SCD identified improvements in agricultural productivity as necessary for 
poverty reduction and as an opportunity for short term gains.  The SCD recognizes the immense potential for 
improvement in Myanmar by addressing yield gaps, diversification, and value-addition. 

 
20. The proposed project is also aligned with the World Bank’s Twin Goals.  The proposed project activities are 
intended to increase the income of the rural poor and generate shared prosperity by building the capacity and knowledge 
of farmers to undertake enhanced farming practices that increases the resilience of their diversified farming systems as 
well as increase their agricultural competitiveness.   

 
21. This proposed project concept has benefited substantially from ongoing and completed analytical and 
investment activities.  The experience from the ongoing Agriculture Development Support Project (ADSP) in project 
management and implementation (fiduciary aspects), and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) arrangements will be used 
extensively for the proposed NAFSP.  Successful instruments of the ADSP such as Project Working committees (PWCs) 
that meets bi-monthly to improve collaboration and monitoring across participating departments and divisions and 
implementation through existing MOALI decentralized bodies such as Agricultural Consultative Committees (ACCs) at 
district and village track levels will be applied to this project.   

 
22. Insights on the status of Myanmar’s agriculture sector performance were drawn from two recent completely 

analytical activities.  The first study is “Myanmar: Analysis of Farm Production Economics”. This was funded by LIFT 

(Livelihood and Food Security Trust Fund) to address existing agriculture data constraints using a 2013/2014 Myanmar 

Agricultural Survey of 1,728 farm households in four regions/states across three Agro-ecological Zones (AEZs) in 

Myanmar: (i) Ayeyarwady and Bago (Delta AEZ), Sagaing (Dry AEZ), and Shan (Hills and Mountains AEZ).  The study did 

not cover the Coastal AEZ.  The survey covers crops produced during two main seasons i.e., monsoon and dry seasons. A 

follow-up survey is currently ongoing to assess changes in farming practices since the 2013/2014 survey.  The second 

study this concept note benefited from is the “Myanmar Agriculture Public Expenditure Review”.  Several insights on the 

status of Myanmar’s food system were highlighted during the recent “Workshop on Modern Food Systems in Myanmar” 

(February 2018).  The workshop discussions noted the ongoing challenges and opportunities for the development of 

Myanmar’s food systems, and these were captured in this concept note.   

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
 
23. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to, “increase productivity of select high value commodities, enhance 
agricultural diversification and competitiveness, and diet diversity in selected agro-ecological zones of Myanmar”.  This 
will be achieved through the provision of key public goods and services that will facilitate and further enhance the 
engagement of (and with) the private sector. 
 


Key Results (From PCN) 
 
24. The key results of the proposed project are: 

 
i. Increase in production volume and yields of selected commodities 

ii. Change in agricultural land productivity of targeted farmers supported by the project (percentage) 
iii. Increase in sales of farm produce as a share of production among targeted farmers supported by the project 

(percentage, disaggregated by gender male- and FHHs) 
iv. Increase in efficiency of processing facilities supported by the project (percentage) 
v. Increase in linkages between producers and buyers 

vi. Increase in dietary composition of targeted households (percentage, disaggregated by gender) 
 

 
25. The key project beneficiaries are: (i) smallholders in four agro-ecological zones (Dry, Delta, Hills and Mountains, 

and Coastal); (ii) extension workers; (iii) agricultural researchers; (iv) buyers for value chain development; (v) MOALI 

departments and units participating in the project. 

 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
1. Once the priority agro-ecological zones and high value / potential commodities and value chains are determined, 
the proposed project will adopt the “Theory of Change” and “Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD) for Agricultural 
Value-Chains” frameworks for the identification and selection of project activities within each component and 
subcomponents.   
 
2. The proposed project areas and interventions will be made with close consideration provided to the following: (i) 
promotion of improved nutritional outcomes; (ii) inclusiveness of minorities and other marginalized groups; and iii) 
implementation in conflict and non-conflict areas.   

 
3. The proposed project is envisaged to have the following three components (with interventions tailored to the 
specific context of the selected commodities / value chains): 

 
4. Component 1: Development of Value Chains (US$ 20 million) – The objective of this component will be to support 
mechanisms by which public sector services are improved in collaboration with the private sector where opportunities 
exist to promote the development of selected agricultural commodity value chains, innovative modalities to better link 
farmers to markets, and improvements in the enabling environment for agro-enterprise.  This component will explore 
opportunities (including pilots) for private sector engagement on capacity strengthening to add value for key commodities, 
provision of equipment and infrastructure using out-grower schemes, and matching funds for farmer organizations and 
commodity specific associations.  This component will also include improvements in the enabling regulatory / legal 
environment for agro-enterprise (support to farm inputs and products) including food quality and food safety.  The 
infrastructure investment needs based on business plans and cost sharing mechanisms may include, (i) product collection 
centers, (ii) drying facilities, (iii) post-harvest storage structures, (iv) micro irrigation; (v) improved information technology 
service facilities, (vi) cold chain facilities, and (vii) facilitating a conducive policy environment, among others. 

 
5. Component 2: On-farm Agricultural Investment Support (US$74 million) – This component has two sub-
components: (i) On-farm Infrastructure Investments (US$54 million) and (ii) Agricultural Support Services (US$20 million).  



The objective of the first sub-component is to improve the production volume of selected commodities and crop 
diversification by providing support for infrastructure investments in priority farming systems.  The activities may include 
upgrading/constructing of critical infrastructure for increased productivity, crop diversification and/or competitiveness 
such as in existing and new research/ experimental stations, seed multiplication farms, laboratory buildings and 
equipment, border post quarantine and testing service centers; irrigation systems on-farm/ downstream; and 
decentralized training centers / information centers.  Capacity building related to optimizing infrastructure investments 
and operation and maintenance will also be included.  This sub-component will prioritize infrastructure investments in 
high-value commodities and areas where the level of engagement of the private sector is low or nonexistent.  The 
objective of the second sub-component is to ensure and enhance the provision of key public agricultural services such as 
agricultural research and innovation, extension services, institutional development and farmer training.  This component 
will provide capacity building and policy support to the national agriculture research and extension system with the aim 
to improve service delivery in the agriculture sector.  This component will also focus on services related to on-farm 
management practices which will include the adoption of climate smart production practices, crop diversification, and 
integration of nutritional and gender-sensitive activities. 
 
6. Component 3: Project Management (US$ 6 million) - The objective of this component is to ensure effective 
project management.  This component will support carrying out of the day-to-day project management activities, including 
project administration and implementation, procurement, financial management and audit, social and environmental 
safeguards (including peace and inclusion filters, marginalized/vulnerable population groups, gender etc.), and monitoring 
and evaluation (M&E). 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
At concept stage, location for project interventions have not been determined.  
 
Myanmar is characterized by its central lowlands along the Ayeyarwady river, which flows from north to south through 

the Central Burma Basin and ends in a wide delta. These areas are its well-established agricultural production areas, 
which the current Agricultural Development Support Project (ADSP) (P147626) supports. The Central Valley Region is 
bordered by steep, rugged highlands in the north, the Arakan Mountains in the west and the Shan Hills, Karen Hills and 
Tenasserim Hills to the east. As a result, physical characteristics vary significantly across the country, as well as ethnic, 
social and cultural characteristics. 
 
Once project locations are identified, further information will be provided. 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
Under the current ADSP project, the project management has hired one environmental and one social safeguards 

consultant, who have the skills and experience to manage the environmental and social risks of the project. The project 
management unit overall has been gaining knowledge and experience on World Bank safeguards policies and their 
implementation. However, without the consultants, the project management unit does not have dedicated staff who has 
backgrounds and experience in environmental and social risk management. As a part of the project’s environmental and 
social management framework (ESMF) preparation, a capacity need assessment will be conducted to identify areas for 
improvement and measures to increased capacities. 




 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Martin Fodor, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Vivianti Rambe, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler, Social Safeguards Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The proposed project will focus on activities that (i) 
improve farm management and value chain 
development which include upgrading testing 
laboratories and upgrading/building post-harvest 
storage and cold chain facilities; (ii) strengthening 
capacities of agricultural extension officers and 
researchers; (iii) improve farm management which 
includes support of seed multiplication and 
procurement and distribution of seeds and seedlings 
as well as supply of biological control; and (iv) ensure 
effective project management. 
 
Under Component 1, the proposed project will fund 
specific investments on infrastructure for improved 
farm management such as (i) research, ((ii) seed farms, 
(iii) national service laboratories, (iv) off-site and on-
site service and testing laboratories and centers, (v) 
border post quarantine and testing centers, and (vi) 
training centers and other high priority infrastructure 
to support improved farm management in selected 
agro-ecological zones.  
 
The project will also fund infrastructure for value chain 
development such as (i) product collection centers, (ii) 
drying facilities, (iii) post-harvest storage structures, 
(iv) improved information technology service facilities 
and (v) cold chain facilities intended to support 
downstream agricultural value chain development. 
 
Main potential environmental impacts are related to 
construction activities, maintenance and operation of 
the post-harvest storage and cold chain facilities (e.g. 
hygiene, reliable and adequate water and power 
supply). In regards to seed farms, waste management 
on the use of polythene plant bags for 
seedlings/nursery will be the main issue.  

Main potential social risks are related to land 
acquisition, contested land ownership and land 
conflict, and potential exclusion of ethnic minorities, 
landless farmers, women-headed households or other 
vulnerable groups. Any social assessment conducted 
during preparation or implementation will cover these 
social risks.  
 
Project target provinces and states are yet to be 
determined; therefore an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared. The 
Framework will include the following: 
 
1. Guidance for screening of subprojects, 
ensuring that relevant safeguard policies (natural 
habitats, forests, and projects in disputed areas) are 
adequately addressed.  
 
2. Assessment of environmental and social 
impacts of various activities related to Component 1 
and Component 3. Component 2 of the proposed 
project will focus on capacity building. The component 
will incorporate technical inputs from the safeguards 
specialists into TA’s Terms of References to ensure 
safeguards aspects are mainstreamed. 
 
3. Details on the type, level and depth of 
environmental and social impact assessments 
(SAs/EMPs/SOPs/ECoPs) required for each of the 
investments/activities. 
 
4. Environment Health and Safety (EHS) 
Guidelines for reference as a generic environmental 
management plan, particularly for construction 
related activities. 
 
5. Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(ESMP), particularly on the following issues: 
construction related activities, maintenance and 
operation (hygiene, reliable and adequate water and 
power supply) issues related to the post-harvest 
storage and cold chain facilities (Component 1), and 
waste management on the use of polythene plant 
bags for seedlings/nursery as well as implication of the 


supply of biological control as part of the integrated 
pest and disease management (Component 3). 
 
Overall, the proposed project is expected to deliver a 
number of environmental benefits, such as improved 
soil and water management practices considering the 
agro-ecological context of the project intervention 
area. The project will also contribute to an integrated 
pest and disease management through the adoption 
of sustainable practices by supplying biological 
controls; the use of natural enemies to manage 
population of pest organisms.  
 
Considering the type of investments and activities, 
scale of the proposed project, as well as the nature 
and magnitude of its potential impacts, an 
environmental Category B operation is proposed. 
 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No  

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The policy is triggered to ensure that any affected 
natural habitats are adequately protected, because 
some of the project sites may take place near parks or 
protected areas. The proposed project’s ESMF will 
screen out and exclude any subprojects that would 
involve clearing of new land for agriculture. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The proposed project’s ESMF will screen out and 
exclude any clearing or effects on forest lands. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The policy is triggered as a precaution, because 
pesticide use is a necessity in agricultural activities in 
the region. The ESMF will promote Integrated Pest 
Management as standard practice. A screening 
mechanism will be included in the ESMF to determine 
if there are any sub-projects or activities with 
significant pest management issues; if so, then a 
separate Pest Management Plan will be required to 
ensure that these materials are well managed for 
those subprojects and/or activities. 
 
Under Component 3, the proposed project will fund an 
integrated pest and disease management which will 
support the adoption of sustainable pest and disease 
management practices by supplying biological 
controls; the use of natural enemies to manage 
population of pest organisms. The ESMF will provide 

more detailed information on the application of this 
method. 
 
 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

This policy is triggered to ensure that any “chance 
finds” or other physical cultural resources during 
excavation or other earth-moving activities are 
adequately protected. Project’s ESMF will consist of a 
chance find procedure which requires that should any 
areas of potential cultural importance or artefacts be 
identified, works should stop and the government 
related agencies (to be identified at appraisal stage) 
should be contacted. No work should continue until 
approval has been sought from these agencies. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Myanmar is one of the most ethnically diverse 
countries in Asia, and the project will likely fund sub-
projects where ethnic minorities are present. Both 
under Component 1 (rehabilitation and construction 
of infrastructure) and Component 2 (formation of 
farmer groups), there may be risks that ethnic 
minorities do not have equal and culturally 
appropriate access to benefits, and may not be 
adequately consulted in decision making. 
 
Since project sites are not known at this time, MoA 
will prepare an IPPF as part of the ESMF in order to 
ensure that in sub-projects are screened for ethnic 
minorities, and sub-project areas where ethnic 
minorities are present, MoE will conduct a social 
assessment and ensure that free, prior and informed 
consultations are held to reach broad community 
support. If target project locations are identified 
during preparation, a social assessment will be 
prepared by appraisal, and free, prior and informed 
consultations will be held. If locations and location-
specific activities are not identified during preparation 
and this is left to project implementation, the social 
assessments under the current ADSP project will be 
combined and updated as an assessment of social risks 
in the agriculture sector, specific to the new project 
activities. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Rehabilitation and construction of test laboratories, 
post-harvest storage units and cold chain facilities are 
not expected to result in significant land acquisition 
impacts, especially since siting should be flexible for 

construction of new facilities. The impacts should be 
moderate and manageable. 
 
Since siting of sub-projects is not known at this time, 
MoA will prepare a RPF in order to ensure that sub-
projects are screened for land acquisition, and 
appropriate plans are prepared in cases where land 
acquisition is necessary. The RPF will also include 
protocols for voluntary land donation. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 TBD 

The project will not finance construction of new dams, 
however, it is yet to be determined during project 
preparation whether it will include repairs / 
maintenance / rehabilitation  of existing dams in which 
case the dam safety measures would be applied. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

TBD 

Project target provinces and states are yet to be 
determined. ESMF will cover the provision of OP/BP 
7.50 should project preparation discussions determine 
that the locations or activities subject to the policy are 
within the international waterway. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The proposed project’s ESMF will screen out and 
exclude any projects in disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Oct 10, 2018 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
MoALI- Department of Agriculture will prepare an ESMF, including a pest management plan, IPPF and RPF, before 

appraisal. If target project locations are identified during preparation, a social assessment will be prepared by appraisal, 
and free, prior and informed consultations will be held. If locations and location-specific activities are not identified 
during preparation and this is left to project implementation, the social assessments under the current ADSP project will 
be combined and updated as an assessment of social risks in the agriculture sector, specific to the new project activities. 
These will be disclosed and consulted on after being cleared by the Bank. These instruments will be informed by the 
documentation and implementation experience of the on-going Agriculture Development Support Project (ADSP). 
 
 


























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
State of Maharashtra's Agribusiness and Rural Transformation Project (P168310) 

 
 

  
Sep 18, 2018 Page 1 of 11  

     

 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 03-Oct-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC25483 
     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

India P168310  State of Maharashtra's 
Agribusiness and Rural 
Transformation Project 
(P168310) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA May 13, 2019 Aug 12, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of India Department of Agriculture, 
Government of Maharashtra 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The project development objective is to support the development of inclusive and competitive agriculture value chains , 
focusing on small holder farmers and agri-entrepreneurs in Maharashtra. This would be achieved by expanding access 
to new and organised markets for producers and enterprises with complementary investments in technical services and 
risk management capabilities. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 300.00 

Total Financing 300.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 210.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 210.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 80.00 

          Borrowing Agency 80.00 



     Other Sources 10.00 

          Foundation/s (identified) 10.00 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. India continues to be one of the world’s fastest-growing large economies and has experienced a substantial 
decline in poverty. The Indian economy’s annual growth rate grew from 5.5 per cent in 2012-13 to 8 per cent in 2015-
16, supported by robust private consumption, a resilient services sector, and some revival in industrial activity. In recent 
times, temporary disruptions from demonetization and uncertainty surrounding GST slowed India’s economic 
momentum; real GDP growth declined to 7.1 per cent in 2016-17 and further to 6.5 per cent in 2017-18. Private 
investments have remained subdued. Economic activity is expected to stabilise in 2018-19 and growth will resume 
gradual acceleration in the near term. Since the 2000s, India has made remarkable progress in reducing absolute poverty, 
declining sharply from 38.9 to 21.6 per cent at the international poverty line (US$1.90 PPP/day) between 2004 and 2011. 
With over a 100 million people escaping poverty, the pace of poverty reduction in India exceeded that of the developing 
world as well as that of Middle-Income Countries (MICs) in this period. High economic growth, a rapid rise in rural wages, 
greater rural-urban integration and increase in non-farm activity, especially construction, were the key drivers of poverty 
reduction. Since 2011, robust economic growth may have aided further reduction in poverty. However, trends in the 
construction sector and rural wages suggest that the pace of poverty reduction may have moderated.  

 
2. Agriculture plays a vital role in India’s economy and is central to policies aimed at alleviating poverty. 
Increasingly, the potential role of the sector to expand growth, create jobs and support the ongoing rural-urban 
transformation is becoming evident. More than 54 per cent of the population is engaged in agriculture and allied 
activities (census 2011), and the sector contributed 17.1 per cent to the country’s Gross Value Added (GVA) for the year 
2017-18 (at current prices). As expected in a fast-growing economy, there has been a continuous decline in the share of 
agriculture and allied Sectors in the GVA from 18.6 per cent in 2013-14 to 17.4 per cent in 2016-17. The annual agriculture 
growth rate was around 3-3.5 per cent in the 1990s and 2000s and dropped 3below 2 per cent per annum during 2013-
15, due to low productivity, growing water and land scarcity, rising labour costs, and declining commodity prices. This 



 

has led to an agrarian crisis with a growing emphasis on improving the ecological sustainability of the resource base and 
the socio-economic potential of the sector to increase farmer welfare and rural growth opportunities1. 

 
3. Rapid urbanisation in India is driving change in the agriculture value chain, deepening linkages between urban 
food systems and producers. This urbanisation leads to (i) an increased uptake of agricultural produce from rural to 
urban areas; (ii) changes in the farm production to reflect the food marketed and consumed; and (iii) larger and changing 
role of food supply chains in meeting urban food needs2. However, the current urban food system is in disarray with 
limited or no focus on food safety, food security to urban poor and multiplicity of authorities handling food related issues. 
 
4. Over the years India has developed export competitiveness in certain specialised products, making it the 
world’s 10th largest agriculture exporter.  Leading exports consisted of basmati rice, the meat of bovine animals, marine 
products, cotton, and sugar. However, India’s agriculture export basket accounts for only about 2 per cent of world trade. 
and the share of India’s high value and value-added agriculture produce in its agriculture export basket is less than 15 
per cent compared to 25 per cent in the US and 49 per cent in China.  This low share and low value are contributed mainly 
by (i) inconsistent policies in the areas of farm production, support prices and R&D (all focused on food security); (ii) poor 
inland transportation, exit point infrastructure; and (iii) export restrictions which results in uncertainty among the 
stakeholders. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
5. Maharashtra has a high agricultural growth rate, agricultural transformation toward higher value crops is 
underway, and the state is relatively integrated into global commodity markets.Agriculture has grown at an annual 
average of 6.4 per cent from 2004-05 to 2011-12, and the area under cultivation for cereals has declined since 2000, 
reflecting a shift from food grains towards cash crops. Food grains (rice, wheat, and millets, excluding maize) account for 
about 25 per cent of the gross cropped area, contributing only 7. 7 per cent of agricultural GDP3.  Since 2000, with the 
upsurge in the production of high-value crops, the state has emerged as one of the country’s largest producers and 
exporter of fruits, vegetables, pulses, cotton, and soybean. Many of these changes in the sector have led to positive 
developments because production is labour intensive (e.g., horticulture and floriculture), climate resilient (pulse-based 
cropping systems increase resilience, e.g. pigeon pea intercropping leads to higher soil carbon sequestration than 
monocrop system), and responds to market needs, both domestically and globally.  The food processing industry is 
dynamic in the state with increasing value addition, and it employs approximately 240,000 workers, about 15 per cent of 
the total formal sector employment. However, agriculture growth and structural transformation are not spread evenly 
across the state with some areas, notably the north and east, lagging behind.  Likewise, around 57 per cent of all industries 
are concentrated in only three districts4.  
 
6.  Small and marginal farmers5 dominate Maharashtra's agriculture and commodity downturns significantly 
impact them as the state’s agriculture is diversified and relatively integrated with the global value chains. Commodities 
like soybean, cotton, and sugar (covering 44 per cent of the cropped area in Maharashtra) are strongly influenced by 
global price movements. Commodities with little footprint outside India are mainly influenced by trade policies. For 
example, over the past few years, the price of pulses (where pulses cover about 20 percent of the total cropped area in 

                                            
1 Annual Report, 2017-18. Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers Welfare, Government of India 
2 India is the fifth largest online grocery market in the Asia Pacific region and one of the fastest growing.  India’s online food and drink market grew to $135 million in 
2016 and is expected to cross $464 million in 2021. Likewise, the emergence of larger chains and stores which began around 2005 and has grown to over 3,000 modern 
retail outlets in 2016. 
3 Economic Survey of Maharashtra, 2017-18, GOM. 
4 A Report Based on ASI 2010-11, GOM. 
5 With average farm size of 1.44 ha. 


Maharashtra), while influenced by domestic consumption, were largely affected by the inconsistent trade policies of 
India. This is reflected in periodic farm distress in sectors linked to domestic and global markets, with broad shifts in the 
global prices of commodities such as pulses, soybean, sugar and milk leading to farmers not even being able to cover the 
cost of production in many cases. 
 
7. In response to these emerging production and market-related challenges, the Government of India (GOI) and 
Government of Maharashtra (GOM) have launched a number of programs, policies, and reform initiatives under the 
overarching vision of “Doubling Farmer’s Income by 2022”. New initiatives to address the production risks include a 
crop insurance scheme with enhanced coverage and use of technology; and a dedicated long-term irrigation fund with 
an initial tranche of US$3 billion. Additionally, to liberalise the regulated agriculture market, the GOI launched, and GOM 
adopted, second-generation marketing reforms, including the move towards integrating the country into a unified 
national market; and 100 per cent Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) is allowed to enhance investments in agribusiness/food 
processing sectors. A new agricultural export policy is in the final stages of approval and proposes doing away with 
arbitrary export quotas, and price restrictions.  Through this policy, India is targeting a doubling of agriculture exports to 
4.00 per cent (US$ 60 billion) by 2022.  
 
8. Women face a number of additional barriers to the transition to high value agriculture (HVA) and agribusiness. 
While India’s farmers are increasingly likely to be women, they are less able to transition to HVA than men, and their 
ownership of agricultural assets has stagnated. Unlike men who, in addition to production, also serve as the actors in the 
upper levels of the value chains, including intermediaries or village-level traders and processors, wholesalers, retailers, 
or exporters, women are generally concentrated at the lower levels of the value chains. This division of labour is mostly 
a reflection of social and cultural norms, which discourage women to travel by themselves or own land. These factors 
curtail women’s access to resources and services, including credit, training, extension, inputs, and trading and marketing 
networks. Women do not have collateral to apply for loan or opportunities to participate in extension training because 
selection for these opportunities is often based on land ownership titles or other formal records. More than 2 million 
poor women have been mobilised into Self Help Groups (SHGs) and federated organisations in the state.    These SHGs 
and federated organisations can serve as an important pillar to substantially enhance inclusion of rural poor women into 
agribusiness transformation and related entrepreneurship opportunities.   
 
9. The state also faces significant adverse risks from climate change:   As part of the National Action Plan on Climate 
Change (NAPCC), the Government of Maharashtra has formulated the Maharashtra State Adaptation Action Plan on 
Climate Change (MSAAPCC) by commissioning a comprehensive vulnerability assessment study. The MSAAPCC climate 
modelling results for 2030, 2050 and 2070, show that temperature and rainfall are projected to increase across the state, 
with important regional variations resulting in potentially significant adverse impacts on agriculture performance. 
Impacts will be further aggravated by the projected increase in the frequency of extreme climate events (droughts, 
hailstorms, floods, delays in the onset of monsoons, higher rainfall intensity) already experienced in the state over recent 
past, as illustrated by the three severe droughts that hit the state over the past five years. Given these uncertain shifts in 
weather and climatic events, the small and marginal farmers are disproportionately exposed to risk and farm distress. 
 
10. With the support of the World Bank, Maharashtra has recently rolled out four programs, to enhance the climate 
resiliency of the state’s agriculture: the Maharashtra Project on Climate Resilient Agriculture, and three national level 
programs that have significant presence in the state: the National Dairy Support Project (P107648), the National 
Groundwater Management Improvement Program (P158119) and the proposed Agriculture Risk Resilience Insurance 
Access Project (P165923). Their focus is on enhancing climate resilience of farmers through promoting adoption of 
climate-resilient agricultural technologies, irrigation and production risk management. The proposed project will seek to 
complement and leverage these Bank financed projects/programs and other thematically related on-going/pipeline 



projects and initiatives both nationally and in the state viz., National Rural Economic Transformation Project (P104164), 
the proposed Food Processing and Value Addition Pilot Program (P167559). 
 
Relationship to CPF 

 
11. The project advances two focus areas of the India CPF of promoting more resource efficient growth and enhancing 
competitiveness and creating jobs. Specifically, the project will support the following CPF goals: 

 
12. Objective 1.1: Promote more resource-efficient, inclusive, and diversified growth in the rural sector. The project 
closely aligns to the CPF sectoral goal of supporting Government of India (GOI) priorities of agricultural transformation 
and doubling farmer incomes by 2022. The project seeks to undertake a range of interventions to enhance market access, 
competitiveness and resilience to market shocks of farmers and value chain actors in the state of Maharashtra. The 
project will seek to generate jobs in agribusiness related areas including input supply, provision of technical services and 
food processing. The project will also explicitly target and develop mechanisms for inclusion of women at all level of 
agricultural transformation, from diversification to higher value crops, to access to higher level technical services, and 
access to a broader range of markets. This will promote inclusivity and diversification of the rural growth. With its strategy 
to align with complimentary investments under other projects and schemes, the project will also advance resource 
efficient growth and build climate resilience of farmers. 

 
13. Objective 2.1: Improve the business environment and select firm capabilities. The project will support the GOM’s 
efforts to develop a more favourable regulatory environment for private investment in agribusiness related areas, 
promote private sector investments and enhance the competitiveness of the agricultural sector. This will include support 
for the improved implementation of reforms already undertaken; setting up of institutional structures for consultative 
planning and capacity building of identified value chains and growth clusters, and provision of technical services to 
agribusiness enterprises.  .  

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
14. The project development objective is to support the development of inclusive and competitive agriculture value 
chains6, focusing on small holder farmers and agri-entrepreneurs in Maharashtra.     
 
B. Key Results 

a) Increased access to new and organised markets (gender disaggregated, with a target for increased access for 
women producers/value chain participants); (measured by increase in the value of marketed output at the 
beneficiary level); 

b) Beneficiaries of job-focused interventions (CRI) (gender disaggregated); (measured by the number of beneficiaries 
reached by training, employment in processing, entrepreneurial development and other interventions that 
contribute to the jobs agenda); and 

c) Farmers reached with agricultural assets or services (CRI) (gender disaggregated). 
 
15. Project beneficiaries include producers, community-based organisations (viz., SHG federations, Farmer Producer 
Organisations, and Primary Agriculture Credit Cooperative Societies), agri enterprises and other value chain participants, 
including individuals where relevant. 
 
D. Concept Description 

                                            
6 Competitive value chains are defined as those providing project beneficiaries with access to services, markets, and jobs. 




 
16. The proposed project will strengthen and speed up ongoing agricultural systems transformation in the state of 
Maharashtra. The project will support the state in strengthening the continuing market-driven transition, with an 
expanded private sector role in the production, processing, and value addition, commercialisation of crops, and livestock 
products. With a substantial urban population – the highest in the country; relatively high per capita incomes – third 
highest in the country; and the highest industrialisation level amongst states, Maharashtra is well placed for such 
agricultural sector transformation. The proposed project will support the following pillars of agriculture and rural 
transformation in the state:  

 
(a) Build state capacity for evidence-based agribusiness reforms. The state has undertaken many agriculture market 

reforms and plans to do more to address market-distorting interventions and bottlenecks for private sector activity.   
The project will seek to build capacity of the state to inform on how reform issues are debated, decided, implemented 
and evaluated; and develop institutional mechanisms for coordination with the private sector.  

(b) Expand market access. Constraints to producers and entrepreneurs accessing emerging domestic and export markets 
include lack of access to technical services relating to food safety and quality; weak information on market 
opportunities and requirements; and inability to invest in market development activities.  The project will seek to 
improve access of producers and entrepreneurs to a range of technical and business development services to 
enhance competitiveness through food safety and quality; new technologies; and skills training. International 
experience shows that accessing new markets requires longer-term strategic actions including identifying 
opportunity based on local competitive advantages and supply-demand projections; and support for firms and 
entrepreneurs to undertake market development. The project will support a range of such activities including: 
identifying opportunity commodities and value chains for interventions; scaling up production and processing of 
identified commodities; enhancing access to timely market information and intelligence; and supporting producer 
and enterprise associations to undertake market access activities.  

(c) Strengthen risk mitigation measures. The project will support strengthening risk mitigation measures including 
building the capacity of the state to respond to commodity-price fluctuations and agriculture sector crises; 
developing access to timely information on markets and productions trends; and enhancing access of producers to 
financing and hedging instruments. Additionally, for building the climate resiliency and resource growth, the project 
will align with complimentary investments under other projects and schemes. 

 
17. In addressing these constraints, the project will support  a number of actions for leveraging additional resources 
by (i) improving the policy and regulatory environment for private sector investments in the agricultural sector; (ii) using 
public financing to enhance private sector incentives and to reduce transaction costs and risks  ; (iii) forging innovative 
partnerships for leveraging funding, including Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funding through the Village Social 
Transformation Foundation (VSTF), a foundation promoted by the GOM, with private sector participation and financing, 
to catalyze rural transformation. 

 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Maharashtra is one of India’s most prosperous states, with a population of 114 million. Yet, it has some of India’s poorest 

people, four of its 36 districts are among India’s 106 most backward. Agriculture and industry form the mainstay of the 
state's economy. Most of the cultivable land is still rain-fed, relying heavily on the southwest monsoon rains. The net 
irrigated area is only 30.77 million Ha or about 16% of cultivable land. Maharashtra has typical monsoon climate, with 
cold weather seasons. The state has been affected by the recurrent monsoon failures in recent years 
resulting in droughts which have disproportionately impacted the state’s semi-arid agro climatic zones. Sahyadri and 
Satpura are two important hill ranges and Godavari, Bhima and Krishna are the two major rivers of the state. The state 
also has a long coastline. About 17% area of the state is forest, majority of which are in the eastern and Sahyadri regions 
of the state. Since the central parts of the state receives low rainfall, most of the rivers in the region have multiple dams. 
Maharashtra has around 1800 notable large dams. Maharashtra is generally rich in biodiversity Southern Tropical Thorn 
with five major forest types (Southern Tropical Semi-Evergreen, Southern Tropical Moist Deciduous, Southern Tropical 
Dry Deciduous, Southern Tropical Thorn and Littoral and Swamp Forests). The Western Ghats areas of Maharashtra are 
included in the 34 global Biodiversity Hotspots. The proposed project will be implemented throughout the state. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The Borrower is familiar with the World Bank's safeguard policies having implemented several Bank funded projects. 

More recently, in the agriculture sector, Maharashtra Agricultural Competitiveness Project (MACP) and Project on Climate 
Resilient Agriculture (PoCRA) are being implemented. Both have sound environmental and social management 
frameworks. MACP has been rated Satisfactory on safeguards performance consistently. There is now adequate capacity 
in the state to manage potential safeguard risks of projects. However, some capacity building efforts are needed to deal 
with the new set of challenges arising as a result of climate change impacts. In general, Maharashtra has good institutions 
that can prove technical support to deal with safeguards related impacts, risks and challenges and build on positive 
outcomes of resource efficiency and sustainability. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Anupam Joshi, Environmental Specialist 
Gitanjali Chaturvedi, Social Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

This policy is triggered. The project involves a series of 
interventions on agriculture value chain development, 
facilitating market access, supporting improvement of 
livestock productivity, food processing and, in general, 
enhancing resilience.  It is anticipated that 
investments to be made under the project will not 
lead to any major irreversible impacts. the project by 
design promotes market-led better natural resource 
and environmental management within the selected 
sectors and sub-sectors. The potential environmental 
issues that could arise if project financed investments 
are not implemented appropriately, include food 
safety, supply chain sustainability, waste generation 
and management, poor energy efficiency and 
associated emissions, soil degradation etc. Activities 
for post-harvest management and value chain creation 
for product aggregation, handling, and marketing 


could have impacts associated with general civil works 
construction, if supported under the project. This 
includes appropriate site selection for creating new 
infrastructure and reducing impacts of construction 
related activities like debris disposal, dust and solid 
wastes. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

TBD 

This policy may/may not be triggered. At this stage it is 
not clear if investments in enhancing the access of 
intended project beneficiaries to private markets will 
trigger this policy. The project investments may result 
in increased role of private markets and attract private 
investments in food processing etc. The proposed EA 
will ascertain whether this policy will be triggered. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD 

This policy may/may not be triggered. Project 
investments are not likely to adversely impact natural 
habitats but certain elements may have some bearing 
on agro-biodiversity. The EA will ascertain whether 
this policy will be triggered. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The project will not lead to any impact on forests or 
their management practices. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Even through the project is not going to invest on the 
crop production side of agriculture, this policy is 
triggered as opportunities created through better 
market access could lead to overuse of pesticides and 
other agro-chemicals for boosting production. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
The project is unlikely to have any impact on physical 
cultural resources. Proposed investments are largely in 
existing markets and/or rural household level. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Project activities will be implemented state-wide. 
Given that Maharashtra has a large tribal population 
spread across the state with 54% of those living below 
poverty line, OP 4.10 has been triggered. As specific 
locations for the project are unknown, an Indigenous 
People's Planning Framework (IPPF) will be prepared 
after free, prior and informed consultation with 
affected Scheduled Tribes as per OP 4.10 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 TBD 
Project activities currently envisaged are not likely to 
cause any involuntary resettlement. This will be 
updated during preparation. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The project will not invest on constructing any new 
dam and/or support rehabilitation/improvement of 
any existing dam. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project does not involve any international 
waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project does not include any disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Apr 08, 2019 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The safeguard preparation will involve undertaking an Environment Assessment. The preparation timeline is aligned with 

project processing timeline. In addition, an Indigenous People's Planning Framework (IPPF) will be prepared to take into 
account initiatives undertaken in areas populated by Scheduled Tribes. 
 
 



















































LOAN NUMBER 3731-BAN

LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations)

(Rural Connectivity Improvement Project)

between

PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 13 JANUARY 2019

BAN 47243



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 13 January 2019 between PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC 
OF BANGLADESH (“Borrower") and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) by a.project design advance agreement dated 5 July 2016 between ADB . 
and the Borrower (“PDA Agreement"), ADB provided a project design advance concessional 
loan (“PDA Loan") from ADB’s ordinary capital resources in an amount in various currencies 
equivalent to one million four hundred twenty-four thousand Special Drawing Rights 
(SDR1,424,000) for the purposes of preparatory activities for the Project;

(C) by a loan agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB (“Concessional Loan Agreement"), ADB has agreed to provide a concessional loan 
(“Concessional Loan") from its ordinary capital resources in the amount of one hundred million 
Dollars ($100,000,000) (“Concessional Loan") to the Borrower for the purposes of financing 
expenditures of the Project;

(D) the Project will be carried out by the Local Government Engineering 
Department (“LGED") of the Ministry of Local Government, Rural Development and 
Cooperatives (“MOLGRDC"), and for this purpose the Borrower will make available to LGED 
the proceeds of the loan provided for herein upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB; 
and

(E) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB’s ordinary 
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations Loan 
Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations"), are hereby made applicable to this 
Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:



2

(a) “Community Development Framework" or “CPF” means the community 
development framework, including any update thereto, as .agreed to 
between the Borrower and ADB;

(b) "Consulting Services” means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds .of the Loan and the Concessional Loan;

(c) “Department of Environment” means the Borrower’s Department of 
Environment or any successors thereto;

(d) “EMP” means the environmental management plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(e) "Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(f) “GAP” means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, including 
any update thereto, and agreed to between the Borrower and ADB;

(g) "Goods” means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the 
Concessional Loan, including any related Nonconsulting Services such 
as transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and 
initial maintenance;

(h) "IEE” means the initial environmental examination for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(i) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(j) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(k) "Nonconsulting Services” means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the Concessional 
Loan;

(I) "PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 17 
September 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as 
updated from time to time in accordance with the respective 
administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(m) "Procurement Plan" means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
17 September 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as 
updated from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policyr 



3

the Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with 
ADB;

(n) “Procurement Policy* means ADB’s Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(o) “Procurement Regulations” means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(p) . “Project Executing Agency” for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means LGED or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which' is responsible for the carrying out of the 
Project;

(q) “Project facilities* means the facilities to be improved, constructed or 
provided under the Project;

(r) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
Implementation of and compliance with the EMP, Including any 
corrective and preventative actions;

(s) “Services” means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services;

(t) “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(u) “Target Areas” means the 34 districts in which the Project roads are 
located;

(v) “Tribes, Minor Races, Ethnic Sects and Communities Safeguards” 
means the principles and requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 
3, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the SPS; and

(w) “Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the 
Concessional Loan, including any related Nonconsulting Services and 
project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred million Dollars ($100,000,000), as such 



4

amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency Conversion in accordance 
with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period’1 as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Sec tion 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest 
Period equal tothe sum of:

(a) LIBOR;

(b) 0,60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a credit
of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations; and

(c) a maturity premium of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan 
Regulations.

Section 2.03. The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0,15% 
per annum. Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts withdrawn 
from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement.

Sec tion 2.04. Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 1 May and 1 November in each year.

Sec tion 2.05. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this 
Loan Agreement.

Sec tion 2.06. (a) The Borrower may at any time request any of the
following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt management:

(i) a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the 
principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and 
outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency;

(ii) a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any portion 
of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding 
from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa; and

(iii) the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any 
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 
outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or 
Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate.

(b) Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that 
is accepted by ADB shall be considered a "Conversion”, as defined in Section 2.01(f) of the 



5

Loan Regulations, and shall be effected In accordance with the provisions of Article V of the 
Loan Regulations and the Conversion Guidelines.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 May 2024 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02, (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (lv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors' opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.



6

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Sec tion 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
Inspect the Project, the Goods, Works and Services, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01, The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 9.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the Concessional Loan has become 
liable for suspension or cancellation for any reason whatsoever.

Section 5.02. The following is specified as additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 9.07(a)(iv) of the Loan Regulations: either 
of the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6,01. The following Is specified as an additional condition to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the Concessional Loan Agreement has been duly executed and delivered, and 
all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the effectiveness 
of this Loan Agreement) has been fulfilled or arrangements satisfactory to ADB shall have 
been made for the fulfillment thereof within a period of time satisfactory to ADB.

Section 6.02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of the 
Loan Regulations,



7

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Senior Secretary or Secretary or any Additional 
Secretary or Chief, Joint Secretary or Joint Chief, Deputy Secretary or Deputy Chief, Senior 
Assistant Secretary or Senior Assistant Chief, Assistant Secretary or Assistant Chief of the 
Economic Relations Division of the Ministry of Finance of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 12.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Economic Relations Division
Ministry of Finance
Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh
Sher-e-Bangla Nagar
Dhaka 1207, Bangladesh

Facsimile Number:

(880)2-918-0788

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444
(632) 636-2340,



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

PEOPLE’S . REPUBLIC OF
BANGLADESH

MONOWAR AHMED 
Secretary 

Economic Relations Division 
Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

MANMOHAN PARKASH 
Country Director 

Bangladesh Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to increase transport efficiency and to generate
related employment in the Target Areas.

2. The Project shall comprise:

(a) (i) improving the condition of approximately 1,700 km of rural roads to
all-weather standards which incorporate climate resilience and safety 
features; and (ii) maintaining approximately 242 km of such rural roads 
for a period of five years after completion of the Works;

(b) (i) provision of training for LGED on road asset management, road
safety, contract management, financial management and climate- 
resilient road design and construction; (ii) raising the awareness of road 
users on road safety, human trafficking, and prevention of sexually 
transmitted infections; and (iii) enhancing the skills of women workers 
on road construction and maintenance; and

(c) . upgrading the rural road masterplan for the entire territory of the 
Borrower, using a geographic information system for selecting priority 
rural roads.

3. The Project is expected to be completed by 30 November 2023. This is
expected to cover approximately 3 out of the 5 years under the maintenance period as referred 
to in paragraph 2(a) above.



10

SCHEDULE 2

Amortization Schedule

1. The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date 
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the first 
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying (a) the total principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment Date; by (b) 
the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount to be 
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, to 
which a Currency Conversion applies.



2, If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:

(a) to the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn 
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the 
amount withdrawn and outstanding as of such date In accordance with 
paragraph 1 of this Schedule; and

(b) any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall, be 
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such 
withdrawal in amounts determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of 
each such withdrawal by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the 
original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph 1 of this 
Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment 
Share) and the denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining 
Original Installment Shares for Principal Payment Dates falling on or 
after such date, such repayment amounts to be adjusted, as necessary, 
to deduct any amounts referred to In paragraph 4 of this Schedule, to 
which a Currency Conversion applies,

3. Withdrawals made within 2 calendar months prior to any Principal Payment
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable oh any Principal 
Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal Payment 
Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal Payment Date 
commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of withdrawal,

4, Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an 
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be 
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be 
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount In its currency of denomination immediately 
prior to said Conversion by either (a) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal 
in said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating to 



12

Schedule 2

said Conversion; or (b) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion Guidelines; 
the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.

5. If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time
shall be denominated In more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule shall 
apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a 
separate amortization schedule for each such amount.



13

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1, The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table"). (Reference to “Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table,)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2, Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion Of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Retroactive Financing

5. Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible
expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 
months before the date of this Loan Agreement in connection with Goods, Works and Services, 
subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 20% of the Loan amount



14

Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

*Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower,

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

($) 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Works 80,105,000 75% of total expenditure claimed
2 Equipment and Vehicles 3,375,000 75% of total expenditure claimed
3 Consulting Services 9,700,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*
4 Equipment Operation 

and Maintenance 
(Project Management)

1,140,000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

5 Unallocated 5,680,000
TOTAL 100,000,000



15

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED. to ensure that the Project is
implemented In accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth In the PAM. Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan 
Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Procurement

2. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
. accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 

Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements, The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications  set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

must.be

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

3. The Borrower shall ensure that LGED does not award any Works or
Nonconsulting Services contracts which Involves environmental impacts until:

(a) the Department of Environment has granted the final approval of the 
IEE; and

(b) the Borrower has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into 
the Works contract.

Community Participation Framework

4. The Borrower shall, or shall cause LGED to, implement the CPF as agreed with
ADB and in conformity with all relevant applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower.



16

Schedule 4

5. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause LGED to ensure, no section or part thereof
under any works contract awarded for the relevant Subproject shall be handed over to the 
contractor unless the applicable provisions of the CPF have been Implemented in full.

Operation and Maintenance

6. The Borrower shall ensure that it allocates sufficient funds for operation and
maintenance of the roads to be constructed or upgraded under the Project, and ensure that 
the funds are made available to LGED on a timely basis for the same purpose. This shall 
include providing financing for the remainder of the 5-year maintenance period under the 
maintenance contract financed by the Loan or the Concessional Loan after Project completion.

7. In relation to the 5-year maintenance contract financed by the Loan or the
Concessional Loan;

(a) the Borrower shall exercise its rights under such contract in such a 
manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower and ADB and to 
accomplish the purposes of the Loan or the Concessional Loan, as 
applicable; and

(b) in the event that a contractor fails to perform the maintenance of the 
Project roads required under such contract, the Borrower, through 
LGED, shall assume the maintenance responsibility by providing 
sufficient funds and making appropriate implementation arrangements.

Environment

8. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that the preparation,
design, construction/implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and all 
Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the IEE, the EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth 
in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Involuntary Resettlement and Tribes, Minor Races. Ethnic Sects and Communities

9. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that the Project does hot
have any Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards impacts or Tribes, Minor Races, Ethnic Sects 
and Communities Safeguards impacts. If the Project does have any such impacts, the 
Borrower shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies with the applicable 
laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

10. The Borrower shall make available or cause LGED to make available necessary
budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMP.



17

Schedule 4

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

11. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that all bidding documents
and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(c) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the IEE 
and the EMP (to the extent they concern impacts on affected people 
during construction), and any corrective or preventative actions set forth 
in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(d) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(e) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental risks or impacts that were not considered in the IEE or 
the EMP or any resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project;

(f) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(g) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at . 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

12. The Borrower shall cause LGED to do the following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the IEE and the EMP, promptly inform ADB of the 
occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the 
event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP promptly after becoming aware 
of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

13, The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that no proceeds of the
Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities 
provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.



18

Schedule 4

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

14. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that the core labor
standards and the Borrower's applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project 
implementation. The Borrower shall ensure that LGED includes specific provisions In the 
bidding documents and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the 
contractors, among other things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and 
regulations and incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use 
child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do 
not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of association and effectively recognize the right to 
collective bargaining; and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to 
disseminate, information on the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to 
the employees of contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the local 
communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women.

15. The Borrower shall cause LGED to strictly monitor compliance with the
requirements set forth in paragraph 14 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

16. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that (a) the GAP is
implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts Include 
relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) 
adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP; (d) progress on 
implementation of the GAP, including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and 
output targets include: (i) target at least 40% women participants in project orientation seminars 
and planning of project roads; (il) provide on-the-job training to all women workers on basic 
construction, improvement, reconstruction works and maintenance skills; (iii) target at least 
20% women workers to be employed for road improvement works; (iv) conduct awareness on 
sexually-transmitted infections including HIV/AIDS, and anti-human-trafficking to at least 40% 
of students, teachers and parents along the project roads; (v) implement core labor standards 
with' gender-inclusive provisions and women-friendly work environments; (vi) conduct road 
safety awareness programs to at least 40% of students, teachers and parents along the project 
roads; and (vil) conduct technical training of LGED staff including 30% women staff.

Counterpart Support

17. The Borrower shall ensure that LGED has sufficient funds to satisfy its liabilities
arising from any Works, Goods and/or Services contract.

Governance and Anticorruption

18, The Borrower shall, and shall ensure that LGED, (a) complies with ADB’s.
Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the 
right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.



19

Schedule 4

19. The Borrower shall ensure or cause LGED to ensure that anticorruption
provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and. contracts, Including 
provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the 
executing and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other 
service providers as they relate to the Project.






















































Untitled


LOAN NUMBER 3737-UZB(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Horticulture Value Chain Infrastructure Project) 

between

REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED MAY 2019

UZB 51041



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated May 2019 between REPUBLIC OF
UZBEKISTAN (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Project will be carried out by AIFSA (as hereinafter defined), and for 
this purpose the Borrower will make available to AIFSA the proceeds of the loan provided for 
herein upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB and the Borrower; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Project Agreement to be entered into between ADB and the ALC Management Company (as 
hereinafter defined);

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject, however, to the following modifications:

(a) Section 2.01 (w) is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

“Project Agreement” means the project agreement between ADB and 
ALC Management Company, as such agreement may be amended from 
time to time; and such project agreement includes all schedules to the 
project agreement; and

(b) The term “Project Executing Agency” appearing in Sections 6.01(a), 
8.01(d), 8.01(f), 8.01(k), 9.01(c) and 9.02(c) of the Loan Regulations 
shall be substituted by the term “ALC Management Company”.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:



2

(a) “AIFSA” means the Agency for Implementation of. Projects in the Field, 
of Agro-industry and Food Security of the Borrower, or any successor 
thereto acceptable to ADB;

(b) “ALCs” means the agro-logistic centers to be established under the 
Project in Andijian and Samarkand regions of the Borrower; and “ALC” 
means either of them;

(c) “ALC Management Company" means a special purpose vehicle to be 
established as a limited liability company to operate and manage the 
ALCs, which shall be fully owned by the Borrower;

(d) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(e) "Consulting Services" means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan as described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to this 
Loan Agreement;

(f) “EMP” means an environmental management plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, incorporated in the respective IEE;

(g) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(h) “GAP” means the gender action plan for the Project, including any 
update thereto, prepared by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(i) “Goods" means equipment and materials to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including related services such as transportation, 
insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance, 
but excluding Consulting Services; .

(j) “iee” means an initial environmental examination for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(k) “Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(I) “LARP” means a land acquisition and resettlement plan for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(m) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);



3

(n) “MlFT” means the Ministry of Investment and Foreign Trade of the 
Borrower, or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;

(o) “Output” means an output of the Project;

(p) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 11 
October 2018 and agreed between the Borrower, through AIFSA, and 
ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the respective 
administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(q) “Procurement Guidelines" means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(r) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the'Project dated 
11 October 2018 and agreed between the Borrower, through AIFSA, 
and ADB, as updated from time to time in accordance with the 
Procurement Guidelines, the Consulting Guidelines, and other 
arrangements agreed with ADB;

(s) “Project Executing Agency” for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means AIFSA or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the 
Project;

(t) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the EMPs and the LARPs, 
including any corrective and preventative actions;

(u) “SPS” means ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009); and

(v) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, 
and project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting Services.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred ninety-seven million Dollars 
($197,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.



4

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter, on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 May and 15 November in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall make the proceeds of the Loan 
available to AIFSA upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB and the Borrower and shall 
cause AIFSA to apply such proceeds exclusively to the financing ofexpendituresonthe Project 
in accordance with the provisions of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of Goods, 
Works and Consulting Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to:

(a) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Consulting Services which are supplied from such member countries of 
ADB as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as eligible 
sources for procurement; and

(b) Goods, Works and Consulting Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time.



5

Section 3.05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2024 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 4.02. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

Section 4.03. (a) The Borrower shall cause AIFSA to (i) maintain
separate accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the 
Project in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (Hi) have such 
financial statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, 
experience and terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing 
standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a 
report, which includes the auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the 
Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control 
of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no 
later than six months after the close of the fiscal year to which they relate, copies of such 
audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, 
and such other information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall 
from time to time reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

(c) The Borrower shall cause AIFSA to enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, 
to discuss the financial statements for the Project and AIFSA’s financial affairs where they 
relate to the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, 
and shall authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such 
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only 
in the presence of an authorized officer of AIFSA, unless AIFSA shall otherwise agree.

Section 4.04. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable the ALC Management Company to perform its obligations under 
the Project Agreement, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the 
performance of such obligations.



6

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. A date 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of the Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VI

Delegation of Authority

Section 6.01. The Borrower hereby designates AIFSA as its agent for 
the purposes of taking any action or entering into any agreement required or permitted under 
Sections 3.02, 3.03 and 3.05 of this Loan Agreement and under Sections 5.01, 5.02, 5.03 and 
5.04 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6.02. Any action taken or any agreement entered into by 
AIFSA pursuant to the authority conferred under Section 6.01 of this Loan Agreement shall.be 
fully binding on the Borrower and shall have the same force and effect as if taken by the 
Borrower.

Section 6.03. The authority conferred on AIFSA under Section 6.01 of 
this Loan Agreement may be revoked or modified by agreement between the Borrower and 
ADB.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
29 Istiqlol Street
Tashkent 100008
Republic of Uzbekistan



7

Facsimile Numbers:

(998-71)239-1128 
(998-71)239-1252.

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(63-2) 636-2444 
(63-2)636-2017.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN

ELYAR GANIEV 
Deputy Prime Minister

Vice President (Operations 1)



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to increase the production and value addition of
horticulture products in the territory of the Borrower.

2. The Project shall comprise the following Outputs:

(a) Output 1: Establishment of ALCs. This Output comprises:

(i) the establishment of an ALC in Andijan region with (A) 
approximately 25,000 square meters (m2) of trading area split 
evenly between wholesale and small farmer sales areas with an 
annual throughput of approximately 425,000 tons; (B) 
approximately 60,000 cubic meters (m3) of cold storage with an 
annual capacity of approximately up to 1.5 million tons; (C) 
approximately 12 processing lines with an approximate annual 
throughput of 600,000 tons for export and 80,000 tons for the 
domestic market; and (D) groundworks for future expansion of 
the ALC for an increased volume of horticulture produce and/or 
trading, storage and processing of alternative food products; and

(ii) the establishment of an ALC in Samarkand with: (A) 
approximately 35,600 m2 of trading area split evenly between 
wholesale and small farmer sales areas with an annual 
throughput of approximately 550,000 tons; (B) approximately 
60,000 m3 of cold storage with an annual capacity of 
approximately up to 1.5 million tons; (C) approximately 17 
processing lines with an approximate annual throughput of 
850,000 tons for export and 150,000 tons for the domestic 
market; and (D) groundworks for future expansion of the ALC for 
an increased volume of horticulture produce and/or trading, 
storage and processing of alternative food products.

(b) Output 2: Improvement of ALC Management Capacity. This Output 
comprises the development of institutional and operational capacity of 
various stakeholders in the horticulture value chain, including the 
assistance to MIFT in (i) establishing the ALC Management Company 
in accordance with best international practices; (ii) preparing operation 
and management guidelines for the ALCs; (iii) conducting training in 
management, operation, and maintenance of the ALCs; (iv) conducting 
training in horticulture business development and management; and (v) 
learning from successful international agro-logistic models.

3. The Project shall include the provision of Consulting Services for activities,
including those specified in paragraph 2(b) above.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2023.



10

• * The arrangements for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 4.03 of the Loan Regulations.

The arrangements for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 4.03 of the Loan Regulations.

Payment Due Payment of Principal 
expressed in US Dollars*

15 May 2042
15 November 2042
15 May 2043
15 November 2043

4,925,000
4,925,000
4,925,000
4,925,000

Total 197,000,000



12

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures; and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all. agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Conditions for Withdrawals from Loan Account

5. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawal
shall be made from the Loan Account in respect of Goods and Works (Turnkey Contract) until:

(a) the ALC Management Company has been duly established and is 
adequately staffed and fully operational in accordance with the laws of 
the Borrower;



13
Schedule 3

(b) the ALC Management Company has entered into the Project Agreement 
with ADB upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

(c) ADB has received a satisfactory legal opinion confirming that the Project 
Agreement referred to in paragraph 5(b) above has been duly 
authorized by, and executed and delivered on behalf of, and is legally 
binding upon the ALC Management Company in accordance with its 
terms.



14
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

* Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower.
** Subject to the conditions of withdrawal described in paragraph 5 of Schedule 3.

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

$ 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal 
from the Loan Account

1 Goods and Works 
(Turnkey Contract) ** 187,119,707

100% of total expenditure 
claimed*

2

Other Expenditures, 
including for:
(a) Project Management 

and Supervision 
Consultants;

(b) Project Management;
(c) Resettlement;
(d) Project Financial 

Audit; and
(e) Environmental 

Management

9,880,293 100% of total expenditure 
claimed

TOTAL 197,000,000



15

SCHEDULE 4

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured and
Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan. 
The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the Consulting 
Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

4. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding; and

(b) Shopping.

Conditions for Award of Contract

5. The Borrower shall not award and shall cause AIFSA not to award any Works
contract which involves environmental impacts until:

(a) the relevant environmental authority of the Borrower has granted the 
final approval of the applicable I EE; and

(b) AIFSA has incorporated the relevant provisions from the applicable 
EMP into the Works contract.

6. The Borrower shall not and shall cause AIFSA not to award any Works contract
which involves involuntary resettlement impacts, until AIFSA has prepared and submitted to 
ADB the final LARPs based on the Project's detailed design, and obtained ADB's clearance of 
such LARPs.

Consulting Services

7. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.



16
Schedule 4

8. The Borrower shall apply the following selection method for the specified
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan: Least-Cost Selection for financial auditing.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

9. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured (including
without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured 
or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

10. The Borrower shall ensure that ail ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

APB's Review of Procurement Decisions

11. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.

12. In the case of a contract for Goods or Works, which is subject to ADB’s prior
review, the Borrower shall seek ADB’s prior approval of any modification or waiver of the terms 
and conditions of the contract, including:

(a) granting an extension of the stipulated time for completion of a contract 
for a period of one month or more, or which is likely to require an 
extension of the Loan Closing Date, and

(b) increases in aggregate of the original price by more than 5% (for the 
avoidance of doubt, such increase shall take into account any previous 
change under such contract).

13. In the case of a contract for Goods or Works, which is subject to ADB’s post
review, ADB shall review the required contract modification or waiver and respond to the 
Borrower as soon as practicable, but not later than one month after the receipt of the required 
document.

14. The Borrower shall provide to ADB copies of all time extensions, modifications
or waivers to the contracts (including change orders) within one month following amendment 
of the contract.



17

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower and AIFSA shall ensure that the Project is implemented in
accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to 
the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower, through 
AIFSA, and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan Agreement, 
the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Safeguards

Environment

2. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that the preparation,
design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and all 
Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the lEEs, the EMPs, and any corrective or preventative actions set 
forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

3. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that all land and all rights-
of-way required for the Project are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with 
the schedule agreed under the related Works contract and all land acquisition and resettlement 
activities are implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) the Involuntary 
Resettlement Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set forth in each LARP, and 
any corrective or preventative actions set forth in the Safeguards Monitoring Report.

4. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards or
each LARP, the Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that no physical or economic 
displacement takes place in connection with the Project until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with each LARP; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with each LARP.

Indigenous Peoples

5. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that the Project does not
have any indigenous peoples impacts within the meaning of the SPS. In the event that the 
Project does have any such impact, the Borrower shall take and shall cause AIFSA to take all 
steps required to ensure that the Project complies with the applicable laws and regulations of 
the Borrower and with the SPS.



18
Schedule 5

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

6. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to make available necessary
budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMPs and the LARPs.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

7. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that all bidding documents
and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the lEEs, 
the EMPs, and the LARPs (to the extent they concern impacts on 
affected people during construction), and any corrective or preventative 
actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that 
were not considered in the lEEs, the EMPs, and the LARPs;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

8. The Borrower shall cause AIFSA to do the following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the lEEs, the EMPs, and the LARPs, promptly inform 
ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description 
of the event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMPs and the LARPs promptly after 
becoming aware of the breach.



19
Schedule 5

Prohibited List of Investments

9. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that no proceeds of the
Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities 
provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards,, Health and Safety

10. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that the core labor
standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project 
implementation. The Borrower shall cause AIFSA to include specific provisions in the bidding 
documents and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, 
among other things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and 
incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do 
not discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; 
(e) allow freedom of association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; 
and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on 
the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HlV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors 
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project 
area, particularly women.

11. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure strictly monitor compliance
with the requirements set forth in paragraph 10 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

12. The Borrower shall and shall cause AIFSA to ensure that (a) the GAP is
implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include 
relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) 
adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP; (d) progress on 
implementation of the GAP, including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and 
output targets include, but not limited to: (i) promote jobs'for female workers in the ALCs; (ii) 
improve entrepreneurial abilities for existing and potential women entrepreneurs; (iii) monitor 
employment cheated by the ALCs for female workers, and agribusiness start-ups by female 
entrepreneurs; (iv) recruit national social and gender officer in the project management office; 
(v) identify gender focal points in the ALC Management Company; and (vi) ensure collection 
of sex-disaggregated baseline and end-line information, and monitor trends on number of 
female beneficiaries.

Grievance Redress Mechanism

13. The Borrower shall cause AIFSA to ensure that a joint safeguards grievance
redress mechanism acceptable to ADB is established in accordance with the provisions of the 
lEEs, the EMPs, and the LARPs at the project management office, within three months of the 
Effective Date, to consider safeguards complaints.

14. The safeguards grievance redress mechanism referred to in paragraph 13
above shall function to (a) review and document eligible complaints of Project stakeholders; 
(b) proactively address grievances; (c) provide the complainants with notice of the chosen 



20
Schedule 5

mechanism and/or action; and (d) prepare and make available to ADB upon request periodic 
reports to summarize (i) the number of complaints received and resolved;, (ii) chosen actions; 
and (iii) final outcomes of the grievances.

Counterpart Support

15. The Borrower shall make available requisite counterpart support, including,
without limitation, by exempting taxes and duties imposed on the Goods and within the territory 
of the Borrower for the timely, smooth and successful implementation of the Project. In 
addition, the Borrower shall ensure that AIFSA, at all times, have sufficient funds to satisfy its 
obligations arising from any Goods, Works or Consulting Services contract.

Financial/Operational Covenants

16. The Borrower shall cause MIFT to establish the ALC Management Company
on or before 31 December 2019 to ensure professional, independent, efficient and smooth 
operations of the ALCs.

17. To enable the ALC Management Company to be operationally and
commercially autonomous, and free from any interference by state agencies and local 
administrations, the Borrower shall and shall cause MIFT to ensure that the ALC Management 
Company, among others, has:

(a) independent decision-making powers;

(b) the ability to own its assets;

(c) the power to incur liabilities, for and on its own behalf, and accept and 
enter into future obligations and commitments;

(d) the capacity to implement an appropriate accounting system to enable 
it to submit its accounts to the national tax authorities in accordance with 
the applicable laws of the Borrower;

(e) ’ the power to borrow and raise funds;

(f) the ability to function in a manner that shall generate sufficient revenue 
to keep the ALCs in good working conditions and to enable them to meet 
the commercial, social, and environmental criteria applicable to such 
ALCs;

(g) no involvement in trading activities at the ALCs; and

(h) capacity to comply with prevailing legal and regulatory requirements.

18. For the purposes of monitoring the performance of the ALC Management
Company, the Borrower shall cause MIFT to carry out an annual assessment of the ALC 
Management Company, starting from the second year after commencement of commercial 
operations of the ALCs, by employing, among others, a combination of following financial and 
physical indicators: (a) Financial - return on assets (of at least equal to annual inflation rate of 



21
Schedule 5

the reporting year plus 2%); and debt to equity (not exceeding 1.5 times); and (b) Physical - 
occupancy rate of the wholesale market area (of not less than 65%); occupancy rate of the 
small-farmers’ market area for each ALC (of no less than 70%); total processing throughput in 
each. ALC for export and domestic sales (of no less than 700,000 tons); and utilization rate of 
cold storage capacity in each ALC (of no less than 900,000 tons).

19. The Borrower shall ensure that ADB’s written consent is obtained at least three
months prior to the implementation of any of the following: (a) change in the ownership of the 
ALC Management Company, any asset, facility or structure constructed under the Project; (b) 
sale, transfer or assignment of interest or control in the ALC Management Company, any asset, 
facility or structure constructed under the Project; (c) creation of a lien or charge on any asset 
of the ALC Management Company as security to borrow or raise funds; or (d) lease or other 
contract or modification of the functions and authority of the ALC Management Company over 
the operation and maintenance of any asset, facility or structure constructed under the Project. 
The Borrower shall ensure that ADB is promptly notified of any proposal to implement any such 
changes and that the notification includes sufficient details regarding the change to be 
implemented. The Borrower shall ensure that any such change shall be carried out in a legal 
and transparent manner.

Governance and Corruption

20. The Borrower, AIFSA and the implementing agencies (a) comply with ADB’s
Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the 
right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

21. The Borrower, AIFSA and the implementing agencies shall ensure that the
anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and 
contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records 
and accounts of AIFSA, the implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, 
and other service providers as they relate to the Project.




































































48098-002: Balochistan Water Resources Development Sector Project


LOAN NUMBER 3700-PAK(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Balochistan Water Resources Development Sector Project)

. between

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED

PAK 48098



LOAN AGREEMENT
{Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 7 ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN ("Borrower") and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK ("ADB"}. '

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan, and to the Japan Fund for 
Poverty Reduction ("JFPR1’) and the High-Level Technology Fund ("HLTF") for grants to be 
administered by ADB, for the purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan 
Agreement;

(B) by a grant agreement between the Borrower and ADB (“JFPR Grant 
Agreement”), ADB has agreed to make the proceeds of a grant from JFPR (“JFPR Grant”) in 
the amount of three million Dollars ($3,000,000) available to the Borrower for the purposes of 
financing expenditures under Part B of the Project;

(C) by a grant agreement between the Borrower and ADB (“HLTF Grant 
Agreement" and, together with the JFPR Grant Agreement, “Grant Agreements”), ADB has 
agreed to make the proceeds of a grant from HLTF (“HLTF Grant” and, together with the JFPR 
Grant, “Grants") in the amount of two million Dollars ($2,000,000) available to the Borrower for 
the purposes of financing expenditures under Part C of the Project;

(D) the Project will be carried out by Balochistan, and, for this purpose, the 
Borrower will make available to Balochistan the proceeds of the Grants and the loan provided 
for herein upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

(E) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB's ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Project Agreement between ADB and Balochistan;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB's Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 ("Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein

Section 1.02. ' Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used In this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:



2

(a) “ACD" means the Agriculture and Cooperatives Department of 
Balochistan, or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;

(b) "Balochistan” means the Province of Balochistan, or any successor 
thereto acceptable to ADB;

(c) "Consulting Guidelines" means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(d) "Consulting Services" means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan and the Grants as described in paragraph 3 of 
Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(e) "EARF" or "Environmental Assessment and Review Framework" means 
the environmental assessment and review framework for the Project, 

' including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(f) ' "EIA" or "Environmental Impact Assessment" means the environmental
impact assessment for a Subproject, including any update thereto, 
prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the requirements 
set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

(g) "EMP" or "Environmental Management Plan" means the environmental 
management plan for a Subproject, including any update thereto, 
incorporated in the EIA or IEE, as the case may be, for the Subproject;

(h) "Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable), of the 
SPS;

(i) . "IEE” or "Initial Environmental Examination" means the initial 
environmental examination for a Subproject, including any update 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

(j) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards" means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable), of the SPS;

(k) “GAP" means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, including 
any update thereto, and agreed to between the Borrower and ADB;

(I) "Goods" means equipment and materials to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan and the Grants, including related services such as 
transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and 
initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting Services;

(m) "ID” means the Irrigation Department of Balochistan, or any successor 
thereto acceptable to ADB;



3

(n) "LARF" or "Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework" means the 
land acquisition and resettlement framework for the Project, including 
any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and 
cleared by ADB;

(o) "LARP" or "Land Acquisition and Resettlement Plan" means the land 
acquisition and resettlement plan for a Subproject, including any update 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the LARF and cleared by ADB;

(p) “Loan Disbursement Handbook" means ADB's Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(q) “PAM" means the project administration manual for the Project dated 19 
July 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated from 
time to time in accordance with the respective administrative procedures 
of the Borrower and ADB;

(r) "Procurement Guidelines” means ADB's Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(s) "Procurement Plan" means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
19 July 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, the 
Consulting Guidelines, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(t) "Project Executing Agency" for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations and the Grant Regulations (as this term is 
defined in the Grant Agreements) means Balochistan, acting through ID, 
or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for 
the carrying out of the Project;

(u) "Project and Subproject facilities" means the facilities to be constructed, 
improved, upgraded, rehabilitated, established, piloted, protected or 
provided under the Project;

(v) "Safeguards Monitoring Report" means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower.to ADB that describes progress with the 
implementation of, and compliance with, the EMPs and the LARPs (as 
applicable), including any corrective and preventative actions;

(w) "SPS" or "Safeguard Policy Statement" means ADB's Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(x) "Subproject" means a subproject under the Project that meets the 
subproject eligibility criteria set out in the PAM; and

(y) “Works” means construction or- civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan and the Grants, including services such as drilling 
or mapping, and project related services that are provided as part of a 



4

single responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting 
Services,

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2,01, (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred million Dollars ($100,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter,

(c) The term "grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 1 April and 1 October in each year.

Section 2.04, The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall make the proceeds of the Loan 
available 'to Balochistan upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB and shall cause 
Balochistan to apply such proceeds exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project 
in accordance with the provisions of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.



5

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement,

Section 3,04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 . 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2024 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4,01,. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project and Subproject facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all 
obligations set forth in Schedule 5.to this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

. Section 4.02. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents. .

Section 4.03. ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial 
statements for the Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 
days of the date of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

Section 4,04. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable Balochistan to perform its obligations under the Project 
Agreement, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the performance 
of such obligations.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following are specified as additional events for the 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations:

(a) the Borrower shall have failed to perform any of its obligations under the 
JFPR Grant Agreement; and

(b) the Borrower shall have failed to perform any of its obligations under the 
HLTF Grant Agreement,

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for the 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: either of 
the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.



6

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6.01. The following are specified as additional conditions to the
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations:

(a) the JFPR Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this 
Loan Agreement or the HLTF Grant Agreement) have been fulfilled; and

(b) the HLTF Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this 
Loan Agreement or the JFPR Grant Agreement) have been fulfilled.

Section 6.02. The following are specified as additional matters, for the
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB:

(a) that the JFPR Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower and is legally binding on the 
Borrower in accordance with its terms; and

(b) that the HLTF Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower and is legally binding on the 
Borrower In accordance with its terms.

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Delegation of Authority

Section 7.01. The Borrower hereby designates Balochistan as its agent
for the purposes of taking any action or entering into any agreement required or permitted 
under Sections 3.02, 3.03 and 3.04 of this Loan Agreement and under Sections 5.01, 5.02, 
5.03 and 5.04 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7,02. Any action taken or any agreement entered into by
Balochistan pursuant to the authority conferred under Section 7.01 of this Loan Agreement 
shall be fully binding on the Borrower and shall have the same force and effect as if taken by 
the Borrower.



7

Section 7.03. The authority conferred on Balochistan under Section
7.01 of this Loan Agreement may be revoked or modified by agreement between the Borrower 
and ADB.

ARTICLE VIII

Miscellaneous

Section 8.01. The Secretary, Economic Affairs Division, Ministry of 
Finance, Revenue and Economic Affairs of the Borrower is designated as representative of the 
Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 8.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.Q1 of the Loan Regulations: . ’

For the Borrower

Secretary
Economic Affairs Division
Ministry of Finance, Revenue and Economic Affairs
Islamabad, Pakistan

Facsimile Number:

(92-51) 910 4016.

For ADB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444
(632) 636-2424.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto,. acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is increased agricultural productivity in the Zhob
and Mula river basins in the Province of Balochistan.

2. The Project shall comprise:

Part A

(a) the construction and rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure and 
watershed protection, including the construction, upgrade and 
rehabilitation of the Siri Toi Dam with a storage of approximately 
36,000,000 cubic meters including a spillway and water intake; weirs 
and infiltration galleries; approximately 276 kilometers of irrigation 
network; infrastructure to reduce flood risks to irrigation canals and the 
command area; facilities to increase women’s access to water for 
domestic use; and watershed protection for approximately 4,145 
hectares;

(b) the establishment and improvement of command areas, including the 
development of approximately 16,592 hectares of command area 
(including approximately 1,839 hectares for rainwater harvesting 
(khuskaba) farming); and

(c) the strengthening of institutional capacity, including the provision of 
training to ID and ACD on project management, financial management, 
procurement, disbursement, gender and social and environmental 
safeguards, and the development of infrastructure for improved project 
management and training;

Part B

(d) . further to the establishment and improvement of command areas, the 
pilot testing of approximately 130 hectares of high-value agriculture in 
the Project area; and

Part C

(e) further to the strengthening of institutional capacity, the procurement of 
hydrometeorological equipment to strengthen information collection and 
water use monitoring.

Part A shall be financed by ADB; Part B shall be financed by JFPR; and Part C shall be 
financed by HLTF, all In accordance with the terms and conditions of this Loan Agreement, the 
JFPR Grant Agreement, and the HLTF Grant Agreement.



10

Schedule 1

3. The Project shall include the provision of consulting services for detailed
engineering design, construction supervision, and implementation support, including the 
provision of training.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2023.



13

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1, The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table"). (Reference to "Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table).

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to the Category "Interest Charge" is for financing the
interest charge on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project ADB shall be 
entitled .to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the 
amounts required to meet payments, when due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



14

Schedule's

Retroactive Financing

6. Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible
expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 
months before the date of this Loan Agreement, in connection with the Consulting Services for 
detailed design, construction supervision and Implementation support to the Project; Goods 
and Works; and provision of training, subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 20% of the 
Loan amount,



15
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

($)
Basis for Withdrawal from 

the Loan Account
Category

1 Civil Works 88,350,000 87.5% of total expenditure 
claimed

2 Goods 1,150,000 83% of total expenditure claimed

. 3 Consulting Services 
and Training 6,000,000

83% of total expenditure 
claimed

4 Recurrent Cost - Project Management 1,280,000
100% of total expenditure 
claimed

5 Interest Charge 3,220,000 100% of amounts due
TOTAL 100,000,000



16

SCHEDULE 4

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree. Goods and Works shall be procured and
Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan. 
The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the Consulting 
Guidelines,'as applicable.

Eligible Source of Procurement oJ Civil Works, Goods and Consulting Services

4. Civil Works, Goods and Consulting Services may also be procured under Parts
A and C of the Project from non-member countries of ADB.

Goods and Works

5. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding;

(b) National Competitive Bidding;

(c) Shopping; and

(d) Community Participation in Procurement.

National Competitive Bidding

6. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of-any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrowers national competitive 
bidding procedures are .consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and1 ADB shall be set out in the 
Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.



17

Schedule 4

Community Participation in Procurement

7. The Borrower may use community participation in procurement for Works
contracts for command area development, watershed management, farmers managed small 
private irrigation systems and farm irrigation systems improvement, and high value agriculture 
as may be provided .in, and in accordance with the agreed procedures set out in, the 
Procurement Plan.

Conditions for Award of Contract

8. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract for a Subproject which
involves environmental impacts until Balochistan has:

(a) obtained the final approval of the EIA or IEE, as the case may be, from 
the relevant environment authority of the Borrower; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.

9. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract involving involuntary
resettlement impacts for a Subproject until the Borrower has prepared and submitted to ADB- 
the final LARP for such Subproject based on the Subproject's detailed design and obtained 
ADB's clearance of such LARP.

Consulting Services

10. The Borrower shall apply Quality- and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting
Services.

11, The Borrower shall recruit the Individual consultants for the Siri Toi Dam panel
of experts in, accordance with procedures acceptable to ADB for recruiting individual 
consultants.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

12. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured (including
without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured 
or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts, for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

13. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate of infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.



18

Schedule 4

ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

14, Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan,

15. In the case of a contract for Goods or Works, which is subject to ADB's prior
review, the Borrower shall seek ADB’s prior approval of any modification or waiver of the terms 
and conditions of the contract, including:

(a) granting an extension of the stipulated time for completion of a contract 
for a period of 1 month or more, or which is likely to require an extension 
of the Loan Closing Date or the Grant Closing Date (as indicated in the 
Grant Agreements); and

(b) increases in aggregate of the original price by more than 5% (for the 
avoidance of doubt, such increase shall take into account any previous 

. change under such contract).

16. In the case of a contract for Goods or Works, which is subject to ADB’s post
review, ADB shall review the required contract modification or waiver and respond to the 
Borrower’as soon as practicable, but not later than 1 month after the receipt of the required 
document.

17. The Borrower shall provide to ADB copies of all time extensions, modifications
or waivers to the contracts (including change orders) within 1 month following amendment of 
the contract.



19

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project

implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower and Balochistan shall ensure that the Project is implemented in
accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to 
the PAM shall become effective only after the approval of such change by the Borrower and 
ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM, on the one hand, and this Loan 
Agreement, the Grant Agreements or the Project Agreement, on the other, the provisions of 
this Loan Agreement, the Grant Agreements and the Project Agreement shall prevail. As more 
particularly described in the PAM, Balochistan shall implement the Project through ID and ACD 
and their respective responsibilities shall be as set out in the PAM.

2. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that, within 3
months from the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement, (i) ID will appoint and engage a financial 
management specialist for the Project management office in ID; and (II) each of iD and ACD 
will adopt a financial management manual for the Project with detailed procedures on 
budgeting and planning, funds withdrawal and management, bank account management, 
expenditure management, accounting and bookkeeping, financial reporting, and fixed asset 
management, as may be acceptable to ADB.

3. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that ID and ACD
will consult ADB regarding all significant matters related to the management and 
implementation of the Project, including the selection, appointment or change of the Project 
Director at the Project management office in ID or the Deputy Project Director at the Project 
implementation office in ACD to ensure continuity, transparency, and efficiency in the 
management of the Project.

Environment

4. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the 
Project, each Subproject and all Project and Subproject facilities comply with (a) all applicable 
laws and regulations of the Borrower and Balochistan relating to environment, health, and 
safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; (c) the EARF; and (d) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the ElAs, I EEs and EMPs, and any corrective or preventative actions 
set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

5. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that all land and all
rights-of-way required for the Project, each Subproject and all Project and Subproject facilities 
are made available to each Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed under 
the relevant Works contract and all land acquisition and resettlement activities are 
implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and 
Balochistan relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) the Involuntary 
Resettlement Safeguards; (c) the LARF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in 
the relevant LARP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards



20

Schedule 5

Monitoring Report. The Borrower shall also ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that all 
land acquisition and resettlement activities will comply with the specific Involuntary 
Resettlement Safeguards arrangements and requirements set out in the PAM. For the 
avoidance of doubt, the Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that no land 
is acquired, for the purposes of the Project or any Subproject, under the emergency acquisition 
provisions of the Borrower's Land Acquisition Act (1894), as amended from time to time.

6. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards, the
LARF or any LARP, the Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that no 
physical or economic displacement takes place in connection with any Subproject until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the LARP for the Subproject; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the LARP for the Subproject.

7. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that the Project
and all Subprojects do not have any indigenous peoples impact within the meaning of the 
Safeguard Policy Statement. In the event that the Project or any Subproject does have any 
such impact, the Borrower shall take and cause Balochistan to take all steps required to ensure 
that the Project or the Subproject, as the case may be, complies with the applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower and Balochistan and with the Safeguard Policy Statement.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

8. The Borrower shall make available or cause Balochistan to make available
necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMPs and the LARPs.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

9. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that all bidding
documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures and requirements relevant to the contractor 
set forth in the relevant EIA or iEE (as the case may be), EMP and LARP 
(to the extent they concern impacts, on affected people during 
construction), and any corrective or preventative actions set out in a 
Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental or resettlement risks or impacts that arise during 
construction, implementation or operation of the Project or any



21

Schedule 5

Subproject that were not considered in the relevant EIA or I EE (as the 
case.may be), EMP or LARP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

. (e) fully reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land 
to at least their pre-project condition upon the completion of 
construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

10. The Borrower shall do the following or cause Balochistan to do the following:

(a) submit semi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB during the 
construction of the Project and the Subprojects and until their 
completion, and, thereafter, submit annual reports to ADB during their 
operation, and disclose the relevant information from such reports to 
affected persons promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project or any 
Subproject that were not considered in the relevant EIA or IEE (as the 
case may be), EMP or LARP, promptly inform ADB of the occurrence of 
such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the event and 
proposed corrective action plan;

(c) no later than the date that is 3 months from and after the effectiveness 
of this Loan Agreement, engage qualified and experienced external 
experts or qualified NGOs under a selection process and terms of 
reference acceptable to ADB to verify information produced through the 
Project monitoring process, and facilitate the carrying out of any 
verification activities by such external experts;

(d) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in an EMP or LARP promptly after becoming 
aware of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

11. ■ The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that no proceeds
of the Loan or Grants are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited 
investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

12. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that the core labor
standards and the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and Balochistan are 



22

Schedule 5

complied with during Project implementation. The Borrower shall include or cause Balochistan 
to include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by ADB under 
the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things, (a) comply with the applicable 
labor law and regulations of the Borrower and Balochistan and incorporate applicable 
workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers 
in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of 
association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining ; and (f) disseminate,, or 
engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually 
transmitted diseases, including H1V/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under the 
Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area and Subproject 
areas, particularly women.

13. The Borrower shall strictly monitor or cause Balochistan to strictly monitor
compliance with the requirements set forth in paragraph 12 above and provide ADB with 
regular reports.

Gender and Development

14. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that (a) the GAP is
implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include 
relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) 
adequate resources are allocated for the implementation of the GAP; (d) progress on the 
Implementation of the GAP, including progress towards achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and 
output targets include: (i) at least 30% of all consultations held during the design and 
construction phase of each Subproject are held with women groups; (ii) at least 30% of all 
Subprojects have facilities for increased access by women to water for domestic use, for 
instance washing facilities and water collection points; (iii) at least 200 women and girls are 
trained in kitchen gardening skills; (iv) at least 250 women are trained for income-generating 
high-value agri-businesses; and (v) at least 22 women-led small-scale income-generating agri­
businesses are launched.

Counterpart Support

15. The Borrower shall cause Balochistan to make available all counterpart funds
required for the timely and effective implementation of the Project, including for any shortfall of 
funds or cost overrun, through providing annual budget allocations and releasing applicable 
funds in a timely manner. In addition, the Borrower shall provide all necessary support to 
Balochistan and ensure that Balochistan has sufficient funds to satisfy all liabilities arising from 
any Works, Goods and/or Consulting Services contract under the Project

Operational Covenants

16. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that the selection
of sites for the feasibility study of potential subprojects, and the selection of sites for the 
implementation of Subprojects, will be undertaken in accordance with such criteria and 
procedures as may be agreed upon between Balochistan and ADB. The Borrower shall cause 
Balochistan to select all Subprojects in accordance with the criteria and procedures set out in 
the PAM.



23

Schedule 5

17. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that no Subproject
will involve, and no proceeds of the Loan or the Grants will be used to support, groundwater 
extraction by deep tubewells, turbine pumps, or tapping of karezes.

18. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that, for each
Subproject, the local communities in the Subproject area will be fully involved in the planning, 
design, implementation and maintenance of the Subproject and related initiatives in the areas 
of integrated water resources management, command area development, and agricultural 
support services. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that both male 
and female members of the local communities will be consulted and involved.

19. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that the Project
and each Subproject will be implemented in accordance with applicable design and technical 
specifications and construction norms satisfactory to ADB, and construction supervision, 
quality control and contract management shall be performed in accordance with international 
and national standards.

20. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that, within 3
months from the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement, ID will appoint an independent dam 
safety panel of eminent national engineers which will review the detailed design of proposed 
subprojects involving the construction of dams, oversee dam construction, and confirm to ADB 
that the design and construction of the dams meet international safety standards.

21. (a) The Borrower shall ensure and . cause Balochistan to ensure that all
Project and Subproject facilities will be operated and maintained, in an effective and 
sustainable manner, in accordance with the applicable laws, regulations and standards of the 
Borrower and Balochistan and, in other respects not covered by such laws, regulations and 
standards, in accordance with best international industry practice.

(b) The Borrower shall cause Balochistan to develop, approve and adopt 
an operation and maintenance plan, including an annual budget, for all Works to be 
constructed, improved, upgraded, rehabilitated, established, piloted or protected under the 
Project, including the water resources information system to be established with assistance 
from the Project, prior to their completion.

(c) The Borrower shall cause Balochistan to ensure that budgetary and 
other resources are allocated timely and provided promptly as necessary and appropriate for 
the operation and maintenance of the Project and Subproject facilities, and, at any given time, 
the amount of such budgetary and other resources shall not be less than the total sum required, 
at that time, to cover and defray the operation and maintenance expenditures indicated in the 
then current annual budget referenced in sub-paragraph (b).

(d) The Borrower shall cause Balochistan to review its irrigation tariff policy 
and prepare draft reforms for the policy, which include the Introduction of irrigation tariffs for 
small irrigation systems, on or before 31 December 2020.

(e) The Borrower shall cause Balochistan to timely and promptly prepare 
operation and maintenance manuals and provide operation and maintenance training to the 
farmer communities and organizations that will assume the operation and maintenance of the 



24

Schedule 5

small irrigation systems and on-farm irrigation facilities that will be constructed, Improved, 
upgraded, rehabilitated, established, piloted or protected under the Project.

Security

22. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure (through the
political administration of the relevant local governments in the Project area and Subproject 
areas) that adequate security is provided for the smooth and uninterrupted implementation of 
the Project and the Subprojects. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan .to ensure 
that (i) all Works contracts under the Project include a security plan to ensure the safety of 
Project contractors’ personnel and consultants, and each such security plan allocates sufficient 
budget under the relevant Works contract or through Balochistan’s counterpart funding; and 
(ii) all relevant permits are issued and all access and other necessary requirements are 
provided so that all security plans will be successfully implemented.

Governance and Anti corrupt! on

23. The Borrower and Balochistan shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anticorruption Policy
(1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate 
directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice 
relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary 
assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

24. The Borrower and Balochistan shall' ensure that anticorruption provisions
acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions 
specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing 
and Implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service 
providers as they relate to the Project.

25. The Borrower shall cause Balochistan to provide updated information on the
Project on its website, including information on performance, business opportunities, bidding 
process and guidelines, outcorhe of biddings, and summary progress reports.



























































Loan Agreement (Ordinary Operations [Concessional]) for Loan 3877-CAM: Irrigated Agricuture Improvement Project 


LOAN NUMBER 3877-CAM(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

{Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Project)

between

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 5 DECEMBER 2019

CAM 51159



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 5 December 2019 between KINGDOM OF 
CAMBODIA ("Borrower11) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB ("ADB Grant Agreement"), ADB has agreed to provide a grant in the amount of two million 
one hundred and sixty thousand Dollars ($2,160,000) from ADB's Special Funds resources to 
assist in financing a part of the Project;

(C) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB ("HLTF Grant Agreement "), ADB has agreed to administer a grant from the High-Level 
Technology Fund ("HLTF’) in the amount equivalent to one million and six hundred thousand 
Dollars ($1,600,000) for the purpose of cofinancing certain activities under the Project; and

(D) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB's ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows;

ARTICLE I 

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (Loan Regulations’1), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) "Consulting Services" means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(b) “Data Center" means the National Water Resources Data Management 
Center to be established in MOWRAM, as further described in the PAM;



2

(c) “EIA" means the environmental impact assessment for the Stung Chinit 
South Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted 
by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(d) "EMP"' means the environmental management plan for each Subproject, 
including any update thereto, incorporated in the EIA or IEE, as the case 
may be;

(e) 'Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(f) "FWUC1" means farmer water user communities;

(g) J'GAPJ" means the gender action plan for the Project, including any 
updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower, and cleared 
by ADB;

(h) ' Goods1’ means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(I) "HIV/AIDS" means human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome;

0) "IBBA” means the Important Bird and Biodiversity Area, as more fully 
described in the PAM;

(k) "IEE” means the initial environmental examination for the Subprojects 
other that Stung Chinit South Subproject, including any update thereto, 
prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(I) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards" means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(m) "Kam pi ng Pouy Subproject” means a subproject located in Battambang
province, as further described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement and 
the PAM;

(n) "Loan Disbursement Handbook" means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(o) "MOWRAM" means the Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology 
of the Borrower or any successor thereto;

(p) "Nonconsulting Services’" means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;



3

(q) "O&M" means operation and maintenance;

(r) PAM" means the project administration manual for the Project dated 7 
October 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(s) "Procurement Manual" means the Procurement Manual under the 
standard operating procedures prepared by the Borrower and endorsed 
by ADB, which sets forth the procurement-related policies and 
procedures for externally-financed projects and programs;

(t) "Procurement Plan" means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
7 October 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policy, the 
Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with ADB 
(which include the Standard Operating Procedures and the 
Procurement Manual as updated from time to time);

(u) 'Procurement Policy* means ADB's Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

{v) ^Procurement Regulations” means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services {2017, as amended from time to time);

(w) “Project Executing Agency1’ for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of the Loan Regulations means MOWRAM or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for carrying cut of the Project;

(x) “Project facilities” means ail facilities incorporating or using Goods or 
Works;

(y) “RP’1 means the resettlement plan for the Kamping Pouy Subproject,
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(z) “Safeguards Monitoring Report" means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the BMP and the RP, including 
any corrective and preventative actions;

(aa) ’Services" means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services;

(bb) "SPS* means ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(cc) "SRP” means sustainable rice platform, a multi-stakeholder platform 
established by the United Nations Environment Program and the 
International Rice Research Institute in December 2011;



4

{dd) “Standard Operating Procedures” means the Standard Operating 
Procedures of the Borrower (sub-decree no. 74 ANK.BK dated 22 May 
2012, as amended from time to time) providing the procedures 
applicable to all externally financed projects and programs;

(ee) "Stung Chinit South Subproject" means the subproject located in 
Kampong Thom province, as further described in Schedule 1 to this 
Loan Agreement and the PAM;

(ff) ‘ Subproject' means a subproject under the Project, as further described
in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement and the PAM;

(gg) ‘Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services and project related services that are 
provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract; and

(hh) WRIS” means the water resources information system to be developed 
under the Project, as further described in the PAM.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2 01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADBJs
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred seventeen million Dollars 
($117,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter

(c) The term "grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2.02 The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 1 June and 1 December in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.



5

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03{a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2025 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Bo Tower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02 (a) The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing
Agency (i) maintain separate accounts and records for the Project; (ii) pre pa re annual financial 
statements for the Project in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; 
(iii) have such financial statements audited annually by independent auditors whose 
qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, In accordance with 
auditing standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors 
prepare a report, which includes the auditors' opinion(s) on the financial statements and the 
use of the Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the 
internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) 
furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such 
audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, 
and such other information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall 
from time to time reasonably request



6

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of AD B’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADBJs website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon AD B’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods, Works and Services, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8 01(m) of the Loan Regulations: the Borrower shall have failed to perform 
any of its obligations under the ADB Grant Agreement or the HLTF Grant Agreement.

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8 07(d) of the Loan Regulations: the events 
specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following are specified as additional conditions to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations:

{a) the ADB Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this 
Loan Agreement and the HLTF Grant Agreement) shall have been 
fulfilled; and

(b) the HLTF Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to 



7

their effectiveness (other then a condition requiring the effectiveness of 
this Loan Agreement) shall have been fulfilled.

Section 6.02 The following is specified as an additional matter, for the 
purposes of Section 9 02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB: the ADB Grant Agreement and the HLTF Grant Agreement shall have 
each been duly authorized, executed and delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and are legally 
binding in accordance with their terms.

Section 6. 03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of Economy and Finance of the Borrower is 
designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan 
Regulations

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Economy and Finance
St. 92, Sangkat Wat Phnom
Khan Daun Penh
Phnom Penh, Cambodia

Facsimile Numbers:

+355 23 427-798
+855 23 438-424

For ADB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers.

(632) 8636-2444
(632) 8636-2231.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

KINGDOM OF

By_________
H.E. DR. A^N PORNMONIROTH

Deputy Prime Minister 
Minister of Economy and Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

SUNNIYA DURRANI-JAMAL
Country Director 

Cambodia Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1, The objective of the Project is to enhance water and agriculture productivity in
the provinces of Battambang, Kampong Cham, Kampong Thom and Takeo {“Project Areas11).

2. The Project shall comprise the following:

Component 1: Efficiency and climate resilience of irrigation systems 
enhanced - this includes the modernization and climate-proofing of four 
irrigation Subprojects in each of the Project Areas through (a) remodeling and 
improving reservoir embankment, pumping stations, canals and drains as well 
as appurtenant structures; (b) improving water sharing arrangements between 
linked systems; (c) strengthening existing FWUCs and forming additional 
FWUCs to improve the sustain ability of the operations and maintenance 
scheme; (d) piloting an irrigation asset management information system to 
improve operations and maintenance budgeting and procedures; and (e) 
formulating an SRP for the Stung Chinit South Subproject. The Subprojects to 
be financed under this Component comprise:

(a) Kamping Pouy Subproject in Battambang province;

(b) Prek Po Subproject in Kampong Cham province;

(c) Stung Chinit South Subproject in Kampong Thom province; and

(d) Canal 15 Subproject in Takec Province.

Component 2: Water resources management improved - this includes (a) 
installing hydromet stations; (b) capacity training for government staff, including 
MOWRAM and fts provincial departments, and FWUCs; (c) establishing a Data 
Center; and (d) developing a WRIS.

3. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2024.





Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category ("Table”). (Reference to ‘'Category1' in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each Hem of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed in the territory of the Borrower.

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount 
Allocated for 

ADB 
Financing 

($) 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan
Account

1 Works (Stung Chinit South 
Subproject)

31,100,000 93.5% of total expenditure claimed

2 Works (Other Subprojects) 68,070,000 100% of total expenditures claimed

3 Consulting Services (the 
Data Center)

580,000 26.6% of total expenditures claimed*

4 Consulting Services 
(Others)

6,550,000 100% of total expenditures claimed*

5 Goods 7,450.000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

a
Capacity building, 
incremental operating 
costs

3,250,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

TOTAL 117,000,000
'AALaL-a / ■. ____ ____________ _^1.'■. ■■!



14

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that the Project is implemented
in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change 
to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower, through 
MOWRAM, and ADB, In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan 
Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Procurement

2. The Borrower shall cause MQWRAM to ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in ths Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
AD B’s review requirements. The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

3. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM not to award any Works contracts which
involves environmental impacts until MOWRAM has:

(a) obtained the final approval of the EIA or the I EE, as the case may be, 
from the Borrower’s relevant authority; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.

4. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM not to award any Works contracts for a
Subproject involving involuntary resettlement impacts until the Borrower has prepared and 



15

Schedule 4

submitted to ADB the final RP based on the Subproject's detailed design and obtained ADBs 
clearance of such RP.

Environment

5. The Borrower shall cause MOW RAM to ensure that the preparation, design,
construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and all Project 
facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the EIA or the 1EE, as the case may be, the EMP, and any corrective 
or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Reports

6. For the Stung Chinit South Subproject, the Borrower shall, and shall cause
MOWRAM to, ensure that during and after the project implementation period, it (a) will not 
extend or permit the extension of any canals into the IBBA; and (b) will not permit any third 
party pumping from command area canals.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

7. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that all land and ail rights-of-
way required for the Kamping Pouy Subproject and the Project facilities to be developed under 
the Kamping Pouy Subproject are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with 
the schedule agreed under the related Works contract and all land acquisition and resettlement 
activities are implemented in compliance with (a) all measures and requirements set forth in 
the RP based on all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land acquisition 
and involuntary resettlement; (b) the provisions of SPS relating to Involuntary Resettlement 
Safeguards; and (c) any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring 
Reports.

8. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards or
the RP, the Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that no physical or economic 
displacement takes place in connection with the Kamping Pouy Subproject until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the RP; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the RP.

9. If voluntary land donation or negotiated settlement is required, the Borrower
shall cause MQWRAM to ensure that such voluntary land donation or negotiated settlement 
shall be carried out in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and 
SPS.

Indigenous Peoples and Involuntary Resettlement for Concerned Subprojects

10. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that the Project does not have
any indigenous peoples impacts and the Subprojects other than the Kamping Pouy Subproject 
do not have any involuntary resettlement impacts, both within the meaning of the SPS. In the 
event that the Project does have any such impact, the Borrower shall take all steps required 



16

Schedule 4

to ensure that the Project or any concerned Subproject complies with the applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Grievance Redress Mechanism

11. The Borrower shall ensure that a safeguards grievance redress mechanism
acceptable to ADB is established at the project management unit in accordance with the 
provisions of the EIA, EMP and RP, within the timeframes specified in the relevant EIA, IEE, 
EMP and RP, to consider safeguards complaints.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

12. T he Bo rro wer shall make availa ble necessa ry bu d g eta ry a n d h uma n resou rces
to fully implement any EMP and RP

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

13. The Borrower shall, and shall cause MOWRAM to, ensure that all bidding
documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the EIA 
or the IEE, the EMP and the RP (to the extent they concern impacts on 
affected people during construction), and any corrective or preventative 
actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures; and

(c) provide the Project Executing Agency with a written notice of any 
unanticipated environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks 
or impacts that arise during construction, implementation or operation of 
the Project that were not considered in the EIA or the IEE, the EMP, and 
the RP.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

14. The Bo Tower shall, and shall cause MOWRAM to, do the following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB within one 
month after the reporting period at the end of each half of the calendar 
year, and disclose relevant information from such reports to affected 
persons promptly upon submission,

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the EIA or the IEE, the EMP and RP, promptly inform 
ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description 
of the event and proposed corrective action plan in accordance with the 
SPS;



17

Schedule 4

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP and the RP promptly after 
becoming aware of the breach; and

(d) prior to the commencement of the Works, prepare and submit to ADB a 
handover letter which certifies that all activities, measures and 
requirements set forth in the RP are duly accomplished.

Prohibited List of Investments

15. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance
any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the 
SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

16. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that the core labor standards
and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project 
implementation. The Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents and 
contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: 
(a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable 
workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers 
tn respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) do not restrict the 
workers from developing a legally permissible means of expressing their grievances and 
protecting their rights regarding working conditions and terms of employment; and (f) 
disseminate information on the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to 
the employees of contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the local 
communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women.

17, The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to strictly monitor compliance with the
requirements set forth in paragraph 16 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

18. The Borrower shall ensure that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance with
its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include relevant provisions for contractors 
to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for 
implementation of the GAP; and(d) progress on implementation of the GAP, including progress 
toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets, are regularly monitored and reported 
to ADB using ADB's template.

Counterpart Support

19. The Borrower shall ensure that counterpart funds for the Project are provided
on a timely basis. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that the Project 
Executing Agency has sufficient funds to satisfy its liabilities arising from any Goods, Works, 
Goods and Services contract.



18

Schedule 4

Operation and Maintenance of Project Facilities

20. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that the Project facilities are
operated and maintained appropriately and in accordance with the standards and 
requirements prescribed by the applicable taws and regulations of the Borrower, and that 
adequate budgetary and other resources are promptly provided for such operation and 
maintenance.

Water Resources Management Scholarship. Internship, Training and Mentoring Program

21. The Borrower shall ensure compliance with the candidates’ selection criteria for
the water resources management program, as further specified in the PAM.

Governance and Anticornuption

22. The Borrower shall (a) comply with ADB's Anticorruption Policy (1993, as
amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directlyr or 
through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the 
Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for 
satisfactory completion of such investigation.

23, The Borrower shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB
are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the right 
of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing and implementing 
agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service providers as they relate 
to the Project.




































































51242-002: Resilient Community Development Project


LOAN NUMBER 3864-MYA(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Resilient Community Development Project)

between

THE REPUBLIC OF THE UNION OF MYANMAR

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED £

MYA51242



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated £ between THE
REPUBLIC OF THE UNION OF MYANMAR (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
(“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB (“ADF Grant Agreement”), ADB has agreed to make a grant to the Borrower from ADB’s 
Special Funds resources in the amount often million Dollars ($10,000,000) (“ADF Grant”) for 
the purposes of the Resilient Community Development Project (“Project”), described in 
Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB (“JFPR Grant Agreement), ADB has agreed to administer a grant from the Japan Fund 
for Poverty Reduction (“JFPR”) in the amount of three million Dollars ($3,000,000) (the “JFPR 
Grant”) for the purpose of cofinancing certain expenditures under the Project;

(C) by a grant agreement to be entered into between the Borrower and ADB 
(“EU Grant Agreement”), ADB has agreed to administer a grant from the Asia Investment 
Facility of the European Union (EU), in the amount of twenty-four million two hundred fifty 
thousand Euros (€24,250,000) (“EU Grant”) for the purpose of cofinancing certain 
expenditures under the Project;

(D) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(E) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein; and

(F) the Project will be carried out by the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, 
and Irrigation (“MOALI”), and for this purpose the Borrower will make available to MOALI the 
proceeds of the loan provided for herein upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.



2

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “CDR” means climate and disaster risk;

(b) “Consulting Services" means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(c) “CPF” means the community participation framework for the Project, 
including any updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(d) “DRD” means the Borrower’s Department of Rural Development within 
MOALI or any successor thereto;

(e) “EARF” means the environmental assessment and review framework 
for the Project which includes the ECOP and a generic environmental 
management plan, including any updates thereto, prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(f) “ECOP” means environmental codes of practice for a Subproject with 
minimum or minor impacts;

(g) “EGDF” means the ethnic group development framework for the Project, 
including any updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(h) “EGDP” means an ethnic group development plan for a Subproject, 
including any updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
pursuant to the requirements set forth in the EGDF;

(i) “EIA or IEE Type Project” means a project determined by the Ministry of 
Natural Resources and Environmental Conservation to have adverse 
impacts as per categorization criteria defined in Annex 1 of the 
Notification No. 616/2015 on environmental impact assessment 
procedure of the Government of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar;

(j) “EMP” means an environmental management plan for a Subproject, 
including any update thereto;

(k) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter Vt Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(I) “GESIAP” means the gender equity and social inclusion action plan 
prepared for the Project, including any update thereto, and agreed 
between the Borrower and ADB;



3

(m) “Goods” means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(n) “Indigenous Peoples Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(o) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(p) “MOALI” means the Borrower’s Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and 
Irrigation;

(q) “Nonconsulting Services” means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

(r) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
3 October 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(s) “PIU” means a project implementation unit established at the township 
cluster level;

(t) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
3 October 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policy, the 
Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(u) “Procurement Policy” means ADB’s Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(v) “Procurement Regulations” means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(w) “Project Executing Agency” means the MOALI or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the overall supervision and 
execution of the Project;

(x) “Project facilities” means the facilities to be provided, constructed, 
operated, upgraded and maintained under the Project;

(y) Project Implementing Agency” means the DRD or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the day-to-day 
implementation of the Project;

V



4

(z) “Project Operations Manual” means the project operations manual, 
comprising sub-manuals (including sub-manuals on resilient 
communities infrastructure, resilient community livelihoods, community 
finance and procurement, implementing mechanism and project 
monitoring and evaluation), to guide the implementation of the 
Subprojects, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(aa) “Project Townships and Villages” means the townships and villages and
such other regions of the Borrower which may from time to time be 
designated as Project Townships and Villages by agreement between 
the Borrower and ADB;

(bb) Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS” means ADB's Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(cc) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the EARF, EMP, ECOP, CPF, 
EGDF and EGDP (as applicable), including any corrective and 
preventative actions;

(dd) “Services” means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services;

(ee) “Subproject” means a subproject as described in Output 1 and Output 2 
which is to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and which meets 
the selection and eligibility criteria set out in paragraph 6 of Schedule 4 
below and in the PAM;

(ff) “Subproject facilities” means, in respect of a Subproject, the equipment 
to be provided and the facilities to be installed, constructed, operated, 
upgraded and maintained under that Subproject;

(gg) “VDP” means a village development plan;

(hh) “VDP Process” means a VDP process led by the Project Implementing 
Agency which starts at the village level, then aggregates at village tract 
level, and informs the township level and which takes into account the 
climate risk and vulnerability assessments and market opportunity 
assessment in the process of prioritization of infrastructure and 
livelihood investments;

(ii) “Village Tract” means a group of villages in a contiguous territory;

(jj) “VTDSC” means a village tract development support committee 
responsible for community planning process and subproject cycle at the 
village tract level; and

(kk) “Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 



5

related Nonconsulting Services and project related services that are 
provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred eighty-five million Dollars 
($185,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1 % per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 May and 15 November in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.



6

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. (a) Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of
Goods, Works, and Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to:

(i) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 
Services which are supplied from such member countries of ADB as 
shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as eligible sources 
for procurement; and

(ii) Goods, Works, and Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time.

(b) For purposes of subparagraph (a)(ii), items to be procured may also be 
procured under the Project from non-member countries of ADB.

Section 3. 05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 March 2027 or such other date as may from time to time 
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4. 01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this'Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual consolidated financial statements for 
the Project in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such 
financial statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, 
experience and terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing 
standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a 
report, which includes the auditors’ opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the 
Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control 
of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no 
later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial 
statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other 
information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time 
reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.



7

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Sec tion 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods, Works and Services, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations:

(a) the Borrower shall have failed to perform any of its obligation under the 
ADF Grant Agreement, JFPR Grant Agreement or EU Grant Agreement; 
and

(b) the ADF Grant, JFPR Grant or the EU Grant shall have become liable 
for suspension or cancellation.

Section 5. 02. The following is specified as additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: any of the 
events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following are specified as additional conditions to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations:

(a) the ADF Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered 
and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than a condition 
requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have been 
fulfilled;

(b) the JFPR Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and 
delivered and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than a 



8

condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have 
been fulfilled; and

(c) the EU Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered 
and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than a condition 
requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have been 
fulfilled.

Sec tion 6.02. The following are specified as additional matters, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB:

(a) the ADF Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and is legally binding upon the 
Borrower in accordance with its terms;

(b) the JFPR Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and is legally binding upon thd 
Borrower in accordance with its terms; and

(c) the EU Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and is legally binding upon the 
Borrower in accordance with its terms.

Section 6. 03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Borrower’s Union Minister or Deputy Minister of 
Planning and Finance is designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of 
Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Planning, Finance and Industry
Building No. 26 Nay Pyi Taw
The Republic of the Union of Myanmar

Facsimile Number:

+95 67 410198



9

For ADB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

+632 8636-2444.



10

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

THE REPUBLIC OF THE UNION OF 
MYANMAR

SI SI PYONE 
Director General 

Treasury Department 
Ministry of Planning, Finance 

and Industry

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

By
NEWIN SINSIRI
Country Director 

Myanmar Resident Mission



11

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to improve the standard of living and resilience
of selected communities.

2. The Project shall comprise:

(a) Output 1: development of climate and disaster resilient community 
infrastructure subprojects, such as village access or farm roads, small 
bridges, water supply, electric grid connections and multipurpose 
centers, identified through the VDP process, based on selection criteria 
and funded through block grants;

(b) Output 2: development of resilient livelihood activities for poor men and 
women in the lowest four deciles of poor and vulnerable households in 
their villages, through livelihood subprojects identified through the VDP 
process, funded through block grants, such as new or improved climate­
smart agriculture, livestock, fisheries activities, among others; provision 
of access to vocational training particular for women and youth; and 
provision of training to poor households above the lowest four deciles to 
adapt to CDR; and

(c) Output 3: strengthening of the institutional and organizational capacity 
of communities and government by further developing their VDP 
process and building their capacity to assist villagers, through the 
formation of a DRD training unit along with associated training curricula 
in the areas of community-based planning, resilience building, gender, 
leadership and livelihood development, among others; and knowledge 
centers to promote CDR in agriculture, livestock, fishery and rural 
development.

3. The Project includes a disaster contingency feature. In the event of a disaster
affecting an entire township, and upon the request of the Project Executing Agency and 
approval by ADB, funds from the subsequent cycle of community subproject implementation 
may be advanced for reconstruction of the damaged infrastructure and recovery of livelihoods. 
The selection of infrastructure and livelihood subprojects will follow similar participatory 
processes and criteria as set out in Outputs 1 and 2 described above and detailed in the PAM.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 30 September 2026.


SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



15
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount 
Allocated for ADB 

Financing 
($)

Category

Basis for Withdrawal from 
the Loan Account

1 Community investment funds (other townships) 154,293,000
100% of total expenditure 
claimed

2 Implementation support 23,341,000 100% of total expenditure 
claimed

3
Facilitation and capacity 
building (other 
townships)

7,366,000 20.9% of total expenditure claimed

TOTAL 185,000,000



16

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project is implemented in accordance with
the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to the PAM shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB. In the event 
of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan 
Agreement shall prevail.

2. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that each
PIU and the township DRD offices involved in implementing the project are equipped with 
appropriately skilled staff, reasonable office space, equipment, and adequate financial 
resources required for implementation of the project throughout Project implementation.

Project Operations Manual

3. Not later than 6 months after the Effective Date, the Borrower, through the
Project Executing Agency, shall furnish to ADB the fully revised Project Operations Manual 
acceptable to ADB. The Borrower shall not amend, delete, suspend, or waive any part of the 
Project Operations Manual without the prior written approval of ADB.

Design and Construction Quality Management

4. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that all
Works under the Project are designed and constructed in accordance with all relevant national 
and local design codes and standards of the Borrower and that the construction supervision, 
quality control, contract management, and completion inspection and acceptance procedures 
will be in accordance with all applicable national laws and municipal and local regulations of 
the Borrower and the PAM.

Selection of Project Locations

5. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
selection of target Project locations is based on the following criteria, as set forth in detail in 
the PAM: (a) villages are poor and vulnerable to climate and disasters, based on objective 
information and data; and (b) villages have no ongoing or planned community development 
program or project. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the 
target Project locations will not be selected without ADB’s approval.

Subproject Selection and Eligibility Criteria

6. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that each
subproject meets the selection and eligibility criteria as set forth in detail in the PAM, including:

(a) not involve any activity included in the list of prohibited investment 
activities attached hereto as Schedule 5 and the list of prohibited 
investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS, to the extent 



17
Schedule 4

not duplicative or included in the list of prohibited investment activities 
list attached hereto as Schedule 5;

(b) not involve any subproject categorized as Category A for Environment, 
Resettlement or Indigenous Peoples under the SPS;

(c) not involve any subproject categorized as EIA Type Project or IEE Type 
Project under the Government of Myanmar Environmental Impact 
Assessment Procedure (2015); and

(d) is a community development subproject that is technically, financially 
and environmentally viable, and socially and economically justified.

Block Grants Transfers for Subprojects

7. Prior to the release of a block grant from DRD to a VTDSC account, the
Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the following conditions are 
met:

(a) all village development support committees (VDSCs) in the village tract 
and the VTDSC have been established and staffed as required;

(b) the VTDSCs’ finance sub-committee has been set up and trained;

(c) the VTDSC has opened a bank account at a local bank (condition
applicable for the first disbursement only); and

(d) the VTDSC has signed a block grant agreement for the current cycle 
with the township DRD office.

8. The VTDSC shall submit a request for disbursement to the DRD union office
through the DRD township office, which the DRD township office signs, confirming all 
conditions above have been fulfilled.

Counterpart Support

9. The Borrower shall ensure that counterpart funds necessary for the Project is
provided on a timely basis. The Borrower shall ensure that additional counterpart funds are 
available to cover any funding shortfalls that may occur. In addition to the foregoing, the 
Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency has sufficient funds to satisfy its 
liabilities arising from any Works, Goods and Services contract.

Operation and Maintenance (“O&M”) of Subprojects

10. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that each
Subproject involving infrastructure has an O&M plan in place and takes into account the O&M 
costs. The processes for planning and implementing O&M activities shall include: 
(a) calculation of estimated costs and the allocation of responsibilities between the village and 
the DRD; (b) annual plan for the collection user/beneficiary contributions for O&M; (c) O&M 



18
Schedule 4

monthly schedule; (d) six-month O&M status report indicating the status of the work items in 
the last 6 months; and (e) routine inspections and maintenance.

Procurement

11. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations; and

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements. The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

12. The Borrower shall not award any Works contracts for a Subproject which
involves environmental impacts until:

(a) the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental Conservation has 
granted the final approval of the EARF; and

(b) the Borrower has incorporated the relevant provisions from any ECOP 
and EMP into the Works contract.

13. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract for a Subproject which
involves voluntary land donation, until the Borrower has met the requirements described in the 
CPF.

14. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract for a Subproject which
involves impacts on ethnic groups, until the Borrower has met the requirements in the EGDF.

Environment

15. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of each 
Subproject and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 



19
Schedule 4

Borrower relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and 
(c) all measures and requirements set forth in the EARF, EMP or ECOP, as applicable, and 
any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

16. The Borrower shall ensure that no Subproject categorized as Category A under
the SPS or categorized as lEE or EIA Type Project under the Borrower’s Environmental Impact 
Assessment Procedure (2015) is financed under the Project.

17. The Borrower shall ensure that each Subproject requiring an EMP under
section 24 of the Borrower’s Environmental Impact Assessment Procedure (2015) secures any 
required environmental approval by the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental 
Conservation.

Land Acquisition

18. The Borrower shall ensure that no Subproject which has any involuntary
resettlement impacts, within the meaning of the SPS, shall be financed under the Project.

19. In the case of voluntary land donation for a Subproject, the Borrower, through
the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that: (a) eminent domain or other powers of the 
Borrower is not involved in the acquisition, (b) such voluntary land donation(s) are implemented 
in accordance with the CPF, (c) there was informed consent and power of choice of affected 
persons through a prior and informed consultation(s) with them, and (d) such voluntary 
donation(s) do not severely affect the living standards of the affected persons but benefit them 
directly.

20. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that all land
and all rights-of-way required for the Project are made available to the Works contractor or 
villagers in accordance with the schedule agreed under the related Works contract.

21. The Borrower shall ensure that no Subproject categorized as Category A or
Category B under the SPS is financed under theProject.

Indigenous Peoples

22. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation and operation of each Subproject and all 
Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
indigenous peoples; (b) the Indigenous Peoples Safeguards; and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the EGDF and any subproject EGDP, and any corrective or 
preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report. The Borrower shall ensure 
that no Subproject categorized as Category A or Category B resulting in negative impacts 
on ethnic groups as defined under the SPS is financed under the Project For the 
avoidance of doubt, a Subproject resulting in Category B due to positive impacts on ethnic 
groups as defined under the SPS shall be permitted to be financed under the Project.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

23. The Borrower shall make available necessary budgetary and human resources
to fully implement the EARF, EMP, ECOP, CPF, EGDF and EGDP, as applicable.



20
Schedule 4

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

24. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that all
bidding documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors or 
villagers to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor or villager set forth 
in the EARF, any subproject EMP or ECOP, the CPF and the EGDF and 
any subproject EGDP (to the extent they concern impacts on affected 
people during construction), and any corrective or preventative actions 
set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that 
were not considered in the EARF, any subproject EMP or ECOP, the 
CPF and the EGDF and any subproject EGDP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

25. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall do the following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the EARF, any subproject EMP or ECOP, the CPF 
and the EGDF and any subproject EGDF, promptly inform ADB of the 
occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the 
event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in EARF, any subproject EMP or ECOP, the 
CPF and the EMGF and any subproject EMGP promptly after becoming 
aware of the breach.



21
Schedule 4

Grievance Redress Mechanism

26. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that
(a) safeguard grievance redress mechanisms acceptable to ADB are established in 
accordance with provisions in the EARF, CPF, and EGDF, at PMU, within the timeframes 
specified in the relevant EARF, CPF, and EGDF, to consider safeguards related complaints; 
and (b) a grievance redress mechanism, acceptable to ADB and in accordance with the PAM, 
is established and functioning effectively to (i) review and document eligible complaints,of 
project stakeholders; (ii) proactively address grievances; (iii) provide the complainants with 
notice of the chosen mechanism/action; and (d) prepare periodic reports to summarize the 
number of complaints received and resolved, chosen actions, and final outcomes of the 
grievances and make these reports available to ADB. Eligible complaints will include (a) those 
related to the project, (b) any of the service providers, (c) any person responsible for carrying 
out the project, (d) complaints on misuse of funds and other irregularities, and (e) grievances 
due to any safeguards and gender issues.

Prohibited List of Investments

27. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance
any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities attached hereto and the list 
of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS, to the extent not 
duplicative or included in the list of prohibited investment activities list attached hereto.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

28. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the core
labor standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during 
Project implementation. The Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding 
documents and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, 
among other things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and 
incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do 
not discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; 
(e) allow freedom of association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; 
and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on 
the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors 
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project 
area, particularly women.

29. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set forth
in paragraph 28 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

30. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that (a) the
GESIAP is implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts 
include relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the 
GESIAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GESIAP; and 
(d) progress on implementation of the GESIAP, including progress toward achieving key 
gender outcome and output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB.



22
Schedule 4

Public Awareness

31. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall undertake public
awareness campaigns through information disclosure, education and consultation on the 
Project and its benefits, including but not limited to information related to the CPF, EGDF, 
EARF, and GESIAP.

Good Governance and Anti corruption

32. The Borrower, the Project Executing Agency, and the Project Implementing
Agency shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anticorruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and 
acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or through its agents, any 
alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the Project; and 
(b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory 
completion of such investigation.

33. The Borrower, the Project Executing Agency and the Project Implementing
Agency shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all 
bidding documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and 
examine the records and accounts of the executing and implementing agencies and all 
contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service providers as they relate to the Project. 
Individuals/entities on ADB’s anticorruption debarment lists are ineligible to participate in ADB- 
financed activity and may not be awarded any contracts under the Project. If the Project 
Executing Agency, Project Implementing Agency or ADB is or becomes aware or has a 
reasonable suspicion that any member of any Project Implementing Agency, PMU or PIU has 
engaged in corrupt or fraudulent practices (as defined in ADB’s Anti corruption Policy under or 
in connection with the Project or the Loan, the Project Implementing Agency will take such 
timely and appropriate action satisfactory to ADB to investigate and/or remedy the situation.

34. In addition to these requirements, to deter corruption and increase
transparency, the Project Executing Agency shall create a Project webpage within 2 months 
of the Effective Date, accessible by the general public, to disclose various information 
concerning the Project including general information about the Project, public procurement 
related to the Project, Project progress and contact details in English and Myanmar. The 
website shall also provide a link to ADB’s Integrity Unit 
(http://www.adb.org/lntegrity/complaint.asp) for reporting to ADB any grievances or allegations 
of corrupt practices arising out of the Project and Project activities. For each contract, the 
website shall include information on, among others, the list of participating bidders, name of 
the winning bidder, basic details on bidding procedures adopted, amount of contract awarded, 
and the list of goods/services, including consulting services, procured. The Project Executing 
Agency shall ensure that the Project Implementing Agency permits any bidder to request an 
explanation as to why a bid was unsuccessful and the Project Executing Agency shall respond 
within 20 working days. The webpage will be updated within three weeks after (a) each award 
of contract, and (b) each submission of the semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Report to ADB. 
In addition to the web-based disclosure, stakeholders, which include civil society and non­
governmental organizations, shall be provided by the Borrower with detailed information on 
procurement on public notice boards in their respective areas.



23

SCHEDULE 5

Prohibited investment Activities List

1. Production or activities involving harmful Or exploitative forms of forced labor or
child labor;

2. Production of or trade in any product or activity deemed illegal under the laws
of Myanmar or regulations or international conventions and agreements or subject to 
international phaseouts or bans, such as (a) pharmaceuticals, pesticides, and herbicides, 
(b) ozone-depleting substances, (c) polychlorinated biphenyls and other hazardous chemicals, 
(d) wildlife or wildlife products regulated under the Convention on International Trade in 
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, and (e) transboundary trade in waste or waste 
products;

3. Production of or trade in weapons and munitions, including paramilitary
materials;

4. Production of or trade in alcoholic beverages, excluding beer and wine;

5. Production of or trade in tobacco;

6. Gambling, casinos, and equivalent enterprises;

7. Production of or trade in radioactive materials, including nuclear reactors and
components thereof;

8. Production of, trade in, or use of unbonded asbestos fibers;

9. Commercial logging operations or the purchase of logging equipment for use in
primary tropical moist forests or old-growth forests;

10. Marine and coastal fishing practices, such as large-scale pelagic drift net fishing
and fine mesh net fishing, harmful to vulnerable and protected species in large numbers and 
damaging to marine biodiversity and habitats;

11. Road construction into protected areas;

12. Political and religious activities;

13. Development of new or expansion of existing settlements in critical habitats;

14. Activities that will require any compulsory acquisition of land or involuntary
resettlement; and

15. Activities that will have a negative impact on ethnic groups.




































































52256-001: Naryn Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Development Program


LOAN NUMBER 3854-KGZ(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Naryn Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Development Program)

between

KYRGYZ REPUBLIC

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED .2^ .2^$

KGZ 52256



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated $&£#?&&& Z0& between KYRGYZ 

REPUBLIC ("Borrowed) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK ("ADB”),

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
prog ram described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement (the ‘’Program");

(B) by a grant agreement between the Borrower and ADB (:,ADF Grant 
Agreement'), ADB has agreed to make a grant to the Borrower from ADB's Special Funds 
resources in an amount of thirteen million seven hundred thousand Dollars ($13700,000) 
(J'ADF Grant”) for the purpose of the Program;

(C) the Program will be carried out by DDWSSD (as defined hereinafter} as 
executing agency and ARIS (as defined hereinafter) as implementing agency; and

(D) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB's ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Program Agreement of even date herewith between ADB and ARIS;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE [

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Sec tion 1.01. All the provisions of ADB?s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 ("Loan Regulations"), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject, however, to the following modifications:

(a) Section 2.01 (v) is delated and the following is substituted therefor:

"Program" means the program for which ADB has agreed to 
make the Loan, as described in the Loan Agreement and as such 
description may be amended from time to time by agreement 
between ADB and the Borrower;

(b) The term "Project?1 wherever It appears in the Loan Regulations shall be 
substituted by the term ‘'Program".

(c) Section 2.01 (x) Is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:



2

''Program Executing Agency" means the entity responsible for 
the carrying out of the Program as specified in the Loan 
Agree m ent;

(d) The term "Project Executing Agency" wherever it appears in the Loan 
Regulations shall be' substituted by the term ^Program Executing 
Agency".

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “ADB's Results-Based Lending Policy” means ADB's policy set out in 
the R-Paper on Piloting Results-Based Lending for Programs approved 
by ADB on 6 March 2013;

(b) "Antlcorruption Guidelines" means ADB's Guidelines to Prevent or 
Mitigate Fraud, Corruption and Other Prohibited Activities in Results- 
Based Lending for Programs as set forth in Appendix 7 to ADB's 
Results-Based Lending Policy;

(o) "ARIS" means the Community Development and investment Agency of 
the Kyrgyz Republic established for the purpose of implementing the 
Borrower's Investment programs;

(d) "DDWSSDH means the Department of Drnking Water Supply and 
Sewerage Development under the State Agency for Water Resources;

(e) "Deposit Account" means the account referred to in paragraph 2 of 
Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement;

(f) “DLI" means each disbursement-linked indicator as set forth in the OLI 
Matrix;

{g) “DLI Matrix" means the DLI matrix for the Program as set forth in 
Attachment 2 of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as updated from 
time to time by the Borrower and ADB:

(h) £!DLI Verification Protocol” means the protocol for verifying the 
Borrowers achievement of each DLI, as set forth in the PID:

(i) "Eligible Expenditures" means the eligible expenditures referred to in 
paragraph 2 of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement;

(j) "Environmental Safeguards” means the objectives and policy principles 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1. and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of 
the BPS;

(k) "FY” means the fiscal year of the Borrower, which runs from 1 January 
to 31 December of each year;



3

(I) "High-Value Contracts" means (i) procurement of works, turnkey and 
supply and installation contracts that cost S5 million equivalent or more 
per contract; (ii) procurement of goods contracts that cost $5 million 
equivalent or mors per contract; (iii) information technology or non­
consulting services contracts that cost $5 million equivalent or more per 
contract; and (iv) consulting services contracts that cost $5 million 
equivalent or more per contract;

(m) "Indigenous Peoples Safeguards” means the objectives and policy 
principles set forth in Chapter V. Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(n) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the objectives and policy 
principles set forth In Chapter V, Appendix 2. and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(o) "Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB's Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(p) "Naryn" means Naryn province {oblast);

(q) TAP" means the program action plan for the Program dated 
13 September 2019, as updated from time to time by the Borrower and 
ADB;

(r) "PID’1 means the program impiementation document for the Program 
dated 13 September 2019, as updated from time to time by the Borrower 
and ADB;

(s) "Procurement Manual" means the procurement manual developed by 
ARIS which sets out the procurement processes forth© Program in line 
with international best practices and acceptable to ADB;

(t) "Program Actions" means the actions set out in the PAP:

(u) "Program Agreement7' means the program agreement of even date
herewith among ADB, Program Executing Agency and Program 
implementing Agency, as such agreement may be amended from time 
to time;

(v) ^Program Completion Date" means the date set out in paragraph 4 of 
Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement or such other date as the Borrower 
and ADB may agree;

(w) "Program Executing Agency” means the DDWSSD or any successor 
thereto acceptable to ADB, which is responsible \>r the overall 
monitoring of the results of the Program;

(x) ‘'Program implementing Agency" means ARIS or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB. which is responsible for the implementation of the 
Program;



4

(y) "SDWSSSS” means the Borrower's Strategy for Development of Water 
Supply and Sewerage Systems in Settlements of the Kyrgyz Republic 
until 2026, which is supported by the Program;

(z) "SPS" means ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(aa) "Table" means the table on the allocation and withdrawal of Loan 
proceeds set forth in Attachment 1 of Schedule 3 to this Loan 
Agreement; and

(bb) "WSU:? means a water supplies and utilities services entity established 
and operating in accordance with laws of Kyrgyz Republic, collectively 
“WSUs”.

ARTICLE 11

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of thirteen million seven hundred thousand Dollars 
($13,700,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term "grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
'ate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03, The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 March and 15 September in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of ths principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shah' be the Dollar.



5

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall apply the proceeds of the Loan to the 
financing of expenditures on the Program in accordance with the provisions of this Loan 
Agreement.

Section 3. 02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2028 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4. 01. In the carrying out of the Program, the Borrower shall 
perform, or cause to be performed, alf obligations set forth in Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement, the Grant Agreement and the Program Agreement

Section 4. 02. As part of the reports and information referred to in 
Section 6.05 of the Loan Regulations, the Borrower shall furnish, or cause to be furnished, to 
ADB (a) quarterly reports on the implementation of the Program, including the accomplishment 
of the DLls, the carrying out of the Program Actions and the Eligible Expenditures; and (b) as 
ADB shall reasonably request, additional Information in connection with the reports described 
in subsection (a) hereinabove and other information on Program implementation.

Section 4. 03. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Program and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01(m) of the Loan Regulations:

(a) the ADF Grant shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation; 
and



6

(b) the Program Implementing Agency shah have failed to perform any of 
its obligations under the Program Agreement.

Section 5. 02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: any of the 
events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following are specified as additional conditions to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations:

(a) the ADF Grant Agreement shall have been duly authorized by, ar.d 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower, and ad conditions 
precedent to its effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have been fulfilled: and

(b) the Program Agreement shall have been duly authorized by, and 
executed and delivered and all conditions precedent to rts effectiveness 
(other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan 
Agreement) shall have been fulfilled.

Sec tion 6.02. The following are specified as additional matters, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included h the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB:

(a) the ADF Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and rs legally binding upon the 
Borrower in accordance with its terms; and

(b) the Program Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Program Executing Agency and Program 
Implementing Agency, and is legally binding upon the Program 
Executing Agency and Program Implementing Agency in accordance 
with its terms.

Section 6,03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement forth© purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.



7

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. Ths Minister of Finance of We Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses ar© specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the.Borrower

Ministry of Finance
58 Erkindik Boulevard
Bishkek 720040
Kyrgyz Republic

Facsimile Number:

(996) 312 661 645

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 8636-2444
(632) 8636-2484.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

KYRGYZ REPUBLIC

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Authorized Representative



SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Program

1 . The objective of the Program is to support SDWSSSS's Implementation through
inclusive and reliable access to safe water supply and improved sanitation for rural 
communities in Naryn ob/asf

2 Part 1; Expanding water supply and sanitation infrastructure and piloting
of sanitation solutions comprising the following:

(a) safe water sources, water storage, and treatment and disinfection 
systems;

(b) distribution networks for the target population of approximately 64,000;

(c) gender-sensitive safe water and sanitation facilities In selected village 
kindergartens; schools and health facilities; and

(d) piloting non-networked household sanitation solutions.

3. Part 2: Strengthening institutional capacities for enhanced sustainability
in the rural water supply and sanitation sector comprising the following:

(a) establishing and strengthening WSUs with at least 20% female 
participation across all WSUs by 2025 and 40% female participation in 
WSU-related trainings and public consultations:

(b) delivering financial management training to further enhance ‘nternal 
control processes and procedures for Program Implementing Agency 
and WSUs;

(c) adopting and applying a procurement manual and a multi-year 
procurement action plan: and

(d) developing and implementing a monitoring and evaluation framework to 
improve knowledge of the asset inventory and data management.

4. The Program is expected to be completed by 31 December 2027.





12

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

f. Except as set out in this Schedule or as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan
proceeds shall be disbursed rn accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Deposit Account

2. Prior to submitting the first application to ADB for withdrawal from the Loan
Account, the Borrower shall nominate an account established at a commercial bank, as the 
Deposit Account for the Program into which all withdrawals from the Loan Account shall be 
deposited.

3. The Borrower shall maintain separate records in respect of the Deposit Account
in accordance with accounting principles acceptable to ADB.

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

4. (a) The Table sets out the Loan amounts allocated for withdrawal in respect
of a DLI upon the Borrowers achievement of the corresponding DLI targets as set out in the 
DLI Matrix. The years set out In the Table are Indicative. They do not restrict withdrawal on 
account of any DLI targets achieved whether ahead of, or later than, the indicated year, 
provided that such DLI targets are achieved on or before the Program Completion Date.

(b) ADB may, by notice to the Borrower, reallocate the Loan amounts set 
out in the Table within the same DLI or from one DLI to any other DLI.

5. Prior to submitting any application for withdrawal from the Loan Account in
respect of a DLI, the Borrower shall submit to ADB in accordance with the DLI Verification 
Protocol satisfactory evidence showing that: (a) such DLI has been fully achieved; or (b) for a 
DLI for which partial disbursement is allowed (as specified in the DLI Matrix), such DLI has 
been achieved to the extent required for partial disbursement under the DLI Verification 
Protocol. Upon ADBJs confirmation that the DLI has been achieved in full or in part, the 
Borrower may submit to ADB an application for withdrawal of the corresponding Loan amount 
for such DLI.

Advance Financing and Financing for Prior Results

6. (a) Prior to the achievement of the DLls. the Borrower may withdraw from
the Loan Account an advance financing amount for the purposes of meeting the Program’s 
financing requirements and supporting the achievement of such DLls, provided that the 
outstanding advance financing amount shall not, at any time, exceed 25% of the Loan amount. 
ADB shall deduct the outstanding advance financing amount, or anyportlon thereof, from the 
Loan proceeds to be disbursed upon achievement of the DLls,



13
Schedule 3

(b) The Borrower may withdraw from the Loan Account for DLls achieved 
prior to the Effective Date but not earlier than 12 months before the date of this Loan 
Agreement, provided that the aggregate of such withdrawals for prior results shall not exceed 
20% of the Loan amount

(c) The aggregate of the outstanding advance financing amount and the 
amount withdrawn for financing for prior results under subparagraphs (a) and (b) hereinabove 
shall not. at any time, exceed 30% of the Loan amount

Reconciliation

7. If any DLl has not been achieved by the Program Completion Date, the
Borrower shall, within 6 months of the Program Completion Date, provide a refund to ADB for 
any outstanding advance financing amount or part thereof for such DLl.

8. If the total Eligible Expenditures amount to less than the Loan amount
withdrawn by the Borrower, the Borrower shall provide a refund to ADB for an amount equal 
to the extent of the shortfall within 6 months of the Program Completion Date.



14
Attachment 1 to Schedule 3

TABLE

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds 
{$)

Disbu^eme 
nt- Linked 
Indicators

____ 1P_U)

Total ADB 
Financing 
Allocation

Financing 
for Prior 
Results

•

FY2020 FY2021 FY2022 FY2023 FY2024 FY2D25 FY2026

DL] 1 4,110,000.00 1,438,500.00 890,500.00 890,500.00 890,500.00

DU 2 1,370,000.00 548,000.00 274,000.00 548,000.00

DLi 3 274,000.00 39,144.00 39.143.00 39,143.00 39,143.00 78,284.00 39,143.00

Dl.t 4 4,521,000.00 ■ 904,200.00 904,200.00 904,200.00 904,200.00 904,200.00

DUS 685,000.00 171.250.00 171,250.00 171,250.00 171,250.00

DUG 685,000.00 411,000.00 39,142.86 39,142.88 39,142.86 39,142.86 39,142.86 39,142.86 39.142.86

□ Li 7 685,000.00 171,250.00 171,250.00 171,250,00 171,250.00

DUB 1,370,000.00 195,714.29 195,714.29 195,714,29 195,714.29 195,714.29 195,714.29 195,714.24

TOTAL 13.700,000.00 411,000.00 1,520,701.14 3,335,950.14 2.685,200.14 2,787,950.14 2,279,091.14 274,000.14 406,107.14



15
Attachment 2 to Schedule 3

DLI MATRIX

Disbursement- 
Linked 

Indicators

Baseline 
Value and 

Year

Prior 
Results 2020

2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026

DL11; By 2026, at
: least 64,000 people 

in the villages of 
Naryn oblast use 
potable water

0 population 
use water 
from 
disinfected 
sources, 
2019

Potable water 
supoly & 
distribution 
network for 
4,500 
population 
commissioned

Potable water 
supply & 
distribution 
network, for 
19,000 
population 
(cumulative) 
commissioned

Potable water 
supply & 
distribution 
network far 
45,000 
population 
(cumulative) 
commissioned

Potable water 
supply & 
distribution 
network for 
64,000 
population 
(cumulative) 
commissioned

DLI 2: By 2026, at 
least an additional 
13 village schools/ 
kindergartens and 
8 health facilities 
are served by 
improved gender- 
sensitive water and 
sanitation facilities

0 additional 
schools/ 
kindergartens 
and hearth 
facilities, 
2019

(ij GSWS 
facilities in 3 
schools/ 
kindergartens 
commissioned 
(ii) GSW8 
facilities in 3 
health 
facil'ties 
commissioned

(i) GSWS 
facilities in 7 
schools/ 
kindergartens 
(cumulative) 
commissioned 
(ii) GSWS 
facilities in 5 
hearth 
facilities 
(cumulative) 
commissioned

(i) GSWS 
facilities fa 13 
schools/ 
kindergartens 
(cumulative) 
commissioned 
(ii) GSWS 
facilities in 8 
health 
facilities 
(oumulsiive) 
commissioned

□LI 3: By 2025, 
detailed design of 
infrastructure is 
completed for 43 
villages

0 completed P redesign 
activities and 
detailed 
design 
completed in 
13 villages

Predesign 
activities and 
detailed 
design 
completed in 
23 villages

Predesign 
activities and 
detailed 
design 
completed in 
28 villages

Predesign 
activities and 
detailed 
design 
completed in 
33 villages

Predesign 
activities and 
detailed 
design 
completed in 
38 villages

Predesign 
activities 
and detailed 
design 
completed fa 
43 villages

□E I 4: By 2024, 
infrastructure

Infrastructure 
inadequate

Preparation of 
bidding

(QSafe water 
source,

(i) Safe water 
source,

(i) Safe water 
source,

(I) Safe water 
source, J



16
Attachment 2 to Schedule 3

Disbursement- 
Linked 

Indicators

Baseline 
Value and 

Year

Prior 
Results

2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
I

2025 2026

components for 
water supply and 
distribution 
networks are in 
place for at least 
64,000 population

or non­
existent

documents to 
conduct 
tender for 
construction 
works to cover 
at least 4,500 
population

disinfection, 
and storage 
system 
completed to 
cover needs 
Of 4 500 
population

(ii) WEjter 
distribution 
networks 
expanded to 
serve 4,500 
population

I disinfection, 
and storage 
system 
completed to 
cover needs 
of 19,000 
population
(ii) Water 
distribution 
networks 
expanded to 
serve 19.000 
population

disinfection, 
and storage

I system
I completed to 

cover needs 
of 45,000 
population
(ji) Water 
distribution 
networks 
expanded to 
serve 45,000 
population

I disinfection, 
and storage 
system 
completed to 
cover needs 
of 64,000 
population

(ii) Water 
distribution 
networks 
expanded to 
serve 64,000 
population

DU 5: By 2023, 
non-networked, 
household 
sanitation solutions 
have been piloted 
in at least 2 villages 
with minimum 
combined total of 
660 households

Sanitation 
solutions not 
piloted

Feasibility 
study 
completed for 
pilot approach

List of target 
villages and 
households 
identified.

Detailed 
designs 
developed

Solutions 
implemented 
for at least 
250 
households

Solutions 
implemented 
for at least 
660 
households 
(cumulative)

□ t.l 6: Procurement 
manual developed 
and implemented 
for the RBL 
program from 2020

Gaps 
identified in 
ARIS1 
procurement 
and contract 
management 
systems

Procurement 
manual and
MYP 
developed

2020 MYP 
targets 
implemented 
according to 
procurement 
manual

2021 MYP 
targets 
implemented 
according to 
procurement 
manual

2022 MYP 
targets 
implemented 
according to 
procurement 
manual

2023 MYP 
targets 
implemented 
according to 
procurement 
manual

2024 MYP 
targets 
implemented 
according to 
procurement 
manual

2025 MYP 
targets 
implemented 
according to 
procurement 
manual

2026 MYP 
targets 
implemented 
according to 
procurement 
manual

DLI 7: By 2026, 
100% of internal 
audit staff and

Gaps 
identified in 
ARIS’s

ARIS ensures 
that at least 
four internal

ARIS ensures 
that at least 
four internal

ARIS ensures i 
that at least I 
four internal |

J
ARIS 
ensures that 
st icast four



17

Disbursement- 
Linked 

Indicators

Baseline
Value and

Year

Prior 
Results 202D 2021

finance staff of 
ARIS are trained in 
internal audit and 
financial
management, 
respectively, by a 
nationally 
recognized institute

financial 
management 
system. The 
audit and 
financial 
management 
units have 3 
and 13 staff, 
respectively, 
without 
accreditation.

audit staff 
(female/msle) 
and finance 
staff are 
trained and 
certified 
respectively in 
audit and 
financial 
management

DLl 3: By 2026. 
WSUs fully 
operational and 
financially 
sustainable, with at 
least 20% female 
participation within 
WSUs, and at least 
40% female 
participation in 
WSU-related 
trainings and public 
consultations

No 
functioning 
structures for 
operations, 
maintenance, 
and 
management 
support

Scoping study 
conducted for 
jurisdiction, 
roles and 
responsibilities 
of raion and 
aiyl okmotu 
levels

(i) Public 
consultations 
and trainings 
completed, 
with at least 
40% female 
participation, 
to cover 4,500 
population 
(ii) Tariff 
developed by 
aiyl okmotu 
tor 4,500 
population
(lit) “anff 
approved by 
aiyl kenesh 
for 4,500 
population



Attachment 2 to Schedule 3

2022 2023 2024 2025 2026

audit staff 
(female/inafe) 
and finance 
staff are 
trained and 
certified 
respectively in 
audit and 
financial 
management

audit staff 
(female/male) 
and finance 
staff are 
trained and 
certified 
respectively in 
audit and 
financial 
management

I internal audit 
staff

: (female/male) 
' and finance
staff are 
trained and 
certified 
respectively 
in audit and 
financial 
management

(i) WSUs 
established to 
serve 
population 
receiving 
water supply 
in 2021 
(ir) Public 
consultations 
and trainings 
completed, 
with at least 
40% female 
participation, 
to cover 
19,000 
population
(Hi) Tariff set 
by aiyl okmotu 
for 19,000 
population.
(iv) Tariff 
approved by

(i) WSUs 
established to 
serve 
population 
receiving 
water supply 
in 2022
(ir) Public 
ccnsLitt^inns 
and trainings 
completed, 
with at least 
40% female 
participation, 
to cover 
45,000 
population 
(ill) Tariff set 
by aiyl okmotu 
tor 45,000 
population
(iv) Tariff 

_app roved by

(i) WSUs 
established to 
serve 
population 
receiving 
water supply 
in 2023 (ii) 
Public 
consultations 
and trainings 
completed, 
with at least 
40% femaie 
participation, 
to cover 
64,000 
population 
(iti) Tariff set 
by aiyl okmotu 
tor 54,000 
population
(iv) Tariff 
approved by _J

(i) 64,000 
population 
served by 
WSUs, with 
(ii) at least 
20% female 
participation 
in the overall 
WSUs

(i) 64,000 
population 
served by 
WSUs, with 
(li) at least 
20% female 
participation 
in the overall 
WSUs

s

f



18
Attachment 2 to Schedule 3

Disbursement- 
Linked 

Indicators

Baseline
Value and 

Year

Prior 
Results

2020 2021 f 2022
I

2023 2024 2025 2026

j aiy! kenesh 
i for 19,000 

population

aiyl kenesh 
for 45,000 
population

aiyl kenesh 
for 64,000 
population

ADB = Asian Development Bank, ARIS = Community Development and Investment Agency, BPM: Beneficiary Feedback Mechanism, DLl = 
disbursement-linked indicator, WSU = water supplies and utilities services entity established and operating in accordance with laws of Kyrgyz Republic, 
MYP = Multi-Year Procurement Plan of Action.
Source; Asian Development Bank and Community Development and Investment Agency.



19

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Program

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall ensure, and shall cause the Program Executing Agency and
the Program implementing Agency to ensure, that the Program is implemented in accordance 
with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PID. Any subsequent change to the PID shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADE. In the event 
of any discrepancy between the PID and this Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan 
Agreement shall prevail.

2. The Borrower, through the Program Executing Agency and the Program
Implementing Agency, ensure that the amount of Eligible Expenditures under the Program for 
any FY is equal to or exceeds the Loan proceeds withdrawn by the Borrower in the same FY. 
Such Eligible Expenditures are part of the expenditures Incurred under SDWSSSS, but they 
exclude any expenditures for (a) procurement of works, goods and services from countries 
which are not members of ADB; (b) procurement of works, goods and services from persons 
or entities debarred or suspended by ADB; (c) procurement involving High-Value Contracts; 
(d) any activities which are classified as category A for environmental impact under the SPS; 
and (e) any activities which are prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the 
EPS.

Independent Verification Agent

3. Within 240 days of the Effective Date, the Borrower, through DDWSSD, shall
have entered into an agreement with an independent verification agent, acceptable to ADB.

DLl Compliance and Program Dialogue

4. The Borrower shall ensure that all DLls achieved under the Program continue
to be complied with for the duration of SDWSSSS.

5. The Borrower shall keep ADB informed of relevant discussions with other
multilateral or bilateral aid agencies that may have implications for the implementation of 
SDWSSSS and shall provide ADB with an opportunity to comment on any resulting proposals. 
The Borrower shall give due consideration to ADB!s views before finalizing and implementing 
any such proposal.

Program Technical Aspects

6. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that all Program Actions in the area of technical requirements are implemented in a 
timely and efficient manner.



20
Schedule 4

Fiduciary

7. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that all Program Actions in the area of financial management and fiduciary are 
implemented in a timely and efficient manner.

Procurement

8. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that all Program Actions in the area of procurement are implemented in a timely and 
efficient manner.

Procurement Manual

9. The Borrower shall ensure that ARIS has the Procurement Manual in place for
institutional strengthening and improving procurement practices.

EhyLC°O.Tteritaj and Social Safeguards

10. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that all Program Actions in the area of environmental and social safeguards are 
implemented m a timely and efficient manner.

11. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that no construction or rehabilitation works under the Program involve significant 
adverse environmental impacts that may be classified as category A under the SPS. Prior to 
commencing any construction or rehabilitation works under the Program, the Borrower shall 
conduct, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to conduct, a screening to ensure that 
any works that may be classified as category A for environment impacts within the meaning of 
SPS are excluded from the Program.

12. Additionally, the Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing
Agency to ensure, that before any activities are approved for financing under the Program, the 
following conditions are met relating to limiting asbestos use under the prohibited investment 
activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS: (a) an assessment is conducted on the existing 
structures that need to be demolished or removed to evaluate the risk of asbestos presence; 
and (b) a screening of procurement procedures be conducted to ensure that asbestos- 
containing materials are not used or financed under the Program (except for the purchase and 
use of bonded asbestos cement sheeting where the asbestos content is less than 20% as 
provided under the prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS).

13. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that the preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and 
decommissioning of all activities under the Program comply with: (a) all applicable laws, 
regulations and guidelines of the Borrower relating to environment, health and safety: (b) the 
Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements, including monitoring 
requirements set forth in the Program Action Plan.

14. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that the preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and 



21
Schedule 4

decommissioning of all activities under the Program comply with; (a) all applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower relating to resettlement; (b) Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; 
and (c) all measures and requirements, including monitoring requirements set forth in the 
Program Action Plan.

15. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that the Program does not involve any indigenous people risks or impacts within the 
meaning of ths SPS. If due to unforeseen circumstances, the Program Involves any such 
rmpacts, the Borrower shall ensure that the Program complies with (a) all applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower refating to indigenous peoples; (b) Indigenous Peoples 
Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements, including monitoring requirements set 
forth in the Program Action Plan.

Gender

16. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause the Program Implementing Agency to
ensure, that all Program Actions in the area of gender equality are implemented in a timely and 
efficient manner.

Financial Support for WSUs

17. The Borrower shall, through the local governments, allocate, separate from any
tariff increases, through budgetary allocations or other means, counterpart funas on a timely 
basis to ensure that the WSUs have sufficient financial support for their operation and 
maintenance.

C cod Govern a nee and. Anti corru pt io n

18. The Borrower shall ensure, and shall cause the Program Executing Agency and
the Program Implementing Agency to ensure, that the Program complies with the 
Anti corruption Guidelines and that all appropriate and timely measures are taken to prevent, 
detect and respond to allegations of fraud, corruption or any other prohibited activities relating 
to the Program in accordance with the Anticorruption Guidelines.

19. The Borrower shall, or cause the Program Executing Agency and the Program
Implementing Agency to, (a) promptly inform ADB of any allegations of fraud, corruption or any 
other prohibited activities relating to the Program; and (b) cooperate fully with any investigation 
by ADB on such allegations and extend all necessary assistance, including providing access 
to all relevant records, for satisfactory completion of such investigation,

20. With 90 days of the Effective Date, the Borrower shall, or cause the Program
Implementing Agency to update its public website to (a) provide information on the progress 
of the Program; (b) post the audited annual financial statements *or the Program, as such 
financial statements become available; and (c) disseminate other relevant information on 
Program implementation.






















































Untitled


LOAN NUMBER 3847-NEP(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Ope^at on? [Concessional]) 

(Food Safety and Agnculture Cornmerc alization Program) 

between

NEPAL 

and 

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 10 DECEMBER 20'9

NEP 48218



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT daled 10 Decerrber 2019 between NEPAL ("Borrower') 
and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) ADB has received from the Borrower a development policy letter sales 
12 September 2C19 ('Policy Lottof), sod ng forth certain objectives, policies and actions 
described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement, dosigrod to develop the Borovzer's 
agriculture sector ("Program”);

(B) tne Borrower has applied to ADB tor a loan for the purposes o' the 
Program; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
AJB's ordinary capital resources upon tie terms and cond tions sot forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB's Ordinary Ope'aticrs 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (Loan Regulations*), are hereby 
mace applicable to this I can Agreement with Ihe same force and effect as if they were July 
set forth hemin, submet however, to the following mod fixations:

(a) Sec: on 2.01(v) s de etec and the following is substituted therefor:

“Program" means Ihe program for w-lch ADB has agreed to 
Ta<e the Loan, as described in the Loan Agreement and as the 
description thereof may be amended from time to tme by 
agreement between ADB and the Borrower;

(b) Tho term ‘Project" wherever it appears in the Loan Regulations shall bo 
substituted by the term^P-ogram’.

(c) Sect on 2.01(x) s de eted and the following is substituted tharefcr

■Program Executing Agency* means the entity or entitles 
responsible for the carrying out of the Program as specified h 
the Loor. Agreement:



2

fd) The term ‘Project Executing Agency’ wherever it appears n the Lean 
Regulations Shall be substituted by the term "Program Executing 
Agency"; and

(e) Section 5.0"{b) is cclctcd.

Section 1.02. Wherever used n this Lean Agreement tno several 
terns defined in the Loan Regelations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified he en or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) 'Counterpart Funds" means the loca currency generated Irom the Loan 
proceeds under the Program and refe'red to in oaragraphs 8 o' 
Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement;

(b) “Deposit Account’ means tits account referred to in paragraph 3 o' 
Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement;

fci "First Tranche" means tne purton of the proceeds of the I can in an 
amount equivalent tc $25,000,000 to be withdrawn pursuant to and 
subject to the provisions of paragraph 5 of Schedule 3 to ths Loan 
Agreement;

fd} ":GANDAKI MOLMAC"’ means the Ministry of Land Management. 
Agriculture and Cooporatves in the Gandaki Province of the Borrower, 
or any successor thereto

(e) HLC' means the High Level Committee, chaired by the Secretary of 
MOALD, which is established for the Program;

(I) “Loan Disbursement Handcoo\" means ADBs Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017. as amended Irom time to time):

(qj “MOALD" moans the Borrower's- Ministry cl Agriculture and Livestock 
Development, or any successor thereto acceptable to AOB:

(h) ‘MOF’ means the Borrower's Ministry of Finance, or ony successor 
thereto:

(i) 'MOLMAC' means the Ministry of Land Management, Agriculture and 
CoopA'atives in any prov nee of the Borrower, or any successor thereto;

(j) NPCS" means the Borrowor's National Planning Commission 
Secretariat, or any Successor thereto;

(k) "Policy Matrix" means the policy matrix as agreed between the Borrower
and ADB. which sets forth actions accomplished or to be accomplished 
by the Borrower under the Program and is attached to too Policy Letter.

(I) "Program Executing Agency' fo' the purposes of. and wrhin the 
meaning of. the Loan Regulations means MOF or any successor thereto 



3

acceptable to ADB. which is responsible for the caiyng OLt of the 
Program;

(m) "Province” means the Gandaki Province of tha Borcwer.

(n} "Second T'ancho" moans the balance of the p-oceeds of the Loan 
remaining in the Loan Account afie- the utilization o' the First Tranche 
to be withdrawn pursuant to and subject to the provisions of paragraph 
6 of Schedule 3 Io this Loan Agreement; and

(o} "Working Committee" means the working committco established under 
each of MOALD and GAhDAKI MOLMAC fcr tne Program as doscribad 
in paragraph 3 of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to end to the Borrower from ADC’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of fifty million Dollars (S5O.OOC.DOC).

(b> Tho Loan has a principal repayment period of '6 years, and a grace 
pcrod as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “g^ace period1 as usee in subsection (b) here nabove means 
the perod prior to the first Principal Payment Date in acco'dance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedue 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2 02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB ar interest charge at the 
rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Lean withdrawn from the Loan Account a^d outstanding from time to time

Section 2.03. The interest cha'go and any other charge on the Loan 
shall bo payable semiannually on 1 May and 1 November n each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Laan Account in accordance with tne amort nation schedule set fodh 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal of the Loan 
and tho currency of payment of the interest charge ter tho purposes of Sections 4.03(a) and 
4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall bo the Dollar.



4

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. I he Borrower shall cause the proceeds of tho Loan to be 
apolied to the financing of expenditures on the Program n accordance with the provisions of 
this Loan Agreement.

Section 3 02. The proceeds of the Loan snail be withdrawn in 
accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Ag-eement. as such Schedule may 
bo amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrows- and ADB.

Section 3.03. The Loan Closing Date for the otrposes of Section 8.02 
o' the Loan Regulations shall be 31 May 2021 or such other date as may from time to time be 
ag-eed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4. 01. In the carry ng out of the Program, tho Borrower shal 
perform, or cause Io be performed all obligations set forth in Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement.

Section 4. 02. (a) As part of the reports and information referred to
in Section 6.05 of the Loan Regulations, the Borrows' shal furnish, or cause to be furnished, 
to ADB all such raoorts and information as ADB shall reasonably request concerning: (I) the 
Ccuntarpart Funds and the use thereof; ano (ii) the implementation of he Program, including 
tho accoTpilshmo('t of tho targets and carrying out of the actions set cut in the Policy Letter.

(b) Without limiting the generality ot the foregoing or Section 6.05 o' the 
Lean Regua’ons. the Borrower snail furnish, or cause to be turnsned, to ADB quarterly 
reports on 'he carrying out of the P-ogram and on the accomplishment of the largels and 
earn/ ng out of the actons set out r the Pol cy Latter.

ARTICLE V

Effectiveness

Section 5.01. A date 90 days alle- the date ol this Loan Agreement is 
specified kr the effectiveness of the Loan Agreement for the purposes of Socoon 9.04 pt ne 
Lean Regulations.



5

ARTICLE VI

Miscellaneous

Section 6.01. Tne Secretary ur Joint Secrets^ (International Economic 
Cooperation Coordination Div sion) o' the MOF is designatec as representative of lie Borrower 
for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 6.02. Tfe follow ng addresses are specified far the purposes 
of Section 11.0' of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
Singha Durbar
Kathmandu, Nepal

Facsimile Number

♦977 1 421-1 164

For APB

Asian Development Rank
6 ADB Avenue
Menoaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philipp nes

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444
(632) 636-2391



IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties ncrctc, acting through their
rcsrosontativos thcroirto duly authorised, have caused this _oan Agroorront to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
pr ncipal office of ADB.

Secretary 
Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK



7

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Program

1. The ofnclpal objective of the Program is to improve food safely and commercial
competitiveness in the agriculture sector and the- scope induces (a) food safety arc quality 
monitoring systems improved; (bj agriculture commercialization promoted; and (c) Institutional 
capacity strengthened. Ine Program is described in more detail in the Policy Leiter.

2. The Program is expected Io be completed by 31 May 2021.




9

SCHEDULE 3

Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

1. Except as set out in this Schedule or as ADB nay otherw se ag'ee the Loan
proceeds shall be disbursed n acco'danco with the Loan Dsbursemenl Handbook

2. An appl cation for withdrawal from the Loan Acccunt shall be submitted lo ADB
oy the Borrower and shall bo in a form satisfactory to ADB.

3. (a) Pho' to submitting the first application to ADB for withdrawal from the
_oan Account, tho Borrower shall nominate ar account (the Deposit Account)al Nepal Rastra 
Bank into which all withdrawals from the Loan Account shall be deposited. rhe Deposit 
Account shall bo established, managed and liquidated in accordance with the applicable 
regulations anc pxcecuresof tie Borrower.

fb) Separate accounts end records n respect of the Deposit Account shall 
be maintained n eccorcance w th accounting principles accep-.3ble to ADB. Upon ACB s 
request, the Borrower shall have tho financial statements lor the Deposit Account audited by 
independent auditors, whoso qualifications experience and terms o' rcfcrcnco are acceptable 
to ADB, in accordance with international standards for auditing cr the national equivalent 
acceptable to ADB. Promptly after their preparation but in any event not later than 6 months 
after tho date of ADB's tequest. copies of such audited financial statements anc the option of 
the auditors on the financial statements, in the Engl sr language, shall be turn shed to ADB

4. No Loan proceeds shall bo withdrawn to finance any item sDocrtod in
Allacmert 1 tc this Schedule.

5. The Borrower may wihdraw the First Tranche upon effectiveness of this Loan
Agreement

6. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Loan Agreement and except as
ADB may otherwise agree, nq withdrawals shall be inado from the Loan Account for tho 
Socono Tranche unless ADB Is sadsfiec. after consultation with the Borrower, that 
(a) sufficient progress has been achieves by Ihe Borrower n the carrying out of the Program. 
(b)tho policy actions that were met for me release of the F rat Tranche coni nue to be compl ed 
with by the Borower; and (c) Ihe Borrower has met the policy actions for tie release cf th*? 
tranche specified In Attachment 3 to this Schedule.



10
Attachment 1 to Schedule 3

Negative List

No withdrawals of Loan proceeds wil be made tor the following;

(i) expenditures for goods included in the following groups or sud-qroups of the 
United Nations Standard International Trade Classification. Rov sion 3 (SITC. 
Rev. 3) or any successor groups or suc-groups jrdor future revisions to the 
SITC. as cesignatod by ADR by notice to the Borrower:

Tabic: ineligible Items

Chapter Heading Description of Items
112 Alcoholic beverages
121 Tobacco, unmanufactured: tobacco refuse
122 Tobacco, manufactured {whether or not containing tobacco 

substitute
525 Radioactive and associated materials
567 Pearls, precious and semiprecious stones, unw-orkee cr 

worked
718 7187 Nuclear reacto's. ard parts thereof, fuel elements 

(cartridges), nonirraciated for nuclear readore
728 728.43 Tobacco processing machinery
857 897.3 Jewelry of goid silver or plalinurn-group metals (except 

watches and watch cases) and goldsmiths' or silversmiths' 
wares (including set gems}

_ 971 ____
Source: United Nations.

Cold nonmonotaty (axclucing gold ore and coneenlrales)

(ii) expenditures in the currency of the Borrower o' for goods supplied from the 
territory of the Borrower;

(ii) expenditures for goods supplied under a contract that any national or 
international financing institution or agency will have financed or has agreed 1n 
finance, including any contract financed under any loan o' gran: from too ADB;

(ivy expenditures for goods intended fc a military or param litary purpose or (or 
luxury consumption;

(v) expenditures for narcotics;

(vl) expenditures for cnvkonmentally hazardous goods, the manufacture, use or 
import of which is prohibited unoer the laws of the Borrower or internatnrai 
agreements to which the Borrower is a party; and

(vi) expenditures on account of any payment prohibited by the Borrower in 
compliance with a dec sior of the United Nations Security Council takeh under 
Chapter VII of the Charter of the United Nations.



11
Attachment 2 to Schedule 3

Policy Actions for Release of the First Tranche

1. Cab net shall have endorsed Ihe draft Pestic de Management Bill 2075 (2018)
far submission to the Part ament, tc regulate production, sales, storage transpo'talicn and to 
discourage Ihe overuse of harmful chemicals.

2. MOALD shall nave suomittod a notification on the World Trade Organization
Notification Submission System for the Max mum Residue I mil (MRl i of pesticides in at bast 
10 fruits, vegetables and food items, far comments and suggestions by tracing partner 
countries.

3. Cab not shall have approved the National Food Safety Policy 2C76 (2019)
incorporating a aomp'onensive framework far food safety and quality. developing national food 
industry, and promote food exports.

4. MOALD shall have prepared a drart Food Safety and Quality Bill ar d suomitted
fa ‘tie Ministry ol Law, Justice, and Parliamentary Affairs for review, Including provisions to 
align the certification system with International fooc safety standards.

5. MOALD snail have approved a roadmap lor international accred tat on of (a) the
Cental Arirral and Poultry Disease Investigation Laboratory, (b) National Avian Disease 
Investigator Laboratory, and (c) Veterinan/ Standards and Drug Administration Labo'atory

6. MOAl D shall have submitted a draft of the Agribusiness Promoter BII2075 to
the Cabinet to encoirage contract farming and agrieulturc marketing, with prcvsio?s on the 
participation and benefits of marginalizes and women farmers.

7. Cab net shall have enco'sod a draft amondmont to the Seed Act 2045 (1988)
for suemsson to Parliament, to ensure farmer protection and Io encourage private sector 
participation in seed business.

8. Cab not shall have endorsed the draft amendment to Plant Protection Act 2064
(2007) far submission to too Part ament to regulate protect reps ago nst nvasi’/o species 
and posts.

9. MOALD shall have conducted Agnculture Development Strategy (AOS)
orientation workshops in all provinces. to align sub nationa love agriculture strategies and 
p ans to the rational ADS.



12
Attachment 3 to Scnedule3

Policy Actions for Release of the Second Tranche

1. MOALD shall have endorsed □ d<aft Pesticide Manaqomont Regulation and
subm tied to the Ministry of Law. Justice and Pari amentary Abairs for consent.

2. MOALD shall have: (a) issued and published in Ine ofTiaal gazette the Max mum
Residuo Limit (MRL) of postiados in at least 10 rnjiis, vegetables and food items: and (b) 
submitted a notification on the World Trade Organization Ncti'ication Submisscr System for 
tho MRL of postic dos for at least 1C add tional fruits, vegetables and fooc items, for comments 
a^d suggestions by trading partner countries.

3. MOALD shall have: (a) developed pesticide residue test protocol and
surveillance plan for selected 2 vegetables: ard (b) conducted a pilot study of pesticide residue 
les! in the selected 2 vegetables.

4. MOALD shall have: (a) prepared a plan for upgrading existing food safety
laboratories urderthe Department of Food Technology & Qualty Control (DFTQC). and (b) 
completed all pre-requsr.es for ISO’lEC 17025 certification for either pyrethroid or caroarrate 
group pesticides testing in the Natonal Food and Feed Refe'erce Laboratory, h preparation 
for international accreditation.

5. MOALD shall have completed all pre-requ sites for ISO;EC 17025 certification
for molecular unit m the Central Animal ano Pojlt'y Disease Investigation Laboratory, m 
preparation for international accreditation.

6. MOALD shall have comoleted all pro-roqusites for ISOvEC 17025 certification
for new castle d.seosc vaccine production unit in the National Vacc ne Production -aboratory, 
in preparation for internal onal accreditation.

7. MOALD shall have competed all pre-requisites for ISO-IEC 17025 certification
'or PPR vaccine production unit in the National Vaccine Production Laboratory, in preparation 
'or International accreditation

8. GAN JAKI MOLMAC shall have approved and posted on government web $> les
operational guidelines for custom hiring of agricultural machinery, Including n'tor-salos service 
ard procedural -ecuirements: and approved sample business plans comprisng technical, 
financial. branding, and manceting aspects'or (a) custom hlrng of agricultural machinery, ano 
(b) al least two high-value commod tics

National Seed Board shall have approved min mum standards for establishing 
seed testing laborator a> of different categor es

11. MOALD shall have prepared a dralt Plant ^rotect on Regulation and submitted
’.o the Ministry of Law, Justice, and Parliamentary Abairs fo' consent.

12 GANDAKI MOLMAC shall have formulated and subm tted Io provincial cabinet
gendor-and socially inclusive provincial strategic Investment plan for at least one prioritized 
commodity and aligned it w th the provlnc a medium-term expenditure''amework (MTEF).



13
Attachment 3 to Schedule 3

13. To st'-er,gtincn institutional capacity io implement gerder*$en$itive and socially
ndusive agri-bus ness reforms,

(a) GANDAKI MOLMAC shell have designated a focal oerson or unit with clearly 
defined job descriptor! lo oversee ma nslreamirg cl gender equally and social 
Inclusion practices in Gandaki MOLMAC operations:

(b) GANDAKI MOLMAC shall have published a training manual fcr promotion of 
improved agricultural practices and agribusiness development, and deivered 
Iraning to at least '5C farmers (including indigenous peoples, other 
marginalized groups, and a: least 50% wren); and

(c) MOALD shall have conducted ADS oriental on workshops for at least 50% of 
local levels (mun cipalilies and rural municipalities) of Gandaki province 
Including orientation on gender equality and social inclusion strategy of the 
ADS.



14

SCHEDULE 4 

Program Implementation and Other Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. MOF shall be lire Program Executing Agency. MOALO and GANDAKI MOLMAC
shall oc tho implementing agencies and shall be responsible for implementing their respective 
policy actions under the Program.

2. Within 60 days cf Ine Effective Dato., the Sorrower st all have expanded tho HLC
to induce representation from MOF and NPCS. which shall be responsible for overall 
supervision and coordination oftho implementation of the policy actions and other advdes for 
the Program.

3. With n 60 days of die Effective Date, the Borrower shall ensure that a separata
Working Committee is established under MOALD and GANDAKI MOLMAC. eacn of which shall 
bo responsible for coordination of tne implementation of their respective policy actions and 
activities under the Program.

Policy Actions and Dialogue

4. Tre Borrower shall ensure that all policy actions adopted under JicP'ogram.as
set forth n tno Policy Letter and the Policy Matrix, continue to be in effect for the duration o* 
the Program.

5. The Borrower shall keep ADB informed Curing periodic reviews of polcy
d scuss ons with other multilateral and bilateral aid agencies that may have implications for the 
imp ementation of lie Program and shall provide ADB with an oppertun ty to comment cn any 
resulting pol cy proposals. The Borrower shall take into account ADB's views cefcre finalizing 
and implement ng any such proposal.

6. The Borrower shall take all act ons wh ch shall be necessary on its pan to enable
the Province to perfoTi certain oblige: ons net are applicable to the Province as sot forth in 
the Polcy _et:er, and shall rot take or permit any action which would interfere with the 
performance of such obligations.

7. The Borrower shall ensure and shall cause MOALD and GANDAKI MOLMAC to
ensure that the policy actions identified as hav ng potent al safeguards impacts are carried out 
In accordance with ADB s Safeguard Pol cy Statement (2QC9). Specifically, the training marual 
for promotion ol agribusiness and tho ensuing training shall have at least 50% women 
particicaton and shall ensure that nd gorous people are informed and 'epresented.

Use of Counterpart Funds

8 The Borrower shall ensure that the Counterpar Funds aro used to finance tho
Implementation Of Certain programs and activit cs oonsistort wit" the object ves ol the ^ogram.



15

Schedule 4

Governance and Articorruption

9. The Borrower, the Program Executing Agency. MOALD and GANDAKI
MO_MAC sha I (a) comply with ADB's Anticorrupticr Policy £1998. as amended to data) and 
acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly or through its agents, any 
alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive praodce rotating to the Program; and 
(b)coope'ale with any such invest galicn and extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory 
completion of such investigation.

Monitoring and Revew

10. The Borrower shall ensure that HLC meets at least sem-annually and. if
needed, on an ad hoe basis to: (I) monitor the progress of the Program, (ii) provide gu dance 
and (fraction for program mplementaton to the Working Committee, and (iii) recommend 
adjustments or supplementary measures to facilitate and ensure timely implementation of the 
Program. ADR shall be invited to allene all meetings of HLC as an observer. Dosed on the 
feedback 'rorr the Working Committee and ADB. HLC shall, if nocossary, amend a^d revise 
its work, p-ograms to ensure t mely and effective implementation of the Program.

11. ADB shall undertake periodic review missions to: (a} confirm progress and
fulfilment of policy actions for tranche release; £h) confirm release of adequate 'unds from the 
Borrower for Program-spcc fic activit os, (c) monitor continued applicability of the assumptions 
that might impact Program success, as wel as specifies risks and their mitlgat ng measures 
one (d) advise on actions to maintain effective mplementaVon within tie Program period.




































































50013-002: Sustainable Tourism Development Project


LOAN NUMBER 3787-MON

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

(Sustainable Tourism Development Project)

between

MONGOLIA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED. J2.lune 2.019

MON 50013



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated between
MONGOLIA (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for two loans for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) by an agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and ADB 
(“Concessional Loan Agreement”) ADB has agreed to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s 
Ordinary Capital Resources, on concessional terms, nineteen million Dollars ($19,000,000) in 
connection with the Project; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB’s ordinary 
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations Loan 
Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 ("Loan Regulations”), are hereby made applicable to this 
Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein, except 
that the term “Project Executing Agency" appearing in Sections 7.01 (a)(i), 9.01(d), 9.01(f), 
9.01(k), 10.01(c) and 10.02(c) of the Loan Regulations shall be substituted by the term "the 
Ministry of Environment and Tourism of Mongolia or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB”.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) "CKTC" means the Chinggis Khaan Tourism Complex in OBNP, as 
further described in the PAM;

(b) “Consulting Services” means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations to be financed out of the proceeds of the 
Loan;



2

(c) “Environmental Management Plan" or "EMP" means the environmental 
management plan for the Project, including any update thereto, 
incorporated in the IEE;

(d) “Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(e) “Goods’* means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(f) “Indigenous Peoples Safeguards" means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(g) "Initial Environmental Examination” or “IEE" means the initial 
environmental examination for the Project, including any update thereto, 
prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(h) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(i) “KLNP" means Khuvsgul Lake National Park;

(j) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(k) “MoF” means the Ministry of Finance of the Borrower or its successor;

(I) ‘'Nonconsulting Services'* means nonconsulting services as described In 
the Procurement Regulations to be financed out of the proceeds of the 
Loan;

(m) “OBNP” means Onon-Balj National Park;

(n) "PAM" means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
14 March 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(o) "PILI" means the project implementation unit to be established at the 
Project Executing Agency as described in the PAM;

(p) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
14 March 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policy, the 
Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;



3

(q) "Procurement Policy” means ADB’s Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

(r) “Procurement Regulations” means Procurement Regulations for ADB 
Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting Services and Consulting 
Services (2017, as amended from time to time);

(s) “Project Executing Agency” means the Ministry of Environment and 
Tourism of the Borrower or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;

(t) “Project Implementing Agencies" means the Department of Protected 
Area Management and Department of Tourism Policy Coordination 
under the Project Executing Agency or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB;

(u) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the EMP, including any 
corrective and preventative actions;

(v) “SGAP" means the social and gender action plan for the Project 
including any updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(w) “SPS” or "Safeguard Policy Statement" means ADB's Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009); and

(x) ‘Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services and project related services that are 
provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of nineteen million Dollars ($19,000,000), as such 
amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency Conversion in accordance 
with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 21 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.



4

(c) The term "grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest 
Period equal to the sum of:

(a) LIBOR;

(b) 0.60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a credit
of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations; and

(c) a maturity premium of 0.10% as provided by Section 3,03 of the Loan 
Regulations.

Section 2.03. The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0.15% 
per annum. Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts withdrawn 
from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement,

Section 2.04. Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 15 November and 15 May in each year.

Section 2.05. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this 
Loan Agreement.

Section 2.06. (a) . The Borrower may at any time request any of the
following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt management:

(i) a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the 
principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and 
outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency;

(ii) a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any portion 
of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding 
from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa; and

(iii) the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any 
portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 
outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or 
Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate.

(b) Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that 
is accepted by ADB shall be considered a “Conversion”, as defined in Section 2.01(f) of the 
Loan Regulations, and shall be effected in accordance with the provisions of Article V of the 
Loan Regulations and the Conversion Guidelines.



5

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the Procurement Plan.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2025 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors’ opin ion (s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.



6

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 9.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the Borrower shall have failed to perform 
any of its obligations under the Concessional Loan Agreement.

Section 5. 02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 9.07(a)(iv) of the Loan Regulations: the 
event specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following is specified as an additional condition to the
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the Concessional Loan Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered 
on behalf of the Borrower and shall have become fully effective and binding upon the Borrower 
in accordance with its terms, subject only to the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement.

Section 6.02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.



7

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of MoF of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 12.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 12.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
Government Building 2
S. Danzan Street 5/1 
Ulaanbaatar 15160 
Mongolia

Facsimile Number:

+976 51 267-468

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

+63 2 636-2444 
+63 2 636-2534.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly.authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

MONGOLIA

By

Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Mongolia Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is the achievement of sustainable and inclusive
tourism in the KLNP and OBNP.

2. The Project shall comprise:

Component 1: Enhance inclusive planning and capacity for community based 
tourism through strengthening the institutional framework for tourism planning 
and increasing the number of local beneficiaries from tourism by: (a) revising 
development plans for the three largest settlements at the KLNP and OBNP (two 
at the KLNP and one at the OBNP) to include livelihood targets, natural resource 
use and spatial planning for residents; (b) developing and implementing two 
tourism concession manuals, and an ecotourism certification program, for KLNP 
and OBNP; (c) strengthening the KLNP tourism council and creating a tourism 
council at OBNP; (d) installing information facilities in the Khuvsgul Aimag capital 
to promote KLNP products and services; and (e) increasing employment and 
business opportunities for local residents by providing vocational training for 
small businesses and installing tourist markets.

Component 2: Construct enabling infrastructure for tourism, comprising: (a) at 
KLNP (i) upgrade unsealed roads, (ii) construct car parks and (iii) improve traffic 
control and safety; and (b) at OBNP (i) construct the CKTC, (ii) establish 
supporting infrastructure, (iii) upgrade an access road and (iv) extend a power 
line to the CKTC site.

Component 3: Scale up waste management, including: (a) plan and coordinate 
the installation, operation and maintenance of low-cost sanitation systems at 
KLNP and OBNP; (b) construct three wastewater treatment plants suitable for 
cold climate; and (c) upgrade three landfill sites and establish new procedures 
for recycling and for leachate and waste management.

Component 4: Strengthen park management by: (a) constructing a KLNP 
headquarters and visitor center, two fee collection stations and a road control 
station; (b) rehabilitating public trails; (c) revising KLNP's and OBNP’s 
management plans; (d) preparing an action plan for each of KLNP and OBNP; 
and (e) training park and soum government staff to implement the revised plans.

3. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2024.



10

SCHEDULE 2

Amortization Schedule

1. The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date 
(Installment Share). If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the first 
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying (a) the total principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment Date; by 
(b) the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount to be 
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, to 
which a Currency Conversion applies.

Date Payment 
Due



2. If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows:

(a) to the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn 
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the 
amount withdrawn and outstanding as of such date in accordance with 
paragraph 1 of this Schedule; and

(b) any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be 
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such 
withdrawal in amounts determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of 
each such withdrawal by a fraction, the numerator of which shall be the 
original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph 1 of this 
Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment 
Share) and the denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining 
Original Installment Shares for Principal Payment Dates failing on or 
after such date, such repayment amounts to be adjusted, as necessary, 
to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, to 
which a Currency Conversion applies,

3. Withdrawals made within 2 calendar months prior to any Principal Payment
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any Principal 
Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal Payment 
Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal Payment Date 
commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of withdrawal.

4. Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an 
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be 
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be 
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount in its currency of denomination immediately 



12
Schedule 2

prior to said Conversion by either (a) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal 
in said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating to 
said Conversion; or (b) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion Guidelines, 
the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.

5. If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time
shall be denominated in more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule shall 
apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a 
separate amortization schedule for each such amount.



13

SCHEDULE 3 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category ("Table”). (Reference to “Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest and Commitment Charges

3. The amount allocated to Category "Interest and Commitment Charges” is for
financing interest and commitment charges on the Loan during the implementation period of 
the Project, ADB shall be entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf 
of the Borrower, the amounts required to meet payments, when due, of such interest and 
commitment charges.

Reallocation

4, Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (I) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until ail 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



14
Schedule 3

Condition for Withdrawals from Loan Account

6. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals
shall be made from the Loan Account until the PIU has been established and has engaged a 
qualified project coordinator, financial specialist and procurement specialist.



15
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

* Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 6 of Schedule 3.
** Proceeds of the Concessional Loan Agreement for the corresponding category are to be fully utilized prior to 
disbursement of this loan for this category

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing

................... (S)........
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Civil Works* 13,870,238 100.0% of total expenditure 
claimed**

2

Goods, Consulting 
Services, Community 
Contracts, Workshops, 
PIU operating costs*

3,614,862 100.0% of total expenditure claimed**

3 Interest and
Commitment Charges 1,514,900 100.0% of amounts due

TOTAL 19,000,000



16

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
Project is implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and the Loan 
Agreements, the provisions of the Loan Agreements shall prevail.

2. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure close
coordination in implementing the Project with all relevant ministries, relating especially to the 
ministries that will be responsible for operation and maintenance of the project roads, landfill 
sites, wastewater treatment plants, and power lines. Without limiting the foregoing, a steering 
committee for the project shall be established by the Project Executing Agency and shall meet 
not less than quarterly during Project Implementation to oversee and ensure well-coordinated 
implementation of the Project. The steering committee shall be chaired by the State Secretary 
of the Project Executing Agency and shall comprise high-level officers from at least the 
ministries responsible for roads and transport, construction, urban development and energy, 
as well as from relevant departments of the Project Executing Agency,

Project Specific Assurances

Supporting Project Implementation

3. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
Project Executing Agency, Khuvsgul Aimag government and the Khentii Aimag government 
will not issue any commercial tourism licenses or land entitlements for business activities within 
the KLNP or OBNP (including the OBNP buffer zone in Dada I Soum) until the following have 
been (a) completed, (b) approved by the Project Executing Agency, the aimag and soum 
governments, and ADB, (c) adopted by the Project Executing Agency and/or local government, 
and (d) commenced implementation: (i) tourism concession manuals for KLNP and OBNP; 
(ii) the Khankh Soum development plan for KLNP; and (iii) revised Khatgal Town development 
plan for KLNP and revised Dadal Soum development plan for OBNP.

4. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall provide or cause to
be provided adequate start-up capital to establish the holding company for the CKTC, as 
described in the PAM, to cover the costs of at least the first year of CKTC's operation and to 
cover further costs of operating CKTC until visitor revenue is sufficient to fund CKTC’s 
operating expenses.

5. The Borrower shall ensure that the Khentii Aimag power station and the power
transmission line from Ondorkhaan Town (also known as Chinggis Khaan Town) to Dadal 
Soum, are upgraded before the completion of construction of the CKTC to the extent necessary 
to ensure an adequate and reliable power supply to operate the CKTC.



17
Schedule 4

6. The Borrower shall ensure that the road from Onddrkhaan Town (also known
as Chinggis Khaan Town) to Dadal Soum is upgraded to repair the most damaged sections of 
the existing, unpaved, portions of the road and shall further exert best efforts to ensure paving 
and upgrading of the entire road (including the section of road from the Dadal Soum center to 
the CKTC) in close consultation with the Project Executing Agency, the Project Implementing 
Agencies and the PIU so as to ensure coordination and planning with the needs of the Project.

Supporting implementation of Project Safeguards

7. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall appoint officers to
act as focal points for the EMP and SGAP and ensure that these officers undertake regular 
coordination with and support for the environment and social specialists to be recruited by the 
PIU as provided in the PAM.

8. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
Khatgal Town power substation (in Khuvsgul Almag) and Dada! Soum power substation (in 
Khentii Aimag) are adequately maintained and managed in order to: (a) provide the required 
power for Project facilities, especially the KLNP headquarters and visitor center in Khatgal 
Town and the CKTC in Dadal Soum; (b) ensure there is no disruption to the existing power 
supply for communities and services, including during winter and times of peak demand. If 
any changes are planned that may adversely affect the capacity or function of these power 
stations the Borrower shall: (a) inform ADB of the proposed changes; (b) if there is any potential 
adverse impact on the Project or any Project facilities, prepare and implement a corrective 
action plan as agreed with ADB.

9. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
Project Executing Agency, Project Implementing Agencies and PIU to, ensure that: (a) public 
services for power, water supply, and wastewater collection at the KLNP and OBNP will be 
maintained for communities during the Project civil works; (b) any interruptions to such services 
which result from Project works will be as limited as possible; and (c) prior to any planned 
interruptions, meaningful consultations are held with all affected communities.

10. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that all
planting activities under the Project (a) occur only for rehabilitation of construction sites; 
(b) except as provided in (c), below, use only species that are native to Khuvsgui Almag, for 
KLNP, and that are native to Dadal Soum, for OBNP, and utilizing seedlings that are sourced 
from local stocks within Khuvsgul Aimag and Khentii Almag, respectively; (c) If fast-growing 
non-native species (e.g. grasses) are required for stabilizing bare surfaces of construction 
sites, use for such purpose only sterilized seedlings that cannot propagate; (d) do not use any 
invasive plant species; and (e) do not use pesticides or top-dressing fertilizers.

Tariffs for Wastewater and Solid Waste Management

11. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
Project Implementing Agencies or Khuvsgul Aimag and Khentii Aimag governments (a) make 
continuous efforts to increase wastewater tariffs and solid waste management tariffs 
progressively to achieve full cost recovery and in accordance with national tariff policies and 
regulations; and (b) undertake at least once a year a periodic review of tariffs and fees including 
an assessment of their impact on the poor.



18
Schedule 4

12. During the process of adjusting wastewater tariffs and solid waste management
tariffs, the Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the Project 
Implementing Agencies or Khuvsgul Aimag and Khentii Aimag governments take into 
consideration (a) the minimum tariff level to cover basic operating costs, debt service and 
capital replacement; (b) users’ affordability and willingness to-pay data from available surveys; 
and (c) recent tariff escalations. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall 
ensure that the Project Implementing Agencies or Khuvsgul Aimag and Khentii Aimag 
governments include public consultation in their tariff setting processes.

Governance

13. The Borrower shall not withdraw any ADB loan proceeds until the Project
Executing Agency has engaged a project coordinator and Project financial specialist and a 
procurement specialist in accordance with the PAM.

Design and Quality Control Requirements

14. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, Project Implementing
Agencies and PIU to, shall ensure that:

(a) the detailed designs for the Project are completed in accordance with 
the Project implementation schedule as set forth in the PAM, but not 
later than 2 months before the start of the concerned Works;

(b) construction management, quality control, contract management, final 
completion and acceptance of all Works comply with all applicable laws 
and regulations of the Borrower and with all applicable requirements of 
ADB; and

(c) al! structures and facilities constructed or installed under the Project are 
well operated and maintained, and all operation and maintenance staff 
are fully trained in monitoring, operating, and maintaining the structures 
and/or facilities for which they are responsible.

Procurement

15. The Borrower shall, through the Project Executing Agency, ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
ADB’s review requirements. The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and



19
Schedule 4

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

Safeguards

Conditions for Award of Works Contracts

16, The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that no
Works contract which involves environmental impacts is awarded until:

(a) the Project Executing Agency has endorsed the IEE; and

(b) the Project Executing Agency or the relevant Project Implementing 
Agency has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the 
Works contracts.

Environment

17, The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, the Project Executing
Agency, Project Implementing Agencies and PIU to, shall ensure that the preparation, design, 
construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and ali Project 
facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
environment, health and safety; (b) the SPS; arid (c) all measures and requirements set forth 
in the IEE and EMP and any corrective or preventative actions (i) set forth in a Safeguards 
Monitoring Report, or (ii) which are subsequently agreed between ADB and the Project 
Executing Agency.

18. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Project Executing Agency
shall ensure that: (a) during detailed engineering design of the CKTC, meaningful consultations 
are held with local residents, civil society organizations and other stakeholders to assess 
community concerns about the siting of the CKTC and its access road and to identify 
community-led or other solutions to address any community concerns; (b) the consultations 
include dissemination of all site-related information collected for the detailed designs, including 
the exact proposed location for the CKTC and access road; (c) if, following consultations, some 
stakeholders oppose the location of the CKTC, the PIU delivers a report and recommendations 
for resolution to the project steering committee and ADB and that the project steering 
committee confers with ADB on next steps; and (d) that design work and other preparation for 
the CKTC is suspended until siting issues are resolved in a manner acceptable to ADB.



20
Schedule 4

No Involuntary Resettlement or Indigenous Peoples Impacts

19. The Borrower shall ensure and shall cause the Project Executing Agency to
ensure that the Project does not have any involuntary resettlement impacts or indigenous 
peoples impacts within the meaning of the S PS. In the event that the Project does have any 
such impacts, the Borrower shall, and shall cause the Project Executing Agency, Project 
Implementing Agencies and PIU to, take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies 
with the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

20. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall make available
necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

21. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that all
bidding documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the I EE 
and the EMP (to the extent they concern impacts on the respective 
affected people under ADB’s Environmental Safeguards during 
construction), and the domestic environmental impact assessments, 
and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in (i) a Safeguards 
Monitoring Report, or (if) subsequently agreed between ADB and the 
Project Executing Agency;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Project Executing Agency with a written notice of any 
unanticipated environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks 
or impacts that arise during construction, implementation or operation of 
the Project that were not considered in the IEE and the EMP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

22. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall do the following:

(a) submit Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB in respect of 
implementation of and compliance with Environmental Safeguards and 
the EMP, semiannually during construction and the implementation of 



21
Schedule 4

the Project and the EMP, and thereafter annually during operation, until 
the issuance of ADB's Project completion report unless a longer period 
is agreed in the EMP; and disclose relevant information from such 
reports to the respective affected people under the Environmental 
Safeguards, the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards and the 
Indigenous Peoples Safeguards promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the IEE and the EMP, promptly inform ADB of the 
occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the 
event and proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP promptly after becoming aware 
of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

23. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that no
proceeds of the Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited 
investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

24 The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the core
labor standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during 
Project implementation. The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing Agency or the 
relevant Project Implementing Agency to include specific provisions in the bidding documents 
and contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other 
things: (a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate 
applicable workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not 
discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; 
(e) allow freedom of association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; 
and (f) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on 
the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors 
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project 
area, particularly women.

25. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall strictly monitor
compliance with the requirements set forth in paragraph 24 above and provide ADB with 
regular reports as provided in the PAM.

Gender and Development

26. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that (a) the
SGAP is implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts 
include relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the SGAP; 
(c) adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the SGAP; and (d) progress on 



22
Schedule 4

implementation of the SGAP, including progress toward achieving key gender and social 
outcome and output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB.

27. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that the
“Consultation and Participation Plan" and “Stakeholder Communication Strategy” for the 
Project are fully implemented in accordance with their terms and that activities thereunder are 
regularly monitored and reported to ADB.

Counterpart Support

28. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall, and shall cause the
Project Executing Agency the Khuvsgul Aimag government, the Khentii Almag government 
and other government agencies to, ensure that (a) counterpart funds are made available to the 
Project in a timely manner, including any additional counterpart funds, as and when required, 
to meet any Project shortfall or cost overruns during Project implementation; and (b) operation 
and maintenance of all Project facilities is fully and timely funded. In addition to the foregoing, 
the Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency and Project Implementing 
Agencies have sufficient funds to satisfy their liabilities arising from any Works, Goods and/or 
Consulting Services contract.

Governance and Anticorruption

29. The Borrower shall, and shall cause the Project Executing Agency, the Project
Implementing Agencies and the PIU to, (a) comply with ADB's Anticorruption Policy (1998. as 
amended to date); (b) acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or 
through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the 
Project; and (c) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for 
satisfactory completion of such investigation.

30. The Borrower shall, and shall cause the Project Executing Agency, the Project
Implementing Agencies and the PIU to, ensure that anticorruption provisions acceptable to 
ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts related to the Project, including 
provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the 
Borrower, the Project Implementing Agency, the Project Executing Agencies, the PIU and all 
contractors, suppliers, consultants and other service providers as they relate to the Project.

Grievance Redress Mechanism

31. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall ensure that a
safeguards grievance redress mechanism acceptable to ADB is established at the Project 
Executing Agency and each Project Implementing Agency in accordance with the provisions 
of the IEE and EMP, within the timeframe specified in the I EE and EMP, to consider safeguards 
complaints.

Ownership and Control of Project facilities

32. In the event any change in ownership or control of any Project facilities is
anticipated, the Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall consult with ADB at 
least 6 months prior to the implementation of such change, and shall ensure that no change 



23
Schedule 4

will be made that will have an adverse impact on the implementation of the Project in 
accordance with the Project Agreement and the PAM.




































































Loan Agreement (Ordinary Operations [Concessional]) for Loan 3817-LAO: Sustainable Rural Infrastructure and Watershed Management Sector Project


LOAN NUMBER 3317-I.AO(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Sustainable Rural Infrastructure and Watershed Management Sector Project!

between

LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 30 OCTOBER 2019

LAO 5023G



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Oidinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 30 October 2019 between LAO PEOPLES 
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC ('Borrower") and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK {"ADB').

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower rias applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Project will be partly carried out hv the provinces of Houaphan, 
Louangphabang. XalgnaboUji and Xiangkhouang ("Project provinces'), and for this purpose 
the Borrower will make available to the Project provinces a portion of the proceeds of the loan 
provided for herein upon terms and conditions acceptable to ADB:

(C) the Borrower has also applied to ADB tor a grant in an amount Oi five 
million Dollars ($5,000,000) from ADB's Disaster R^sk Reduction Fund ("DRRF Grant") for the 
purposes of the Project;

(D) the Borrower has also applied to the European Union for a grant ("Ei1 
Grant". together with DRRF Grant. "Grants") in an amount in Euro equivalent to four million 
four hundred sixty thousand Dollars ($4,460,090) for the purposes el the Project, and

(E) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADR's ordinary capital resources upon the tomia and conditions sei forth herein and in rhe 
Project Agreement between ADB and Project provinces;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as foilawe:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01 All provisions of ADB's Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 ("Loan Regulations"), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject, however, to the following modifications:

(a) Section 2.01(uu) is deleter! and the following is substituted therefor

"Project Agreement" means rhe Project Agreement between ADB of one 
part, and Houaplian Province, Louangphabang Province. Xaignabouii 
Province and Xiangkhouang Province of the other part, as such 
agreement may be amended from time to time.



2

(b) The [erm "Project Executing Agency" appearing in Section G.01(3)0), 
8.01 (d), 8.01(f), 8.01 (k). 9.01(c) and 9.02(c) of the Loan Regulations 
shall be substituted by the term "Houaphan Province, Louangphabang 
Province, X^Qmaboujj Province and Xiariglchouang Province"

Section 1^1 Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
ternis defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or I he context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) "Consulting Services" means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set nut in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan.

(b) "EARP" means the environmental assessment and review framework 
for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Borrower and cleared by ADB,

(c) 'EM?" means an environmental management plan developed for a
Subproject and approved by ADB:

(di "Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1. and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of Ihe 
SPS,

(e) "Goods" means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation commissioning, training. and initial maintenance,

(f) "HIV/AIDS" means human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome;

(g) "IEE" means each initial environmental examination for a Subproject, 
including any update thereto prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
pursuant to the requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB

(h) "List of Eligible Subprojects" means a list which provides all candidate 
subprojects pre-screened in accordance with the criteria set forth in the 
PAM;

(I) 'Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB's Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (SOI7, as amended from time to lime):

(I) 'MAF means the Borrower's Ministry of Agriculture and F nrestry, or any 
successor(hereto

(k i "NonconsLilling Services" means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;



3

l it "PAFO' moans a provincial agriculture and Forestry office in a Project 
province or any successor thereto;

r। r।j "PAM" means the project administration manual for Uie Project dated 26 
July 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB. as updated from 
time to time in accordance will i the respective administrative procedures 
of the Borrower arid ADB;

(n) "Procurement Plan1' means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
26 July 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB as updated 
from time to time in accordance with Hie Procurement Policy, the 
Procuremient Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(o) ‘‘Procurement Policy" means ADB's Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works. Nonconsulting and Consuliing Services (2017 as amended from 
time to time),

(pi 'Procurement Regulations'" means ADBJs Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods. Works Nonconsulling and Consulting 
Services (2017. as amended from time to time).

(q) "Project Executing Agency' for the purposes ol, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means MAF or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the 
Project;

(r) "Project facilities" means facilities to be provided, constructed or 
operated and maintained under the Project;

(s) "Project province" means each of the Borrower's provinces of 
Houaphan, Louangphabang. Xaignabouli and Xiangkhouang, or any 
successors thereto:

(t) "’REGDF" means the resettlement and ethnic group development 
Framework tor the Project, as agreed between the Borrower and ADB;

(u) "RP" means each resettlement plan For a Subproject, including any 
update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the REGDF and cleared by ADB:

(vj "RSP" means a representative subproject selected among the 
Subprojects, more fully described in the PAM;

(w) "SPS" means ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(X) "Safeguards Monitoring Report" means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of. and compliance with, the EMP and the RP (as 
applicable), including any corrective and preventative actions;

(y) "Services" means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services'



■I

(z) 'SubprajeGf means a subproject to be financed under the Project, as 
selected In accordance with paragraphs 18 to 26 of Schedule 4 to this 
Financing Agreement.

taa) 'UXO' means Lmexploded ordinance:

(bb) Works" means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurer nt’rd 
Rian and to be financed out of the proceeds ot the Loan and Grants, 
including any related Nonconsulling Services and project related 
services thai are provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey 
contract;

(cc) WUA" means a water user association; and

(dd) "WUG" means a Water user group.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01 (a) ADB ogress to lend Io the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital lesources an amount of forty million Collars ($40 000,000}.

(b) T he Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (cj hereinafter

(c) The term "grace period' as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Pnncipal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2 02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1 5% per annum (hereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time io time.

Section 2.02 The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 March and 15 September in each year.

Section 2.04 The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2.05 The currency of repayment of the principal amount Of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes Of Sections 4 03(a) 
and 4 04 pif the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar



5

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. (a) The Borrower shall make available a portion of
the proceeds of the Loan to the Project provinces upon terms and conditions satisfactory to 
ADB

(b) The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be applied 
exclusively tn the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions of 
this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3 02 The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement

Section 3,04 (a) Withdrawals from the Laan Account in respect of
Goods, Works, and Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to

(I) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Warks and 
Services which are supplied from such member countries of ADB as 
shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as eligible sources 
for procurement; and

(H) Goods, Works, and Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time

(b) For purposes of subparagraph (a)(ii), Goods, Works, and Services may 
also be procured under the Project from non-member countries of ADB

Section 3.05 The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8 02
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 September 2027 or such other date as may from time to 
time be agreed between the Borrower and ADB

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement



6

Sec tion 4.02 (a) The Borrower shall, or shall cause the Project
provinces to, (I) maintain separate accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual 
financial statements for the Project in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable 
to ADB; (III) have such financial statements audited annually Dy independent auditors whose 
qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with 
auditing standards acceptable to ADB. (iv) as part of each such audit have the auditors 
prepare a report, which includes the auditors' opinion^) on the financial statements and the 
use of the Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the 
internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) 
furnish to ADB. no later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such 
audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, 
and such other information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall 
from time to time reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB's confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB's website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower , unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03 The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project the Goods, Works and Services, and any relevant records and documents.

Section 4.04. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable the Project provinces to perform their obligations under the 
Project Agreement, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the 
performance of such obligations

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01(m) of the Loan Regulations: any of the DRRF Grant arid ELI Grant 
shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8 07(d) of the Loan Regulations: the event 
specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred



7

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6 01 The following is specified as an additional condition to the
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: all of DRRF Grant and EU Grant Agreements shall have been duly executed and 
delivered, and all conditions precedent to their effectiveness (other than a condition requiring 
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have been fulfilled

Section 6.02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7 01. The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11 02 of the Loan Regulations

Section 7 02 The following addresses are specified for the purposes
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
23rd Singha Road
P.O Box 46
Vientiane Capital
Lao People's Democratic Republic

Facsimile Number:

(856-21)412142

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADS Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines



8

Facsimile Numbers

(632) 636-2444
(632) 636-2366

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered st the 
principal office of ADB

LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC

Deputy Minister
Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

By
ASUSHi NEGISHI
Country Director

Lao Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of Lhe Project

1 The objective of the Project is to improve high value agricultural production,
natural resources management ®nd community nutrition

2 The Project shall comprise th§ following outputs.

Output 1: Market-oriented agricultural production increased.

(a) Completing and confirming market demand assessments for all 
additional subproiect:

(b) Starling market connectivity forums and meetings in the RSPs;

(c) Confirming enterprise grants procedures and implementation 
arrangements and completing grant awards.

(d) Implementing Subproject farm to farm extension, and

(e) Operation a bzing market produce quality assurances systems

Out put 2: Watershed ecological services protected.

(a) Preparing Provincial land use plans (PLUPs) for catchments in four 
Xiangkhouang province and five Houaphan province productive rural 
infra structure subprojects (PRIs);

(b) Preparing PLUP associated land use behavioral change programs with 
supporting community agreements including female participation' and

(c) Implementing PLUPs land use behavior change action plans

Out put 3: Command area irrigation reliability improved.

(a) Contracting and completing RSP works:

(b) Designing and contracting additional PRI subprojects in batches 2 and 
3 with batch 3 being the final processing deadline, and contracting and 
completing Works with handover for batches 2 and 3;

(c) Farming WUGs and WUAs, including 507a participation by females, 
and water user management wilh 25% of female representation: and

(d) Organizing Subproject WUG into WUAs.

Out put 4 Nutrition awareness and facilities improved

(a) Forming and operationalizing district nutrition committees;



in
Schedule 1

(bj Implementing village nutrition schools, and

(c) Implementing Water sanitation and hygiene facilities In targeted 
villages.



SCHEDULES

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets Forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category ("Table") (Reference lo "Caregory" in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the I. nan Account

2. Except as adb may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items Of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis oi the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure sei forth in the Table.

Kite re stC barge

3. The amount allocated to Category "Interest Charge' is for financing the interest
charge on the Loan during I he implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to 
withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itseft. on behalf of the BorroWef the amounts 
required to meet payments, when due. of such interest charge

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to he 
insufficient to finance ail agreed expenditures in that Category ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (1i) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made: and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears lo exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category

Dis burse pre nt Procedures

5 Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disburse men! Handbook



Schedule 3

'condition,for Withdrawals 'mm Lnan Account

3, Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals
shall be made from the Loan Account for Category 3 until the Borrower has issued guidelines 
lor usage of matching grant, in a form and substance satisfactory to ADB, including selection 
criteria and selection procedures for activities in accordance wiih the PAM.



15
Attachment lo Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Num her Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

(Dollar) _
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Works for RSPs 2.316,170 34.7% of total expenditure claimed

2
Project Costs Other 
Than Category 1 above 
and Category 3 below

33,696,275 100% of total expenditure claimed

3 Matching Grant* 180,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

4 Interest Charge 1,523,445 100% of amounts due

5 Unallocated 2,284,110

TOTAL 40.000,000

Snt। eel to the cond lion tor withdrawal described >n paragraph 5 of Schedule 3



16

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Implementation, Environmental, Social and Other Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project provinces to ensure that the Project is 
implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the even I of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan 
Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement, and DRRF Grant and EU Grant 
Agreements shall prevail.

Procurement

2 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project provinces to ensure that.

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in accordance 
with the ADB Procurement Policy and the Procurement Regulations,

(to) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth (he Procurement Plan including the procurement and 
selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and ADB's review 
requirements The Borrower may modify the detailed arrangements set forth in 
the Procurement Plan only with the prior agreement of ADB. and such 
modifications must be set out ip updates to the Procurement Plan: and

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all computer
hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured or incorporated 
within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party: and 
(iij all contracts for the procurement of Goods. Works and Services contain 
appropriate representations, warranties and. if appropriate, indemnities from 
the contractor supplier consultant or service provider with respect to the 
matters referred to in I his subparagraph

Environment

3 . The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project provinces to ensure that the 
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of each 
Subproject and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to environment, health, and safety; (b) the EARF: and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the respective 1EE and EMP, and any corrective or preventative 
actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report

4 The Eiorrower shall ensure the following measures are taken: (a) coordinate with the 
regulatory authorities to ensure agrichemicals are used in accordance with national laws and 
regulations and international conventions to which the Borrower is a signatory, (b) ensure that 
pest and/or vector management activities related to the subproject sites are based on 
integrated pest management approaches; (c) implement the training and related measures 



17
Schedule j

included rn the project's good agricultural practice capacity building program, and rd) Include 
a specific section in the semi-annual envi^riment safeguard reports on the application of 
agrichemicals.

5 The Borrower shall ensure that no subproject which meets the ADBs Category A 
environmental criteria as defined under the SPS, is included in the List of Eligible Subprojects, 
and that no subproject with Category A environ mental criteria is financed under ihe Project

6 The Borrower shall cause each Project province to establish river how gauging plates 
and lo provide, for each year, fortnightly readings of nvei flow during the dry season between 
1 October and 1 May throughout Project implementation

Inyoji1 nlary Resettlemerit

7 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project provinces to ensure that ail land and 
all rights-of-way required for each subproject and all Project facilities are made available to the 
Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed under ihe related Works contract 
and all iand acquisition and re sett Ie me nt activities are implemented in compliance with (a) ad 
applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land acquisition and fnvpluntafy 
rose tile meni^ (b) the REG DE and (c)al) measures and requirements set forth mtha respective 
RP. and any corrective or preventative actions set Forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report

8 . The Borrower shall ensure that no subproject which meets the ADB's Category A 
resettlement criteria as defined under the SPS. is included in the List of Eligible Subprojects, 
and that no subproject with the Category A resettlement criteria is financed under me Project.

9 Without) jimrtihg the apptication of the REGDF or the RP, the Borrower shall ensure or 
cause the Project provinces lo ensure that no physical or economic displacement takes place 
m connection with the Subprojects until

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected people 
in accordance with the RP. and

Jb) a comprehensive income arid livelihood restoration program have been 
established in accordance with the RP.

10 The Borrower shall dlSO ensure that a grievance redress mechanism acceptable to 
ADB is established for affected people in the districts where the resettlement activities under 
the Project are carried out.

'indigenous Peoples arid Vulnerable Groups

11 . The Borrower shall ensure that subprojects do not adversely affect ethnic groups, 
households headed by women disabled, elderly or other similarly vulnerable groups, and that 
rights and needs of ethnic groups are fully addressed in accordance with ADS's Policy on 
Gender and (development (1998) and SPS. in particular the Project shall be carried out in 
accordance with the REGDF.

12 The Borrower shall ensure that no subprojects which have significant impacts on ethnic 
groups, is included in the List of L-ligible Subprojects, and that no Subproject with such impacts 



10
jr,neoule 4

is financed under the Project. For Subprojects In which ethnic groups are present and affected, 
an tn dig eno us peoples plan shall be prepared in accordance with the REGDF

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

13 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Prelect provinces to ensure that all bidding 
documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require con tractors to

(a) comply with the measures and requirements relevant to the contractor set forth 
in the IEE, the EMP, and the RP (to the extent they concern Impacts on affected 
people during construction}, and any corrective or preventative actions set out 
in a Safeguards Monitoring Report

(b) make available a budget for all such environ mental and social measures, and

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated environmental, 
resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that arise during 
construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were not 
considered in the IEE, the EMP or the RP

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

14 The Borrower shall do the following or shall cause the Project provinces to do the 
following.

(a) submit semi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly upon 
submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise during 
construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were not 
considered in the IEE. the EMP or the RP. promptly inform ADB of the 
occurrence of such risks Or impacts, with detailed description of the event and 
proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures and 
requirements set forth in the EMP or the RP promptly after becoming aware of 
the breach.

Human and Fmoncla! Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

15 . The Borrower shall make available or shall cause the Project provinces Io make 
available necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMP and the RP 
In particular. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project provinces to ensure dial the 
environment consultants, whose qualification are acceptable to ADB, are engaged and 
deployed in a timely manner



19
Schedule 4

Prohibited List of Investments

16 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project provinces to ensure that no proceeds 
of the Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities 
provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS

Gender and Development

17 The Borrower, through MAF, shall ensure that me gencfer mainstreaming activities are 
(a) incorporated into the Project design and undertaken during Project implementation, and (b) 
monitored by the Division Advancement of Women within MAF

Grievance Redress Mechanism

16 . The Borrower shall ensure that safeguards grievance redress mechanisms acceptable 
to ADB are established in accordance with Ihe provisions of the EARF, EMP and RP at the 
project management office, within the timeframes specified in the relevant IEE EMP and RP 
to consider safeguards complaints.

Subproject Eligibility and Priority

19 , i he Borrower shall ensure that only candidate subprojects listed in the List of Eligible 
Subprojects are considered for financing under the Project

20 The Borrower shall ensure that candidate subprojects m each Project province are 
taken up in the order of priority indicated in the List of Eligible Subprojects and shall cari^y out 
feasibility studies and detailed design for such candidate subprojects

21 . The Borrower shall require oi cause the Project Provinces to require certification of 
UXO safety to be issued lor each Subproject through the office of Provincial Governor. Where 
UXO clearance is required, the Borrower shall arrange and finance this work, using the 
Borrower's UXO trust fund in accordance with its standard procedures. The UXO clearance 
requires a 12-month notification for inclusion in the Borrower programs.

Feasibility Study and Detailed Engineering Design Review

22 . After completion of the combined feasibility studies and detailed engineering designs 
(design report), candidate subprojects shall be reviewed by PAFO who shall report to the 
Provincial Steering Committee, and shall be taken up for physical implementation only if (a) 
the concerned WUGs commit to paying the irrigation service fees at a level that meet the 
requirement ol the operation and maintenance plans as approved by the Loan Implementation 
Consultant: and (b) they meet the selection criteria as provided in the PAM

23 . In case that a candidate subproject does not meet the criteria provided rn the PAM, it 
shall be replaced by the next priority candidate subproject for the respective Project province 
under the List of Eligible Subprojects If candidate subprojects not listed in the l.ist of Eligible 
Subprojects are to be considered for financing under the Project, they shall be examined and 
screened by MAF with the support from an independent consultant acceptable to both ADB 
and the Borrower and submitted to ADB for approval



2D
Schedule 4

Proiect Irrigation Scheme

2*1. fhe Borrower shall ensure that (a) each irrigation scheme to be developed under the 
Project shall ho longer be included in the prowincial or national register of required rice 
production aieas for the dry season, (b) the irrigation schemes io the Project shall have 
completed irrigation management transfer processes with both WUG and WUAs established 
prior to the award of any related Works contract and shall toimaily Identify the required 
irrigation service fee to enable operation and maintenance Of the irrigation command area, and 
(cj the use of the irrigation service tee collected by WUAs in the Project irrigation schemes 
Shall be limited to the operation and maintenance requirement of the scheme until such time 
when the WUAs' bank account has a year-end balance of a! least two years operational and 
maintenance requirements, and the WUAs. based on majority member, will distribute to village 
or district officials any funds in excess of this amounl

l abor Standards, Health, and Safety

25 . The Borrower shall ensure that the core labor standards and the Borrower's applicable 
laws and regulations are complied with during Project implementation The Borrower shall 
include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by ADB under the 
Project requiring that the contractors, among other things, (a) comply with the Borrower's 
applicable labor law and regulahons and incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety 
norms, (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect of employment and 
occupation, (d) do not use forced labor (e)do not restrict the workers from developing a legally 
permissible means of expressing their grievances and protecting their rights regarding working 
conditions and terms of employment, and (fl disseminate, of engage appropriate service 
providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually transmitted diseases incktding 
HIV/AID8, to rhe employees of contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the 
local communities surrounding the Project area particularly women The Borrower shall strictly 
monitor compliance with the requirements set forth in this paragraph and provide ADB with 
regular reports.

Counterpart Support

26 . The Borrower shall ensure that the counterpart funding required tor successful Project 
implementation is timely allocated and provided The Borrower through MAP and Project 
provinces, shall ensure that qualified staff are added to the project management units in a 
timely manner

27 . In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that MAP and the Project 
provinces have sufficient funds to satisfy 'heii liabilities arising from any Works. Goods pnd/or 
Services contract.

Financial Ma nag en lent

26 . The Borrower shall implement the financial management plan as agreed with ADB and 
set forth in the PAM. In particular, the Borrower shall {a) make available the government staff 
in sufficient numbers and with the required academic background and/or experience, as per 
the positions and the timelines in accordance with the PAM; (b) ensure that he standardized 
financial management manual for Project is developed and agreed by the Borrower's 
concerned ministries prior to the commencement of any activities under the Project, and (c) 
undertake monitoring of the implementation of the financial management plan.



21
Schedule 4

Malching Grant

29 rhe Borrower shall implement activities to be financed by the matching grant tn 
accordance with its guidelines, and report to ADB details of the activities on an annual basis.

Governance and Anti corruption

30 . The Borrower shall (a) comply with ADB's Anti corruption Policy (1998, as amended to 
date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or through its agents 
any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the Project, and 
(b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory 
completion of such investigation

31 The Borrower shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are 
included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the light of 
ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing and implementing 
agencies and all contractors suppliers, consultants, and other service providers as they relate 
to the Project.





