










AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 
 

 

LIBERIA 

 

SMALLHOLDER AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT FOR FOOD AND 

NUTRITION SECURITY (SADFONS)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

June 2021 

  
  
  
  
  



 
Grant Information 

Client’s information 

 
RECIPIENT:     Republic of Liberia 

 

EXECUTING AGENCY:   Ministry of Agriculture 

 

 

Financing plan 

 
Source Amount (USD) Instrument 

 

GAFSP  

 

8.2 Million 

 

Grant 

ADF 15 0.43 Million (UA 0.3 million) Grant 

Government Contribution 0.45 Million In-kind 

TOTAL COST 9.08 million  

 

 

Key financing information 

 
 

Grant currency 

 

US$ 

Interest type* Not Applicable 

Interest rate spread* Not Applicable 

Commitment fee* Not Applicable  

Other fees* Not Applicable 

Tenor Not Applicable 

Grace period Not Applicable 

FIRR, NPV (base case) US$ 17.13 million 

EIRR (base case) 23.7% 

 
*if applicable 

 

Timeframe – Main Milestones (expected) 

 
 

Concept Note approval  

 

June, 2020 

Project approval June, 2021 

Effectiveness July, 2021 

Completion March, 2026 

Last Disbursement July, 2026 

 

 

 



 

iv 

 

Project Summary 

Project Overview: The proposed Smallholder Agriculture Development for Food and 

Nutrition Security (SADFONS) project seeks to improve food and nutrition security and reduce 

poverty of targeted rural populations in Liberia. This will be achieved through (i) increased 

agricultural productivity and production of smallholder farmers (with a focus on food crops 

such as rice, cassava, and vegetables), (ii) improved smallholders’ value addition, market 

access and income, and (iii) strengthening the capacity of the government institutions, farmers 

and producer organizations. The Project area will cover six counties over a five-year period. 

The project consists of three components, namely: (i) Support smallholder agricultural 

productivity and market access, (ii) Institutional Strengthening and Capacity building and (iii) 

Project management and coordination. The total project cost is estimated at US$ 9.08 million, 

of which the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP) will finance US$ 8.2 

million, African Development Fund UA 300,000 (US$ 429,027) and the Government of 

Liberia (GoL) US$ 453,000. 

 

Needs Assessment: The Smallholder Agriculture Development for Food and Nutrition 

Security (SADFONS) project is designed within the context of the Liberian Agriculture Sector 

Investment Plan (LASIP II). LASIP II has five main strategic objectives which are (1) to 

sustainably and reliably access adequate, nutritious, and needed food for utilization of a healthy 

living; (2) to develop and support competitive value chains and market linkages; (3) to 

strengthen agricultural extension, research and development for enhancing sustained 

productivity growth; (4) to adopt agricultural practices that maintain the ecological and 

biological integrity of natural resources and (5) to improve governance and institutional 

capacity to implement programs and projects. The project aligns and supports the LASIP II 

regarding its objective to mainstream nutrition considerations in agriculture and development 

programmes.  

 

Bank Added Value: The Bank’s comparative advantage and added value in this project are 

derived from its accumulated experience in financing the on-going Smallholder Agricultural 

Productivity Enhancement & Commercialization (SAPEC) project and past projects in Liberia, 

which includes a number of infrastructures- and capacity building-related interventions. The 

project will provide opportunities not only to leverage lessons learnt in enhancing the 

development of the proposed investments but will also provide the Bank, as the supervising 

entity of the GAFSP grant, an ideal platform for partnering with FAO which is the supervising 

entity for the Technical Assistance in the project. The Bank’s partnership with other technical 

and development agencies such as the Consultative Group of International Agricultural 

Research (CGIAR) system, Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), International Finance 

Corporation (IFC), World Bank (WB) and others is an asset that the Bank can draw upon. 

 

Knowledge Management: The Project shall develop a Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) 

System. Knowledge will be captured using analysis of the M&E database, supervision 

missions, mid-term reports, and periodic impact assessments and field exchange visits of the 

stakeholders within and outside the production areas. In addition, knowledge would be 

disseminated by showcasing the Project results using Bank’s communication systems (Intranet, 

blog posts, short documentaries on the Bank’s website, etc.). The Farmer Field Schools will 

serve as sources of innovative knowledge and information sharing learning tools empowering 

farmers and other actors of the value chain to train their peers, share knowledge and 

experiences, thus reducing their overdependence on the public extension agents.



 

v 

 

RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 

 R E S U L T S  F R A M E W O R K   

A 
 

PROJECT INFORMATION 
❚ PROJECT NAME AND SAP CODE: SMALLHOLDER AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT FOR FOOD 
AND NUTRITION SECURITY (P-LR-AA0-010) 

❚ COUNTRY/REGION: Liberia / RDGW 

❚ PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE: To improve food and nutrition security and reduce poverty of targeted rural population in Liberia 

❚ ALIGNMENT INDICATOR (S): Improved food and nutrition security and reduced poverty of rural communities 

B  RESULTS MATRIX 

RESULTS CHAIN AND INDICATOR DESCRIPTION 
RMF/ADOA 
INDICATOR 

UNIT OF MEASUREMENT BASELINE (date) 
TARGET AT 

COMPLETION (date) 
MEANS OF VERIFICATION 

❚ OUTCOME STATEMENT 1: Increased agricultural productivity 

1.1: Yield of rice, cassava and vegetables  □ Mt/ha 
Rice 2.48 Mt/ha 

Cassava 10.2 Mt/ha 

3.5 Mt/ha 

25 Mt/ha 

Project Reports, MoA 

reports, Household surveys 

❚ OUTCOME STATEMENT 2: Increase volume of agricultural production 

2.1: Production volume of rice, cassava and vegetables  □ Mt 
Rice - 0 

Cassava - 0 

29,050 Mt (40% by 

female); 91,800 Mt (40% 

by female) 

Project Reports, MoA 

reports, Household surveys 

❚ OUTCOME STATEMENT 3: Increased minimum diet diversity 

3.1: Stunting amongst children under five □ Percentage 32.1 28 
Project Reports, MoA 

reports, Household surveys 

1. ❚ OUTPUT STATEMENT 1: Strengthening of sustainable crop production and intensification 

1.1: Volume of breeder seeds multiplied ☑ Mt 0 200 

Project Reports, MoA 
reports, Household surveys 

1.2 Volume of foundation seeds produced   ☑ Mt 0 1500 
1.3 Area  of land under irrigation rehabilitated ☑ Ha 0 208 
1.4 Area of land under cultivation  ☑ Ha 0 7,000 
1.5 Mechanization centres set up ☑ Number 0 1 
1.6 Farmers receiving productivity enhancement support ☑ Number 0 8,000 (40% female) 

2. ❚ OUTPUT STATEMENT 2: Value Addition and Market Linkages 

2.1 Beneficiaries of credit guarantee ☑ Number 0 400 (40% female) 

Project Reports,  
MoA reports, 

Household surveys reports 

2.2 Post-harvest facilities, storage centres and market-related 
installations  

☑ Number  5 8 
2.3 Agricultural production processed ☑ Percentage 0 80 
2.4 Farmer Based Organizations trained  ☑ Number 0 60 
2.5 Contracts signed by off takers ☑ Number 0 24 



 

vi 

 

3. ❚ OUTPUT STATEMENT 3: Strengthening participatory farmer advisory services 

3.1 Farmer field schools (FFS) established ☑ Number 0 320 

Project Reports,  
MoA reports, 

Household surveys 

3.2 FFS Master Trainers trained  ☑ Number 0 10 
3.3 Lead farmers (ToF) trained as facilitators of FFSs on climate 

resilence Agricultural and sustainable land management Practices 
☑ Number 0 160 

3.4 Producer Organizations’, including women farmer organizations 

capacity built 
☑ Number 0 60(40% women 

organizations) 

3.5 People reached with social behavior change communication (BCC) 

campaigns  □ Number 0 10,000 
3.6 Persons trained in nutrition enhancing activities, products and 

services 
☑ Number 0 13,000(60 % women) 

3.7 People receiving improved nutrition training  ☑ Number 0 30,000(school children) 
(50% women) 

3.8 Persons trained on SRI and other climate-smart agricultural practices   ☑ Number 0 200 (40% women) 
4. ❚ OUTPUT STATEMENT 4: Support to national food safety and security 

4.1 National Standard laboratory refurbished ☑ Number 0 1 Project Reports 
4.2 Food safety policy frameworks developed/ updated □ Number 0 1 Project Reports 

5. ❚ OUTPUT STATEMENT 5: Strengthening the capacity of MoA in investment planning and implementation 

5.1 Establishment of a unified M&E system at MoA ☑ Number 0 1 
Project Reports,  

MoA reports, Household 

surveys 

5.2 Agribusiness and investment policy dialogues with private sector 

partners □ Number 0 5 Project Reports,  
MoA reports 

5.3 MoA staff receiving post-graduate training ☑ Number 0 5 
6. ❚ OUTPUT STATEMENT 6: Capacity development of agricultural research institutions 

6.1 Seed laboratory equipped ☑ Set 0 1 Project Reports,  
MoA reports 

 

  



 

vii 

 

Project Timeframe 

 

 

Task Name 

2021 2022 2023 2024 - 2025 2026 

Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 

Negotiations                    

Board approval                    

Signing of Grant Agreement                    

Satisfaction of conditions for effectiveness and first disbursement for grant                    

Project launch                    

Technical coordination meetings                    

Project work plans and budgets                      

Technical Design Review/Baseline data update                    

Prepare bid documents and contract awards for works, goods and services                    

Contracts execution for works, goods and services                    

Quarterly reports submission                    

Bank’s supervision missions                    

Financial audit                    

Annual E&S compliance Audit                    

Mid-term review                    

Impact assessment and technical audit                     

Project completion reporting                     



 

 1 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE MANAGEMENT TO THE BOARDS 

OF DIRECTORS ON A PROPOSED GRANT TO THE REPUBLIC OF LIBERIA FOR 

THE SMALLHOLDER AGRICULTURE DEVELOPMENT FOR FOOD AND 

NUTRITION SECURITY 
 

Management submits the following Report and Recommendation for approval of the proposed GAFSP 

grant of US$ 8.2 million and ADF grant of UA 0.3 million to finance the Smallholder Agriculture 

Development for Food and Nutrition Security Project in Liberia. 

I – STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 

1.1. Project linkages with country strategy and objectives 

1.1.1. The Government unveiled a development strategy in 2018, the Pro-poor Agenda for Prosperity 
and Development (PAPD), which was further elaborated in the second edition of the Liberian 

Agriculture Sector Investment Plan (LASIP II) and the 2019 National Food Security and Nutrition 

Strategy (FSNS). The PAPD strongly emphasizes the role of a diversified and competitive agricultural 

sector for the economy and for improving food and nutrition security. Its stated main goals are for 

Liberia to achieve “a more competitive and diversified agricultural sector that promotes value chains 

for food self-sufficiency, increased exports, job creation, and livelihood opportunities” by 2023. The 

PAPD emphasis the importance of the successful implementation of LASIP II and prioritizes the 

strengthening of production and processing of locally consumed food products (rice, cassava, 

vegetables) as well of main export agricultural products (oil palm, cocoa, rubber). 

 

1.1.2. The PAPD responds to Liberia’s wide-ranging sources of societal, economic and environmental 
fragility in various ways. By increasing production and processing of rice, cassava and vegetables, food 

security and nutrition is being strengthened and the high incidence of undernourishment and stunting 

among children will be decreased. Moreover, the high import bill of rice (218 Million      USD in 2017) 

would be reduced, decreasing fiscal deficits and local currency depreciation. As a major factor for 

integrating value chains, the Government of Liberia is committed to improving the road and electricity 

network, giving priority to road corridors for transporting agricultural produce. Upscaling production 

and processing would increase economic growth and strengthen the private sector. Further actions of 

addressing economic fragility are the reactivation of the Agriculture and Cooperative Development 

Bank to improve access to agricultural finance, and the implementation of the Land Rights Act to 

strengthen land rights in the agriculture sector. By emphasizing the importance of implementing LASIP 

II the GOL equally commits to strengthening the capacity of public administration and policy 

framework. Environmental and climate fragility will be e addressed by the adoption of climate-resilient 

agriculture. 

 

1.1.3. The Smallholder Agriculture Development for Food and Nutrition Security (SADFONS) 
project is designed within the context of LASIP II. LASIP II has five main strategic objectives which 

are (1) to sustainably and reliably access adequate, nutritious, and needed food for utilization of a 

healthy living; (2) to develop and support competitive value chains and market linkages; (3) to 

strengthen agricultural extension, research and development for enhancing sustained and climate-

resilient productivity growth; (4) to adopt agricultural practices that are resilient to climate change and 

maintain the ecological and biological integrity of natural resources and (5) to improve governance and 

institutional capacity to implement programs and projects. The project aligns and supports the LASIP’s 

II objective to mainstream nutrition considerations in agriculture and development programs.  

 

1.1.4. The project is aligned with the National Food Security and Nutrition Strategy (2015) which 
focuses on increasing availability, access and utilization of food and strengthening the institutional 

system to achieve these objectives. In addition, the project is aligned with the National Policy and 

Response Strategy on Climate Change (2018). It supports the implementation of the National 

Adaptation Program for Action (NAPA), by promoting climate-smart agricultural production 

techniques and supporting the conservation of forest areas. 

 



 

 2 

1.1.5. The proposed project responds to the issues of food and nutrition security, and persistent 
poverty emphasized  in the government’ PAPD National Development Plan 2018-2023. The Plan 

prioritizes agriculture as central to economic transformation, supporting the development of priority 

value chains, including rice, cassava and horticulture, with specific focus on women and youth. This 

agenda is further elaborated in LASIP II 2018-22 that identifies food and nutrition security; 

development of competitive value chains and market linkages; agricultural extension and research; 

sustainable production and natural resource management; and governance and institutional 

strengthening as main areas for priority investments in the country. 

1.2. Rationale for Bank’s involvement 

1.2.1 Food and nutrition security are a critical factors in preserving peace and stability in Liberia and 
can be achieved through inclusive agricultural development that accelerates productivity and income 

growth among smallholders and improves agriculture livelihoods. The proposed project will contribute 

to the implementation of the government’s vision to improve food and nutrition security by investing 

in solutions that directly benefit smallholder farmers who are held back by the quality of inputs, 

machinery and infrastructure for irrigation, storage, processing and marketing. The project will expand 

access to improved inputs, promote technology transfer, improve food safety and facilitate the provision 

of research and climate-smart advisory services to farmers.  

 

1.2.2 The Bank’s Country Strategy Paper (CSP) 2019 – 2023 aims to support private sector driven 
economic diversification and strengthen economic governance. Accordingly, the CSP is articulated 

around the following two priority areas for Bank support: Priority Area 1 – Economic diversification 

through improved transport and energy infrastructure; and Priority Area 2 – Improving economic 

governance and enhancing private sector development. In addition, special emphasis will be placed on 

the following aspects: 1) strengthening resilience to fragility; 2) capacity development; 3) gender and 

women’s empowerment; 4) youth economic empowerment 5) environment and climate change; and 6) 

regional integration and trade (especially within the Manu River Union). The proposed project is fully 

aligned with these strategic areas where the CSP places emphasis; building resilience of vulnerable 

population, supporting youth development and empowering women. 

 

1.2.3 The proposed project contributes directly to objectives of the Feed Africa Strategy of the 
African Development Bank and the ADF-15 priorities. As part of the Bank’s High 5 Agenda and the 

objectives of “Feed Africa,” the Bank is elaborating a strategy for its support to the four specific goals 

of CAADP (i) contribute to eliminating extreme poverty in Africa by 2025; (ii) end hunger and 

malnutrition in Africa by 2025; (iii) make Africa a net food exporter; and (iv) move Africa to the top of 

export‑orientated global value chains where it has comparative advantage. The project contributes to 

ADF-15 strategic pillar II: human, governance and institutional capacity development for inclusive 

growth and job creation. 

 

1.2.4 The project is aligned with the Bank’s Jobs for Youth Strategy (2016-2025), the ENABLE 
Youth Programme, and the Multi-Sectoral Nutrition Action Plan (2018-2025). The proposed operation 

is aligned with the Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy (2013-2022) and supports its twin objectives of inclusive 

growth and transition to green growth. The Project is also aligned with the Bank’s Strategy on 

“addressing Fragility and Building Resilience in Africa”, which promotes inclusiveness and resilience 

building.   

 

1.2.5 The project will leverage on prior Bank investment in Liberia through the Agriculture Sector 
Rehabilitation project (ASRP) and Smallholder Agricultural Productivity Enhancement & 

Commercialization (SAPEC) project. The SAPEC project has achieved substantial results in improving 

food security and increasing farmer household incomes. The proposed project will build upon approach, 

lessons and target groups of the SAPEC project, and aims at consolidating and sustaining its achieved 

results.  The consolidation is especially required in lowland development sites where irrigation and 

roads development interventions will be coming into implementation towards the end of the SAPEC 

project.  



 

 3 

 

1.3. Donors coordination 

             

  
Sector or subsector* 

Size    

  GDP Exports Labor Force    

  [Agriculture] [36%] [71.28%] [70%]    

  Players - Public Annual Expenditure (average)**    

  Government Donors 

 

[IFAD] 
 

[46%]    

 [US$ 2.4 million] [US$ 25.69 million] [AfDB] [27%]    

 [24%] [76%] [World Bank] [14%]    

    [FAO] [13%]    

  Level of Donor Coordination    

  Existence of Thematic Working Groups Yes    

  Existence of SWAPs or Integrated Sector Approaches No    

  ADB's Involvement in donors coordination*** Member    
* as most appropriate ** Years [yr1 to yr2] *** for this sector or sub-sector **** L: leader, M: member but not leader, none: no 

involvement 

 
1.2.6 The Liberia National Aide and NGO Policy of 2020 provides a framework for donor 
coordination that ensures the advancement of the principles of the Paris Declaration (2005), the Accra 

Agenda for Action (2008) and Busan Partnership for Effective Development Corporation (2011). The 

policy is set to improve the effectiveness of aid, ensure aid mobilization in a coordinated way with a 

wider reach, produce more visible results and closer collaboration with NGOs. This Policy serves as a 

reference for the Government of Liberia and Development Partners in the management of official 

development assistance. Various donor coordination groups exist, and these include: Cooperating 

Partners Group (CPG), UN Country Team (UNCT), Budget Support Working Group, PFM Donor 

Coordination Group, Sector Working Groups on Energy, Transport, Agriculture, and Water, Sanitation, 

and Hygiene (WASH). These forums provide the Bank with a platform to engage in dialogue with 

development partners and the Government of Liberia (GoL) on a range of issues, including economic, 

financial, social development and sector-specific ones.  

 

1.2.7 There are a number of Development Partners (DPs) active in Liberia and these include AfDB, 
World Bank, International Monetary Fund (IMF), USAID, EU, GIZ, JICA, China, Sweden and SIDA. 

Liberia remains highly donor-dependent. Estimates show the development partners’ share of the total 

government expenditure rose from 64% in FY2012/2013 to 76%in FY2014/2015. The Ebola Virus 

Disease (EVD) crisis explains this increase. The increase in ODA placed Liberia among the top four 

recipient countries in the world. The post-EVD period has seen declining donor transfers and grants 

from 60% to 20% of GDP.  

 

1.2.8 To help safeguard food systems that were being disrupted by COVID-19, the Bank prepared 
the Feed Africa Response to COVID-19 (FAREC) document to collaborate and partner with the 

different donors on the ground. This project will also seek close collaboration with the ongoing World 

Bank-funded STAR-P project and IFAD Tree Crop Extension Projects I and II that also focuses on food 

security, nutrition and income generation in Liberia. The project will also collaborate with the WFP the 

implementation of the Home-Grown School Feeding Program (HGSFP) in the areas where the proposed 

project will provide the basis for increased smallholder agricultural production, and where the increased 

food supply could be met by the demand from the HGSF program. A close collaboration is also foreseen 

with the ongoing UN Women and UNFPA projects in the target counties to ensure that women farmers 

receive the necessary support to effectively benefit from the proposed investments. The project will 

explore collaboration with IFC to engage with the private sector in strengthening the agricultural input 

distribution networks. 



 

 4 

II – PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

2.1. Project components 

2.1.1 The project development objective is to improve food and nutrition security and reduce poverty 
of targeted rural populations in Liberia. This will be achieved through (i) increased agricultural 

productivity and production of smallholder farmers (with a focus on food crops such as rice, cassava, 

and vegetables), (ii) improved smallholders’ value addition, market access and income, and (iii) 

strengthening the capacity of the government institutions, farmers and producer organizations. 

Component 1. Support to enhancing smallholder agricultural productivity and market access 

2.1.2 Sub-Component 1.1. Strengthening of sustainable crop production and intensification: 
The project activities will be implemented in both upland and lowland areas, increasing the productivity 

of cassava, rice and vegetables production. The project will support the rehabilitation of irrigation 

schemes for rice cultivation in a total of 130 ha of lowland areas. The rehabilitation will include 

stabilization of existing irrigation infrastructures for rice and vegetable production for improved water 

availability in the rice-producing counties of lowland areas and will include earth and layout works, 

water control and small irrigation structures.  

 

2.1.3 The project will establish a farm mechanization centre to provide equipment maintenance and 
repairs within the project area. The centre will be established under the Central Agricultural Research 

Institute (CARI) and concentrate technical skills and resources that can be supplied at request on a cost-

recovery basis, to ensure continued repair and service of machinery. It will act as a Centre of Excellence 

for mechanics and repair persons, where they can learn new knowledge and skills for serving their 

communities. A cost recovery model will be applied at the outset of the project, to ensure the 

sustainability of the centres’ operations beyond the project implementation period.   

 

2.1.4 The project’s activities on the development and strengthening of smallholder farmers’ capacity 
will start with the development of training modules for master trainers and farmer field school 

facilitators (lead farmers). The training modules will be refined to supplement and build on existing 

farming knowledge and experiences while also reflecting modern farming techniques. These modules 

will build on the cumulative knowledge of farmers, using control groups and trial & error techniques to 

share and shape future sustainable and climate-resilient farming practices. Farmers will remain 

custodians of their own knowledge, embedded within communities, helping to perpetuate improved 

practices going forward.  

 

2.1.5 The project will, in turn, support the implementation of an extension model based on the 
participatory, lead farmer approach. This approach utilizes the experience of the farmer field schools 

(FFS), for improved rice, cassava and vegetable production, and also improved access to inputs such as 

seeds, marketing opportunities and skills and nutritional status. The limited number of public field 

extension officers in the counties are not enough to reach out to all the farming households with the 

needed extension support, so the lead farmer approach helps to fill in voids. A total of 160 FFS 

facilitators working in pairs and trained by the project, will implement one FFS per year, for four years.  

 

2.1.6 The project will build the capacity of lead farmers at the county level, through training of master 
trainers. Two master trainers/county extension officer (ideally one female and one male) are trained per 

county. The master trainers will train lead farmers as FFS facilitators and manage the needed extension 

support and backstopping support (including FFS activities) at the county level. Each master trainer 

goes through one cropping season (4-5 months long) training. While the training of 10-12 master 

trainers is envisaged under this project, up to 30 trainees can be trained per training, allowing for the 

project to accommodate other projects to join the TOMT (training of master trainers) on a cost-sharing 

basis. This would leverage the capacity building of the project and contribute to further embedding the 

lead-farmer FFS (farmer field schools) approach across more counties, within Liberia (refer to Annex 

C5 in volume II) 

 

2.1.7 The Central Agricultural Research Institute (CARI) will support the development of the seed 
supply system to increase farmers’ access to certified seeds, by training selected farmers on seed 



 

 5 

multiplication techniques at their centre and by providing the needed support to set-up local seed 

/planting material multiplication farms in their communities. CARI will work with various seed grower 

groups and encourage and support the participation of private seed producer businesses and agro-input 

dealers to enable them fully to undertake the production and distribution of the certified seeds in Liberia. 

 

2.1.8 FAO will provide technical assistance to the MOA for the execution of FFS activities. The 
MOA will lead the process by developing training manuals for the FFS to which the FAO through its 

national staff (an agronomist) will provide further technical backstopping by facilitating FFS activities.  

FAO will provide supervision, reporting and evaluation support services for the completion of the FFS 

activities. 

 

2.1.9 Sub-Component 1.2. Value Addition and Market Linkages: The project will support 
interventions for the development and strengthening of smallholder market access and value chain 

linkages. The project will strengthen the linkages between smallholder farmers and six micro-hubs for 

primary processing of cassava and rice, with the help of four aggregation centres located near micro-

hubs. The micro-hubs currently lack the management and operational capacities needed to consistently 

supply value addition services to smallholder farmers and to fully utilize the already installed processing 

machinery. The project will provide the additional financial support for a specified period during the 

lifetime of the project, on a declining basis, while concurrently building management and operational 

capacities to turnover independently. 

 

2.1.10 The project will enhance access to agriculture finance through the establishment of a ringfenced 
facility dedicated to financing for various value chain actors. The World Bank financed project STAR-

P is financing the establishment of innovative financial product to provide credit guarantee to medium 

scale value chain actors, applying a competitive rates and flexible payment plan that address the needs 

of each value chain actor. This project will complement the effort of the World Bank by contributing 

resources to the Credit Guarantee Fund to be established under STAR-P project. This “seed money” 

will be housed in a financial institution to be selected with guidance from the Central Bank of Liberia 

using a competitive process acceptable to the Bank. The credit guarantee will be operated to de-risk 

lending to the agriculture sector.  

 

2.1.11 The project will expand and equip the standard lab for food quality and safety testing. This will 
improve the quality of food products for Liberians and the possibilities going forward – for import and 

export of quality produce. After the completion of the investment, the lab will have higher capacity for 

performing standard tests for food safety. The lab is hosted by the National Standards Laboratory, with 

ease of access all year round.  

 

Component 2. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity building  

 

2.1.12 Sub-Component 2.1: Strengthening participatory farmer advisory services: This sub-
component will support institutional strengthening of extension service delivery, by continuing to 

engage the trained lead farmers as change agents for knowledge sharing, while encouraging ownership 

of the process by the FBOs for sustainability, with support by the MoA. As a complement to the FFS, 

group strengthening training courses will be implemented to improve group cohesion and internal 

functions. Informal groups that begin to formalize their operations into a FMO, to organize formal 

(purchasing and sales) functions for the group members, and may qualify for equipment support, along 

with existing FMOs. Inter-regional exchange visits will remain a vehicle for cross-learning among 

groups.  

 

2.1.13 The project will support communities in improving farmers awareness, production and 
consumption of diverse nutritious foods, especially among nutritionally vulnerable groups

1
. Enhanced 

access to input provision, such as seed provision to smallholder farmers, with the support of FFS lead 

farmers trained in nutrition enhancing activities, will facilitate production of vegetable food by 

smallholder farming families. In peri-urban areas, the provision of 5,000 kitchen garden demos and kits 

 
1 Nutritionally vulnerable groups in the case of Liberia include: children under the age of five, children and 

adolescents between the age of five and 19 and women of reproductive age. 



 

 6 

to peri-urban households will help to enhance consumption of nutritious foods, especially among 

nutritionally vulnerable groups, through nutrition education and by diversifying local food production. 

The close proximity of peri-urban households to food markets is considered an advantage that may 

allow some households to sell their produce at markets for enhanced income generation as a result of 

enhanced production. Sensitization sessions with recipients of kitchen garden kits will aim to 

communicate the importance of consumption of healthy diets, to reinforce the message and benefits of 

the vegetables, so that consumption benefits remain with the family and not only result in increased 

incomes.  

 

2.1.14 In addition to the enhanced production and consumption of households in receipt of improved 
inputs and production knowledge, the project aims to cast a message among a wider net of women and 

children on basic nutrition, hygiene and health, and on the importance of consumption of healthy diets. 

To increase the scale of outreach, the project will develop, deploy strategy, deploy harmonization of 

messages and monitor a social behaviour change campaign. The project will provide nutrition training 

sessions for 30,000 school children enrolled in the National School Feeding Programme and facilitate 

sessions on nutrition enhancing activities at the UN Women trainings that will impact 5,000 women 

beneficiaries.  

 

2.1.15 Sub-Component 2.2: Strengthening the capacity of MoA in investment planning and 
implementation: The project will support the capacity strengthening of the MoA in the planning of 

sustainable agricultural investments, including trainings on system of rice intensification (SRI), Climate 

Smart Agriculture (CSA) practices and Sustainable Water and Land Management, and on economic 

and financial analysis of agricultural investments. The project will support the mainstreaming of climate 

change adaptation in national agricultural M&E and in the extension and advisory system. It will also 

support the MoA to build its capacity to crowd in private investment to the agricultural sector by 

conducting agribusiness and investment policy dialogues with private sector partners, investment and 

commercial banks; and meetings with trade and financial specialists to share knowledge and interact on 

economic trends and events. 

 

Component 3. Project management and coordination  

2.1.16 The component will focus on the planning, coordination and management, and delivery of 
project activities within the scope and of high quality cost-effectively and efficiently. Activities will 

include the procurement of services for design, supervision and construction works, purchasing of good 

and services, including mechanized agricultural and office equipment, and training, consultancy and 

non-consultancy services (workshops). Project management tasks also include recruitment or 

appointment of project staff, provision of office space, and preparation of office manuals, annual work 

plans and budgets (AWPB), quarterly progress reports, the mid-term reviews, thematic studies, 

procurement plans and audit reports. Others include on-the-job training, adoption of the monitoring and 

evaluation (M&E) system, provision of operational resources for project-related transportation and 

communication infrastructure, organization of stakeholder workshops, and coordination of baseline and 

impact assessment studies.  

  



 

 7 

Table 2.1: project components 

 
nr. Component name Est. cost 

(USD) 

Component description 

 

1 Support to enhancing 

smallholder 

agricultural 

productivity and 

market access 

4.60 

million 

Sub-component 1.1. - Strengthening of sustainable crop 

production and intensification: 

▪ Support the development of seed supply system for rice, 
cassava and vegetables through seed multiplication. 

▪ Rehabilitation and stabilization of irrigation 
infrastructures for rice cultivation in lowland areas 

▪ Establish an agricultural mechanization service centre 
▪ Training of farmers. 
▪ Training of FFS Master trainers 
▪ Training of lead farmers as FFS facilitators  

1.24 

million 

Sub-component 1.2 - Value Addition and Market Linkages 

▪ Strengthening linkages between farmers and micro-hubs 
for primary processing of cassava and rice; 

▪ Improving storage and reducing harvest and post-harvest 
losses (Aggregation centres) 

▪ Expand and equip a Standards Lab for food quality and 
safety testing 

▪ Establish Risk Sharing Facility to provide credit guarantee 
to value chain actors 

2 Institutional 

Strengthening and 

Capacity Building 

1.22 

million 

Sub-component 2.1 – Strengthening participatory farmer 

advisory services 

▪ Strengthening the capacity of farmer / agricultural 
producer organizations 

▪ Implementation of community-based nutrition promotion 
activities 

▪ Development of Peri Urban Agriculture 
▪ Expand and strengthen the community grain reserve 

concept to include rice and cassava food products. 

 0.68 

million 

Sub-component 2.2 – Strengthening the capacity of MoA in 

investment planning and implementation 

▪ Strengthening the capacity of MoA staff  
▪ Mainstreaming climate change adaptation in national 

agricultural M&E and extension system 

▪ Conduct agribusiness and investment policy dialogues 
with private sector partners  

3 Project management 

and coordination 

1.34 

million 

Support the establishment of structures required for 

coordinating the implementation of project activities 

▪ Strengthen NCO;  
▪ Project Monitoring and Evaluation, including Knowledge 

Management and communication 

2.2. Technical solutions retained and alternatives explored 

2.2.1 The response to the ensuing COVID-19 crisis saw a redirection of country allocation funds away 

from agriculture, and a subsequent decrease in external sources of project funding. Under the new 

reality, the option of large ticket items was no longer a possibility. Large ticket items such as feeder 

roads, extended irrigation works, and a microcredit line were cut to bring the project within the confines 

of funds allocated by the GAFSP grant. The options ahead were also guided by the central premise to 

further enhance the engagement of smallholder farmers in monetizing their excess production at local 

markets, to ensure sustainable production from year-to-year, while encouraging improved productivity 

and consumption of nutritious diets. Three technical alternatives were considered and rejected for their 

weaknesses in generating the expected impact on a sustainable basis. Table 2.2 presents design options 

considered and reasons for their rejection. 

  



 

 8 

Table 2.2: project alternatives considered and reasons for rejection 

 
Alternative name Brief description Reasons for rejection 

1. Infrastructure 
support 

Construction of market centres and 

road infrastructure to link the 

farmers to market. 

• Difficulty in reaching effectiveness with limited 
project resources. 

• High maintenance cost in rural areas. 

• Problem to be addressed exceeds project 
resources. 

2. Procurement of 
imported seeds and 

supply to farmers 

The project will procure imported 

seeds and distribute to farmers for 

planting. 

• This approach was thought to be highly 
unsustainable. There is the need to develop local 

seeds sector for the country to be self-sufficient in 

seed production; 

• With the passage of the seeds board law, there is 
the need to support local seed production. 

 

Credit line Credit through MFIs or SACCOs   • Seed - key input - a small proportion of production 
costs.  

• Fungibility of money - loan use for production 
competing with the need to smooth consumption. 

2.3. Project type 

The project is a standalone investment project with technical assistance (TA) and capacity building 

activities. It is to be financed by a grant under the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program 

(GAFSP) and the African Development Fund (ADF).  

2.4. Project cost and financing arrangements 
 

2.4.1 The total cost of the project is estimated at US$ 9.08 million, net of taxes, and based on 2020 

prices, comprising of 38% of the total cost in foreign cost, and 62% in local costs. The project cost 

comprises of GAFSP Grant of US$ 8.2 million (90.3%), ADF contribution of UA 300,000 ($ 429,027) 

and GoL contribution of US$ 0.45 million (5%) in kind. This cost is inclusive of physical and price 

contingencies estimated at average rates of 6% and 4% respectively. The price contingencies were 

estimated on the basis of actual and projected levels of local and foreign inflation rates of about 20.4% 

and 2% per annum, respectively. The physical contingencies are estimated from 0 to 15%, based on 

common practices. The ADF resources will finance mainly the credit risk guarantee scheme while 

Government contribution will be in kind contribution of project staff seconded to the National 

Coordinating Office (NCO). A summary of the project cost estimates by components and expenditure 

accounts is shown in Tables 3, 4, 5 and 6, while details are provided in the Technical Annexes – Volume 

II. 

 

Table 1: Summary of Project Cost by Components 

COMPONENT 

(LRD, million) (US$, 000) % 

For 

%. 

Base 

Local  Foreign Total Local  Foreign Total   
A. Support to enhancing smallholder 
agricultural productivity and market 

access 406.40 378.74 785.14 2,579.78 2,404.23 4,984.01 48 61 

B. Institutional Strengthening and 

Capacity Building 210.63 88.54 299.17 1,337.05 562.08 1,899.13 30 23 

C. Project Management, M&E and 

Knowledge Management 197.55 13.71 211.25 1,254.00 87.00 1,341.00 6 16 

Total Baseline Costs 814.57 480.99 1,295.56 5,170.83 3,053.31 8,224.14 37 100 
Physical Contingencies 23.21 54.15 77.36 147.32 343.74 491.05 70 6 

Price Contingencies 47.88 9.90 57.79 303.97 62.87 366.84 17 4 

Total Project Cost 885.66 545.05 1,430.71 5,622.12 3,459.91 9,082.03 38 110 

 

 
 

 



 

 9 

 

Table 2: Summary of Program Cost by Category of Expenditure  

Expenditure Category 

(LRD, million) (US$, 000) % 
For 

Exch 

% 

Base 

Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total   

A. Goods 63.98 118.82 182.80 406.14 754.26 1160.39 65 14 

B. Services 488.06 122.02 610.08 3098.20 774.55 3872.74 20 47 

C. Works 100.90 235.43 336.33 640.50 1494.50 2135.00 70 26 

D. General Operating Expenses 161.63 4.73 166.35 1026.00 30.00 1056.00 3 13 

Total Baseline Costs 814.57 480.99 1295.56 5170.83 3053.31 8224.14 37 100 

Physical Contingencies 23.21 54.15 77.36 147.32 343.74 491.05 70 6 

Price Contingencies 47.88 9.90 57.79 303.97 62.87 366.84 17 4 

Total Project Costs 885.66 545.05 1430.71 5622.12 3459.91 9082.03 38 110 

 

Table 3: Financing arrangements by Local & Foreign Distribution 

Sources of finance 
(US$, 000) % Total 

Foreign Local Total  

GAFSP Grant 2,980,317 5,219,683 8,200,000 90.3 

ADF 85,805 343,222 429,027 4.7 

Government - 453,000 453,000 5.0 

Total 3,066,122 6,015,905 9,082,027 100.0 

 
Table 4: Expenditure Schedule by Component  

Component 
 (US$) 

2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 TOTAL 

A. Support to enhancing smallholder 

agricultural productivity and market access 1,603,276 2,099,074 1,614,197 374,597 150,759 5,841,902 

B. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity 

Building 650,375 537,875 460,875 150,000 100,000 1,899,125 

C. Project Management, Coordination, M&E 

and Knowledge Management 286,200 266,200 266,200 266,200 256,200 1,341,000 

TOTAL 2,539,851 2,903,149 2,341,272 790,797 506,959 9,082,027 

2.5. Project’s target area and population  

2.5.1 The Project area will cover six counties out of a shortlist of 11 counties that include the rice-

producing counties in the south-eastern areas of River Gee, Maryland and Grand Gedah, and the major 

cassava producing north-western areas of Bomi, Montserrado and Grand Bassa.  The selection criteria 

for the counties is based on high incidences of poverty and malnutrition rates, ecology, infrastructure, 

labor, target group, crop history, market hubs, and also on the locations of GAFSP-funded processing 

facilities under SAPEC that require sustained and increased supply of raw materials for production (rice 

and cassava). The value chains prioritized under the project are rice, cassava and vegetables, and they 

are of particular importance for food and nutrition security in the country.  

2.5.2 The estimated total number of project beneficiaries is 41,740, which includes direct 

beneficiaries of farming and nutrition activities including 30,000 children of school age. Of these, 

11,740 participants are among smallholder farmers with a plot size in the range of 0.8-2 ha that will be 

targeted. During the field mission, a number of farmer groups were already identified. During 

implementation, additional groups will be identified and added to reach the target of 11,740 farming 

households. Preferably, these groups will be located in farming communities with at least 100 farming 

households, to enable optimal use of project resources for further outreach. Using the Farmer Field 

School (FFS) approach, lead farmers will be selected (preferably one female  and one male) on the basis 

of their skill and knowledge as a farmer on the crop selected by the group for support. S/he will be 

respected by their farming group/community and have good communication skills in their local 

language of the community as well as a national language (for training purposes). To cover gender and 

nutrition issues it is important that each group selected one female and one male lead farmer.  

The nutrition campaign focuses on women groups and school children, using 5,000 kitchen garden kits 

in peri-urban areas, 5,000 women of UN Women trainings and 30,000 children of school age enrolled 

in school.  



 

 10 

2.6. Participatory process for project identification, design and implementation 

2.6.1 The SADFONS project was formulated on the basis of GAFSP’s special call for proposals for 

fragile and conflict-affected countries of 01 March 2019, after which the Government of Liberia 

requested the assistance of AfDB and UNFAO to develop the project proposal and document. In 

September 2019, a joint AfDB / UNFAO mission undertook a wide-ranging consultation process that 

culminated in a multi-stakeholder validation workshop with over 40 participants from within the NGO 

and donor community, including FBOs, the private sector, and relevant government offices and 

agencies of Liberia. The GAFSP proposal for SADFONS was endorsed by the ADWG, comprising of 

the EU, IFAD, USAID, WB and others. Initially, the project was narrowed down to 11 counties out of 

a nationwide total of 15 counties, when the proposal was cleared to go to appraisal. An appraisal mission 

in February 2020 was postponed indefinitely after the onset of Covid-19.  

 

2.6.2 A remote-based mission, with in-country support from the FAO-Liberia office, allowed the 

design process to press ahead, with a field team, comprising of the Government Technical Team (GTT) 

and FAO-Liberia colleagues, visiting five counties in the southeast and northwest parts of the country. 

Despite restrictions to movement related to Covid-19, the field mission was able to meet with farming 

communities, FBOs, civil society groups, agro-dealers and private sector operators in all planned five 

counties. The field mission was concluded with an in-depth stakeholder meeting with CARI and a field 

report ensued. As a follow-up to the field visits, virtual meetings in Monrovia were conducted with a 

wide range of stakeholders that included the Treasury, the Ministry of Finance and Development 

Planning, the Ministry of Gender, Child & Social Protection, ADWG members, UN Women, USAID 

and INGOs. Throughout this process, the GTT was involved and consulted in the suggested features of 

the project to address concerns raised, with the Minister of Agriculture’s participation on key occasions. 

Despite the distance of the core design team to the GTT due to Covid-19 restrictions, the SADFONS 

project was able to build strong country ownership of the project through a consultative process.  

 

2.6.3 Implementation of the project will involve the MoA and a NCO to plan, direct and execute 

activities in a participatory manner with the local communities, private sector stakeholders and other 

related government and international agencies. The project takes a special interest in using a 

participatory, lead-farmer extension model that is set to ensure local ownership of knowledge and 

project outputs.  

2.7. Bank Group experience, lessons reflected in project design 

2.7.1 The Bank has 14 on-going and recently approved operations (all sovereign) in Liberia with a 
total commitment of UA 292 million, an equivalent of US$ 403 million. Liberia is also supported by 

four Technical assistants and Trust fund operations, of which three are multi-nationals- see table in 

annex 1 for details. The Bank has completed four operations in the Agricultural sector and three ongoing 

projects, for a total approved amount of UA 38.24 million (equivalent of USD 53 million). These 

include: (i) Smallholder Agricultural Productivity and Commercialization (SAPEC); (ii) Study to 

identify areas of need in the Agricultural value chain; and (iii) Support to the Forestry Authority to 

Scale up the participation of SMEs in secondary wood processing. In this regard, the Bank is supporting 

the Government of Liberia’s Agricultural Transformation Agenda (LATA) to increase productivity in 

the agriculture sector, especially rice and cassava production, particularly women farmers.  

 

2.7.2 The overall active portfolio performance is rated satisfactory, a score of 3.0 on a scale of 1 – 4. 
This portfolio performance has been maintained over a year now by drastically reducing the percentage 

of flagged operations from 50% at the start of 2019 to 20% at the end of the year and maintaining it at 

that level. There is no outstanding Project Completion Report, as well as no potentially problematic or 

problematic operation in the active portfolio. As such, the Bank’s portfolio at risk (PAR) and 

commitment at risk (CAR) is zero. The average age and approved amount of the ongoing portfolio is 

3.8 years and UA 20.85 million, respectively. Overall disbursement improved from 32% to 40% from 

April 2019 to April 2020, albeit amidst a very challenging fiduciary environment. Key factors amongst 

the factors responsible for this overall poor performance in disbursement are: (i) non-compliance with 

the Bank’s procurement and financial management procedures and guidelines; sometimes as a result of 

limited knowledge by the project staff, thereby unnecessarily delaying procurement and disbursement 



 

 11 

lead times; (ii) Limited capacity to process Bank related documents at different levels of Government; 

(iii) excessive delay by contractors and consultants to deliver on the contracts; and (iv) sometimes, delay 

by the Bank to provide prompt feedback to requests submitted by the projects. 

 

2.7.3 The lessons learnt from the Bank’s operations in Liberia has enhanced the design of this project 
for implementation efficiency and sustainability. The proposed operation takes into account the 

identified key lessons learned. These include: (i) the importance of quality at entry - as lack of detailed 

designs at project start-up results in implementation delay; (ii) ensuring adequate national stakeholders 

consultation to enhance project ownership and sustainability; and (iii) institutional capacity and 

implementation – there were challenges in the implementation of SAPEC due to inadequate staff 

capacity at the Project Implementing Unit. 

2.8. Key performance indicators  

2.8.1 The Project’s key performance indicators are presented in the Results-Based Logical 

Framework. Regular implementation progress will be measured through bi-annual Bank supervision 

missions, quarterly project progress report and annual technical and financial audit reports. The Project 

Implementation Unit will collect and analyse data to monitor progress and submit to the Bank on agreed 

timeframes. 
 

2.8.2 The main indicators defined for monitoring the project’s impact, including the Bank’s Core 

Sector Indicators and GAFSP core development indicators, were developed together with the 

Government of Liberia technical team and validated during project preparation. Impact indicators 

include: (i) Proportion of households who are categorized as food insecure [Food Insecurity Experience 

Scale (FIES)] and (ii) Household income. Outcome indicators include: (i) % increase in yield of cassava 

and rice and (ii) Stunting amongst children under five. Gender dis-aggregated indicators will inform 

decision-makers to guide project mid-term review and to facilitate project management outcomes after 

completion. The Liberia Country Office of the Bank and FAO will play an active role in coordination, 

capacity support, sector dialogue, project supervision and monitoring. 

III – PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1. Economic and financial performance 

3.1.1 Based on the objective and component structure, the Project is expected to generate benefits of 
different nature. Such benefits include: (i) increased yields; (ii) increased resilience to weather 

variability and shocks; (iii) reduced land degradation and soil rehabilitation; (iv) increased nutritional 

food availability at the household level from home-gardening activities; (v) additional income obtained 

from selling farm produce; and (vi) rural poverty reduction. Primary project beneficiaries are: (i) rural 

smallholder farmers in the selected counties producing rise and cassava, and involved in Farmer Field 

Schools (FFS); (ii) service providers and Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs). 
 

3.1.2 The target population was estimated to be around 11,740 households (HH). In order to avoid 
overlaps and double counting, this number has been disaggregated as follows for the use in the 

Economic and Financial Analysis: (i) 10,500 households from Component A “Support to enhancing 

smallholder agricultural productivity and market”; (ii) 1,240 households from Component B 

“Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building”.  

 

Table C.1: Key economic and financial figures 

NPV (base case) US$ 17.13 million 

EIRR (base case) 23.7% 

NB: detailed calculations are available in Annex B6 
 

Economic analysis 

3.1.3 The period of analysis is 20 years to account for the phasing and gestation of the proposed 
interventions. Economic benefits from the farm and enterprise models have been aggregated using 

average incremental net benefits and beneficiaries for each agricultural and agri-business activities 



 

 12 

under the project interventions and assuming different adoption rates, extracted from the costing 

exercise. Economic benefits from enterprise models have been aggregated using an expected number 

of small enterprises to be supported by the project and for the agricultural models for the number of 

hectares. Benefits are phased-in progressively for all types of interventions.  

 

3.1.4 Economic costs associated with improving productivity and agri-business and small and medium 
enterprises were estimated at US$ 21.35 million. The economic costs have then been deducted from the 

overall economic benefit stream to obtain the project’s net incremental benefit stream. The economic 

analysis shows satisfactory results, with a Net Present Value at US$ 17.13 million and a 23.7% 

Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR), suggesting that the overall project is economically profitable. 

 

3.1.5 Sensitivity analysis. Results were tested for sensitivity to variations in benefits and costs and 
for various lags in the realization of benefits. A delay of 2 years in the generation of benefits or a decline 

of 30% relative to the base scenario would reduce the EIRR to 18.5% and 18.8% respectively, 

substantially above the discount rate. Cost overruns would have very moderate impact, with EIRR 

falling to 20.2% with a 30% increase. An adoption rate of 70% would decrease the EIRR to 18.8%. All 

scenarios show robust results under all hypothetical scenarios. 

3.2. Environmental and Social impacts 

3.2.1 Environment 
 
3.2.1.1 The project is classified as Category 2 according to the AfDB Integrated Safeguard System (ISS) 

and as category B based on the Liberian EPA legislation (Environmental Protection and Management 

Law of the Republic of Liberia of 2003, and Environmental Protection Management agency procedural 

guidelines, 2006). This categorization is validated in ISTS2 and SAP3 by the Department of 

Environmental and Social Safeguards and Compliance (SNSC) on 20 May 2020, then confirmed in the 

approved PCN of 19 June 2020.The justification for categorization has been based on the medium E&S 

risk and the magnitude of the assessed negative impacts of the project. The project is not expected to 

involve land acquisition as the project will be executed on existing farms. Any likely impacts will be 

few, site-specific, largely reversible, and will readily be minimized by applying appropriate 

management and mitigation measures or incorporating internationally recognized design criteria and 

standards.  

 

3.2.1.2 Given the specific locations of the subprojects being unknown the project prepared a budgeted 

Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF - $419,000 reflected in the project costs) 

by the government of Liberia, reviewed and cleared by the AfDB and then disclosed by the Liberian 

Government on the website on January 15, 2021 and on January 21, 2021 by the AfDB on ISTS, with 

the authorization of the Liberian authorities. The Bank has ensured that the Borrower has carried out 

the public consultations in an adequate manner and the consultation minutes are annexed to the ESMF. 

The Borrower must prepare, submit for review to the Bank, and disclose Environmental and Social 

Impact Assessment (ESIA) reports for each physical investment sub-project once the locations are 

known. In addition, the Borrower must share with the Bank proof of the availability of funds for the 

implementation of the ESMFP and the ESMPs of the sub projects. The environmental permit that will 

be issued for each of these sub-projects will be shared with the Bank before the publication of each 

ESIA reports in ISTS. The NCO and the works contractors will have to implement the Grievance 

Redress Mechanism (GRM) proposed in the ESMF to ensure respect for the rights of populations and 

workers. The mid-term and final evaluation and an annual audit of the environmental and social 

performance of the project will be carried out by independent Consultants. Globally, the project is ready 

on the environmental and social aspects for its passage to the Board.  

 

 

 

 
2 ISTS: Integrated Safeguards Tracking System 
3 SAP: System of Applications and Products 



 

 13 

3.2.2 Climate Change 
The project has been screened for climate risks and categorized as a Category 2 operation, in line with 

Bank’s Climate Safeguards System (CSS). This means that the project may be vulnerable to climate 

risks and requires a review of climate change risks and adaptation activities. Practical risk management 

and adaptation options could be integrated into the project design and implementation plans. 

Agricultural production in Liberia is vulnerable to the impacts of climate variability and change such 

as excessive rainfall in the coastal cities and high temperatures in the northern counties. Drought and 

floods are increasing in frequency and intensity, while average temperatures during the growing season 

are rising. Crop failures, reduction in productivity and outbreaks of pest and diseases are exacerbated 

by extreme climatic events. The project will also support technical and institutional capacity 

development for long-term climate resilience in agricultural sector in Liberia through various trainings 

on sustainable and climate smart agricultural practices and the mainstreaming of adaptation to climate 

change in national agricultural M&E and extension systems. This is not limited to government 

stakeholders, but also key private sector players, building community resilience to climate compatible 

agriculture and rural livelihoods, and research authorities to work in collaboration with project 

implementation team to carry out data collection and research to enhance policy and strategy on climate 

adaptation and low-carbon agricultural development practices. Overall, the project will facilitate 

climate resilience along the selected value chains by promoting climate smart agriculture including SRI, 

Sustainable land management, improved agriculture technologies 

 

3.2.3 Gender  
Liberia has a Gender Inequality Index value of 0.651, ranking it 155 out of 162 countries in the 

2018 index. In Liberia, 11.7 percent of parliamentary seats are held by women, and 18.5 percent of adult 

women have reached at least a secondary level of education compared to 39.6 percent of their male 

counterparts. 

Women are central to the development of rural areas and to national economies: Women account for 

60% of the agricultural labour force, contribute to 98% to food crop production and 76% of their work 

is directed at cash crop production (FAO, 2018). However, rural women and girls have restricted access 

to productive resources, such as land, agricultural inputs, finance and credit, extension services, and 

technology, which in turn limits agricultural output. They face more difficulty than men in gaining 

access to public services, social protection, employment opportunities, information, innovations and 

local and national markets and institutions, due to cultural norms and security issues.  

Unpaid care work further and gender-based violence hamper rural women’s ability to take advantage 

of on- and off-farm employment and new market opportunities in the agricultural sector. Their 

leadership and participation in producer organizations, decision making, and local governance remains 

low and rural and agricultural policies insufficiently address their needs and priorities. 
 

In addressing the above constraints, the Project will impact both women and men through (i) 

sensitization campaigns targeting women’s groups, especially in rural areas on training of women 

farmers on the elaboration of bankable proposals (ii) ensuring at least 50% representation of women in 

all capacity-building activities such as the Farmer Field Schools (FFS) and the improved nutrition 

capacity building activities (iii) Training of women as extension workers for the participatory famer 

advisory system (iv) strengthen the capacity of Ministry of Agriculture to ensure that the functioning of 

a Gender based M&E system adequately captures sex disaggregated data (v) strengthen the capacity ( 

training, equipment) of rural women’s farmer associations in the processing of rice, cassava and 

vegetables; (vi) link women farmers to marketing networks, particularly the national Market 

Information System; (vii) Information, Education and Communication on gender issues (Gender and 

agriculture, women participation in local development, Gender-based violence (GBV) to reduce gender 

stereotypes and violence (vii) involvement of a gender specialist in the Project Implementation Unit 

(ix) involvement of the Ministry in charge of Gender in the Project Coordination Unit. For all the above 

reasons, the project is categorized 2, according to the AfDB Gender Marker System. The annexed 

gender context analysis and action plan is providing more information. 

 

 



 

 14 

3.2.4 Fragility  

Liberia has experienced economic growth to some extent, but this growth has not always been shared 

equally across different groups of Liberians. Consequently, poverty is widespread and an estimated 51 

per cent of the population lives in rural areas where poverty is heavily concentrated. Rural areas reported 

higher food shortage (58.8 percent) than urban areas 44.2 percent (AfDB 2020 AEO). Liberia was 

crafted as an extractive, not developmental state that evolved institutional structures and practices that 

exploited the country’s natural wealth, initially around coastal areas and later into the interior, without 

providing public goods (social services and infrastructure) that benefit the indigenous majority. 

Economic diversification that focuses on agriculture that has the propensity to shift 

Liberia economy away from a single income source of extractive toward multiple sources from a 

growing range of sectors and markets is very limited. Many lack access to basic critical infrastructure 

and social services, and poor roads leave many areas inaccessible particularly during the wet season 

when the shortage of food becomes inevitable. Approximately 55 per cent of rural Liberian households 

is food insecure, (LISGIS 2018). The COVID-19 pandemic is already having devastating impacts on 

the Liberian economy. The impact is also being felt by the food and agriculture sector. According to 

the AfDB 2018 CRFA Report, an estimated 5.2% of Liberia’s total land area being arable but there is 

significant pressure to improve access to food and nutrition. 

 

The single greatest driver of fragility in Liberia is extensive and extreme poverty in a volatile post-war 

environment where expectations are high, as patience is waning amongst the youth who prefer to 

undertake quick-cash activities like artisanal mining, transportation and petty trade. Complicating this 

existing pressure and driver of fragility is the rapid urbanization of mainly the youth population 

migrating from rural to urban areas without requisite skills and education to seek gainful and sustainable 

employment. The youth perception of agriculture is “Something you do when you have nothing to do 

and is intended for older people.” It is difficult enough to persuade youth to enter the farming or the 

agriculture sector. Without technical support, many understandably avoid the sector altogether. Once 

some youth have agreed to enter the sector and received some training, the issue then becomes how best 

to deliver on-going support to new young farmers to help them to succeed. It will take enormous 

education and incentives (access to finance and etc) to change this mindset and perception of the youth 

in Liberia and many countries in transition. Youth lack of interest in the agriculture sector is particularly 

risky given their potential recruitment and mobilization into organized crimes and illegal activities. This 

has adverse implication on the peace and stability of the country owing to its history of war and low 

resilience capacity. According to the Bank 2019 CRFA Assessment, Liberia capacity score for the 

Security Dimension is as low as 2.4 which is consistent with rapid youth urbanization and surge. 

The Smallholder Agriculture Development for Food and Nutrition Security builds on the foundation on 

the ASRP, SAPEC and Fish Town- Harper Road Projects for sustainability. The Project aimed at 

addressing drivers of fragility through enhancing smallholder agricultural productivity and market 

access and linkages by supporting Smallholder farmers and producers with modern marketing skills, 

market information, and requisite organizational capacity to increase their market share and 

profitability. The Project is intended to alleviate pre-harvest and post-harvest losses, increase industrial 

processing as inadequate feeder roads and access to market further restrict the linkage between potential 

producers and buyers. It will be mainly implemented in the same region (Southwestern) as the two 

previous Agriculture Projects and will complement the Fish Town- Harper Road Project.  

 

3.2.5 Involuntary resettlement 

 
There will be no involuntary resettlement or land acquisition as a result of the project. The major 

infrastructure related project activities are the rehabilitation of existing irrigation schemes, which will 

require the repair and stabilization of the water distribution canals. The interventions will be 

implemented on existing agricultural systems. 



 

 15 

IV – IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1. Implementation arrangements 

Implementation Arrangements  

The implementation arrangements for the project will follow the implementation model for the on-going 

GAFSP funded SAPEC project in the agriculture sector. The MOA will be the executing agency with 

implementation mainstreamed within its National Coordinating Office (NCO) to consolidate sector 

manpower capacity building for project implementation. The NCO will include key officers as follows: 

(i) Project Coordinator, (ii) Procurement Officer, (iii) Finance Officer, (iv) Monitoring and Evaluation 

Officer, (v) Irrigation Specialist, (vi) Food and Nutrition Officer, (vii) Agronomist and (viii) 

Environmental & Social Development Expert to support the national project coordinator the effective 

coordination of the project.  

 

The Government will provide full time staff to the NCO. These experts shall possess the experiences 

and qualifications acceptable by the Bank and will require the Bank’s prior approval. The appointment 

of project coordinator and accountant will be retained as a condition precedent to first disbursement. 

The day-to-day management of the project shall be the responsibility of the NCO under the technical 

guidance of MOA. At the county levels, the responsibility for delivery will rest with the County 

Agricultural Coordinators and District Agricultural coordinators. Planning, monitoring and evaluation 

will be done by the CACs working in conjunction with the NCO. The CAC will report to the Project 

Coordinator. The NCO will be assisted by Technical Assistance from FAO in the implementation of 

the Farmer Field Schools. For seed multiplication, quality control will be done by CARI with Technical 

Assistance from FAO. 

 

A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established to provide policy guidance to the project. The 

PSC will be responsible to the Minister of Agriculture. The PSC will be chaired by the Minister of 

Agriculture and will comprise a representative (of not lower than the grade of Director) each from 

Ministry of Finance and Development Planning, Ministry of Public Works, Ministry of Local 

Government, Ministry of Commerce, Ministry of Gender, Social Protection & Children, Liberian 

Agriculture Commodity Regulatory Agency, Cooperative Development Agency, and Environmental 

Protection Agency. A representative from each Farmers Union of Liberia, Liberia Chamber of 

Commerce and National Civil Society Council of Liberia will also be in the PSC. The PSC shall ensure 

timely implementation and monitoring of audit recommendations and also be responsible for the overall 

strategic direction and oversight guidance of the project as well as approve key project documents 

(including annual work plans and budgets). 

 

Procurement Arrangements  

“Procurement of goods (including non-consultancy services), works and the acquisition of consulting 

services, financed by the Bank for the Project, will be carried out in accordance with the “Procurement 

Policy and Methodology for Bank Group Funded Operations” (BPM), dated October 2015 and 

following the provisions stated in the Financing Agreement. Specifically, Procurement would be carried 

out the following: (i) Borrower Procurement System (BPS): Procurement through National Competitive 

Bidding (NCB) and shopping procedures will be carried out using BPS comprising its Laws and 

Regulations (Public Procurement Concessions Act (PPCA) of 2005 which was amended and reinstated 

in year 2010 , using the national Standard Solicitation Documents (SSDs) agreed during project 

negotiations” for various group of transactions to be indicated under the project, detailed in annexes of 

this report and the provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement; and (ii) Bank Procurement Policy 

and Methodology (BPM): Bank standard PMPs, using the relevant Bank Standard Solicitation 

Documents (SDDs), will be used for Open Competitive Bidding International (OCB-I) and Limited 

International Bidding (LIB) or Restricted Competitive Bidding contracts for both goods and works and 

Acquisition of Consulting Services as indicated in the relevant Annex of this document.  

 

Procurement Risks and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): the assessment of procurement risks at the 

Country, Sector, and Project levels and of procurement capacity at the Executing Agency (EA), were 

undertaken for the project and the output have informed the decisions on the procurement regimes (BPS 



 

 16 

and Banks PMP) being used for specific transactions or groups of similar transactions under the project. 

The appropriate risks mitigation measures have been factored in the entire procurement arrangements 

of the project. 

 

Financial management  

 

The existing financial management system will be used to manage the fiduciary arrangements of the 

proposed project. The project FM system will be handled by an experienced chartered accountant (to 

be deployed or competitively recruited) who is proficient in the use of an accounting software with 

hands-on experience in donor funded projects accounting and financial reporting. The Project 

Accountant (PA) will report to the Project Coordinator and under the guidance of the overall NCO 

Financial Management Specialist report to the Comptroller at the MOA (for consolidation of the 

Ministry’s financial reports). The PA will be assisted by an Accounts Assistant (deployed from the 

MOA) for capacity building and sustainability. The Accounts Assistant shall be partly qualified with a 

bachelor’s degree in accounting (or higher) and practical experience on donor funded projects. The PA 

will use the existing Tompro accounting software to record, process project transactions and prepare 

financial reports. The Project will adopt International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) 

Cash Basis in harmony with the accounting standards applied by the Government of Liberia (GoL) and 

other MOA NCO managed projects.  

 

A bespoke Financial Management Manual (FMM) and Project Implementation Manual (PIM) shall be 

developed from the existing manuals to codify FM practices and guide project implementation, 

respectively. On a quarterly basis the PA will produce un-audited interim financial reports (IFRs) from 

Tompro, for the benefit of MOA and shared with the Bank within forty-five (45) days after the end of 

each quarter. The project financial statements at end of each financial year shall be audited and the audit 

reports submitted to the Bank no later than six (6) months after the end of each financial year. The 

content of the IFRs and annual financial statements have been agreed and shall be discussed in detail at 

project launching. The existing internal control and administrative procedures appear adequate and shall 

be implemented for the execution of the project. The internal auditor responsible for MOA-NCO 

projects in collaboration with the MOA internal audit function shall provide internal checks and 

periodically review project operations to strengthen the project control environment. The internal 

auditor will report to the PSC (in existence, chaired by the Minister of Agriculture) through the NCO 

Coordinator. The overall FM risk is assessed as moderate. 

 

4.1.2 Disbursement: The following four (4) disbursement methods are used by the Bank in 

disbursing funds to projects: (i) Direct payments; (ii) Payments through Special Account (SA); (iii) 

Reimbursement method; (iv) and Reimbursement by guarantee. Direct payments will be used for the 

payments against larger contracts signed between project management and contractors/suppliers/ 

service providers. The Special Account (SA) method will be used in paying for eligible recurrent 

expenses and smaller contracts only under GAFSP funding. This will require the opening of a dedicated 

USD denominated special account at a Commercial Bank in Liberia acceptable to the Bank. 

Reimbursements will be made for eligible expenses for goods, works, services and operating expenses 

already incurred and paid for by the GoL from its own resources. Under the Reimbursement guarantee 

method, the Bank shall provide an irrevocable undertaking to reimburse a commercial bank for 

payments made or to be made to a beneficiary against a letter of credit (for imported goods). All 

disbursements will follow with the disbursement’s procedures outlined in the Bank’s Disbursement 

Handbook 2020. 

 

4.1.3 Audit arrangements: The Auditor General Auditing Commission (GAC) of Liberia will audit 

the annual financial statements of the project or outsource the audit (using its outsourcing guidelines) 

to a private independent audit firm through a competitive recruitment process, acceptable to the Bank. 

The audit will be conducted in accordance with audit terms of reference (TOR) acceptable to the Bank. 

The audit reports (comprising of the audited financial statements with the auditor’s opinion and related 

management letter) must be submitted to the Bank no later than six (6) months after the end of each 

financial year. The audit cost shall be paid for from project resources. The assessment noted that Bank 



 

 17 

funded projects managed under the MOA have consistently complied with the submission of their 

annual reports to the Bank.   

4.2. Monitoring  

4.2.1 The basic tool for monitoring and evaluation of this project is the logical framework that details 

the impact, effect and product measurement indicators aligned to GAFSP core indicators. The project 

monitoring and evaluation officer who will be recruited after approval by the Bank of his qualifications 

and experience will be placed under the authority of the coordinator. He/she will be responsible for the 

monitoring and evaluation of project activities and the implementation of the ESMP. He/she will also 

be responsible for establishing a diagnosis and baseline situation for the project as well as developing 

specific tools for planning and data collection. 

  

4.2.2 The NCO will be required to provide the Bank with a quarterly report showing progress in 

implementing the approved program and annual budget. This report should include the following 

information for each activity: the physical objectives, the level of achievement and the explanation of 

any discrepancies, the expected costs and actual costs, and the explanations of any discrepancies, the 

financial data of the project. The Bank will carry out two (2) supervisory missions per year to assess 

progress in terms of realization of products and effects as well as administrative and financial 

performance. The mission will then make recommendations to improve project implementation. A 

performance status report will be written after each supervision mission. 

4.3. Governance 

The Government of Liberia has formulated a National Aid and NGO Policy in 2020 to improve the 

effectiveness of aid, mobilize aid in a coordinated way with a wider reach, produce more visible results, 

collaborate more closely with NGOs, and serve as a reference for the Government of Liberia and 

Development Partners in the management of official development assistance. This policy provides an 

enabling environment for implementation of the project. 

 

This National Aid and NGO Policy will lead to better exploitation of the potential of the agriculture 

sector. With reference to sector-specific governance issues, policy, institutional and structural issues 

are also being addressed. For instance, the Government of Liberia recently passed the Seed 

Development and Certification Act. This is one of the major first steps in advancing the governance of 

seed sector in the country. 

 

Based on Bank’s experience in implementing projects in Liberia, the existing governance practices and 

controls have been deemed satisfactory. The implementation of the Project requires good governance 

at all levels from the national to County to District levels. This is in relation to better responsiveness, 

transparency, accountability and efficiency in the use of resources. Hence, the institutional arrangement 

has been designed to ensure good governance and will serve as an instrument for achieving Project 

objectives. 

4.4. Sustainability  

The ownership of the project is made manifest by the roles that various stakeholders played during 

formulation and preparation of the Project. The intense interest of the Minister of Agriculture in this 

project was made manifest during the design and preparation of the project. The irrigation schemes will 

be managed by farmers’ organizations and technical sustainability will be assured since they will 

finance the recurrent costs based on generated funds. The group strengthening and capacity 

development will build the capacity of the farmers’ organizations to be able to manage the facilities. 

 

Farmers remain challenged when attempting to improve and adapt to productive farming methods, 

especially when access to improved inputs and markets remains a key issue. In this respect, the project 

benefits from lessons from past projects by aiming to instill a critical number of master trainer capacity 

within the selected counties, by training at least two FFS master trainers in each county. This would 

build a degree of momentum through the FFS approach, to propel farmers into becoming more 

productive in selected value chains, while becoming custodians of community acquired knowledge and 



 

 18 

information developed within their groups. Community embedded facilitators will enable the 

knowledge to remain a perpetual force for learning and discovery among the farming communities, 

from generation to generation.  

 

The sustainable multiplication of selected seeds will ensure continuity in farmer access to quality seeds 

for production. The project will fund capacity building of beneficiaries which will increase the 

knowledge base and guarantee sustainability.  

4.5. Risk management 

SN Identified Risks  Mitigation measures  

 

 

1 

Project benefits captured by local elites due 

to weak participation / political 

influence 

 

- Publish and publicize selection criteria for transparent beneficiary 

selection 

- Publish beneficiary lists in public places and online 

- Increase beneficiary sensitization on the project 

2 Mechanization centres and irrigation 
systems are not well maintained or 

underutilized  

 

.-Ownership of machinery will remain with FBOs with sufficient time 

for oversight of operations by the project team 

- Build capacity of FBOs in operation and maintenance. 

-WUAs will be formed to take responsibilities for irrigation 

infrastructure  

3 Farmers discontinue using inputs after the 
initial farming cycle 

 

Heightened awareness of the importance of nutrition 

FFS help farmers to become custodians of local farming knowledge 

4 Difficulty in maintaining equipment. 
 

Initiate a cost-recovery model to cover operational and maintenance 

cost 

5 Implementing agencies limited by technical 
and operational capacities 

- Train project staff on project objectives, activities and 

implementation arrangements among development partners 

6 Climate risks: droughts, dry spells, floods, 
etc.  

-Promote climate-resilient Agricultural and sustainable land 

management Practices 

-Mainstream adaptation to climate change in M&E and 

extension/advisory system 

4.6. Knowledge building 

Knowledge building will be vital to the success of the Project. Knowledge enhancement is foreseen on 

the evolving concept of decentralized implementation unit located in the Counties; the role of value 

chain actors including farmers and farmers’ organization, women, youth, private sector, commercial 

and public sector. Knowledge will be captured using analysis of M&E database, supervision missions, 

mid-term reports, and periodic impact assessments and field exchange visits of the stakeholders within 

and outside the production areas. In addition, knowledge would be disseminated by showcasing the 

Project results using Bank’s communication systems (Intranet, short documentaries on the Bank 

website, etc.). The Farmer Field Schools will serve as sources of innovative knowledge and information 

sharing learning tools empowering farmers and other actors of the value chain to train their peers, share 

knowledge and experiences, thus reducing their overdependence on the public extension agents. This 

will also expand significantly the number of value chain actors having access to the disseminated 

knowledge and information. The technical assistance supports from FAO will introduce and consolidate 

knowledge and skills and facilitate technology and skills transfer both at the community and national 

levels. 



 

 19 

V – LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

5.1. Legal instrument  

GAFSP Grant and ADF Grant to the Republic of Liberia.  

5.2. Conditions associated with Bank’s intervention 

o Conditions Precedent to Entry into Force: The Protocol of Agreement for the ADF Grant and 
the Grant Agreement for the GAFSP Grant shall enter into force on the date of signature by the 

Recipient, the Fund and the Bank respectively.  
 

o Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement: The obligation of the Bank and the Fund to make 
the first disbursement of the Grant shall be conditional upon entry into force of the GAFSP and 

ADF Grant Financing Agreements and the following conditions, namely, the Recipient shall have 

provided evidence in form and substance acceptable to the Fund and the Bank: 
 

(i)  Submission of evidence for the recruitment of the Project Coordinator and the Project 
Accountant for the project implementation unit with qualifications and terms of reference 

acceptable to the Bank and the Fund.  
 

Conditions Precedent to Disbursements for Works. Subject to the provisions of Entry into Force) 

and Condition Precedent to First Disbursement, the obligation of the Bank and Fund to disburse the 

Grant for works that involve the use of an Environmental Social Management Framework (ESMF) shall 

be subject to the satisfaction of the following additional conditions by the Recipient:  

 

(a) Submission of the site-specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (“ESIA”) and 

Environmental and Social Management Plan (“ESMP”) for each works prepared in accordance 

with the ESMF and the Bank’s Safeguards Policies, in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank; 

and 

 

(b) Submission of the evidence of approval of the site-specific ESIA and ESMP by the competent 

national authority of the Recipient. 

 

Undertakings:  

 

The Recipient shall, and shall cause the Executing Agency and any of its contractors or agents to 

provide: 

 

(a) Submission of evidence of the recruitment or designation or appointment of the relevant NCO staff 

with qualifications and terms of reference acceptable to the Fund and the Bank not later than six 

(6) months after entry into force of this Agreement; and  

 

(b) Submit evidence of the establishment of the Project Steering Committee with membership and 

composition acceptable to the Fund not later than six (6) months after the entry into force of this 

Agreement. 

5.3. Compliance with Bank Policies 

5.3.1 This project complies with all applicable Bank policies. 

VI – RECOMMENDATION 

 
Management recommends that the Boards of Directors approve the proposed GAFSP grant of US$ 8.2 

million and ADF 15 grant of UA 0.3 million to the Government of Liberia for the purpose of 

implementing the project and subject to the conditions stipulated in this report.



 






















AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

 
 

 

ANGOLA 
 

 

CABINDA PROVINCE AGRICULTURE VALUE CHAINS  

DEVELOPMENT PROJECT 
 

 

PROJECT INFORMATION SHEET 

Client information 

______________________________________________________________________ 

BORROWER : Government of Angola 

EXECUTING AGENCY :  Ministry of Agriculture (MINAGRI)  

 

Source 

Amount (million)  

Instrument UA USD 

African Development Bank  73.77 101.07 Loan 

Government 14.54 19.91 Counterpart contribution 

Beneficiaries 1.58 2.17 In-kind contribution 

Total Project Cost 89.89 123.15  

 

 

AfDB’s key financing information 

 

 
Loan Currency  USD 

Loan Type   Fully Flexible Loan  

Tenor  25 years 

Grace period  8 years 

Average Loan Maturity  16.75 years 

Repayments  (34 consecutive semi-annual payments after grace period) 

Interest Rate  Base Rate +Funding Cost Margin+ Lending Margin + 

Maturity Premium if applicable 

Base Rate  Floating Base Rate (6-month USD LIBOR reset each 1st 

February and 1st August). A free option to fix the Base Rate 

is available. 

Funding Cost Margin  The Bank funding cost margin  as determined each 1st 

January and 1st July and applied to the Base Rate each 1st 

February and 1st August 

Lending Margin  80 basis points (0.8%) per annum 

Maturity Premium  20 basis points (0.2%) per annum 

Front-end fees  0.25% of the loan amount payable at latest at signature of the 

loan agreement 

Commitment fees  0.25% of the undisbursed amount. Commitment fees start 

accruing 60 days after signature of the loan agreement and 

are payable on Payment dates 

Option to convert the 

Base Rate* 

 In addition to the free option to fix the floating Base Rate, 

the borrower may reconvert the fix rate to floating or refix it 

on part or full disbursed amount. Transaction fees are 

payable. 

Option to cap or collar 

the Base Rate* 

 The borrower may cap or set both cap and floor on the Base 

Rate to be applied on part or full disbursed amount. 

Transaction fees are payable. 

Option to convert loan 

currency 

 The borrower may convert the loan currency for both 

undisbursed or disbursed amounts in full or part to another 

approved lending currency of the Bank. Transaction fees are 

payable. 
* Conversion options and transaction fees are subject to the Bank Conversion Guidelines available: 

http://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/document/guidelines-for-conversion-of-loan-terms-july-2014-87643/ 

 

 

 

 

 

http://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/document/guidelines-for-conversion-of-loan-terms-july-2014-87643/


iv 

 

 

Main milestones 

 

Submission of Cabinda Province Study Report November 2016 

Government Request for Bank Support December 2016 

Concept Note Approval May 2017 

Appraisal Mission June 2017 

Board Approval December, 2017 

Effectiveness January 2018 

Completion December 2021 

Last Disbursement March, 2022 

 



v 

 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

 

Project Overview: The Cabinda Province Agriculture Value Chains Development Project 

(CPAVCDP) will provide improved production, produce conservation, storage, processing and 

marketing infrastructure necessary for selected commodity value chains: food crops (cassava, 

banana, sweet potato, peanut, and beans); cash crops (coffee, cocoa and oil palm); marine and inland 

fisheries; small ruminants; and horticulture (vegetables and fruits). The Project will rehabilitate 

water conveyance structures necessary for irrigation; train value chain actors in technical and 

managerial skills; introduce mechanization for land preparation; support adaptive research; and 

improve agricultural extension services. The Project will also rehabilitate or construct rural 

infrastructure, namely feeder roads to link production clusters to markets, agro-processing centers, 

market centers, community health centers, primary schools, potable water facilities in the 

communities and improve rural energy access. The Project will enhance access to improved 

productive resources (improved seed varieties, fish fingerlings, fertilizers, crop protection 

chemicals) through the establishment of a credit facility to be externally administered by World 

Vision International (WVI). The project will be implemented over a four-year period at a total cost 

of USD123.15 million. 

 

Needs Assessment: Angola has made remarkable progress in socio-economic and infrastructure 

development since the end of the 27-year-long civil war in 2002, but more still needs to be done to 

lift majority of its population out of poverty. The sharp and long-lasting decline in oil prices has 

derailed Angola’s economic performance. GDP growth slowed to 0.1% in 2016 down from 4.8% in 

2014. This led to a significant reduction of the nominal GDP to about USD96.2 billion in 2016 from 

USD126.8 billion in 2014. The Government of Angola (GoA) seems increasingly aware of these 

realities and has taken steps to mitigate the impact of the oil price shock on the economy. The 

Government therefore requested assistance from the Bank to strengthen investments in agricultural 

transformation through commodity value chains in order to diversify exports, reduce imports 

through value chains development, increase national revenue sources and reduce dependence on oil.  
 

Value Added for the African Development Bank: The proposed CPAVCD Project fits in with the 

two complementary pillars of Bank’s intervention in Angola in the Country Strategy Paper (CSP, 

2017-2021) as follows: (i) inclusive growth through agricultural transformation; and (ii) support to 

sustainable infrastructure development, in particular, in energy and transport. The Bank Group is 
ideally suited to support Angola through this Project because: (i) the Bank Group has gained useful 

experiences in the development of the agriculture sector in its RMCs and in particular, Angola through 

implementation of similar projects; and (ii) the project is in concordance with the Bank’s High-5 

Priorities with its numerous flagship initiatives that will be brought to bear in this project. The Bank’s 
partnership with other technical and development agencies such as the Consultative Group of 

International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) system, International Fund for Agricultural Development 

(IFAD), World Bank (WB) and others is an asset that the Bank can draw upon. 
 

Knowledge Management: The Project shall develop a Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) System based 

on Geographic Information System and computer assisted technology for data collection, compilation 

and presentation. The M&E Specialist will coordinate all results and measurement activities, ensure the 

quality control and provide the necessary capacity building. In using the performance indicators and 

targets specified in the results-based framework, special note would be taken of changes that reflect 

advancement towards the translation of outputs into development outcomes. In developing monitoring 

and planning indicators, they will be sex and age disaggregated. They will be captured using analysis of 

M&E database, supervision missions, mid-term report, and periodic impact assessment and field 

exchange visits of the stakeholders. Knowledge could additionally be spread within the institution by 

showcasing the Project results using the Bank ICT infrastructure (Intranet, short documentaries on Bank 

website, etc.). 



 

vi 

 

 

ANGOLA 

CABINDA PROVINCE AGRICULTURE VALUE CHAINS DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (CPAVCDP)  

LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 

Country and project name: ANGOLA : Cabinda Province Agriculture Value Chains Development Project 

Purpose of the project:  Contribute to food and nutritional security, employment generation, and shared wealth creation along the commodity value chains 

RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS BASELINE 
TARGET 

(2018-2021) 

MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS/MITIGATION 

MEASURES 

IM
P

A
C

T
 1. Jobs and wealth are generated 

along the value chains 

2. Food and nutrition security is 

enhanced  

1.  No. of jobs created (disaggregated by sex and age) 

2.  Increased domestic food  supply for key commodities 

(cassava, sweet potato, beans, coffee, cocoa, oil palm meat 

and fish) 

3. Prevalence and numbers for child stunting 

1. na  

2. 670,000 mt  

 

 

3. 37% 

1. 27,000 

2. 1.3 million mt. 

 

 

3. 80% reduction 

Min of Finance reports 

National Bureau of 

Statistics (NBS) reports 

Household surveys 

 

 OUTCOMES 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

1. Increased household income 

 

2. Increased Crop, fisheries  and 

livestock Production 

1. Number and percentage of women and men with increased 

incomes, (young men and women) 

2.1 Crops production (tons)  

2.2 Livestock production (tons) 

2.3  Fisheries production (tons) 

 

1. USD500 

2.1 cassava 

(491,359 mt  p.a); 

banana (121,000 

mt p.a); potato 

(163,614 mt  p.a); 

beans (6,121 mt  

p.a); coffee (405 

mt  p.a); cocoa 

(na); oil palm 

(na);  

2.2 Meat (na) 

2.3 Fish (na) 

1. USD3,500/hh pa 

2.1 Cassava (900,000 mt p.a); 

banana (210,000 mt p.a);  potato 

(300,000 mt ton p.a); beans (12,000 

mt  p.a); coffee (2,200 mt p.a); 

cocoa (1,900 mt  p.a); palm oil 

(8,400 mt  p.a);  

 

 

 

 

2.2 Meat (25,000 ton)  

2.3 Fish (15,000 ton) 

Min of Finance reports 

NBS reports 

Household surveys 

Risk 1: Counterpart funding not 

readily made in time 

 

Mitigation 1: Government 

contribution will be limited to local 

costs related to maintenance of 

office buildings and remuneration 

of counterpart staff  

 

OUTPUTS 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

1.  Commodity Value Chain 

Development 

1.1 Capacity of producers on 

improved technical and 

managerial skills built 

1.2  Improved access to  financial 

services (credit) 

 

1.3  Farm extension services provided 

 

 

1.4  Increased production of crops 

 

 

1.5  Increased production of 

livestock/fish 

1.6  Increased employment in crop 

value chains 

 

 

1.1  No. farmer associations trained in technical and 

managerial skills, of which men and women, young men and 

women 

1.2.1  % Farmer Organizations and SMEs obtaining loans  

1.2.2 Number of women, men, young men and women getting 

access to credit 

1.3.1 No.  private sector agencies providing extension services  

1.3.2 % farmers provided with farm extension services, of 

which are women and youth 

1.4.1   Area under crop production 

1.4.2  Crop Yields 

1.4.3  No. of Seedlings multiplied/selected 

1.5.1   Quantity of meat/fish production 

1.5.2 Number of  fish fingerlings 

 

1.6  Number of farmers and processors 

 

 

 

1.1  4 

 

 

1.2.1  5 

1.2.2 23 

 

1.3.1  2 

1.3.2  10 

 

1.4.1 18,800 

1.4.2 2t//ha 

1.4.3  0 

1.5.1  n.a 

1.5.2 NA 

 

1.6   51,000 

 

 

 

1.1  60 

 

 

1.2.1 120 

1.2.2 8,000 

 

1.3.1  25 

1.3.2   80 

 

1.4.1 39,177 

1.4.2  4 mt/ ha 

1.4.3 1.2 million 

1.5.1 25,000mt/15,000 mt 

1.5.2   15 million 

 

1.6  95,000 

 

Enterprise surveys 

Monitoring reports 

Household surveys 

Program reports 

Supervision records 

Work report, 

procurement and 

supervision reports 

 



vii 

 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

2.  Infrastructure Development 
2.1  Roads linking farms to markets 

rehabilitated 

2.2  Extension of electricity 

 

2.3  Processing facilities functional, 

well-equipped demonstration and 

technology centers  

2.4  Storage facilities rehabilitated 

2.6  Rehabilitated irrigation canals 

2.7  Construction of landing sites 

2.8  Construction of abattoir 

2.9  Construction of quarantine parks 

2.10 Community development 

facilities improved  

 

2.1  Kilometers of all-weather feeder roads rehabilitated 

 

2.2.1 Km of power extension 

2.2.2 % of households with an electricity connection 

2.3  No. of demonstration & technology centers  

 

 

2.4  No. of warehouses constructed  

2.6  Area of land under irrigation (Ha)  

2.7  No. of landing sites constructed 

2.8  No. of abattoir constructed 

2.9  No. of parks constructed 

2.10.1 No. of boreholes constructed 

2.10.2  No. of clinics rehabilitated & equipped 

2.10.3  No. of schools/crèches rehabilitated & equipped  

2.10.4 % increase in numbers of boys’ and girls’ school 

enrolment rates,  

 

2.1   0 

 

2.2.1  0 

2.2.2 na 

2.3   2 

 

 

2.4  4 

2.6   108.1 

2.7   0 

2.8   0 

2.9   0 

2.10.1  0 

2.10.2  0 

2.10.3  25 

2.10.4  46 

 

2.1   191 

 

2.2.1   54 

2.2.2   80 

2.3     10 

 

 

2.4   14 

2.6  750 

2.7  2 

2.8. 1 

2.9  2 

2.10.1 16 

2.10.2  4 

2.10.3  29 

2.10.4  65 

Enterprise surveys 

Monitoring reports 

Household surveys 

Program reports 

Supervision records 

Work report, 

procurement and 

supervision reports  

Risk 2: Facilities are not well 

maintained, under utilized  

 

Mitigation 2: Proper  asset usage 

mechanism developed 

3.  Program Management/ 

Monitoring & Evaluation 

3.1  Program work plan and 

operations are implemented 

3.2  Program activities monitored and 

information produced regularly 

3.3 Public sector support 

 

 

3.1  Rate of implementation of the annual work plan 

 

3.2 .1 No. of technical and progress reports prepared annually 

3.2.2  No. of audit reports produced annually 

3.3     No. of staff trained 

 

 

3.1    0 

 

3.2.1 0 

3.2.2 0 

3.3 0 

 

 

3.1   95% 

 

3.2.1 4 

3.2.2 1 

3.3 55 

Program agreements, 

funding documents 

Supervision mission 

Financial management 

reports M&E reports 

 

                                                                                                COMPONENTS                                                                                                                              SOURCES OF FINANCE  

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

 

Component 1: Commodity Value Chain Development 

improved production inputs in crops, fisheries and livestock (seeds, fertilizers, fingerlings, small ruminants); training in good agricultural practices; mechanization along the value chains; 

support to training in post-harvest technologies for farmers and value chain actors; training of value chain actors in modern food processing; entrepreneurship and business management 

training; development of market information system; installation of processing equipment for commodity value addition and marketing; environmental protection management for 

productivity enhancement, processing, marketing and community infrastructure. 

 

Component 2: Infrastructure Development 

Extension of electrical power grid; rehabilitation of feeder roads; rehabilitation of community markets and storage facilities; installation of water boreholes for potable and sanitation 

systems; construction of irrigation water distribution schemes; development of irrigated land; construction of residences to support extension advisory services; construction of structure to 

mitigate coastal erosion; construction of health centers and primary schools; construction of a fisheries training facility; construction of piers and produce preservation warehouses; 

construction of an abattoir; construction of a tissue culture laboratory at Ste Vicente Research Centre; and livestock quarantine facilities.. 

 

Component 3: Program Management, Monitoring and Evaluation  

Project management activities; day-to-day management, management of studies on key policy issues; credit management; development of a results based framework for M&E; and 

procurement, disbursement and audit functions. 

 

 
Project Cost (USD million):   123.15 

  AfDB Loan                     :     101.07 
     

  Other sources 

   Government of Angola  :  19.91 
   Beneficiaries                  :    2.17 

 

Component 1                     :  21.46 
Component 2                     :  90.57 

Component 3                     :  11.12 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.7  Establishment of database for 

value chain actors 

1.7. % of value chain actors registered 

 

1.7  0 

 

1.7   95 

 



viii 

 

 

PROJECT TIMEFRAME 
 

 

Task Name 

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 

Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 

Negotiations                   

Board approval                   

Signing of Loan Agreement                   

Satisfaction of conditions for effectiveness and first disbursement for loan                   

Project launch                   

Technical coordination meetings                   

Project work plans and budgets                     

Technical Design Review/Baseline data update                   

Prepare bid documents and contract awards for works, goods and services                   

Contracts execution for works, goods and services                   

Quarterly reports submission                   

Annual reports submission                   

Bank’s supervision missions                   

Financial audit                   

Mid-term review                   

Impact assessment and technical audit                    

Project completion reporting                    

 

 

 

 



 

1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF MANAGEMENT FOR A 

PROPOSED AfDB LOAN OF USD101.07 MILLION TO THE REPUBLIC 

OF ANGOLA FOR THE FINANCING OF THE CABINDA PROVINCE 

AGRICULTURE VALUE CHAINS DEVELOPMENT PROJECT 

(CPAVCDP) 
 

Management hereby submits this report and recommendation for an AfDB loan of USD101.07 

million to finance the Cabinda Province Agriculture Value Chains Development Project 

(CPAVCDP). 

 

I. STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE 
 

1.1 Project Linkages with the Country Strategy and Objectives 

 

1.1.1 Angola’s Long Term Plan, dubbed “Vision 2025” articulates the country’s conceptual 

view to achieve sustainable development and seeks to “extricate the country from poverty by 

promoting economic growth, macroeconomic stability and employment”. Vision 2025 was 

designed to be implemented in a period of 25 years, in three stages, with concrete objectives and 

targets and which may be adapted: 2000-2005 (peace, national reconstruction and economic 

growth startup); 2005-2015 (consolidation of national reconstruction, modernization and 

development); and 2015-2025 (sustainability and growth). The National Development Plan 

(NDP) 2013-2017 underscored aspects of the “Vision 2025” by stressing the need to: (i) diversify 

the economy; (ii) invest in infrastructure (in particular, transport, energy and water and 

sanitation); (iii) enhance better management of natural resources; and (iv) expand employment 

opportunities to reduce poverty. The new NDP 2018-2022 that is under preparation is only due 

for approval after the general elections in August 2017. 

 

1.1.2 The recent approved CSP 2017-2021 adopts a broader context of policy continuity by 

anchoring on the longer Vision 2025 of the country. It focuses on two complementary pillars: (i) 

inclusive growth through agricultural transformation; and (ii) support to sustainable 

infrastructure development, in particular energy and transport. The project is aligned to the 

Bank’s Feed Africa – Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa 2016-2025; the Bank 

Group Industrialization Strategy for Africa 2016-2025; the Bank’s Private Sector Development 

Strategy 2013-2017; the Bank Group Strategy for the New Deal on Energy for Africa 2016-

2025; the Bank Group Strategy for Jobs for Youth in Africa 2016-2025; and the Bank Group 

Gender Strategy 2014-2018. Lastly, the CSP is fully aligned to the achievement of Angola’s 

SDGs, in particular, the  SDG 1 (“No poverty”), SDG 2 (“No Hunger”), SDG 5 (“Gender 

equality”), SDG 6 (“Clean water and sanitation”), SDG 7 (“Clean energy”), SDG 8 (“Good jobs 

and economic growth”), SDG 9 (“Innovation and infrastructure”), SDG 10 (“Reduced 

inequalities”), and SDG 13 (“Protect the planet”).  

 

1.2 Rationale for Bank Involvement 

 

1.2.1 In March 2015, a Middle Income Country (MIC) Technical Assistance grant of 

UA420,045 was approved for the Government of Angola to undertake a Study as part of a project 

cycle pre-investment activity. It is noteworthy that the Bank Group had not carried out an 

agriculture sector review in Angola since the Bank Group commenced operations there in 1980. 

The Cabinda Province Agriculture Value Chains Development Project (CPAVCDP) is based 

upon the technical documents produced by the Study.  

 



2 

 

1.2.2 The project fits in with the two complementary pillars of Bank’s intervention in Angola 

in the just approved CSP 2017-2021. The Bank’s strategy focuses on: (i) inclusive growth 

through agricultural transformation; and (ii) support to sustainable infrastructure development, 

in particular, in energy and transport. The agricultural transformation interventions under the 

pillar I are aligned with the Bank’s High 5s priorities of Feed Africa and Industrialize Africa, 

while the infrastructure development interventions under pillar II will help achieve the following 

High 5s: Light-up and power Africa, Integrate Africa and Improve quality of life of Africans. It 

also fulfils the requirement of the Ten-Year Strategy (TYS, 2013-2022) as it pertains to inclusive 

growth objective through the involvement of youth, women and skills development. It is also in 

alignment with Pillar 2 (improving rural infrastructure and trade-related capacities for market 

access) and Pillar 3 (increasing food supply and reducing hunger and malnutrition) of the 

Comprehensive African Agriculture Development Program (CAADP). 

 

1.3 Aid Coordination 

 

Apart from the Bank Group, development partners in the agriculture sector include the World 

Bank and the International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD). The World Bank is 

supporting the Angola Market Oriented Smallholder Agriculture Project (MOSSAP) with the 

amount of USD30 million and jointly financed by IFAD with USD8.2 million and a grant of 

USD4 million from the Government of Japan. The Ministry of Agriculture (MINAGRI) has a 

number of agricultural development initiatives with the aim of promoting the sector by providing 

an enabling environment for farmers and processors. One of the strategies is Private-Public-

Partnerships (PPP) in agricultural production. In pursuit of this, US-owned Chiquita Brands 

International recently announced plans to begin growing banana in the southern province of 

Benguela; while Brazilian-owned Odebrecht Africa Fund is investing in sugar and ethanol 

production in Malanje Province. The American company "Ellada Investiments Pty Ltd" is trying 

to invest in the production of coffee in northern Uige province; and China Development Bank is 

financing rice production in Kuando-Kubango province. Other foreign owned companies are 

expected to invest in coffee, sugar, cassava and palm oil production. Tables 1.1a and 1.1b provide 

the details of development partners’ activities in the various sectors.  

 

Table 1.1a: Official Development Assistance 

 

 

 

 

 

0,66

1,28

3,70

5,15

12,28

40,35

251,61

268,61

876,05
1 252,89

0 200 400 600 800 1 000 1 200

France

United Kingdom

Norway

Netherlands

UNDP

USAID

European Union

Japan

World Bank

AfDB

Total ODA volume (2015) - approved and ongoing projects  (Million USD)



3 

 

Table 1.1b: Sectors of Donor Intervention 

 

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
 

2.1 Project Objectives 

 
Development objective  

 

2.1.1 To contribute to increased food and nutrition security, job and wealth creation.  

 

 Specific project objectives 

 

2.1.2 To increase farmers’ food and nutrition security and incomes through increased 

agricultural output and value addition. The Project will also contribute to enhance income of 

small and medium enterprises engaged in input supply, production, processing, storage and 

marketing of selected commodities on a sustainable basis.  

 

Project Components 

 

2.1.3 The proposed CPAVCD Project is composed of three components: (i) Commodity Value 

Chains Development; (ii) Infrastructure Development; and (iii) Project Management and 

Monitoring and Evaluation. The project focuses on the provision of the enabling environment 

for agricultural development and value addition of staple crops (cassava, banana, sweet potato, 

peanut, and beans); cash crops (coffee, cocoa and oil palm); marine and inland fisheries; poultry 

and small ruminants; and horticulture (vegetables and fruits). It will rehabilitate or construct rural 

and resilient infrastructure, namely feeder roads to link production clusters to markets, agro-

processing centers, market centers, community health centers, primary schools, potable water 

facilities in the communities and improve rural energy access. A summary of the activities is in 

Table 2.1.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Capacity Building & 
Institutional 

Development; 8; 10,38

Agriculture , 7, 

Higher Education and 
Vocational Training, 5, 

83,36

Power; 5; 1 244,93

Environment ; 11; 
28,50

Fisheries; 3; 
29,97

Multi-sector and 
Governance, 5, 554,35

Health ; 8; 148,79Other Infrastructure; 
6; 29,15

Justice; 4; 
Multinational projects; 3; 

9,71

Social, 2, 
68,53

Trade & Regional 
Integration; 2; 13,77

Water & Sanitation ; 
5; 326,11

0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900

1 000
1 100
1 200
1 300
1 400
1 500

0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14

O
D

A
 v

o
lu

m
e

s 
(M

ill
io

n
 U

S
D

)

X- axis: Number of projects 
Note: Bubble size - represents ODA volumes (Million USD)

ODA Sectoral Distribution, Approved and Ongoing projects (2015)



4 

 

 

Table 2.1: Summary of Activities in the Components 

 

Components 

Total Cost 

(USD 

million) 

Description 

Component 1  

Commodity Value 

Chains Development 

 

21.46 

 (17.4 %) 

Provision of improved production inputs in crops, fisheries and 

livestock (seeds, fertilizers, fingerlings, small ruminants); 

training in good agricultural practices; promotion of 

mechanization along the value chains by equipment and 

machinery leasing with two tractors/associated implements each 

in the four Municipalities; support to training in post-harvest 

technologies for farmers and value chain actors; training of value 

chain actors in modern food processing; entrepreneurship and 

business management training; development of market 

information system; installation of 14 processing equipment for 

commodity value addition and marketing; environmental 

protection management for productivity enhancement, 

processing, marketing and community infrastructure; provision 

of two refrigerating units for vegetables in Cabinda 

Municipality; and establishment of the credit fund.   

Component 2 

Infrastructure 

Development 

90.57 

(73.5 %) 

Extension of electrical power grid (54 kms); rehabilitation of 

feeder roads (191 kms); rehabilitation of four community 

markets and storage facilities; installation of 16 water boreholes 

for potable and sanitation systems; rehabilitation of 1,500 km of 

irrigation water distribution schemes; development of 750 ha of 

irrigated land; construction of nine residences to support 

extension advisory services; construction of structure to mitigate 

coastal erosion at Landana; construction of one health center and 

one primary school in each of the four Municipalities; 

construction of a fisheries training facility at Tanda-Zinze 

(Cabinda Municipality); construction of two piers and produce 

preservation warehouses at Tungu and Chicaca in Cacongo 

Municipality; reconstruction of the landing pier at Landana in 

Cabinda  Municipality;  construction of an abattoir in Cabinda 

Municipality; construction of two animal quarantine parks in 

Cabinda Municipality; construction of a tissue culture laboratory 

at Ste Vicente Agriculture Research Centre 

Component 3:  

Project Management 

/Monitoring and 

Evaluation  

11.12 

(9%) 

Project management activities; day-to-day management, 

management of studies on key policy issues; credit management; 

development of a results based framework for M&E; and 

procurement, disbursement and audit functions.  

 

2.2 Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Considered 

 

The technical solutions retained are based on criteria that help ensure Project success and 

sustainability. Three technical alternatives were considered and rejected for their weaknesses in 

generating the expected impact on a sustainable basis (Table 2.2). 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



5 

 

 

Table 2.2: Technical Alternatives Considered and Reasons for Rejection 

 

Alternative Solution Brief Description Reasons for Rejection 

1. Instrument: Project vs. sector 

budget support  

Under sector budget support, 

resources are disbursed in tranches 

based on triggers agreed upon 

Assessment of sector fiduciary 

environment was not conclusive and 

had high level of uncertainty 

2. Build in credit administration 

into the project  

Create a unit within the Provincial 

Department of Agriculture to 

administer credit to beneficiaries 

No experience exists within the 

Government institutions to administer 

credit on a sustainable basis 

3. Matching grant for acquisition 

of production inputs and 

machinery 

Beneficiaries are supported with 

matching grants to partially defray 

the cost of acquiring the requisite 

inputs and machinery for 

production / processing activities. 

The mechanism has often not worked 

effectively if beneficiaries are 

expected to provide surety to access 

the credit from participating financial 

institutions. Stringent collateral 

requirements make it challenging to 

take off. 

 
2.3 Project Type 
 

The Cabinda Province Agriculture Value Chains Development Project (CPAVCDP) is an 

investment project financed by an AfDB loan.  

 

2.4 Project Cost and Financing Arrangements 

 

Project costs 
 

2.4.1 The total cost of the project is estimated at USD123.15 million, net of taxes, and based 

on 2017 prices, comprising of USD66.08 million (54%) of the total cost in foreign cost, and 

USD57.07 million (46%) in local cost. The total cost is inclusive of physical and price 

contingencies estimated at average rates of 15% and 2.5%, respectively. The summary of 

estimated costs by component, expenditure category, sources of financing as well as an 

expenditure schedule are presented in the tables below. Detailed project cost tables are presented 

in Section B2 of the Technical Annexes to this report. 

 

Table 2.3: Summary of Project Cost by Component (USD ‘000) 

 

Components 
Local 

Cost 

Foreign 

Cost 

Total  

Cost 

% 

Foreign 

Cost 

1. Commodity Value Chain Development 9,265.58 10,605.13 19,870.71 53 

2. Infrastructure Development 35,365.08 45,533.41 80,898.49 56 

3. Project Management, Monitoring & Evaluation 7,230.91 3,501.44 10,732.35 33 

Total Baseline Costs 51,861.57 59,639.98 111,501.55 53 

Physical Contingencies 3,736.32 4,865.43 8,601.75 57 

Price Contingencies 1,470.80 1,576.48 3,047.28 52 

Total Project Costs 57,068.69 66,081.89 123,150.58 54 

 

2.4.2 The project cost of USD123.15 million will be financed by: (i) an AfDB loan of 

USD101.07 million (82.1% of project costs) covering all major activities including review of 

infrastructure designs and a credit facility; (ii) the Government of Angola: USD19.91 million 

(16.2% of project costs) mainly through the extension of electricity lines to project areas, 

provision of office space, salaries for government staff, road maintenance and services such as 

electricity, water and telecommunication for the Project office. Government will also, in addition 



6 

 

to the contributions, bear the loss in fiscal receipts due to tax and duty exemptions of all 

procurements; and (iii) beneficiaries: USD2.17 (1.7% of project costs) in-kind contribution 

during land preparation activities and payments for services in maintenance of agro-processing 

facilities. The summary of project costs are presented in the tables below. 

 

Table 2.4: Summary Project Cost by Category of Expenditure (USD ‘000) 
 

Categories of Expenditure 

 

 

Local 

Cost 

 

Foreign 

Cost 
Total Cost 

% 

Foreign 

Cost 

%  

Total  

Costs 

 I. Investment Costs       
   A. Works 34,426.07 44,078.16 78,504.23 56 70 

   B. Goods 1,320.34 3,932.21 5,252.55 75 5 

   C. Services 7,270.44 8,812.12 16,082.56 55 14 

   D. Miscellaneous 2,750.00 2,250.00 5,000.00 45 4 

Total Investment Costs 45,766.85 59,072.49 104,839.34 56 94 

II. Recurrent Costs      
   A. Daily Subsistence Allowance 624.00 336.00 960.00 35 1 

   B. Operation & Maintenance 4,045.40 75.60 4,121.00 2 4 

   C. General Operating Costs 1,425.32 155.88 1,581.20 10 1 

Total Recurrent Costs 6,094.72 567.48 6,662.20 9 6 

Total Baseline Costs 51,861.57 59,639.97 111,501.54 53 100 

Physical Contingencies 3,736.32 4,865.43 8,601.76 57 8 

Price Contingencies 1,470.80 1,576.48 3,047.28 52 3 

Total Project Costs 57,068.69 66,081.89 123,150.58 54 110 

 

Table 2.5: Summary Project Cost Schedule by Components (USD ’000) 
 

 

Components 2018 2019 2020 2021 Total 

1. Commodity Value Chain Development 3,650.36 11,321.45 4,086.91 2,398.89 21,457.61 

2. Infrastructure Development 2,352.79 39,757.04 34,991.95 13,472.07 90,573.85 

3. Project Management, Monitoring & Evaluation 2,904.47 3,212.38 3,060.48 1,941.79 11,119.11 

Total Project Costs 8,907.62 54,290.87 42,139.34 17,812.75 123,150.58 

 

Table 2.6: Source of Finance by Category of Expenditure (USD ’000) 
 

 

Category of Expenditure AfDB Loan 
Government 

of Angola 
Beneficiaries 

Total 

Amount 

% 

Total 

Cost 

I. Investment Costs      

 A. Works      

  Construction & Rehabilitation 20,040.68 - 2,092.58 22,133.25 18.0 

  Roads 54,232.33 8,265.03 - 62,497.36 50.7 

  Electricity extension - 4,947.63 - 4,947.63 4.0 

 Subtotal Works 74,273.01 13,212.66 2,092.58 89,578.24 72.7 

 B. Goods      

  1. Vehicles      

   Vehicles 479.61 - - 479.61 0.4 

  2. Equipment & Materials      

   Equipment 4,595.76 - - 4,595.76 3.7 

   Furniture 271.14 - - 271.14 0.2 

 Subtotal Goods 5,346.51 - - 5,346.51 4.3 

 C. Services      



7 

 

Category of Expenditure AfDB Loan 
Government 

of Angola 
Beneficiaries 

Total 

Amount 

% 

Total 

Cost 

  

Training, Sensitization, Workshops, 

Seminars,  2,003.50 - - 2,003.50 1.6 

  Technical Assistance & Consultancies 7,498.98 - - 7,498.98 6.1 

  Contractual Services 5,207.65 1,328.40 - 6,536.05 5.3 

  Audit 300.00 - - 300.00 0.2 

 Subtotal Services 15,010.14 1,328.40 - 16,338.54 13.3 

 D. Miscellaneous      

  Credit facility 5,000.00 - - 5,000.00 4.1 

Total Investment Costs 99,629.65 14,541.06 2,092.58 116,263.29 94.4 

      

II. Recurrent Costs      

 A. Daily Subsistence Allowance 979.20 - - 979.20 0.8 

 B. Operation & Maintenance      

  Vehicles 108.00 - - 108.00 0.1 

  Infrastructure - 4,144.57 48.00 4,192.57 3.4 

 Subtotal 108.00 4,144.57 48.00 4,300.57 3.5 

 C. General Operating Costs 348.81 1,228.71 30.00 1,607.52 1.3 

Total Recurrent Costs 1,436.01 5,373.28 78.00 6,887.29 5.6 

Total Project Costs 101,065.66 19,914.34 2,170.58 123,150.58 100.0 

 

Table 2.7: Project Costs by Financing Sources (USD ‘000) 

 

Sources 
Foreign 

Cost 
Local Cost Total Costs 

% 

Total 

Cost 

 AfDB Loan 66,081.89 34,983.77 101,065.66 82.1 

 Government of Angola - 19,914.34 19,914.34 16.2 

 Beneficiaries - 2,170.58 2,170.58 1.7 

Total Project Costs 66,081.89 57,068.69 123,150.58 100.0 

 

2.4.3 Justification for Local Costs Financing: The AfDB loan of USD101.07 million will 

finance 100% of Goods; 82.91% of Works; 91.35% of Services; 100% of the credit fund; and 

29.01% of recurrent costs. The loan will finance 100% of foreign costs and 60.85% of local 

costs. Despite contributing 16.2% of total costs, the Government of Angola does not have the 

capacity to finance the requisite 50% of total project costs as a result of the current economic 

hardship and fiscal deficit arising from the prolonged decline in oil prices. Consequently, local 

costs have been factored into AfDB financing in order not to delay implementation of activities.  

A waiver request for financing 82.1% of the project cost through an AfDB loan is presented in 

Annex VII. 

 
2.5 Project Area and Beneficiaries 

 

The CPAVCD Project will be implemented in the four municipalities of Cabinda Province 

namely: Belize, Buco Zau, Cacongo and Cabinda with a combined human population of 688,285. 

The direct beneficiaries are the 51,000 economically active smallholders living in the rural areas 

in the four municipalities of Cabinda Province who are already or being encouraged to participate 

in agriculture. The indirect beneficiaries include existing 15 small, medium and large-scale 

entrepreneurs and business associations who provide services to the producers and processors. 

This number is expected to increase significantly when other economically active value chain 

entrepreneurs get involved in the Project. Commodity processors, marketers, agro-dealers in the 



8 

 

province will be engaged. Among the target group, women and youth play a major role in crop 

and animal production, processing, small enterprises operation and marketing. At least 50% of 

beneficiaries (women) will be specifically targeted in project activities and to reap benefits.  

 

2.6 Participatory Approach to Project Formulation, Design and Implementation 
 

During the study stages, cross-sectional consultations were held by the consultants in the four 

municipalities. A general workshop was held on 25 August 2016 in Cabinda city where all 

stakeholders were present. The general outline of the proposed project was presented and 

deliberated upon. The general workshop incorporated both plenary and working group sessions 

that were designed along thematic areas critical for the successful and logical implementation of 

the project. Comments and suggestions were later incorporated in the final documents by the 

consultants. The workshops established the desirability for interventions using the value chain 

approach. The key outcome of the consultation process was a consensus on the Project objective 

and strategy as well as the implementation arrangement. These were further validated during the 

appraisal mission of June 2017 with representatives from key Government agencies such as: IDA 

(Institute of Agrarian Development); ISV (Veterinary Services Institute); IIV (Veterinary 

Research Institute); IDF (Forestry Development Institute); the Provincial Governor of Cabinda 

and farmer cooperative heads in each of the four Municipalities. The consultation process was 

complemented at final briefing sessions with the Director-Generals of the departments, Secretary 

of State for Agriculture and the Minister of Agriculture, as well as with development partners 

such as the World Bank and FAO. The participatory approach adopted during the formulation 

will be continued during its implementation. The implementation arrangement will therefore 

include representatives of key stakeholders such as the existing farmer groups and value chain 

actors in the Project Steering Committee to ensure that their interests are taken into consideration 

at all times.  

 

2.7 Bank Group Experience and Lessons Learnt Reflected in the Project Design 

 

2.7.1 The Bank Group currently has two on-going projects in the agriculture sector as follows: 

(i) Angola Fisheries Sector Support Project (UA20.00 million); and (ii) Environment Sector 

Support Program (UA0.42 million). Though these initiatives offer great potential for agricultural 

and rural development by improving productivity and ensuring sustainable use of natural 

resources, actual implementation has been bogged by institutional and project staffing 

challenges. The Bank’s overall portfolio performance in Angola is deemed unsatisfactory with 

an average score of 2.3 out of 4. The average age of the portfolio is 3.8 years with two projects 

of more than five years foreseen to be completed by the end of 2017. Details are in Annex B1 of 

the Technical Annexes. 

 

2.7.2 The sole agriculture project financed by Bank Group to date was the Bom Jesus-Calenga 

Smallholder Agricultural Development Project (UA17.2 million ADF grant), which ended in 

November 2016. The Project Completion Report indicated that the project met most of its targets 

for rural infrastructural development and economic diversification, but it took nearly twice as 

much time to complete the construction and rehabilitation works. The Bank Group has gained 

useful experiences in the development of the agriculture sector in the country. Key lessons that 

have been learned include: (i) institutional environment under which the project operates needs 

to be optimum so as to avoid unnecessary delays to project implementation; (ii) retention of 

qualified staff is key to core management functions, to ensure timely delivery of outputs, and 

effectively achieve the development goals. It is thus envisaged that the Cabinda Province 

Agriculture Value Chains Development (CPAVCD) Project will have a specific activities on 

institutional development to bring a major transformation of the agriculture sector in Cabinda 

Province. There is no Project Completion backlog in the country. 



9 

 

 

2.7.3 The Table below summarizes key lessons learnt from closed and on-going agriculture 

sector interventions in the country, and indicates how they have informed the design of 

CPAVCD Project. 

 

Table 2.8: Consideration of Lessons Learnt in Project Design 
 

Lessons learnt  Actions incorporated into the design of CPAVCD 

Project 

The need to ensure a 

geographical focus and that 

resources are not thinly spread 

 

The Bank has adopted a cluster model where production 

and processing are in a closely-knit geographical area as 

opposed to sites in various communes. This would allow 

for optimal use of installed infrastructure and ease of 

technical assistance and supervision activities 

The need for participatory and 

socially inclusive formulation 

and implementation of 

development interventions  

The organization of three workshops that attracted all 

stakeholders and their potential involvement in 

implementing the Project would ensure ownership and 

sustainability after project investment period 

The need for decentralization 

of implementation to the 

Province where the project is 

located using existing organs  

The implementation arrangement of CPAVCD Project is 

located in Cabinda where the actual day-to-day actions are 

taking place. The recruitment of a dedicated PIU will 

ensure efficiency in delivery 

The need to ensure high state 

of readiness for project start up 

and implementation.  

 

The various technical assessments carried out during the 

Study provided the technical, engineering, environmental 

as well as procurement documents that will ensure that 

project will be implemented in a shorter period (four years 

instead the default five).   

 
2.8 Key Performance Indicators 

 

2.8.1  The key performance indicators for monitoring progress in achieving the Project 

objectives are in the results based logical framework (RBLF). These indicators include impacts, 

outcomes and outputs that will be further refined at Project start-up when more information/data 

would be available through revised assessments. Key impact indicators include level of wealth 

created along the value chains (farmers, processors, women, market operators, etc); level of food 

and nutrition security achieved; and number of jobs created. The key outcome indicator is the 

additional income earned by value chain actors.  

 

2.8.2  Outputs indicators on infrastructure development include number of climate resilient 

water control structures rehabilitated; number of wash bore/tube wells constructed, hectares of 

land with supplementary irrigation facilities; increased crop yield and hectares of land put to 

production of the commodities; number of small holders and percentage of them using good 

agronomic practices; percentage of producers trained in technical and managerial skills; and 

percentage of farmers provided with farm advisory services. Other output key indicators for 

processing, market and community development include kilometers of feeder roads 

rehabilitated; number of community markets, storage facilities constructed or rehabilitated; and 

number of social facilities rehabilitated and equipped (schools, clinics, potable water for drinking 

and processing).   

 

2.8.3 Key output indicators for the commodity value chain development include number of 

operational storage facilities and collection centers; percentage of actors trained in post-harvest 



10 

 

technologies, modern food processing, group dynamics and leadership; percentage of farmers’ 

organizations and SMEs undertaking collective marketing and purchasing. Other output 

indicators include market share of local food products vis à vis imported ones; and percentage 

of beneficiaries obtaining credit and paying back on time. Key output indicators for Project 

management include the rate of implementation of the annual work plan, number of supervision 

missions per year and number of technical and financial reports per year, rate of disbursement, 

and timeliness of reports. 

 

III. PROJECT FEASIBILITY 
 

3.1 Economic and financial performance  

 

3.1.1 A financial assessment of the project was undertaken using activity models, and on the 

basis of 2016 market prices. The objective of the financial analysis of the project activities is to: 

(i) assess the commercial viability of the proposed agricultural, livestock and value addition 

enterprises to be funded under the project; and (ii) to provide a basis for the economic analysis 

of the project. The analysis focuses on crops, livestock and aquaculture production modules and 

various agro-processing enterprises. These analyses were carried-out with financial and 

economic costs generated using Costab 32. Summary of financial and economic analysis is in 

Annex B7 and further elaborated in Annex B7 in Volume II of the appraisal report. 

 

3.1.2 The CPAVCD Project will contribute to the improvement of socio economic indicators 

especially on reduction of poverty and malnutrition, maternal and child health, reduced child 

literacy, improved schooling rate of children especially girls due to improved communication 

through rehabilitated roads, provision of schools and community health centers. 

 

       Table 3.1: Key economic and financial figures* 

 

FIRR : 19%  NPV (base case) is USD 204,698,612  

 

EIRR : 23%  NPV (base case)  is USD 317,656,845 
    

*NB: detailed calculations are available in Annex B7 

  

 Financial analysis  
 

3.1.3 Based on the above assumptions, the aggregate financial benefits from agricultural 

production and processing activities when computed against the investment costs for the project 

activities generated Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of 19% and Net Present Value 

(NPV) of USD 204.70 million. Based on the above analysis, the project is deemed financially 

feasible. The FIRR of 19% is higher than the opportunity cost of capital (12%). 

 

 Economic analysis 
 

3.1.4 The Economic Analysis is carried out to determine the impact of the proposed project to 

the economy as a whole, to justify Government intervention with public funds. The economic 

analysis includes most quantifiable incremental costs and benefits that are associated with the 

project's investments.  

 

3.1.5 The economic analysis was conducted using the similar approach as the financial 

analysis, on the basis of shadow prices (prices in conditions of the efficient market operation) of 



11 

 

tradable goods and total cost of project. In addition, other indirect benefits were also expected, 

such as, easy access to markets through market linkages; easy transportation of goods and 

services, better health delivery systems, improvement in literacy and employment generation. 

However, these additional benefits were difficult to value in monetary terms due to the limited 

scope of this report and data limitations, hence they could not be adequately captured in the 

analysis. In these conditions, the economic analysis yielded an NPV of USD317.66 million and 

Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 23% as captured in the technical annexes. 

 

3.2 Environment and Social Impact 

 

3.2.1 Environment  

 

3.2.1.1 The proposed Cabinda Province Agricultural Value Chains Development project was 

classified Category 2 (validated 9th June 2017) because the project activities are expected to have 

minimal and site-specific environmental and social impacts. The project will finance 

construction and rehabilitation of small irrigation scheme, processing and storage facilities, and 

community infrastructure (heath care centers, schools and water supply and sanitation) as well 

as support activities for increased production and commercialization. These impacts can be 

managed with the application of mitigation measures elaborated in site-specific environmental 

and social management plans (ESMPs). The ESMP that was prepared in September 2016 by the 

Cabinda Province Agriculture Development Study consultants for the general project 

intervention areas will be fine-tuned for specific sites during project implementation; hence, an 

environmental and social management framework (ESMF, which was posted on the Bank’s 

website on 11th August 2017) will provide the framework for managing the environment and 

social issues and guide the preparation of environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) 

and/or ESMP as required during project implementation.  

 

3.2.1.2 The anticipated negative impacts are those associated with the construction and/or 

rehabilitation works and the agricultural production and value-chain development activities 

including  (i) loss of vegetation cover due to site clearing, soil erosion, landscape degradation 

and possible habitat fragmentation, (ii) noise, vibration and emissions from operation of 

machinery that may impair air quality and induce health implications, (iii) increased use of 

agrochemicals including pesticides and fertilizers, and (iii) wastes generated from processing 

and marketing facilities. These impacts are site specific and readily managed with the application 

of well-defined measures elaborated in site-specific ESIAs/ESMPs such as (i) refilling the 

exposed or excavated soil soon after completion of works and avoiding or minimizing 

compaction of soils, (ii) ensuring environmental flow for rivers/lakes, (iii) establishing 

sustainable water management systems, and (iv) capacity building of value chain actors to 

promote good agriculture practices, improved agriculture technologies such as integrated soil 

fertility management (ISFM), integrated pest management (IPM) and Waste-to Energy.  

 

3.2.1.3 Overall, the CPAVCDP will have significant positive impacts such as improved 

production, and competitiveness of selected agricultural commodities that will contribute to 

increased income opportunities for value chain actors, and support the local economy of the 

Cabinda province. 

  

3.2.2 Climate change 

 

The Cabinda province experiences seasonal variability of rainfall. Studies indicate that the 

province is susceptible to sea level rise, with a projection of 0.13 – 0.56m by the 2090s. Sea level 

rise can aggravate flooding events causing riverbank erosion, saltwater intrusion, infrastructure 

damages, crop failure, fisheries destruction, and loss of biodiversity. This has significant 



12 

 

implications on livelihoods of agricultural, pastoral and fisheries communities. The Project has 

been assessed Category 2 per the Climate Safeguard Screening Systems requiring the 

implementation of adaptation measures to increase the resilience of communities and the 

infrastructure to be rehabilitated to withstand the impacts of climate change. The project will 

address the potential climate risk through the implementation of practical risk mitigation and 

adaptation measures. Specifically, water harvesting technologies, and rehabilitation and 

improvement of water infrastructure to reduce the dependency on rainfall for agricultural 

activities. Furthermore appropriate measures including physical structures will be implemented 

to reduce coastal degradation as well as protect ecosystems at risk from other hazards that 

accompany floods, and land use changes. This includes construction of gabions and rip rap 

concrete pillars at Landana beach to mitigate coastal erosion; reconstruction of the existing pier 

at Landana; construction of a small floating pier for fishing boats; as well improvement of the 

irrigation and drainage schemes. The Project will prioritize the implementation of adaptations 

measures as identified in Angola’s National Adaptation Program for Action (NAPA for 

agriculture, pastoral and fisheries systems). Implementation will be monitored through the 

inclusion of appropriate indicators in the project monitoring and evaluation framework. 

Furthermore engineering designs will integrate the need to raise drainage datum and camber 

access roads to the required levels to mitigate effect of floods in order to enhance resilience of 

the infrastructure. Overall, the project promote climate smart agriculture through the use of 

improved agricultural technologies and conservation agricultural practices as a means to enhance 

the resilience of the farming systems. It is estimated that USD7.40 million (or 7.2%) of the loan 

would be used on the above mentioned activities and is considered as climate finance portion of 

the loan.  

 

3.2.3 Green Growth 
 

CPAVCD Project has been designed in congruence with the Green Growth principle of “quality 

and inclusiveness of growth”. The Project design is flexible enough to address existing and 

emerging development challenges (rapid population growth, urbanization, shifting consumption 

patterns, uneven economic growth, lack of energy access, and limited access to value addition 

by processing. The Project has been designed to be more holistic in that it has integrated 

economic, social and environmental concerns for overall improvement of human well-being in 

the Province. The Project has further considered solutions to the impact of environmental 

changes, such as land degradation, disaster risk and climate change. 

 

3.2.4 Gender  

 

Structural transformation of Africa’s agriculture is a prerequisite for enhancing agricultural 

productivity, food security and poverty reduction on the continent. However, a critical ingredient 

of such a transformation is gender equality, given its potential impact on social inclusion and 

employment generation. Unfortunately, available evidence reveals that Angola’s agricultural 

landscape is characterized by gender inequalities disproportionately against women. These 

gender-based differences ranged from access to productive resources, low rates of technology 

adoption to economic capacities and incentives. This project will address some of the gender 

inequalities in agricultural productivity, by reducing or closing women’s deficits in agriculture 

performance and will unlock women and youth’s productivity potential. The indirect effects 

include increases in female managers’ bargaining power and improvements in their social status 

as their earnings increase, better child nutrition, health, and education attainment in households 

with female-managed plots.  There is a large gap between men and women in terms of income, 

access to basic services (energy, water and sanitation), access to housing, land, credit and 

continuing education in the Cabinda Province. The project will also contribute to the 

improvement of socio economic indicators especially the Sustainable Development Goals on 



13 

 

reduction of poverty, maternal and child health, reduced adult illiteracy, improved schooling rate 

of children especially girls due to improved access roads. With gender integrated value chains, 

the project will achieve competitive domestic food supply and increase the income levels of 

farmers, processors and marketers. Through improved agricultural production, productivity and 

market linkages, expected impact include food and nutrition security, creation of jobs, of which 

women and youths account for about 50%, along the commodity value chains. For inclusivity, 

the project shall ensure professional training, access to credit and other resources to women and 

youth; facilitate acquisition of machinery and equipment among women and youth; and provide 

capacity building (agribusiness and entrepreneurial, etc.) for women and youth amongst other 

activities.   

 

3.2.5 Social Impact 

 

3.2.5.1 As the project intends paying particular attention to women as well as mechanizing and 

enhancing the agricultural processes and products, drudgery will be removed, more women will 

be empowered, more jobs created and nutrition status significantly improved in the intervention 

areas. Access to safe water and adequate sanitation in Angola is quite poor particularly in rural 

areas. This negatively affects the health status of the population, school enrolment and retention 

especially for the girl-child, agricultural productivity and poverty status of the people in general. 

The Project will drill boreholes and construct sanitary facilities in public places such as markets, 

schools and health facilities in an effort to contribute to improvement of the hygiene situation. 

 

3.2.5.2 The expected increased commercial activities particularly around the warehousing, and 

processing facilities and markets with increased influx of people of diverse cultures, beliefs and 

behaviors is likely to expose people to sexually transmitted infections such as HIV/AIDS. The 

Project shall therefore design sensitization and capacity building activities to address these health 

issues. The actions envisaged include: (i) community sensitization on good nutrition and hygiene 

practices as well as prevention and management of malaria and HIV/AIDS; (ii) improving access 

to health facilities by way of extending the feeder roads to them; (iii) rehabilitation and equipping 

community health facilities; and (iv) skills training for health care providers. 

 

3.2.5.3 In order to accommodate all these activities a total of USD34.09 million has been 

earmarked for the provision of social infrastructure such as schools, clinics, potable water and 

sanitation systems for the beneficiaries. Community mobilization and training on nutrition, 

conflict resolution and health issues have been estimated at USD5.63 million. It is also estimated 

that USD17.65 million (or 45%) of these sums will target women. 

 

3.2.6 Involuntary Resettlement 

 

There is no involuntary resettlement or land acquisition or any loss, by the population, of 

property, sources of income and livelihoods envisioned within the implementation of the Project 

activities. The project interventions will be implemented on existing agriculture and pastoral 

systems.  

 

IV- PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION 

 

4.1 Implementation Arrangements 

 

4.1.1 The Ministry of Agriculture will be the executing agency of the project. Based on the 

weaknesses identified in the agriculture project that just ended and lessons distilled by the Bank 

from its experience in implementing programs in the country, the management of the CPAVCD 



14 

 

Project emphasizes a highly decentralized but inclusive structure. At the National Level, a lightly 

staffed National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU) will be established at MINAGRI in Luanda 

to coordinate project activities in Cabinda Province and also to carry out key policy and 

institution back stopping at the Ministry of Agriculture as well as disbursement and reporting 

liaison with the Bank. The NPCU will be headed by a national Project coordinator (NPC) and 

staffed by a liaison officer, a secretary and a driver. The staff of the NPCU will be paid from the 

proceeds of the loan. Furthermore, a Project Implementation Unity (PIU) will be competitively 

recruited as a consulting firm to manage the project and be based in Cabinda town itself. The 

PIU will comprise eight key officers as follows: (i) Project Manager; (ii) Financial Manager; (iii) 

Civil Engineer; (iv) Agro-processing Specialist; (v) Financial Accountant; (vi) Procurement 

Expert; (vii) M&E Officer; and (viii) Credit Management Specialist. The setting up of the PIU 

will be retained as a condition precedent to disbursement.  

 

4.1.2 The Government will provide full time counterpart staff to understudy the consultants 

and IDA (Institute of Agrarian Development) will take over the management of the project after 

two and a half years. The Gender Expert at the Office of the Provincial Governor of Cabinda 

will assume the leadership and responsibility for all gender related aspects of the Project and will 

engage with national NGOs for support. This arrangement will provide in-house training and 

sustainability upon the exit of the consultants. The Government counterpart specialists will 

receive a predetermined monthly allowance as incentive. The existing Provincial Director of 

Agriculture shall provide oversight function on the implementation of the Project in Cabinda 

Province represented by Agricultural Development Stations in each Municipality. 

 

4.1.3 A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established to provide policy guidance to 

the project. The PSC will be responsible to the Minister of Agriculture. The PSC will be chaired 

by the Minister of Agriculture and will comprise a representative (of not lower than the grade of 

Director) each from IDA (Institute of Agrarian Development); ISV (Veterinary Services 

Institute); Ministry of Women and Youth; Ministry of Environment; Ministry of Finance; 

Ministry of Fisheries; Office of the Provincial Governor of Cabinda; and Departments of 

Agriculture; Forestry; and Water from Cabinda Province. A representative of the farmer apex 

cooperative association will also be in the PSC. The PSC will approve work plans and budget 

estimates for activities and monitor reports of project implementation. The organogram for 

Project implementation is presented in Annex II.  

 
 Procurement Arrangement  

 

4.1.4 Procurement of goods and works and the acquisition of consulting services, financed by 

the Bank for the project, will be carried out in accordance with the “Procurement Policy for 

Bank Group Funded Operations”, dated October 2015 and following the provisions stated in the 

Financing Agreement. Specifically, Procurement will be carried out following: 

 

 BPS – Borrower Procurement System: Specific Procurement Methods and Procedures 
(PMPs) under BPS comprising its Laws and Regulations as set forth in the Public Contracts 

Law No. 9/16 of 16 June 2016 and related implementing regulations, using the national 

Standard Solicitation Documents (SSDs) or other SDs agreed during project negotiations. 

Procurement of (i) construction of abattoirs for an estimated total amount of UA 343,360, 

(ii) construction of processing centers for an estimated amount of UA 455,500, (iii) vehicles 

for an estimated total amount of UA 350,080 and (iv) furniture for an estimated total amount 

of UA 197,910 (iii) will be procured using BPS. 

 



15 

 

Bank PMPs: Bank standard PMPs, using the relevant Bank Standard or Model Solicitation 

Documents, will be used for the procurement of works and goods and for the selection of 

consultants under the project. Works procured using Open Competitive Bidding (OCB) through 

International Competitive Bidding include : (i) construction of four clinics for an estimated total 

amount of UA780,000; (ii) construction of four schools for an estimated total amount of 

UA1,200,000; (iii) construction of one irrigation scheme for an estimated total amount of 

UA2,627,440, (iv) drainage works for an estimated total amount of UA1,833,000; (v) 

construction of a greenhouse for an estimated total amount of UA821,000; (vi) construction of 

pier (landing sites) for an estimated total amount of UA4,077,390; (vii) construction of 

warehouses for an estimated total amount of UA518,900; (viii) construction of residences for an 

estimated total amount of UA1,097,890; (ix) other infrastructures for an estimated total amount 

of UA873,750; (x) construction of Belize roads for an estimated total amount of UA10,126,900 

(with prequalification); (xi) construction of Buco Zau roads for an estimated total amount of 

UA5,183,140; (xii) construction of Cacongo roads for an estimated total amount of 

UA6,267,890; and (xiii) construction of Cabinda municipality roads for an estimated total 

amount of UA18,007,710 (with prequalification) . Goods procured using Open Competitive 

Bidding (OCB) through International Competitive Bidding include equipment related to the 

constructions for an estimated total amount of UA3,110,530. The selection of: (i) a Project 

Implementation Unity (PIU) in charge of the implementation of the project, for an estimated 

total amount of UA2,020,070; (ii) service for support to product marketing by NGOs, for an 

estimated total amount of UA291,970; (iii) two consulting firms for review of designs, for an 

estimated total amount of UA1,391,350; and (iv) three contracts for supervision of the works, 

for an estimated total amount of UA3,708,690 will be carried out using the Quality and Cost 

Based Selection (QCBS) method. The selection of audit services, for an estimated total amount 

of UA218,980, will be carried out using the Least Cost Selection (LCS) method. A policy 

advisor, for an estimated total amount of UA289,050, will be recruited using the Individual 

Consultant (IC) selection method. The personnel for the National Coordination Unit will be 

selected through selection of individual consultant method, for an estimated amount of 

UA466,860. The Bank Group has approved that a Memorandum of Understanding should be 

signed with World Vision International for the administration of the credit facility, and with a 

consideration of administration fee estimated at UA182,000. WVI has a well-established 

expertise in a wide range of technical sectors including agriculture, health and nutrition, water 

and sanitation, education, etc. in Angola since 1989 also has experience utilising credit funds 

from the Bank and other development partners.  

 

4.1.5 Advance procurement: Advance procurement mechanism will be used to select the 

project management team (project implementation unit – PIU), in order to be in place at project’s 

start. The establishment of the PIU will be a loan condition. 

 

4.1.6 Procurement Risks and Capacity Development: Country, Sector, Executing Agency 

(EA), and Project procurement risk assessments were undertaken for the project and the output 

have informed the decisions on the procurement regimes (BPS, Bank or Third party) and the 

PMPs being used for specific transactions or groups of similar transactions under the project. 

The appropriate mitigation measures and costs have been included in the procurement capacity 

development action plan (CDAP) under the project. The resources, capacity, expertise and 

experience of the Executing Agency, the Institute of Agrarian Development (IDA), are 

inadequate to carry out the procurement, as it has little experience in implementing Bank-funds 

operations and do not have procurement professionals conversant with Banks and national 

procedures. Most of the issues/risks associated with the procurement components for 

implementation of the project have been identified and include: (i) lack of capacity at the EA 

side, and (ii) weaknesses at sector level (agriculture sector, cooperatives), although some 

capacity exist for execution of smaller works and supply of vehicles and basic equipment and 



16 

 

furniture. The corrective measures which have been agreed are: (i) recruit a private project 

implementation unity (PIU), which will include procurement responsibilities; (ii) this project 

management team will prepare a project procedures manual and train appointed IDA 

staff/counterpart; and (iii) all the executing agency staff will receive adequate procurement 

orientation to enhance their procurement and project management capacity, as part of the project 

launching and during its implementation. It is expected that appointed IDA staff will take over 

the private service provider at mid-term project implementation. Detailed assessment and 

mitigations measures can be found in the Technical Annexes B.5. 

 

 Financial Management 
 

4.1.7 An assessment of the IDA (Institute of Agrarian Development) in the Ministry of 

Agriculture at the Cabinda Provincial level as Project Executing Agency (that included a review 

of the budgeting, accounting, treasury systems, internal controls, and reporting and external audit 

arrangements) was done to ascertain effective financial management of the project.  The current 

financial management of resources managed by IDA at provincial level is primarily for small 

value operating expenditures from periodic transfers made from the National office in Luanda. 

Basic manual records are maintained by an administration staff with no formal reporting and 

specific bank account maintained. At national level, the department of finance (within the 

Finance and Administrative Department at the Ministry of Agriculture) is responsible for the 

function of planning and budgeting including recording expenditures and maintaining assets 

through the use of the Government wide IFMIS (Sistema Integrado de Gestiiodas Finanqas do 

Estado) (SIGFE). The staff receive training in finance and accounting from the Ministry of 

Finance and can manage the accounting for the smaller and recurring nature of some operating 

expenses given their experience with other donor financed projects. However, given the 

complexity and size of the project to be implemented at provincial level, the existing FM capacity 

do not fully meet the Bank’s minimum requirements to ensure financial resources to be made 

available under the project would be used for the intended purposes. In this regard there is need 

for technical assistance in ensuring not only the effective financial management of the project 

but also in capacity building of the finance department at IDA. A Project Implementation Unit 

(PIU) will be competitively recruited as a consulting firm to implement the project, including 

financial management responsibilities and also training government staff with the Ministry of 

Agriculture, through IDA having the overall responsibility of overseeing its implementation.   

 

4.1.8 The project financial management activities will therefore be done by the PIU under the 

oversight of the NPCU that will include a competent accountant whose specific duties shall be 

to ensure a sustained existence of a satisfactory system of accounting, reporting and proper 

record keeping of all documentation to permit a timely production of complete and accurate 

financial reports. The finance staff in the firm will work together with the government 

counterpart finance staff that will be designated to the project at the province to enable transfer 

of skills and offering substantial operational benefits to Angola in terms of contribution to 

capacity development in order to enable them eventually take over project FM. Training in Bank 

requirements regarding financial management will be given as part of project launching and 

during its implementation. Given, the proposed arrangements, the overall FM risk for the project 

is assessed as Substantial with the risk mitigated through the putting in place of the PIU that will 

be responsible for project implementation. The detailed FM assessment including the financial 

management responsibilities of the PIU are attached in Annex B4. 

 

4.1.9 The NPCU will have overall responsibility for ensuring compliance with the Bank’s 

reporting requirements, regarding the submission of periodic progress reports with financial 

information for the Bank loan and Government contributions to the Bank within 45 days after 

the end of the respective quarter. The NPCU in liaison with the PIU will submit quarterly interim 



17 

 

unaudited financial reports covering their activities, as well as the related annual financial 

statements. The PIU will produce a project implementation manual, which will include 

comprehensive financial management procedures, describing the detailed financial procedures 

in processing, budgeting, recording, reporting and auditing of the financial transactions of the 

Project. Furthermore, external audits for the project will be done annually in accordance with a 

Bank approved audit Terms of Reference. The project external audits will be done by private 

auditors and the audit reports (including management letter) submitted to the Bank within six 

months after the end of the respective period covered by the audit with the costs of the audit 

borne by the Loan.  

 

Disbursements 

 

4.1.10 Disbursement of funds under the project shall be primarily by the Direct Payment method 

for the activities under the project. The PIU will be responsible for certification of invoices 

submitted by other service providers or contractors and preparation of disbursement application 

which will be reviewed at the NPCU and signed off by the Government designated staff and 

submitted to the Bank for payment. The Special Account method to be managed by the NPCU 

will however be used for financing the smaller and recurring nature of some operating expenses. 

The opening of a Special Account denominated in United States Dollars together with the 

associated local currency account in Angola Kwanzas at National level will be required before 

disbursement of loan proceeds. The Reimbursement method of disbursement will also be 

available.  All disbursements under the Loan will be made in accordance with the Bank’s rules 

and procedures as laid out in the Disbursement handbook as applicable. In addition, a 

Disbursement letter will be agreed upon as part of the Loan negotiations. 

 

4.2 Monitoring  

 

4.2.1 The foundation for the overall project monitoring and evaluation systems will be the 

logical framework, a series of key performance indicators and project operational manual (POM) 

which will be prepared by the PIU shortly after project loan approval. IDA will monitor overall 

operations for planning and facilitation purposes for the production aspects of the project, 

implementation of the drainage and roads infrastructure for attainment of national standards. The 

PIU will monitor and evaluate overall impact of the project and compile the project’s quarterly 

and annual reports for dissemination to the Bank Group, IDA, other line ministries, and the 

Cabinda Provincial Directorate of Agriculture. A mid-term review (MTR) will be undertaken 

two years after project start to review the project’s achievements and constraints. Similarly, upon 

completion of project investments at the end of project year four, the PIU will prepare a 

Borrower’s project completion report.  

 

4.2.2 The initial assessment of national capacity indicates a satisfactory rating. The Office of 

Planning and Statistics (GEPE) of the Ministry of Agriculture will be used to assess the 

contribution of the project towards the country and province’s development goals and objectives 

as defined in the relevant development plans. The baseline values were drawn from the NDP 

2013-2017, and the results framework of Bank’s new projects. In using the performance 

indicators and targets specified in the results-based framework, project implementers tracking 

progress towards project results are expected to take special note of changes that reflect 

advancement towards the translation of outputs into development outcomes. In developing 

monitoring and planning indicators, they will be disaggregated by sex and age. The key functions 

of the M&E Officer in the PIU will be to ensure quality and accountability of monitoring; 

information management; facilitation of knowledge building; and knowledge sharing on 

monitoring and evaluation. 

 



18 

 

4.2.3 The RBLF will form the basis for measuring outputs, outcomes and impact. Supported 

by the M&E Specialist, the PIU will prepare: (i) Annual Work Program and Budgets; (ii) 

Quarterly Progress Reports; (iii) Mid-year Progress Reports; (iv) Annual Progress Reports; (v) 

Status Reports for Supervision Missions; (vi) Mid-term Review Report; and (vii) Project 

Completion Report.  

 
4.3 Governance 

 

Based on Bank’s experience in implementing projects in Angola, the existing governance 

practices and controls have been deemed satisfactory. The implementation of CPAVCD Project 

requires good governance at all levels from the national to provincial to commune levels. This 

is in relation to better responsiveness, transparency, accountability and efficiency in the use of 

resources. Hence, the institutional arrangement has been designed to ensure good governance, 

and will serve as an instrument for achieving Project objectives.  

 

4.4 Sustainability  

 

The ownership of CPAVCD Project is made manifest by the roles that various stakeholders 

played during formulation and preparation of the Project. As the coordinator of the Study that 

gave rise to this project the Ministry of Agriculture put up a technical team of experts both in 

Luanda and Cabinda to review the various reports produced by the consultants. The intense 

interest of the Governor of Cabinda Province in this project was made manifest during the 

workshop during which she appointed her economic advisor as the focal point for the Province. 

The maintenance of the access roads and municipal infrastructure will be included in the annual 

recurrent budget of the Province as is done nationwide. The present Project will build capacities 

of the Provincial agricultural officers in agri-business management to ensure profitability for the 

value chain actors.  

 

4.5 Risk Management 

 

The current agricultural policy and sectoral strategies of Angola have been developed in a 

consultative manner with the full participation of all relevant stake holders. The Bank Group will 

engage in constant policy dialogue to ensure that the policy, institutional and funding 

(particularly public expenditure) environment remain conducive to agricultural growth and 

development. It is expected that the proposed project will contribute to reducing unemployment 

and poverty, particularly among the youth, and thereby directly mitigate some of the main 

underlying factors of social conflict. Furthermore, social risks will be reduced through gender-

sensitive approaches and ensuring that the poor are not excluded from project benefits. 

CPAVCDP is a category II intervention and will require an environmental, social and health 

impact assessment. The ESIA and ESMPs have been prepared as part of the Study and will be 

fine-tuned for specific project sites during implementation and to be examined as well by the 

Bank. The following is the main risk identified and with its mitigation measures.  

 

Risk Rating1 Mitigation Measures 

Macroeconomic risks: slow 

economic growth and deterioration 

of the country’s creditworthiness 

due to persistent oil crisis     

 

H 
The Bank will intensify the dialogue with the 

Government to adopt supportive macroeconomic 

policies to rationalize fiscal expenditure, introduce 

exchange rate flexibility, strengthen the banking system 

to prevent systemic crisis, and implement structural 

reforms for economic diversification. 
H= High 
 

 



19 

 

4.6 Knowledge Building 

 

Knowledge building will be vital to the success of the Project. Considering the new approach in 

agricultural commodity value chains development, the results of the Project will be monitored 

closely. Knowledge will be built on the evolving concept of decentralized implementation unit 

located in the Province; the role of value chain actors including farmers and farmers’ 

organization, women, youth, private sector, commercial and public sector. Knowledge will be 

captured using analysis of M&E database, supervision missions, mid-term reports, and periodic 

impact assessments and field exchange visits of the stakeholders within and outside the 

production clusters. In addition, knowledge would be disseminated by showcasing the Project 

results using Bank’s communication systems (Intranet, short documentaries on Bank website, 

etc.). The Farmer Field Schools will serve as sources of innovative knowledge and information 

sharing learning tools empowering farmers and other actors of the value chain to train their peers, 

share knowledge and experiences, thus reducing their overdependence on the public extension 

agents. This will also expand significantly the number of value chain actors having access to the 

disseminated knowledge and information. The technical assistance supports will introduce and 

consolidate knowledge and skills, and facilitate technology and skills transfer both at the 

community and national levels. 

 

V. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

 

5.1 Legal Instruments 

 

The legal instruments to finance this operation is an AfDB loan agreement for USD101.07 

million between the Republic of Angola and the Bank.  

 

5.2 Conditions for the Bank’s Intervention  

 

Entry into Force of the Loan Agreement 

 

The entry into force of the Loan Agreement shall be subject to the fulfillment by the Borrower of 

the provisions of Section 12.01 of the General Conditions of the Bank applicable to Loan 

Agreements and Guarantee Agreements.  

 

 Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement of the Loan 

 

The obligations of the Bank to make the first disbursement of the loan shall be conditional upon 

the entry into force of the Agreement and the fulfillment by the Borrower, in form and substance 

satisfactory to the Bank, of the following condition:  

 

(i) Provide evidence of the competitive recruitment of the members of the Project 

Implementation Unit (PIU), which will comprise the following key officers: (a) Project 

Manager; (b) Financial Manager; (c) Civil Engineer; (d) Agro-processing Specialist; (e) 

Financial Accountant; (f) Procurement Expert; (g) Monitoring and Evaluation Officer; 

and (e) Credit Management Specialist, whose experience and qualifications shall be 

acceptable to the Bank (refer to paragraphs 4.1.1 and 4.1.5).  

 

 

 

 

 



20 

 

 

 Other Conditions  

 

The Borrower shall, in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank, fulfil the following 

conditions: 

 

(i) Not later than three months from the date of loan effectiveness, appoint 
Government counterpart staff to the PIU, with qualification and experience 

acceptable to the Bank; 

 

(ii) Not later than six months from the date of loan effectiveness, submit a project 
operational manual (POM) acceptable to the Bank; 

 

(iii) Prior to the use of Special Account disbursement method, submit to the Bank a 
disbursement application with a Special Account in the name of the Project, 

denominated in USD together with the associated local currency account in 

Angola Kwanzas, in a bank acceptable to the Bank, for deposit of the proceeds of 

the Loan. 

 

Undertakings 

 

The Borrower shall, in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank: 

 

(iv) Carry out, and cause its contractors to carry out, the Project in accordance with: 
(a) Bank’s rules and procedures; (b) national legislation; and (c) the 

recommendations, requirements and procedures set forth in the Environmental 

and Social Management Plan (ESMP) prepared for the Project; and 

 

(v) Deliver to the Bank Project quarterly reports in form and substance acceptable to 
the Bank, describing the Borrower’s implementation of the ESMP (including any 

implementation failures and related remedies, if any). 

  

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

 

 This Project complies with all applicable Bank policies. 
 

 Non-standard conditions (if applicable): N/A 
 

VI. RECOMMENDATIONS 

 

Management recommends that the Board of Directors approve an AfDB loan of USD101.07 

million to the Republic of Angola for the purposes of the activities in the proposed project and 

subject to the conditions stipulated in the present report.  

 

 



























































 

 

 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 

 
 

 
 

 

SUDAN  

 

 AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAIN DEVELOPMENT PROJECT  

(AVCDP)  

 

 

 

 

 

 

RDGE/AHAI/PGCL DEPARTMENTS 

 

May 2018 

 

 

 

  

Grant Information  

Client’s information 

 
GRANT RECIPIENT: REPUBLIC OF SUDAN  

 

EXECUTING AGENCY: MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND FORESTS 

 

 

 

Financing plan 

Source Amount 

(Million UA) 

% Instrument 

 

TSF (Pillar 1) 

 

24.95 

 

76.2 

 

Grant 

 

ADF (PBA)  

 

4.00 

 

12.2 

 

Grant 

 

FAPA 

 

0.69 

 

2.1 

 

Grant 

 

Government   

 

3.10 

 

9.5 

 

NA 

 

TOTAL COST 

 

32.74 

 

100 

 

 
Important Financial Information  

 

Grant Currency                                                               
UA 

Commitment Charge/Fee NA 

Service Charge NA 

Tenor NA 

Grace Period NA 

FIRR, NPV (base case) 28%, NPV (15%): US$ 20.3 million 

EIRR, NPV (base case) 26%, NPV (15%): US$ 19.4 million 

 

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected) 

Concept Note Approval  February, 2018 

Project Approval May, 2018 

Effectiveness July, 2018 

Completion June, 2023 

Closing Date December, 2023 

 

  



 

iii 

 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

1. Project Overview: The overall goal of the Agricultural Value Chain Development Project (AVCDP) 

is to contribute to the attainment of Sudan’s National Agriculture Investment Plan (SNAIP) goals in 

achieving a comprehensive national socio-economic development driven by a dynamic agricultural 

sector. The specific objective of the project is to improve household incomes, food security, and climate 

resilience through infrastructure development, market access and trade facilitation as well as enhancing 

production and productivity. The project will be implemented in three states, namely, North Kordofan, 

West Kordofan, and Khartoum and will focus on four commodity value chains: Groundnuts, Sesame, 

Potato, and Gum Arabic. The project cost is estimated at UA 32.74 million, of which AfDB is financing 

UA 29.64 million or 90.5% and the Government of Sudan will contribute UA 3.10 million or 9.5%. 

The project is expected to start in July/August 2018 with a duration of five years. 

 

2. The proposed project will directly benefit farmers in at least 236,457 households (50% females) in 

13 localities in the Kordofan Region of the country. Additionally potato farmers of over 50,000 hectares 

of land currently under potato cultivation in Khartoum State and surroundings will directly benefit from 

the project. The target beneficiaries also include the 200 Gum Arabic Producers Associations (GAPAs) 

in West and North Kordofan States with emphasis on women and youth. The indirect beneficiaries of 

the project include over two million residents in the target localities in the country. With the expected 

increased production and productivity associated with the project and the value chain approach, more 

areas and population outside the target states will benefit from the project. Additionally, processors, 

marketers, agro-dealers in and around the target states will benefit from this project 

 

3. Needs Assessment: The AVCDP was identified as part of SNAIP and is addressing three out its 

seven Investment Program Areas (IPAs), namely: Increasing Agricultural Production and Productivity 

through Development and Modernization of Agricultural Systems and Improved Agricultural Inputs; 

Development of Agricultural Value Chains and Markets Access; and Development of Agricultural 

Support Services and Establishment of Information Network. In achieving the objectives of SNAIP, 

the Government commissioned a comprehensive study on the establishment of a modern Commodity 

Exchange in the country and requested the Bank to assist the development of key market-access 

infrastructures, which are the focus of this project. Therefore, the project is a direct response to GoS’ 

desire to revive the agriculture sector as the key driver for economic growth by promoting the value-

chain development approach.   

 

4. Bank’s Added Value: The Bank’s intervention through AVCDP is merited by the project’s 

consistency with the principles of key Bank Group policies and strategies. These include the Bank’s 

Ten Year Strategy (2013-22) particularly in its operational focus areas (private sector development) 

and areas of special emphasis (agriculture and food security); the Bank’s High 5s, the Bank’s Feed 

Africa Strategy (2016-2025) and its flagship programs such as TAAT and ENABLE Youth; the Bank’s 

Gender Strategy (2014-18) for the promotion of gender equality; and the Bank’s Strategy for 

“Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience in Africa (2014-2019). 

 

5. Knowledge Management: Given its innovative nature of supporting the establishment of a modern 

electronic commodity exchange and piloting the Farm Consolidation concept, the Sudan AVCDP will 

generate considerable knowledge that will add value to the overall design and management of 

agricultural value-chain development operations across the continent. The Bank will share this 

knowledge with other development partners and stakeholders engaged in similar operations 



 

iv 

 

                                                 
1 Prices in SDG are based on the March 2018 exchange rate. On project completion, comparisons will be done at the prevailing exchange rate.  

RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK(RBLF) 

Country and Project Name:    Sudan:  Agricultural Value Chain Development Project (AVCDP) 

Purpose of the Project:   Improve household incomes, food security, and climate resilience through infrastructure development, market access and 

trade facilitation. 

 

 

RESULTS CHAIN 

PERFORMANCE INDICATORS1 

MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS /MITIGATION 

MEASURES 

Indicator  (Including CSI) Baseline Target  

IM
P

A
C

T
  

Improved livelihoods and food 

security. 

 

1. Economic growth (GDP, %) driven by 

agriculture 

2. Poverty level in project area (%) 

2017 

1. (3.5) 

 

2. (58)  

 

By 2031 

1. (7.0) 

 

2. decreased at 

least by 50 

Household survey. 

Annual reports 

Bureau of 

Statistics. 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

 

1. Increased access to modern 
agricultural inputs  

 

2. Reduced high cost of 
imported potato seed  

 

3. Increased market access, 
value addition and 

commercialization  

 

1.1 Average crop yield (kg/feddan) in project area 
 

 

2.1 Avg. price (SDG/kg) of certified potato seeds 
2.2 Foreign currency resources (USD/year) saved  
3.1 % of target farmers with access to  real-time 

market information 

3.2 Increased  earning (SDG) per  feddan 

2017 

1.1 groundnut: 

210; sesame: 57.5  
 

1.2 (30) 

2.2   - 

 

2.1 (0) 

 

2.2  - 

By 2022 

1.1 groundnut: 

450; sesame: 200 

 

1.2 (12 to 16) 

2.2 4.34 million 

 

2.1 at least 80  

 

2.2 increased by 

100% 

 

Project reports 

 

M&E reports  

Risk 1: Macroeconomic 

instability negatively affecting 

productivity and project impact 

 

Mitigation 1: (i) Improved 

diversification of GDP resulting 

from the project intervention 

economic diversification through 

revival of agriculture sector 

remains government priority; (ii)  
Sustained implementation of 

sound macroeconomic policies 

 

 

COMPONENT 1:  ENHANCING PRODUCTION AND PRODUCTIVITY  
 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

 

 

Output 1.1. Improved access 
to clean and certified potato 

seeds.  

 

 

 

Output 1.2.  Enhanced access 
to modern farm inputs through 

farm consolidation. 

 

1.1.1Seed multiplication centre equipped with 

certification lab and cold storage facilities of 

10,000 tons capacity established 

1.1.2 Volume (tons) of certified potato seed 

produced locally and available to farmers. 

 

1.2.1Area (feddans) of farms in the project area 

under fully mechanized agriculture as a pilot 

1.2.2 # cooperatives established (30% women only) 

under the farm consolidation scheme 

1.2.3Risk Guarantee Fund (RGF) with its manual, 
policies and procedures established  

2016 

1.1 .1.  – 
 

 

1.2 (5,000) 
 

 

1.2.1. – (0) 

 

1.2.2  

 

 1.2.3  - 

By 2022 

1.1 .1  by 2019 
 

 

1.2  (15,000) 
 

 

1.2.1 20,000  

 

1.2.2 (7) 

 

1.2.3 by June 2019 

 

 

Project Progress 

Reports 

Midterm reports 

 

Risk 2: Farmers may not fully 

understand farm consolidation 

concept and could resist it  

 

Mitigation 2:   

(i) Sensitization, awareness 

raising and training of farmers on 

the farm consolidation concept  

(ii) Support is provided in 

mobilizing and grouping farmers 

into cooperatives  

 

COMPONENT 2. INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT FOR MARKET ACCESS AND TRADE FACILITATION  
 



 

v 

 

 

Output 2.1. Key rural market 

access roads upgraded to all 

weather standard 

 

Output 2.2 Rural and regional 

markets with  postharvest handling 
facilities and services developed 

 

Output 2.3 Modern Commodity 

Exchange facility established  

 

 

2.1.1 Length (km) of rural access roads upgraded  

 

2.2.1 No. of rural markets constructed/upgraded 

and equipped 

2.2.2 No. of  regional market centers  constructed/ 
upgraded and equipped  

2.2.3 Warehouse receipting system established 

 

2.3.1 Electronic commodity market in El-Obied 

constructed and equipped. 

2.3.2 Market information systems to support 

market operations established 

 

 

2.1.1 (0) 

 

 

2.2.1 (0) 

 

2.2.2 (0) 

2.2.3 - 

 

2.2.4 -  

 

2.2.6 - 

 

2.1.1 (266) 

 

 

2.2.1 (10) 

 

2.2.2 (3) 

2.2.3 by 2020 

 

2.2.5 by 2020 

 

2.2.3 by 2019 

 

 

Project Progress 

Reports 

Midterm reports 

M&E Reports  

 

Risk 3: Climate change impacts 

could hinder project benefits  

 

Mitigation 3:   

Project infrastructures upgraded 

to climate resilient standard 

 

COMPONENT 3.  STRENGTHENING GUM ARABIC VALUE CHAIN 
 

Output 3.1   The Gum Arabic 
value chain is strengthened through 

capacity building, and improved 

access to finance of  Gum Arabic 
Producers Associations (GAPAs) 

3.1  No. of GAPAs trained in value addition and 

commercialization of gums (at least 30 % women 

only owned) 

3.2 % increase of target Gum Arabic farmers with 

improved access to credit  

3.3 No. of farmers supported with improved gum 

harvesting tools 

3.1 - 

 

- 

 

- 

 

 

 

3.1 (200) 

 

3.2 (40)  

 

3.3 (200) 

Annual Reports 

Midterm reports 

M&E Reports 

Technical reports 

(procurement, 

Audits, etc.) 

  

 

 

COMPONENT 4. PROJECT  COORDINATION  AND MANAGEMENT  

 

 

Output 4. Work plan, activities 

monitored and regularly evaluated 

as due 

4.1 Gender action plan developed 

4.2 M&E system established 
4.3 ESMP operational  

4.4 Project  implemented and delivered on time & 
within budget 

 

 

 

4.1 (0) 

- 

- 

 

- 

4.1 (1) 

4.2 by 2019  

4.3 by year 1 

4.4 completion by 

Dec. 2023 

 

 

Annual Reports 

Midterm reports 

M&E Reports 

Technical reports 

(procurement, 

Audits, etc.) 

Risk 4 :  Weak implementation 
capacity that affects progress of 

the project 

Mitigation 4:  (i) Competitive 
selection of PIU team with 

adequate experience; (ii) 

Continuous training of PIU 

personnel by the Bank (project 

management clinics) 

 COMPONENTS  
 

Inputs 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

  Component 1:   Enhancing Production and Productivity: 1.1   Potato seeds development; 1.2 Farm consolidation for 
improved production and productivity  

 

Component 2:   Infrastructure Development for Market Access and Trade Facilitation: 2.1 Construction/rehabilitation of 
rural market access roads; 2.2 Upgrading and equipping main and rural markets with warehousing receiving system and services 

 

Component 3:   Strengthening Gum Arabic Value Chain.  
 

Component 4:  Project Management and Coordination. 

Project Cost in million UA:  UA 32.74 million 
Sources : TSF Grant: 24.95 million; ADF (PBA) 

Grant : UA 4.00 million 

 

FAPA Grant :  UA 0.69 million 
GoS:  UA 3.10 million 



 

vi 

 

PROJECT TIME FRAME/IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE2 
 

 

                                                 
2 This is a general project implementation schedule. Detailed annual work schedule will be developed before the beginning of each Project Year. 

 

Year 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 

Quarter 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 

INITIAL ACTIVITIES  

Grant negotiations and  approval                      

Signature of Grants Agreements                       

Publication of  the GPN                      

Finalization of PIU recruitment (advance contracting)                      

Fulfilment of first disbursement condition                      

Project launching                      

ENHANCING PRODUCTION AND PRODUCTIVITY 

Establishement of seed multiplication centre equipped with certification 
lab and cold storage facilities 

               
    

  

Sensitization, awareness raising and training of farmers on the farm 

consolidation concept 
               

    
  

Mobilizing and grouping farmers in the target area into cooperatives for 
better access to modern agricultural inputs and financing                

    
  

Establishement of the Risk Guarantee Fund (RGF) with its manual, 

policies and procedures 
               

    
  

INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT FOR MARKET ACCESS AND TRADE FACILITATION 
Upgrading/rehabilitation of rural market access roads                      

Construction/upgrading rural and regional markets                      

Establishement of warehouse receipting system                       

Construction and equipping of an Electronic commodity market in El-

Obied, North Kordofan 
               

    
  

Establishement of market information systems to support market 
operations 

               
    

  

STRENGTHENING GUM ARABIC VALUE CHAIN 

Training of target GAPAs in value addition and commercialization of 

Gums 
               

    
  

Supporting target GAPAs with improved gum harvesting tools                      

Supporting target GAPAs with improved access to credit                      

PROJECT MANGEMENT AND COORDINATION 

Development of an M&E system                      

Quarterly Progress Reports                       

Annual workplans and budgets                       

Annual financial audits                       

Mid-term review                      

Completion Report                      



 

1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE MANAGEMENT TO THE BOARDS OF 

DIRECTORS ON PROPOSED GRANTS FOR THE AGRCULTURAL VALUE CHAIN 

DEVELOPMENT PROJECT  
 

Management submits the following Report and Recommendation on a proposed Transition Support 

Facility (TSF-Pillar 1) grant of UA 24.95 million and an ADF (PBA) grant of UA 4.00 million to finance 

the Agricultural Value Chain Development Project in Sudan. 

I – STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 
 

1.1.  Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives  

 

1.1.1 The AVCDP is well in line with Government of Sudan (GoS)’s long term development goals 

which are expressed in its Twenty Five Year National Strategy (2007-2031). Among the objectives and 

goals of the strategy related to agriculture sector, include developing natural resources and optimizing 

their use, realizing balanced agricultural and rural growth, food security, increased job opportunities, 

and revival of agriculture sector through infrastructure development and financing. The Project is also 

in line with the country’s second Five-Year Strategic Plan (2012-16), which aims to diversify the 

economy away from oil to agriculture and other sectors. 

 

1.1.2 The project is also consistent with the Economic Reform Program (ERP) 2015-2019. The ERP is 

the country’s most recent national planning framework and seeks to achieve robust, sustainable and 

inclusive economic growth supportive of employment creation through expansion of the production 

base of the economy, the optimum utilization of resources and its direction towards priorities and 

strengthening the role of the private sector. Its pillars include: (i) Macroeconomic Stability, (ii) Public 

Finance Management, (iii) Value Chain Development in the Productive Sectors, and (iv) Human Capital 

Development. The proposed AVCDP directly contributes to Pillar III of the ERP. The project is also 

aligned with Sudan’s National Agriculture Investment Plan (SNAIP, 2016-2020), which maps the 

investments needed to achieve the Sudan Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program 

(CAADP) target of six percent annual growth in Agriculture GDP.  
 

1.2.  Rationale for Bank’s Involvement 
 

1.2.1 Sudan has long been regarded as having the potential to be one of the major surplus food producers 

in the world. About 63 percent of its land area of 1.886 million km² is classified as agricultural land. 

Before 1960s, the agriculture sector provided the bulk of the export products of the country and 

accounted for the bulk of the foreign exchange earnings. However, the sector’s contribution to the GDP 

had been in decline until the secession of South Sudan in 2011. In the 2000s, the agricultural sector was 

essentially catering only to the domestic market. Following the secession of South Sudan and loss of oil 

revenue, the government has undertaken a number of important initiatives to diversify the economy 

away from oil and revive the agriculture sector. In 2013, Sudan became the 12th member state in the 

Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) region to sign the CAADP Compact. In 

doing so, the government had adopted agriculture as the key driver for economic growth within the 

framework of the CAADP, and subsequently developed the Sudan National Agricultural Investment 

Plan. The plan is a five-year investment blueprint that maps investments and activities needed to achieve 

6% annual growth for the agricultural sector by 2020. The plan is to also help Sudan achieve the 10% 

percent of total expenditure on agriculture in compliance with the Maputo Declaration.  
 

1.2.2 The Agricultural Value Chain Development Project was identified as part of SNAIP and is 

addressing three out its seven Investment Program Areas, namely: Increasing Agricultural Production 

and Productivity through Development and Modernization of Agricultural Systems and Improved 

Agricultural Inputs; Development of Agricultural Value Chains and Markets Access; and Development 

of Agricultural Support Services and Establishment of Information Network. Given the importance of 

AVCDP in achieving the objectives of SNAIP, the Government and Bank agreed to formulate the 

operation as a program and designate the current intervention as the first Project, which will focus on 



 

2 

 

edible oil seeds (Groundnuts, and Sesame), Potato and Gum Arabic value chains. The proposed project 

is also included in the pipeline program of the Bank’s current Country Brief (2017-2019) for Sudan and 

directly contributes to its second Pillar: Agricultural Value Chains for Inclusive Growth. 
 

1.2.3 The Bank’s intervention through ACDVP is also merited by the project’s consistency with the 

principles of key regional and national initiatives as well as Bank Group policies and strategies. These 

include the CAADP Compact; Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (2013-22) particularly in its operational focus 

areas (private sector development) and areas of special emphasis (agriculture and food security); the 

Bank’s High 5s, the Bank’s Feed Africa Strategy (2016-2025) and its flagship programs such as TAAT 

and ENABLE Youth; Jobs for Youth in Africa (2016-2025); the Bank’s Gender Strategy (2014-18) for 

the promotion of gender equality; Bank’s Strategy for “Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience in 

Africa (2014-2019); and with the Bank’s Private Sector-led-Economic Diversification and Development 

in Sudan flagship publication, which identified Agriculture as one of the sectors for economic 

diversification. 
 

1.3. Donor Coordination 
 

1.3.1 Generally, donor assistance to Sudan is coordinated by three ministries, namely, (i) Ministry of 

International Cooperation - Grants from bilateral and multilateral partners, (ii) Ministry of Finance 

and Economic Planning - multilateral financial institutions (AfDB, World Bank and IMF and others), 

and (iii) Ministry of Humanitarian Aid Commission that deals with the humanitarian assistance. The 

USAID and EU are the largest donors in Sudan, which are mainly funding on-going and post-conflict 

humanitarian interventions in the form of food aid and disaster assistance in Darfur, Blue Nile and 

South Kordofan. Concerning development aid, the AfDB’s growing technical assistance and targeted 

operations have enabled it to emerge as a preferred partner and first port of call for Sudan. Other 

leading development partners in Sudan are the EU, WB, IFAD, DFID and IsDB, which are also 

playing active roles in the country’s development. The bilateral support from China and Gulf 

countries (Qatar and Saudi Arabia) and Arab Funds also constitute a significant support, which is 

mainly in the form of grants and FDIs. Arab states have also pledged USD 10 billion towards food 

security in the region with a focus on Sudan, while Qatar has a USD 188 million development 

program in Darfur.  
 

1.3.2 Besides its role to finance important development interventions, the Bank also hosts key policy 

dialogue meetings such as the PRSP Working Group (WG), which is co-chaired by State Minister of 

Finance and AfDB through the guidance and support of COSD. The Bank continues to provide 

leadership in the PRSP process, which has rallied donors’ support for poverty, and poverty related 

issues. The PRSP WG eventually culminated in the establishment of the Development Partners Group 

(DPG). One of its main objectives is to contribute to strengthening coherence among Development 

Partners (DPs) in Sudan by consulting and sharing information on program and project interventions.  

 

 Table: 1.1  Donor Support to Agriculture  
              

   

   
Sector  

Size (%)  
 GDP  Exports  Labour Force  

    Agriculture   31.7  14.9  35.2  

   Players - Public Annual Expenditure (average) : 2017 Budget  

    Government  Donors  AfDB  9.4  FAO  0.25  

UA m  
 % 

  

 630  87.5  WB  0.3  Qatar Govt         5.6  
 88  12 Arab Funds  21.9         UNDP                      12.85  
     IsDB  18.6  IFAD  9.0  
                                                                                   EU                    0.3          Other bilateral            9.3              

      Level of Donor Coordination  

Existence of Thematic Working Groups (this sector/sub-sector)  
Existence of SWAps or Integrated Sector Approaches  

AfDB's Involvement in Donors Coordination  

[N]    
[N]  

[M]    
Key:    L: Leader.    M: member but not leader.     None: no involvement.      Y: Yes.      N: No   



 

3 

 

1.3.3 Development partners’ interventions are coordinated based on their comparative advantages. 

While the Arab Funds and IsDB focus on large infrastructure investments (especially dams), IFAD 

focuses on small scale agricultural operations with focus on traditional rain-fed agriculture and rural 

development, whereas AfDB focuses on value chain development and productivity increase. During 

the preparation and appraisal missions, consultations were made with all relevant DPs including FAO, 

IFAD, JICA, IsDB, WB, USAID, UNDP and EU to explore potential for co-financing and to ensure 

that the Agriculture Value Chain Development in Sudan is implemented in a harmonized and aligned 

manner with other DPs.   

II – PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

2.1.  Project Objectives and Components  

2.1.1 The overall goal of the AVCDP project is to contribute to the attainment of SNAIP goals in 

achieving a comprehensive national socio-economic development driven by a dynamic agricultural 

sector. The specific objective of the AVCDP is to improve household incomes, food security, and 

climate resilience through infrastructure development, market access and trade facilitation as well as 

enhancing production and productivity.  

 

2.1.2 The design of the project components and main activities are mainly informed by the outcome of 

a needs assessment study on the establishment of a modern Commodity Exchange or Borsa (as known 

in Sudan) in North Kodofan. The study was conducted to assess the current agricultural marketing eco-

system in the state and identify key challenges and gaps for establishing a modern commodity exchange. 

Infrastructure development for rural access roads, postharvest handling and storage, and processing 

facilities are some of the key gaps identified by the study. These infrastructures are the focus of this 

project. The project components are described in Table 2.1 below, with details provided in Annex C1 

(Technical Annexes).  
 

Table 2.1: Description of Project Components 

 
No Component Name Cost (UA 

million) and 

% allocation 

Component Description 

 

1 Enhancing Production 

and Productivity 

7.8 

(23.8) 

Sub-component 1: Potato seeds development – This sub-

component will focus on the establishment a potato seed-

multiplication center in Khartoum State, the main area of potato 

production in Sudan. The center is expected to produce locally 

the 10,000 tons of certified potato seed currently imported to 

Sudan. This will be done through the implementation of the 

following activities: 

 Land development for potato seed production  

 Establishment of small irrigation system for plots 

 Establishment of cold storage facilities.  

 Procurement of farm machinery and lab equipment  

 Certification labs and seed packaging facilities  

 Administration facilities and equipment 

 Procurement of foundation seeds 

 Feeder Road (7km) 
 

Sub - Component 2: Farm consolidation for improved 

production and productivity – This sub-component deals with 

piloting the process of joining small plots of land together 

through a participatory approach to form larger areas that are 

more viable production units with better access to 

mechanization, improved agricultural inputs, and financing. 



 

4 

 

No Component Name Cost (UA 

million) and 

% allocation 

Component Description 

 

20,000 feddans (8,400 ha) in seven locations ranging from 2000 

(840 ha) to 4000 feddans (1,680 ha) in North and West 

Kordofan States are already identified for this pilot activity.  

As Sudan is a country with a long tradition in the use of 

agricultural cooperatives, the project will build upon past and 

on-going similar initiatives and lessons learnt. This sub-

component will have following key areas of focus: 

 

 Sensitization, awareness raising and training of farmers 
on the farm consolidation concept. 

 Mobilizing and grouping farmers in the target area into 
cooperatives for better access to modern agricultural 

inputs and financing. 

 Establishment of a Risk Guarantee Fund (RGF), its 
guidelines, organizational structure, and 

implementation. 

 Farm Consolidation financing agreement to be signed 
among participating Financial Institutions (FI), private 

sector (agricultural inputs service providers), and 

farmer cooperatives. 

2 Infrastructure 

Development for Market 

Access and Trade 

Facilitation 

21.2  

(64.8)   

This component addresses the development of key market-

access infrastructures for the proposed Commodity Exchange. 
These include the need to establish a modern Borsa building in 

El Obeid, North Kodofan with a network of access roads and 

warehousing receipt facilities across North and West Kordofan 

States. Activities under this component will be implemented 

under two main categories: (i) Civil Works for 

upgrading/construction of main Borsa building, rural markets, 

feeder roads and one bridge (ii) Consultancy services for design 

review, pre-construction services, construction supervision, and 

technical audits to ensure works carried out meet the 

requirements of the design specifications. The Component has 

two sub-components: 

 

Sub-component 1: construction/rehabilitation of rural market 

access roads and bridge: This sub-component addresses 

upgrading priority rural access roads to all weather gravel 

standards for a total of 266 km and construction of one bridge.  

 

Sub-component 2: upgrading and equipping main and rural 

markets with warehousing receiving system and services:  

Under this sub-component, the construction/rehabilitation of 

the following key infrastructure will be undertaken:  

 El Obeid Main Borsa Building and warehousing 
facilities;  

 12 regional/rural warehousing facilities in 12 localities 

in North and West Kordofan States. Details of these 
facilities and their capacities are described in Annex 

C1 of the Technical Annexes. These warehouses will 

be used for storing not only the sesame and 

groundnuts, but also Gum Arabic, Hibiscus, and 

Sorghum. 



 

5 

 

No Component Name Cost (UA 

million) and 

% allocation 

Component Description 

 

3 Strengthening Gum 

Arabic Value Chain 

0.7 

(2.1) 

This component of the project will be mainly financed with 

USD 1.00 million grant from FAPA. The direct beneficiaries 

of the activities under this component are the Gum Arabic 

Producers Associations (GAPAs) in West and North 

Kordofan States with emphasis on women and youth. The 

component will focus on building the capacities of GAPAs 

through training in value addition and commercialization of 

gums, provision of improved gum harvesting tools, and 

support with improved access to credit. 

4 Project coordination and 

management  

3.0 

(9.2) 
 Recruitment of PIU staff and launching 

 Development of a M&E system  

 Conduct project monitoring and reporting; annual and mid-
term reviews, coordination and supervision of project 

activities;  

 Project procurement, disbursement, financial management, 
and audit. 

Total 32.7  

 

2.2. Technical Solutions Retained and Other Alternatives Explored  
 

2.2.1 The technical solutions retained are based on criteria that will ensure project success and sustainability. 

Three technical alternatives were considered and rejected for their weaknesses in generating the expected 

impact on a sustainable basis (Table 2.2). 

 

Table 2.2: Alternatives Considered and Reasons for Rejection 

 

No Alternative Name Brief Description Reasons for Rejection 

1.  Project to directly 
finance farmer 

cooperatives under 

the Farm 

Consolidation 

scheme  

 

Beneficiaries are supported 

with grants to defray the cost 

of accessing full 

mechanization and improved 

agricultural inputs for better 

production and productivity.  

The option has often not worked 

effectively as it creates a culture of 

dependency and entitlement, which does 

not foster sustainable agricultural growth. 

Therefore, project resources are used only 

as a guarantee fund to leverage financing 

from agricultural lending banks 

2.  Bituminous surface 
treatment for feeder 

roads 

Flexible road with 

bituminous surfacing using 

chip seals. 

The surface treatment was not selected 

because of less traffic and high cost which 

make the investment not economically  

viable 

3.  To ensure equitable 
distribution, consider 

project to cover more 

disadvantaged states 

in the country 

In this scenario, project sites 

would be identified in more 

regions of the country where 

target crops have production 

advantage 

The coordination and supervision of the 

intervention would be cumbersome, and 

the spread of resources to too many 

intervention sites would result in less 

impactful project outcomes. 



 

6 

 

2.3.  Project Type  

 

2.3.1 The Agriculture Value Chains Development Project (AVCDP) is an investment project financed 

by ADF XIV (TSF/PBA) Grants and project activities are in line with TSF Guidelines3 

 

2.4 Project Cost and Financing Arrangements  

2.4.1 Total project costs to be incurred during the five-year implementation period, including price 

and physical contingencies, but excluding duties and taxes, are estimated at UA 32.74 million (US$ 47.5 

million). The project will be financed by the Government of the Republic of Sudan, African 

Development Fund (ADF) and FAPA. The ADF and FAPA will provide UA 28.95 million (US$ 42 

million) and UA 0.69 million (US$ 1.0 million) respectively on grant terms. The Government will 

finance selected project activities, including design of infrastructure; and parts of training, consultancies, 

and recurrent costs to the tune of UA 3.1 million (USD 4.5) million. In conformity with the principle 

that no taxes or duties would be financed out of the proceeds of the ADF and FAPA financing, any 

future changes in the rates and/or structures of taxes and duties would apply to the project. A summary 

of project cost estimates by components, expenditure categories, and schedule are presented in Tables 

2.3, 2.4 and 2.5 below, while details are provided in the Technical Annexes B2 Volume II of the 

appraisal report. 

Table 2.3: Summary Project Cost by Components 

Sn. Components  

In USD (millions) In UA (millions) 

FC LC Total FC LC Total 

1 Enhancing Production and Productivity 6,626 3,396 10,021 4,569 2,342 6,911 

2 Infrastructure Development for Markets and Enhanced Access 17,131 9,307 26,438 11,815 6,418 18,233 

3 Strengthening Gum-arabic Value Chain 799 198 998 551 137 688 

4 Project Coordination and Management 730 3,000 3,731 503 2,069 2,573 

  Total Baseline Cost 25,286 15,901 41,188 17,439 10,966 28,405 

  Physical Contingencies 1,295 669 1,963 893 461 1,354 

  Price Contingencies 1,691 2,658 4,349 1,166 1,833 2,999 

  Total Project Cost 28,272 19,228 47,500 19,498 13,261 32,759 

 

Table 2.4a: Project Cost by Expenditure Categories (UA '000') 

No Categories 

In USD (‘000) In UA (‘000) 

LC FC Total LC FC Total  

1 Civil Works 10,109 16,033 26,141 6,972 11,057 18,029 

2 Goods 243 4,571 4,814 168 3,153 3,320 

3 Services 250 999 1,249 172 689 861 

4 Miscellaneous  1,907 2,551 4,458 1,315 1,759 3,074 

5 Recurrent Costs 3,393 1,132 4,526 2,340 781 3,121 

  Total Base Cost 15,901 25,286 41,188 10,966 17,439 28,405 

  Physical Contingencies 669 1,295 1,963 461 893 1,354 

  Price Contingencies 2,658 1,691 4,349 1,833 1,166 2,999 

  Total Project Cost 19,228 28,272 47,500 13,261 19,498 32,759 

       

                                                 
3ADB/BD/WP/2014/46/Rev.3/Approval - ADF/BD/WP/2014/30/Rev.3/Approval entitled “Operational Guidelines for the 

Implementation of the Strategy for Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience in Africa and for the Transition Support Facility. 



 

7 

 

Table 2.4b: Project Categories of expenditure by source of financing 

 Expenditure Category 
UA (‘000) 

TSF ADF FAPA GoS Total Foreign Local 

Civil Works 15,191 3200 - 1,714 20,106 12,503 7,603 

Goods 3,672 800 - 76 4,548 3,536 1,012 

Services 377 - - 96 473 206  267 

Miscellaneous, incl. RSF 3,074 - 690 182 3,946 3,248 698 

Recurrent 2,636 - - 1,035 3,671 781 2,890 

Total 24,950 4,000.00 690 3,103 32,742.83 19,483 13,260 

 

Table 2.5: Summary Project Cost Schedule by Components (UA '000') 

Components Year1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

Component 1: Production and Productivity Enhancement: 2,695 3,274 590 210 142 6,911 

Component 2: Infrastructure Development 1,472 9,093 7,017 349 302 18,233 

Component 3:  Strengthening Gum-arabic Value Chain 210 113 133 133 99 688 

Component 4: Project management and capacity building 681 482 485 461 463 2,573 

Total Base Cost 5,059 12,962 8,225 1,154 1,005 28,405 

Physical Contingency 200 714 438 2 - 1,354 

Price Contingency 193.00 1,172.26 1,103.50 247.69 283.04 2,999 

Total Project Cost 5,452 14,848 9,767 1,404 1,288 32,759 

 

2.4.2 Project Financing Arrangement: ADF grant will finance the production and productivity 

enhancement component, agricultural infrastructure development component, production and 

productivity component and of market development and trade facilitation, and part of project 

management activities. The Government will mainly finance capacity building activities, design of 

works and allowances for the support staff. The Government of Republic of Sudan will also finance 

some recurrent costs of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in terms of staff salaries, office spaces 

and operating costs.  The breakdown of financing for the project is presented in the Table 2.6.   

 

Table 2.6: Financing plan of the project (UA ‘000) 

Source 

USD ‘000 UA ‘000 

Percentage 

FC LC Total FC LC Total 

ADF Grant 25,983 16,017 42,000 17,919 11,046 28,966 88.4% 

FAPA Grant 789 211 1,000 544 146 690 2.1% 

Government of Sudan 1,500 3,000 4,500 
1,034 2,069 

3,103 9.5% 

Total Project Cost 28,271.9 19,228.1 47,500 18,463 12,841 32,759 100% 

 

2.4.3 Counterpart Funds: The Government of the Republic of Sudan counterpart contribution to the 

project will be 9.5% of the total project cost (equivalent to UA 3.145 million); in addition to VAT 

contribution on all works, goods and services. 

 

Risk Guarantee Fund (RGF): The project will dedicate up to $ 2.0 million to act as a risk guarantee 

fund, which will provide backstopping support to financial institutions that will provide financing to the 

project’s Farm Consolidation scheme. The RGF is expected to be hosted and managed within the 

ENABLE Youth Sudan Project’s Risk Sharing Facility currently being established. Under this RGF 

framework, the Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) are expected to finance full mechanization 

(from land preparation to harvesting) services to 20,000 feddans allocated under this pilot activity 



 

8 

 

through a financing agreement to be signed with private sector (agricultural inputs service providers) 

and farmer cooperatives. The total cost for providing full mechanization services for 20,000 feddans is 

estimated at USD 4 million ($200/feddan) as confirmed by the major agricultural inputs service 

providers in Sudan. Therefore, a USD 2 million for the RGF is considered adequate for giving 

backstopping support to financial institutions who will finance the Farm Consolidation scheme. 

 

2.4.4 Discussions were held with major agricultural inputs service providers and agricultural lending 

Banks and they all indicated their enthusiasm and willingness to participate in the project.  As a next 

step, Terms of Reference will be developed for a consultant to structure RGF, its guidelines, 

organizational structure, and implementation including the development of a manual, policies and 

procedures to facilitate the Flow and Processing of Claims (Receipt, Recording, Screening, Evaluation 

and Determination) with a view of determining eligibility and settlement. 

 

2.5.  Project Target Area and Population 

2.5.1 The project will be implemented in three states, namely, North Kordofan, West Kordofan, and 

Khartoum and it will focus on four commodity value chains: Groundnuts, Sesame, Potato, and Gum 

Arabic. In North and West Kordofan States, the target beneficiaries are the small farmers of groundnuts, 

sesame, and Gum Arabic value chains for which AVCDP will develop critical infrastructures for market 

development and trade facilitation, while also enhancing production and productivity. For potato value 

chain, the project will address one of the major constraints - the high cost of imported potato seed. 

Currently, farmers in Khartoum State spend about a third of the total production cost on acquiring 

certified seed. Moreover, the imported seed typically arrives late in the planting season due to congestion 

at Port Sudan resulting in late planting that causes substantial losses in yield. The project will establish 

a potato seed-multiplication center in the northern Khartoum State, which is the main area of potato 

production in Sudan. The center is expected to produce locally 10,000 tons of certified potato seed 

currently imported to Sudan at cost of about USD 4.3 million. 

 

2.5.2 The project will directly benefit farmers in 158, 756 households (50% females) in seven localities 

in North Kordofan (Sheikan, El Rahad, Um Rawaba, Brieka, Um Dumm, Um Sumeima, Um Kiredim), 

77,701 households six localities in West Kordofan (Gibaish, Al udaya, Alikry, Lagawa, Khammas, and 

Nyama). Additionally potato farmers of over 50,000 hectares of land currently under potato cultivation 

in Sudan will directly benefit from the project. The target beneficiaries also include the 200 GAPAs in 

West and North Kordofan States with emphasis on women and youth. The indirect beneficiaries of the 

project include over two million residents in the 13 target localities in North and West Kordofan States. 

With the expected increased production and productivity associated with the project and the value chain 

approach, more areas and population outside the target states will benefit from the project. Additionally, 

processors, marketers, agro-dealers in and around the target states will benefit from this project. 

 

2.5.3 The selection of states was made based on their (i) potential and high comparative advantage in 

the production of these value chains; (ii) the existence of well-established markets that serve the majority 

of states in Sudan, neighboring countries as well as international markets; and (iii) the importance of 

these crops for the livelihoods and resilience of the smallholder farmers, rural women and youth in the 

area.   

 

2.6. Participatory Process for Project Identification, Design and Implementation  

 

2.6.1 The request for this project came from the Government of Sudan and project components and 

activities were identified as part of a broad consultation undertaken during the identification, 

preparation, and appraisal missions. Extensive consultations were conducted with senior government 

officials of the Ministry of Finance & Economic Planning, the Ministry of Agriculture and Forests, 

Ministry of Industry, State Ministries of Agriculture for Khartoum, North Kordofan and West Kordofan 

States, Forests National Corporation, and financial institutions engaged in agricultural lending. The 



 

9 

 

Bank missions also consulted with technical staff of line ministries and other stakeholders including 

international development partners (USAID, World Bank, IFAD, UNDP, FAO, JICA, IsDB, and 

UNOPS), the private sector (CTC Group, DAL group, Mahgoub Sons Group, agricultural lending 

banks), business associations and NGOs. The participatory process will continue throughout project 

implementation to ensure ownership and sustainability.  

 

2.6.2 These various consultative processes offered an opportunity to discuss with stakeholders of the 

targeted value chains about their constraints, prospects and expectations of the project. The outcomes 

of these consultations can be summarized as follows: (i) the need to advance smallholder farmers’ access 

to improved agricultural inputs for better crop production and productivity; (ii) increased crop 

production and productivity should be complemented with enhanced post-harvest storage, processing 

and market access; and (iii) the need to strengthen value addition and market linkages of small farmers.  

 

2.7. Bank Group Experience and Lessons Reflected in Project Design  

2.7.1 The Bank has currently 10 operations in Sudan valued at UA 171 million. The sectoral composition 

includes Social 39%, Agriculture 30%, Water and sanitation 18% and Multisector, 13%. Three 

operations (totalling UA 51.0 million) are in the areas of Agriculture (DRSLP II, DRSLP III, and 

ENABLE Youth) with no pending issues in satisfying conditions precedent to first disbursements. 

According to the last CPPR conducted in June 2017, the Bank’s overall portfolio performance is 

assessed as satisfactory with an overall rating of 3. There are currently no Problematic Projects (PP), no 

Potentially Problematic Projects (PPP) and no effectiveness delays in the entire portfolio. However, 

some projects such as PFM and DRSLP projects have been affected by PD 02/2015 and currently 

flagged as slow disbursing operations mainly due to difficulties in getting funds transferred as a result 

of US sanctions imposed on the country since 1997. The sanctions were recently lifted and projects have 

started to receive funds in March 2018, which is considered very promising to enhance the portfolio 

performance in the coming three months. 

 

2.7.2 The Formulation of this project drew lessons learnt from these ongoing agriculture projects and 

other similar Bank operations on the continent such as Agricultural Value Chain Development projects 

in Uganda, Angola, Gambia, and Cameron. The design of the project also draws lessons from ongoing 

similar interventions in the country by other development partners (IFAD, WB) in the project area 

including Western Sudan Resources Management Project (WSRMP), Revitalizing the Sudan Gum 

Arabic Production and Marketing Project (RSGAMP), and Seeds Development Project (SDP). The 

lessons learned from these interventions are described in Annex B1 (Technical Annexes). The main 

lessons applied to the project are described in Table 2.7 
 

Table 2.7: Lessons learned and reflected in project design 

No Lessons Learnt  Actions incorporated in the Project design 

1.  Weak M&E system at project level 
which often results in poor assessment 

of implementation progress 

A robust results-oriented M&E system with adequate 

financial allocation has been included in the project 

design. The M&E system will be developed in PY1.  

2.  Inadequate consultation with 
stakeholders in some project designs 

and preparations compromised 

sustainability and ownership 

Components and activities under this project were 

designed and prepared with full participation of all 

stakeholders including government, target beneficiaries, 

private sector, agricultural lending banks, and 

development partners. 

3.  Challenges in transferring project funds 
to Sudan due to US sanctions has 

resulted in implementation and 

disbursement delays of some projects  

 

The sanctions were recently lifted but intermediate 

Banks are still reluctant to transfer money to Sudan The. 

Therefore project AWPB and PP will take into account 

and anticipate these potential delays    

4.  Interventions intended for increased 
crop production and productivity should 

The project is designed to address not only increased 

crop production and productivity, but also providing key 



 

10 

 

No Lessons Learnt  Actions incorporated in the Project design 

be complemented with enhanced post-

harvest storage, processing and market 

access. 

infrastructures for market access, and postharvest 

handling facilities and services. 

5.  The project management staff should 
have inadequate skills and training 

essential for effective conduct of their 

responsibilities. 

Recruitment of PIU personnel on performance based 

contracts. Continuous training of PIU staff by the Bank 

project management clinics will also ensure 

strengthened capacity. 

 

2.8. Project Performance Indicators  

2.8.1 The project’s key performance indicators to be measured throughout its life span are presented in 

the Results Based Logical Framework. The M&E expert of the PIU will carry out internal project 

monitoring and evaluation in collaboration with the other PIU staff to monitor performance of the 

project. The main indicators defined for monitoring the project outcomes and outputs include (i) average 

crop yield (kg/feddan) in project area; (ii) volume (tons) of certified potato seed produced locally and 

available to farmers; (iii) proportion of target farmers with access to  real-time market information; and 

(v) average earning from a feddan. Regular implementation progress will be measured through Quarterly 

Progress Reports, bi-annual Bank supervision missions, and annual technical and financial audits. These 

reports will systematically render an account of the achievement level of indicators, which will be 

regularly presented to decision and policy makers to guide project mid-term review and to facilitate 

project management after completion. 

III – PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

 

3.1.  Economic and Financial Performance  

3.1.1 The main economic benefits of the project are an increase in production and productivity of 

groundnuts, sesame, gum arabic and irish potatoes, enhanced access to markets and ultimately an 

increase in beneficiary incomes and strengthening of food security and climate resilience. Other project 

benefits include jobs generated by business developed, improved balance trade of agricultural products 

as the country will export more groundnuts and sesame and its products. At farm level, the project will 

directly reach out to at least  236,457  farm households4 cultivating groundnut, sesame farmers, and gum 

arabic as well as  50,000 irish potato  farmers. Groundnuts, sesame and Gum Arabic will be exported, 

while the entire additional potatoes produced by the project will be consumed locally. 

 
3.1.2 Main assumptions: The main assumption underpinning the economic and financial analysis is an 

anticipated increase in area under production of groundnuts, sesame, gum arabic and irish potatoes by 

20,000 feddans. As a result of increased farm mechanisation, improved seeds and fertilizer use, and 

capacity building), the project is expected to increase productivity of groundnuts and sesame from the 

current 210 and 57.7 kg/feddan to 450 and 200 kg/feddan respectively. With domestic generation of 

potato seeds, a total amount of USD 4.3 million per annum will be saved from importation. Post-harvest 

losses for groundnuts and sesame will be reduced from 20% to 10%. On-farm consumption of 

groundnuts and sesame accounts for 25% the net total production. The remaining 75% is sold directly 

to middlemen or processed by farmers and then sold to traders or consumers. Ninety eight (98%) of gum 

Arabic produced at household level is sold to middlemen.  

 

3.1.3 The production costs including processing costs are derived from the results of the similar projects 

implemented in the country and computed field data from Sudan. Prevailing 2018 market prices are used 

for input and output valuation. Infrastructure operating and maintenace costs are estimated at 7% of 

investment costs. Groundnuts, sesame, gum arabic and irish potatoes are treated in the analysis, as a 

                                                 
4 On average, each household has a total of 5 to 6 members. 



 

11 

 

traded and import substitute goods. All project costs and prices are estimated on the basis of constant 

market prices for a life span of 25 years. The average market prices of processed crops and their by-

products (seed cakes) are used to value groundnuts and sesame. On-farm consumption is valued at farm-

gate prices. 

 

3.1.4 For the economic analysis, (i) groundnuts, sesame, potatoes and gum arabic are adjusted to reflect 

their economic values. (ii) All agricultural inputs, such as fertilizers, agro-chemicals and farm tools, are 

imported without any import duty or withholding tax. Furthermore, no government interventions in 

terms of input subsidies or import restrictions are recorded. Therefore, the market prices are used as the 

shadow prices for tradable goods used in domestic rice and maize production.  

The FIRR is 28% with a NPV of US$ 20.3 million at a capital opportunity cost of 15%. The EIRR is 

26% for a NPV of USD 19.4 2 million at a capital opportunity cost of 15%. The summary result is 

tabulated below: 

 

FIRR, NPV (base case) 28%, NPV (15%): US$ 20.3 million 

EIRR, NPV (base case) 26%, NPV (15%): US$ 19.4 million 

 

3.1.5 The economic rate of return (EIRR) and the internal rate of return (FIRR) are sensitive to changes 

in prices and costs. A 10% increase in the prices of agricultural products generates an EIRR of 16% and 

a FIRR of 18%. Similarly, a 10% increase in production costs decreases the EIRR and the FIRR to 15% 

and 14% respectively. More details of financial and economic analysis is presented in Annex B7 of the 

technical annexes 

 

3.2.  Environmental, Social and Climate Change Impacts  

 

3.2.1 Environmental Issues: The proposed project is expected to result in a number of minimum 

localized environmental impacts including: (i) biodiversity loss through vegetation clearing and 

destruction of natural habitats during construction works; (ii) soil compaction and some destabilization 

of the geological balance during excavations; (iii) increased use of agricultural chemicals leading to 

pollution as a result of increased agricultural activities; (iv) increased environmental damage through 

excavations and creation of burrow pits to get construction materials; and, (v) dust pollution during 

construction works and transportation of construction materials. Mitigation measures to address these 

impacts have been proposed in the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The 

preparation and implementation of site-specific environmental impact assessments (EIAs) will be 

carried out by the individual contractors under the supervision of the Executing Agency, in consultation 

with resident engineers and environmental authorities in Sudan. The Bank as the financing entity will 

ensure compliance with its environmental and climate change safeguards. Because of the limited and 

localized environmental impacts, the project has been classified as Category 2 in the Bank’s 

environmental and social safeguard systems. 

 

3.2.2 Gender Issues: Access to information, marketing and finance is a challenge faced by both male 

and female farmers in North and West Kordofan. However, consultations indicated that female farmers 

are significantly more affected due to domestic duties and reduced access to collateral. The majority of 

female farmers involved in groundnut and sesame value chains are functioning in informality and with 

low productivity. There have been successful initiatives by the Government and Development Partners 

to organize women groups to access finance, with some promising results. In sesame and groundnut 

Producer Associations, women represent approximately 30% of participants, with some Producer 

associations consisting of only women. The project will endeavour to support women in, and women-

only, cooperatives to formalize and professionalize through targeted training. In terms of markets, 

women are found mainly trading horticultural products and constitute 50-60% of traders in markets 

targeted in this project. Consultations with them indicated their need for infrastructure that protects them 



 

12 

 

from the sun, improved transport to reduce their costs, and better representation in management of 

market structures.   

 

3.2.3 The Comprehensive National Policy for Women (2002-2027), which the Ministry of Agriculture 

was involved in developing, recognizes women as an important human resource in the achievement of 

comprehensive country development and seeks to enable them economically to achieve gender equality. 

The Government of Sudan has also developed “The Policy Document of the National Rural Women & 

Empowerment Project”. This project will align itself to the policy frameworks to put in measures that 

aid equitable access and equity in the distribution of resources to women farmers. 

 

3.2.4 It is expected that this project will reap significant results for women in the target region. There 

are three targeted interventions to manage the gender gap between men and women: (a) the project PIU 

will be trained on Results Based Management and Gender in order to ensure that project objectives are 

defined from the start in a gender-disaggregated manner; (b) a Gender Action Plan will be developed 

by the PIU to create an institutional framework and mechanisms to achieve the advancement of women 

farmers/traders; and (c) a Targeted training for women-led cooperatives, and women in cooperatives, 

on leadership, business management, and negotiation. Whilst the Ministry of Agriculture is highly aware 

of issues faced by men and women in agriculture wholly, the PIU will be capacitated with a Gender 

Officer who is also involved in community mobilization to ensure targeting, monitoring and reporting 

in a systematic way. 

 

3.2.5 Social and economic importance: The project will have several social and economic benefits 

among them: (i) improved agricultural production due to improved and structured market outlets and 

enhanced market access; (ii) reduced post-harvest losses because of improved storage and warehousing 

facilities; (iii) enhanced employment opportunities in the Borsa, warehousing and storage facilities; (iv) 

improved incomes at households and community levels; (v) improved living standards; (vi) improved 

national income through exports; (vii) improved industrialisation through processing and value addition; 

and, (viii) minimised out-migration hence reducing rural-urban migration. Improvement in the market 

infrastructure development and improvement of the rural market access roads in the two states of North 

Kordofan and West Kordofan is a great opportunity for the youth to enhance their participation in trade, 

agricultural production and increased incomes through improvements in transportation. 

 

3.2.6 Involuntary Resettlement: There will be no involuntary resettlement of the population from the 

project sites. The agricultural farms are already existing farming areas. The project will only support 

reorganization of the farming system through farmer grouping and farm amalgamation to make the farm 

units more viable and larger production units. The targeted areas for market construction comprise 

existing market centers and government lands that have over the years been set aside for market 

expansion and development. 

 

3.2.7 Climate change and green growth:  In terms of climate change and green growth, the project 

will contribute to climate change resilience through constructing and rehabilitating rural access roads to 

all weather standards and through increased marketing of the agricultural produce by improving the 

marketing segment of the value chain. The project will also enhance climate change resilience through 

improved storage and warehousing facilities which will minimize post-harvest losses and farmers’ 

desperation to sell their crops at throw-away prices due to lack of storage facilities, especially at harvest 

time. By improving infrastructure through improvement of market and rural access roads, the project 

will also reduce transportation costs hence improving the farmers’ incomes and consequently reducing 

poverty and as such enhancing resilience of the poor farmers as well as their adaptation to climate 

change. The project supports the Government of Sudan in achieving its obligations in the Nationally 

Determined Contributions. Using the Climate Safeguard Systems, the project was screened and 

classified as Category 2. 

 



 

13 

 

IV – IMPLEMENTATION 

 

4.1. Implementation Arrangements 

4.1.1  The Ministry of Agriculture and Forests (MoAF) is the implementing agency of the project. The 

Project will have a Steering Committee (SC) chaired by the Undersecretary of the MoAF  with Director 

Generals of ministries of agriculture of North and West Kordofan as deputy co-chairs. The SC will also 

include members from ministries of Finance & Economic Planning, Industry, Trade, Physical Planning 

and Public Utilities in North and West Kordofan States, Producer Associations, and Agriculture 

Financing Banks.  

 

4.1.2 The MoAF will establish a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) with key staff including project 

coordinator, civil engineer, value chain specialist, procurement officer, M&E officer, gender/social 

development expert, Financial Management specialist and an assistant accountant.  For closer 

implementation, monitoring and follow up of project activities, the PIU will be located in Kordofan 

Region (El-Obeid, North Kordofan), where the Project Coordinator and all project technical officers 

will be based. To build capacity of the staff of the executing agency, the assistant accountant can be 

seconded from the Chamber of Accounts, if such expertise is not available in the MoAF. In addition, a 

Gum Arabic focal person will be seconded from the Forests National Corporation (FNC) to be part of 

the PIU to coordinate activities under Gum Arabic component of the project. Furthermore, two state 

focal officers will be seconded; one from Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry to coordinate the 

activities under the seed multiplication center and one from West Kordofan State Ministry of Agriculture 

to coordinate activities in the state. The Executing Agency, through Ministry of Finance & Economic 

Planning will nominate a focal point before negotiations to facilitate the processing and project start-up 

until the process of competitive recruitment of the PIU is finalized.  

 

4.1.3 Procurement Arrangements: Procurement of goods (including non-consulting services), works 

and the acquisition of consulting services, financed by the Bank for the project, will be carried out in 

accordance with the “Procurement Policy for Bank Group Funded Operations”, dated October 2015, as 

amended from time to time,  and following the provisions stated in the Financing Agreement. 

Specifically, Procurement would be carried out following Bank Procurement Policy and Methodology 

(BPM) using the relevant Bank Standard or Model Solicitation Documents SDs and in exceptional 

circumstances the Borrower’s Procurement System (BPS), for any category of procurement.  

 

4.1.4 The various items under different expenditure categories and related procurement arrangements 

for each contract to be financed by the Grant together with the respective procurement methods or 

consultant selection methods, estimated costs, prior-review requirements, and time frame as agreed 

between the Recipient and the Bank are detailed in the Procurement Plan under Annex B5 of the 

Technical Annexes. To ensure timely project launching and start-up, Advance Contracting will be used 

for the recruitment of key PIU staff before project approval. 

 

4.1.5 Procurement Risks and Capacity Development: The assessment of procurement risks at the 

Country, Sector and Project level and procurement capacity of the Executing Agency (EA), were 

undertaken for the project and the output have informed the decisions on the procurement regimes to be 

used for specific transactions or groups of similar transactions under the project. The appropriate risk 

mitigation measures have been proposed to reduce any fiduciary risk in project implementation (Section 

5.2.4 of the Technical Annexes). 

 

Financial Management (FM): The Bank carried out a FM assessment to determine the adequacy, 

strength and weakness of the financial management systems. The FM assessment concluded that the 

overall risk is “Substantial”.  Mitigation measures in the risk analysis table include (i) Recruiting a 

Financial Management Specialist (ii) Acquisition of suitable accounting software for the project (iii) 



 

14 

 

training on Bank Financial Management requirements and International Accounting Standards (iv) 

Development of the Project Administration and Financial manual.  They will enhance the Project ability 

to (1) use the funds for the intended purposes in an efficient and economical way, (2) prepare accurate, 

reliable and timely periodic financial reports, and (3) safeguard the entities’ assets. 

 

4.1.6 The Executing Agency of the project is the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MoAF). The 

overall accountability of the project will be the Project Steering Committee chaired by the 

Undersecretary of MoAF through the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) under the Project Coordinator. 

MoAF has experience in managing Bank financed projects, and the ongoing project Enable Youth Sudan 

is complying with the Bank requirements including maintenance of special account.  The financial 

transactions of the project will be initiated, processed, recorded and reported in accordance with the 

country’s Financial and Accounting Act (2007), and the Financial and Accounting Regulations (2011) 

which incorporates Generally Accepted International Accounting Standards. The project Financial 

Management Specialist (FMS), recruited competitively with qualification and experience acceptable to 

the Bank, will undertake the day-to-day financial management function. MoAF will assign an Assistant 

Project accountant to strengthen internal control and capacity building for the Ministry. 

 

4.1.7 The Project will prepare quarterly reports and submit them to the Bank within 45 days after the 

end of each quarter. The Internal controls of the Ministry including the internal audit of the project will 

apply to this project. This will include the inclusion of the project in the internal audit program and 

conducting audit at least twice per annum based on risk basis. 

 

4.1.8 Audit: An independent auditor will audit the project annual financial statements in line with the 

General Conditions of the Grant Agreement. The National Audit Chamber (NAC) or Private Audit Firm 

appointed with the involvement the NAC in accordance to the terms of reference for Bank financed 

Projects should audit the Project. The submission of audited project financial statements, along with the 

management letter, to the Bank is within six (6) months after the end of each fiscal year. The cost of the 

auditing the project is part of the eligible expenditure of the Project to cater for audit fees of the private 

audit firm. If the audit is conducted by NAC, no audit fees is payable, but on exceptional circumstances,  

re-emburseable expenses like per diem for staff and transportation can be paid if NAC is facing financial  

constraints. 

 

4.1.9 Disbursement Arrangement: The direct payment and special account/revolving fund methods 

used by the Bank to disburse funds will apply to the Project to pay eligible Project activities. The other 

two methods also described in the Disbursement Handbook maybe used when necessary with prior 

approval from the Bank. The funds from the Transition Support Facility (TSF) are disbursable and 

payable in only US dollars and Euros. The project contracts and disbursement applications should be 

denominated and made payable in EUR or USD. In the transition period (post lifting of sanctions) where 

there are difficulties still encountered in remitting USD to or involving Sudan,  MoAF should  take steps 

to persuade contractors to sign contracts and take payments in only Euros. The ADF Fund will apply 

the direct payment method to disburse ADF resources. 

 

4.1.10 The Bank will issue a Disbursement Letter stipulating key disbursement procedures and 

requirements. With regard to the special Account (revolving fund method), the Recipient will be 

required to open two (2) special accounts. The first will be an account denominated in foreign currency 

(preferably in EUR) and the second a local (operating) account at bank (s) acceptable to TSF. Funds 

paid directly into the foreign currency special account by the Bank are draw able by the Project, as and 

when required, into the operating account to cover local costs expenses including local contractors.  The 

Project implementation Unit will centrally manage the Project funds 

 



 

15 

 

4.2.  Monitoring  

4.2.1  The project will put in place an adequate computerized Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system 

based on a results-based framework with an emphasis on outcomes and impacts, as well as the regular 

monitoring of inputs and outputs covering the four main project components. Effort will be made to 

ensure gender-disaggregated data at every level and where applicable. The project will make use of 

national data sets (e.g. Central Bureau of Statistics, Household surveys, Annual reports, Bureau of 

Statistics, Project reports, etc.) whenever possible. In order to stimulate stakeholder participation in 

M&E, the project will employ participatory approaches such as beneficiary assessments and use of focus 

groups. The Bank office in Sudan will closely monitor day-to-day implementation of the project. The 

Bank will field supervision missions twice a year. The PIU will submit quarterly progress reports 

according to the format and procedures of the Bank. The Mid-Term Review will be undertaken in PY3. 

Project Completion Report will be prepared during PY5. Below is a summary of provisional project 

implementation schedule. 

 

Activity  Responsible Entity  Timeframe  

Appraisal  ADF Feb/March 2018 

Negotiations  Government/ADF April 2018 

Project Approval ADF May 2018 

Signature of Grant Agreement Government/ADF June 2018 

Fulfilment of 1st Disbursement 

Conditions 

ADF  July/August 2018 

Project Launching  ADF/ Government/ PIU August 2018 

Mid-term Review   ADF/Government/PIU June 2021 

Completion Report  ADF/ Government/ PIU August 2023 or when 85% 

disbursement rate achieved  

Auditing  Government/ PIU Annually  

 

4.3. Governance  

4.3.1 Recent international assessments show that Sudan has improved its accountability and 

transparency ratings and indicators of Governance including corruption control, rule of law, 

regulatory quality and Government effectiveness. However, the Bank is in the process of undertaking 

a comprehensive PFM assessment, which will provide more clarity on the Government efficient use 

of public resource. The design of the project has catered for a comprehensive governance structure to 

manage the implementation, monitoring and fiduciary aspects of the project. To ensure conformity 

with the Bank’s procurement procedures, an initial procurement plan is prepared and this will be 

updated regularly during project implementation.  

 

4.3.2  The main governance issues for the project are related to contracting and bidding processes 

mainly due to lack of adequate familiarization with the Bank’s procurement rules and procedures. To 

mitigate the problem, the project will: (i) ensure the use of standard bidding documents and 

procedures of the Bank; (ii) provide financial management manual to guide project staff; (iii) promote 

regular submission of progress reports; and (iv) recruit qualified and experienced National Project 

gram Coordinator, Procurement Specialist and Financial Management  Specialist for the PIU. The 

Bank will also ensure that PIU is trained on Bank requirements and guidelines during the project 

start-up. To ensure regular and quality reporting on implementation progress, the project provides for 

the appointment of a monitoring and evaluation officer in the PIU. Supervision missions and audits, 

with close follow up by COSD, will monitor adherence to the Bank standards and procedures to 

ensure value for money is achieved.      

 



 

16 

 

4.4.  Sustainability  

4.4.1 The Government of Sudan attaches great significance to the proposed AVCDP as it is the 

foundation of the first modern Commodity Exchange in the country soon to be established in North 

Kordofan State and later be rolled out to other states. The operation is a multi-purpose one expected to 

provide an enabling environment for private sector development and agricultural value chains, 

improving food security and contributing to the diversification of the agricultural economy as well as 

employment generation. The Government has already commissioned a comprehensive study on the 

establishment of a modern commodity exchange in North Kordofan State and requested the Bank to 

assist the development of key market-access infrastructures for the proposed commodity exchange. The 

project’s sustainability is ensured by the very strong will and determination at both state and national 

levels for this project. A high-level committee headed by the North Kordofan State Governor is in place 

for the realization of the Borsa project.  
 

4.4.2 In Sudan, the rural feeder roads are under the responsibility of the State ministries of physical 

planning and public utilities. Funds for maintenance planning and management is set aside in the 

national/state budget annually and private sector contractors for the execution of maintenance works. 

The main Borsa building and the 13 market warehousing receipt facilities in North and West Kordofan 

will be managed by the existing state Crop Market Administrations (CMA). The facilities are expected 

to sustain themselves with revenues generated from various fees (storage, grading, marketing, market 

data subscription, membership, etc.) charged on the users.  Availability of commodity prices for the 

smallholder farmers in real time will enable them to produce for the market at a profitable price, which 

will in turn help them build a sustainable business relationship with traders, processors and exporters. 

In addition, the public-private partnerships established through the project provides the basis for 

continuous cooperation among the relevant players, connecting non-financial and financial services, and 

leveraging the private sector in the delivery of business services. 
 

4.4.3 Another key factor of the sustainability of AVCDP is the establishment of the Risk Guarantee 

Fund for the Farm Consolidation Scheme to incentivize the lenders’ participation in the scheme. The 

State Authorities in North Kordofan underscored its commitment to contribute to the current Fund and 

to periodically top-up to ensure sustainable access to finance for the farmers even after the operation 

closes. The Project will also provide adequate resources to train all the technical staff from the 

participating ministries, at all levels, who will support the farmers’ cooperatives as well as the private 

sector involved in the project 
 

4.5 Risk Management 

4.5.1 A Potential risk to the successful execution of the project could stem from a macroeconomic 

instability negatively affecting productivity and project benefits especially the impacts of economic 

sanctions and high inflation rates. Improved diversification of GDP resulting from the project 

intervention and the Government’s strong commitment on economic diversification through revival of 

agriculture sector remaining government priority will mitigate this risk.  Other potential risks include 

Climate Change impacts that could hinder project benefits. This risk will be mitigated by ensuring that 

project infrastructures are constructed/upgraded to all weather standard. Weak capacity of the PIU team 

might undermine effective conduct of their responsibilities of the project. To ensure smooth project 

implementation, the project has broadly defined the skills and qualifications of key members of the PIU 

team, who will be recruited on a competitive basis, following the Bank’s rules and procedures. The 

project has similarly identified focal points in each of the beneficiary states for facilitating technical 

coordination. Continuous training of PIU personnel by the Bank project management clinics will also 

ensure strengthened capacity. 
 

4.6  Knowledge Building  

4.6.1 Given its innovative nature of supporting the establishment of a modern electronic commodity 

exchange and piloting the Farm Consolidation concept, the Sudan AVCDP will generate considerable 



 

17 

 

knowledge that will add value to the overall design and management of agricultural value-chain 

development operations across the continent. Progress reports, audit reports, mid-term review reports, 

and completion reports as well as other information routinely collected, as part of monitoring and 

evaluation framework will be used to document the lessons learnt. PIU will collect, collate, and analyse 

project outputs, outcomes and impact data, including standardized M&E reports. The Bank will share 

this knowledge with other development partners and stakeholders engaged in similar operations.  

V – LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

5.1. Legal instrument  

5.1.1 The financing instruments proposed are a TSF (pillar 1) grant of UA 24.95 million and an ADF 

(PBA) grant of UA 4.00 million.  

 

5.2. Conditions associated with Bank’s intervention  

5.2.1 Conditions precedent to Entry into Force: The grant agreements shall enter into force on the 

date of signature by the Recipient and the Bank.  

 

5.2.2 Conditions precedent to First Disbursement: The obligation of the Bank to make the first 

disbursement of the Grant in each agreement shall be conditional upon the entry into force of the 

Agreements  

  

5.2.3 Other Conditions  

 

(i) The opening of a foreign currency denominated Special Account and a local currency 
account by Recipient in a bank acceptable to the Bank. 

(ii) No later than three months from the date of signature of Grant Agreements, the Recipient 
shall submit project annual work plan and procurement plan covering the first 18 months 

approved by the Project Steering Committee 

 

For the TSF Grant:  

(iii) No later than nine months from the date of signature of the grant, the Recipient shall establish 
a Risk Guarantee Fund (RGF) framework and the development and submission of 

operational manual. The RGF seed money will be disbursed upon the fulfilment of the 

following conditions:    

a. The opening of a foreign currency denominated account by the Recipient in a bank 
acceptable to the Bank into which the RGF seed money will be deposited.  

b. The submission of evidence by the Recipient in form and substance acceptable to the Bank, 
of the Farm Consolidation financing agreement signed among participating Financial 

Institutions (FI), private sector (agricultural inputs service providers), and farmer 

cooperatives. 

 

5.3. Compliance with Bank Policies 

5.3.1 This project complies with all applicable Bank policies.  

VI – RECOMMENDATION 

 

6.1 Management recommends that the Boards of Directors approve the proposed TSF (Pillar 1) grant of 

UA 24.95 million and an ADF (PBA) grant of UA 4.00 million to the Republic of Sudan for the purposes 

of this project and subject to the conditions stipulated in this document.  
































































 

 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND 

 

 
 
 

BENIN  

 

 

 

 CASHEW NUTS SECTOR AND AGRICULTURAL 

ENTREPRENEURSHIP DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT 

(PADEFA-ENA)  
 


April 2019 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    

 

 

 

 

 

 

Project Information Sheet 

 

Client Information 

DONEE/BORROWER               : Republic of Benin 

 

EXECUTING AGENCY : Regional Agricultural Development 

Agency No 4, ATDA4 

Financing Plan 

Source Amount (in UA 

million) 

Instrument 

ADF 

ADF 

7.12 

5.91 

Loan  

Grant 

Government  

Beneficiaries 

1.30 

0.26 

Own resources 

TOTAL COST 14.59 
 

Key ADF Financial Information 

Loan and Grant Amount UA 13.03 million 

NPV (at 20%) CFAF 9.319 billion 

ERR (baseline scenario) 29.84% 

Timeframe – Key Milestones (projected) 

Concept Note Approval March 2018 

Project Approval March 2019 

Effectiveness June 2019 

Completion June 2024 

Closing of Loan/Grant June 2024 



 

iii 

 

Executive Summary 

Project Overview: The cashew nut sector stands out as one of the highest value-added flagship 

sectors featuring in the Government's Action Programme (GAP, 2016-2021), given its: (i) high 

potential to contribute to employment and income generation; (ii) contribution to food and 

nutritional security; and (iii) great export potential. Cashew nut is the country's second-largest 

agricultural export product after cotton, and accounts for 3% of the gross national product (GNP) 

and 25% of the income from agricultural exports. The project area alone generates more than 87% 

of national production. However, it is among the areas with the highest poverty rates, with an 

incidence of poverty rising from 36.2% in 2011 to 40.1% in 2015, well above the national average 

of 30.2%. With the strategic orientations of both Benin and the Bank in mind, the project design 

places particular emphasis on: (i) food and nutritional security; (ii) development of the sector's 

value chain, including local processing of raw cashew nuts (RCN); (iii) employment of youth and 

women; (iv) climate change (CC), strengthening population resilience and improving endogenous 

production systems. The project’s sector objective is to contribute to poverty reduction and improve 

food and nutritional security; its specific objective is to support a sustainable increase in stakeholder 

income and sector productivity. The project's total cost is UA 14.59 million and will take 5 years 

to execute. The main expected outputs include: (i) re-profiling 145 km of access roads; (ii) building 

and equipping 5 RCN storage warehouses each with a capacity of one thousand tonnes; (iii) 

rehabilitating 15,000 ha of old cashew nut plantations and supporting the creation of a modern 

cashew orchard of 3,000 ha for an expected improved yield of 700 kg per hectare; (iv) supporting 

job creation, identified in the various links of the sector, for 10,000 youths and women; (v) 

supporting the construction and equipment of 20 satellite RCN shelling units for the benefit mainly 

of women and 20 walnut and cashew apple processing units; (vi) installing 5 mini-power plants of 

10Kwc and 30 improved village water systems for communities and industrial processing units; 

and (vii) providing assistance to stakeholders in the sector to access bank credit through a 

facilitation fund hosted by the National Agricultural Development Fund (FNDA). In total, the 

project will directly reach more than 75,000 stakeholders in the sector, 30% of whom are women. 

Needs Assessment. RCN production in 2017 was estimated at 100,000 tonnes on 213,000 ha by 

200,000 small-scale producers. The sector's main constraints to development include: (i) the low 

yield of plantations (350 kg/ha compared to a world average of more than 900 kg/ha); (ii) the 

inadequacy and/or poor quality of agricultural infrastructure (storage warehouses, access roads); 

(iii) the low capacity of processing units (10% of national production); (iv) the non-existence or 

limited availability of bank credit; and (v) the organisational weakness of sector stakeholders. 

Value-added for the Bank. The project area has significant agricultural potential that has not been 

fully developed but is also one of the regions with the highest rates of poverty in the country. The 

project will contribute to the sustainable alleviation of food and nutrition insecurity and persistent 

poverty by focusing on women, youths, smallholders and private RCN processing initiatives, 

thereby contributing to attaining the Bank's High 5 strategic objectives, including "Feed Africa," 

"Industrialise Africa" and "Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa." 

Knowledge Management. The project will promote cropping systems that combine cashew nuts 

with food crops to meet food and nutritional security needs, while raising the RCN production and 

processing level for the market (increasing stakeholder income). The project will serve as a test 

model for sustainable management of tree plantations, based on the capacity of cashew tree 

plantations to sequestrate carbon, combat land degradation (climate change mitigation and 

adaptation), diversify and strengthen the livelihood of local communities, thus contributing to 

poverty reduction in the project area. 



 

v 

 

Results-based Logical Framework 
 

TITLE: Benin - Cashew Nuts Sector and Agricultural Entrepreneurship Development Support Project (PADEFA-ENA) 

GOAL:       Contribute to poverty reduction and improved food and nutrition security in Benin. 
 RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

 

RISKS AND MITIGATION MEASURES Indicators  

 

Baseline 

Situation (2018) 

Target (2023) 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

 

1. Contribute to poverty reduction in the 
project area  

2.  Contribute to poverty reduction and 
improved food and nutrition security  

 

1.1. Percentage of population living below the rural poverty line  

 

2.1. Percentage of food-insecure households 

 

2.2. Prevalence rate of chronic malnutrition (among children under 5 years 

of age) 

1.1. 48%  
 

2.1.  9.6% (2014- 

cf. PSDSA 2017) 

 

2.2.34 % 

(MICS/UNICEF, 

2014 

 

 

40%  

 

 7%  

 

 

30 %  

 

National Statistics,  

UNDP, AfDB, WB 

Cereal balance sheets and 

DSA statistics.  

 

Monitoring and evaluation 

report  

 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

 

1. Enhanced cashew nut sector productivity in 

the project area. 

2. Improved income of sector stakeholders in 

the project area (farmers, processors, 

exporters) 

3. Higher employment in agriculture, 

particularly in the cashew nut sector, for 

women and youths. 

4. Strengthened entrepreneurship in the 

cashew nut sector. 

 

5. Improved infant and child feeding 

practices. 

 

1.1. Average yield per hectare of raw cashew nuts 
1.2. Domestic production of raw cashew nuts (RCN) 
1.3. Percentage of domestic production processed 
 

 

2.1 Increase in farmers' income in the project area (export of raw cashew 

nuts) 

2.2. Increase in processors' income (bleached nuts) 

2.3. Increase in retailers' income (collectors, semi-wholesalers, wholesalers) 

3. Number of additional jobs created (including 50% for women) in the 

various links of the chain (private service providers) 

4. Number of additional agricultural enterprises/SMEs created (50% for  

women) 

 

5.  Minimum Acceptable Diet Score 

1.1. 350 kg/ha 

1.2. 100 000 t 
1.3. 4.4% (4400 

t) 

 

2.1.18.21 billion 

2.2. 1.316 billion  

2.3. 4.3 billion  

 

 

3.    0 

 

 

4.       0 

 

 

 

 

5. 15.  1% 

 

1.1. 700 kg/ha  
1.2. 150 000 t 
1.3. 30% (66000 t) 

 

 

2.1 23.67 billions 

2.2. 1,710.8 milliards 

2.3. 5.59 milliards 

 

 

3.  10 000 (of whom 

5 000 women) 

 

4. 20 (10 for women) 

 

 

 

5. 30% 

 

 

Baseline and end-of-project 

survey reports 

 

Activity and appraisal 

reports of agricultural 

statistics project (DSA) ) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Multiple Indicator Cluster 

Survey (MICS/UNICEF) 

reports 

Risk 1: Inadequate attention to sector stakeholder 

needs, including women, in project activities. 

Mitigation 1: A participatory and gender-sensitive 

approach will apply in project planning and 

implementation. 

Risk 2: The effect of climate change and unsuitable 

cultivation practises by farmers could degrade 

natural resources (NR) and limit the project's impact 

Mitigation 2: Integrated NR management and the 

development and dissemination of climate-smart 

technical innovations should sustainably enhance 

the project's impact  

 RESULTS CHAIN  

PERFORMANCE INDICATORS   
MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

1. RISKS AND MITIGATION 
MEASURES 

Indicators  

 

Baseline 

Situation 
Target 



 

vi 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

A/  Resilience of cashew nut farmers and 
increased carbon sequestration potential 

 

A1. Support for carbon adaptation and 

sequestration through sustainable land 

management of old and new cashew tree 

plantations  

 

A2. Supervision of farmers and creation of a 

pool of service providers 

A3. Socio-economic and community 

infrastructure 

 

B/ Development of value chains 

 

B1.  Support to resilient land security 
 

B2. Organising and structuring of sector 

stakeholders 

 

B.3 Support for youth and women's 

entrepreneurship and nutritional awareness 

B.4. Enhancement of the processing and 

marketing industry 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

C/ Project coordination and management 

C.1 Strengthening of the executing agency  

C.2 Activity planning and monitoring  

C.3 Effective project management 

A1.1 Area of rehabilitated ageing plantations 

A1.2 Area of new cashew orchards (30% to women) 

A1.3. Number of managed/irrigated woodlots (graft production) 

 

A2.1. Number of management staff (training advisors) trained, 30% of 

whom are women 

A2.2. Number of farmers supervised (30% women) per year 

 

 

A3.1. Linear of rehabilitated service roads 

A3.2. Number of storage warehouses built and equipped (1000 tonnes) 

A3.3. Number of MV/LV transformers installed on MV lines 

 

 

 

B1. Number of rural land plans (RLPs) issued ( to at least 30% to women) 

B.2.1 Percentage of stakeholders affiliated with cooperatives (30% 

women) 

B2.2. Number of farmers supervised per year, 30% of whom are women 

 

B.3.1. Number of incubators supported in cashew nut trades  

B.3.2. Number of young graduates and non-graduates trained (30% 

women) in sector activities 

B.3.3. Number of people sensitised per year on nutrition, including 30% 

of men  

B.3.4. An Investment Guarantee Fund for the sector's stakeholders is 

operational from the second year of the project  

 

B4.1. Number of RCN satellite shelling units (100% women) 

B4.2. Number of functional clusters around processing plants  

B4.3. Number of certified and labelled cashew products and by-products 

 

 

C1. Compliance with the project implementation schedule 

C2.  Periodic quarterly activity reports   

C3 Annual audit reports prepared and approved 

C3.1 Disbursement percentage 

C3.2 Project procurements are in compliance with procedural rules 

A1.1. 0 

A1.2. 0 

A1.3. 1 

 

 

A2.1. 0 

A2.2. NA 

 

 

A3.1. 0 

A3.2. 0 

A3.3. 0 

 

 

 

 

B1. NA 

 

B2.1. <10% 

B2.2.  NA 

 

 

B3.1.  0 

B3.2.  0 

B3.3.  0 

 

B3.4.  0 

 

B4.1.  0 

B4.2.  0 

B4.3   0 

 

 

 

 

 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

A1.1. 15 000 ha 

A1.2. 3 000 ha  (900 

ha for women) 

A1.3.  5 

 

A2.1. 50 (15) 

A2.2. 45 000 (15000) 

 

 

A3.1.  145 km 

A3.2.   5 

A3.3   10 (2 per year) 

 

 

 

 

B1.    1000 (300 

women) 

 

B2.1.  80% 

B2.3. 5 000 (1500 

women) 

 

B.3.1       2  

B.3.2. 5 000 (1 500 

women) 

B3.3.  1500 (300) 

B3.4.  1 

 

B4.2.  20 (20 for 

women) 

B4.2.  10 

B4.3.   5 

 

C1. 4 quarterly 

reports  

C.2 Audit reports 

before 30 June of 

each year 

C3.1. 20% per year; 

C3.2 Strict 

application of Bank 

rules and procedures. 

Half-yearly project activity 

reports 

 

Bank supervision reports 

Risk 3: Delays in project execution due to poor 

mastery of the Bank’s procedures 

 

Mitigation 3: Regular capacity building workshops 

will be organised for the structure charged with 

implementing the project (procurement, financial 

management, disbursements, etc.). 

 

K
E

Y
 

A
C

T
IV

IT
IE

S
  Components : 

Component 1: Resilience of cashew nut farmers and increase in carbon sequestration potential 

Component 2: Development of value chains 

Component 3: Project coordination and management 

Resources by Component: 

 

Component A: UA 7.791 million 

Component B: UA 3.427 million 

Component C: UA 1.812 million 

Sources of Financing: 

 

Loan and Grant (ADF): UA 13.03 million 

Government: UA 1.30 million 

Beneficiaries: UA 0.26 million 



 

vii 

 

PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE 

Activities 2019 2020 2021 
2022 2023 2024 

 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 
Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 

Negotiations            
           

ADF Board approval             
           

Signature of loan agreements            
           

Effectiveness            
           

Authorisation of first. 

disbursement  
           

           

Publication of the general 
procurement notice 

           
           

Recruitment of PMU staff            
           

Signature of agreements with 

partner structures 
           

           

Procurement of priority 

infrastructure 
           

           

Studies and detailed design of 
additional infrastructure 

           
           

Storage, marketing and access 

infrastructure  
           

           

Development support            
           

Capacity building of sector 

stakeholders 
           

           

Support for RCN processing 
and marketing 

           
           

Youth entrepreneurship 

development support 
           

           

Midterm review            
           

Annual audits of accounts            
           

Project closure            
           



 

1 

 

MANAGEMENT REPORT AND RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 

CONCERNING A LOAN AND GRANT PROPOSAL TO THE REPUBLIC OF BENIN TO 

FINANCE THE CASHEW NUTS SECTOR AND AGRICULTURAL ENTREPRENEURSHIP 

DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT (PADEFA-ENA) 
 

Management hereby submits this report and recommendations concerning a proposal to extend an ADF loan 

of UA 7.12 million and award an ADF grant of UA 5.91 million to the Republic of Benin to finance PADEFA-

ENA. 

I. STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE  

1.1. Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives  

1.1.1 The Government launched its Action Programme in December 2016 (PAG, 2016-2021), entitled 

"Benin Revealed"1 (PEA 2017), as the sole reference framework for Government action. The agricultural 

strategy, as outlined in the PAG, aims to make agriculture the main driver of wealth and job creation. The 

strategy comprises 7 agricultural development clusters (PDAs) and the promotion of 6 key agro-food sectors, 

including cashew nuts. The agricultural component of the PAG is based on the National Plan for Agricultural 

Investment and Food and Nutritional Security (PNIASAN, 2017-2021), which operationalises the Strategic 

Plan for the Development of the Agricultural Sector (PSDSA, 2017-2025). The key outcomes targeted through 

the Investment Plan include: (i) an annual increase in agricultural production of at least 6% between 2017 and 

2021; (ii) increased yields and reduced post-production loss rates in the agricultural, livestock and fisheries 

sectors; (iii) improved local processing rates for agricultural products; and (iv) increased employment created 

in priority value chains (for at least 30% of women).  

1.1.2. Youth employment remains a major and priority concern for the government (PAG, 2016-2021). 

Innovations in cashew value chains offer important employment opportunities for young people, including 

women. The project offers agricultural SMEs the opportunity to: (i) optimise access to finance and markets; 

(ii) promote best practice and innovative business models; and (iii) create employment opportunities. 

PADEFA-ENA will support young innovators to create effective business strategies and improve the 

productivity of the cashew nut value chain in Benin. 

1.1.3. The proposed project is fully in line with the main thrusts of Benin's national cashew nut sector 

strategy (SNFAB, 2016 - 2020), the implementation of which it aims to facilitate. The national cashew nut 

sector strategy is based on the following strategic thrusts: (i) improved orchard productivity; (ii) improved 

local capacity to process cashew nut products; (iii) organisation of the cashew nut marketing chain; (iv) cashew 

nut sector research; (v) cashew nut sector stakeholder organisation; (vi) cashew nut sector financing; (vii) 

regulation and legal framework for cashew nut sector development; and (viii) cross-cutting issues (gender, 

environment, climate change, public private partnerships, etc.). 

1.2. Rationale for the Bank’s Involvement 

1.2.1 Aimed at contributing more to the reduction of poverty and regional inequalities in the country, the 

Bank's interventions (CSP, 2017-2021) focus primarily on economically and socially disadvantaged areas with 

significant agricultural potential, including the support measures targeting the cashew nut and livestock 

sectors, and the development of infrastructure to bolster production, processing and access to basic services. 

The proposed project is of particular interest in the cashew tree-prolific area. Cashew nut is the second most 

important export product after cotton; it provides 3% of the country's GNP and 7% of its agricultural GNP; 

8% of the export revenue and 25% of export agricultural receipts. The project impact area (Alibori, Atacora, 

South Borgou, Donga and Collines) alone represents more than 87% of the national production provided by 

nearly 200,000 small-scale farmers. These regions are among the areas with the highest poverty rates, with 

the income poverty rate increasing from 36.2% in 2011 to 40.1% in 2015, above the national average of 30.2%. 

Furthermore, the cashew tree has the dual advantage of generating income in rural areas and sequestering 

carbon in increasingly soil degraded areas, such as the project region. The potential of the cashew nut sector 

includes the high carbon capture capacity, the existence of a local but also a sub-regional market for the sale 

                                                 
1  The choice of this name reflects the ambition of the highest authorities to further reveal the country’s economic potential to the world, thus strengthening 

Benin’s attraction.  



 

2 

 

of white and roasted almonds, the potential of the rapidly expanding organic fair trade market in Europe, and 

job creation opportunities for youths and women. The major constraints for the sustainable development of 

the cashew nut sector include the absence of coherent and specific policies and actions to promote the sector, 

the low quality of the main final products, such as cashew nuts and kernels, the low productivity of the varieties 

used, inappropriate post-harvest processing of nuts by farmers and wholesale traders, lack of mastery of 

efficient RCN processing techniques by processors, difficulties in accessing bank financing, difficult access 

to efficient inputs and equipment, low level of stakeholder organisation and poor stakeholder management 

capacity.  

The Bank's strategy for the period 2017-2021 aims to support the Government in implementing GAP (2016-

2021) for the structural transformation of the economy and poverty reduction. As a reminder, the CSP (2017-

2021) is structured along two main thrusts: Pillar 1 - develop agricultural and agro-industrial value chains; 

and Pillar 2 - strengthen infrastructure to support competitiveness and regional integration. The Bank's 

interventions under the first pillar support the development of agricultural value chains and agribusiness, 

including assistance for transformative investments; improving the agricultural sector's business environment 

to foster greater private sector involvement; skills development and entrepreneurship, particularly for youths 

and women; access to financing through risk-sharing mechanisms; and rural economic development through 

increased income and improved access to basic social services. Moreover, the proposed project is in line with 

the Bank's Ten-Year Strategy (2013-2022), particularly three of the “High 5s” to transform Africa socially 

and economically: “Feed Africa”, “Industrialise Africa” and “Improve the quality of life for the people of 

Africa.” The project is fully consistent with the Bank's objectives to contribute to the creation of 25 million 

jobs for the youths by 2025 as outlined in its Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy. 

1.3. Aid Coordination 

1.3.1 The annual net flows of aid from development partners to the country represent nearly 30% of the 

state expenditure budget. Technical and financial partners (TFPs) are organised into joint thematic cooperation 

groups chaired by the Government, with a TFP as facilitator. The sector distribution of the Bank's active 

portfolio reflects the predominance of transport infrastructure (50%), followed by agriculture (33%) and 

energy (13%). This situation illustrates the portfolio's alignment with the Country Strategy (CSP, 2012-2016). 

The Bank is among the main stakeholders in the transport and agricultural sectors. The recent opening of its 

Country Office in Benin, with the effective presence of a Country Manager since January 2018, will contribute 

to strengthening the Bank's role and leadership in the thematic groups and TFP coordination. 

1.3.2 Table 1.3.1: Aid Coordination 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Sector or Subsector* 
Scope  (in 2017) 

GDP Exports Workforce  

Agriculture and rural development  23% 75% 70%  

Stakeholders - Annual Public Expenditure (APE) (CFAF) ** 

Government (2012-2017 average) Donors (2012-2017 average) 

The total amount of CFAF 742.31 billion was 

actually invested in the sector between 2011 and 

2015 (6.5% of total government expenditure in 
the agricultural sector). 

GIZ 12 000 000 000 

IsDB 16 795 000 000 

IDA 77 388 611 400 

FIDA 29 725 000 000 

ADF 54 190 500 000 

BOAD 23 000 000 000 

AFD 7 871 484 000 

KFW 15 009 931 300 

CTB 14 431 054 000 

OPEC 6 720 000 000 

 Total 257 131 580 700 

Level of Aid Coordination 

Existence of thematic working groups (TWG) Yes 

Existence of a comprehensive sector programme No 

Bank’s role in aid coordination 
TWG Member 

(*) Sources: INSAE, 2015(**) Source:  Detailed portfolio of active projects, Caisse Autonome d'Amortissement (Autonomous Amortisation 

Fund) (CAA), Ministry of Economy and Finance 



 

3 

 

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION  

The sector objective of the project is to contribute to poverty reduction and improvement of food and 

nutritional security in Benin. The specific objective is to contribute sustainably to raise the income of 

stakeholders and the productivity of the cashew nut chain in Agricultural Growth Pole No. 4 (AGP 4).  

2.1. Project Components 

2.1.1 The project will be grounded on a sector value chain and integration approach to create an enabling 

environment for developing small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in the cashew nut sector, for the 

employment of youths and women, and the creation of a sustainable impact on local development. 

2.1.2 Summary of Components: The project will be implemented over five years (2019-2024) through 

three components, the main achievements of which are described in detail in Annex C3 and summarised in 

the table below: 

Components and 

Costs, including 

Contingencies 

Description 

Component A: 

Resilience of cashew 

nut farmers and 

increase in carbon 

sequestration 

potential: UA 7,791 

million (59.9%) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Component B: 

Development of 

value chains UA  

3,427 million 

(26.2%) 

 

 

 

A1: Support for adaptation and carbon sequestration through sustainable management of old and new cashew 

tree plantations. Support for producing improved plant varieties to meet the rehabilitation needs of old 

plantations on 15,000 ha and creating a new 3,000 ha nursery by: (i) supporting agricultural research to 

increase existing mother trees (600 per 120,000 grafts per year), germs (5 per 200 higher tree clones); 4 

polyclonal nurseries of 5 hectares each and 30 irrigated woodlands of 5 hectares each; (ii) establishing 20 

demonstration plots and school grounds for disseminating innovations and new technologies: adapting 

farming and production system resilience to climate change and impact mitigation.  

A2: Supervising producers and creating pools of private service providers, supporting the training of 50 

agricultural advisers to train 25,000 farmers. Supervising 5,000 youths and women private service providers 

in 6 new trades identified for sustainable employment.  

A3: Socio-economic infrastructure rehabilitation/re-profiling of 145 km of feeder roads and building of 5 

cashew nut storage warehouses (1,000 tonnes each); drilling of 15 boreholes with manual power pumps and 

15 improved drinking water supply systems. Equipping 10 villages with a 10 KWp photovoltaic electricity 

system to supply villages and processing units. 

 

B1: Assistance for resilient land tenure security: (i) support for preparing the 20 Rural Land Plans (RLPs); (ii) 

support to Rural Municipalities for disseminating land transaction tools.  

B2: Organising, structuring and strengthening of stakeholders. The activities will be structured around the 

following thrusts: (i) support for structuring within the sector, in particular POs at village level; municipal and 

divisional associations; (ii) support for national professional federations in the various sector links; and (iii) 

institutional support at the grassroots level (IFA).  

B.3. Support for youths and women's entrepreneurship: Support for job creation for 10,000 youths (30% of 

whom are women) in the sector; Support for access to finance for stakeholders in the sector (30% of whom 

are women). Nutritional awareness of 1,500 people, 30% of whom are men. Identifying and strengthening 

existing incubator capacity to support young people in the sector.  

B.4. Promoting the processing and marketing industry.  Support for: (i) popularising the features of good 

quality cashew nuts (certification and labelling); (ii) support for the operationalisation of a central purchasing 

and stock management system for cashew nuts; (iii) promoting and developing cashew clusters; (iv) support 

for modernising 10 cashew apple processing units and 10 cashew nut processing units (30% of women); 

Support for the installation and equipment of 20 satellite RCN shelling units, mainly for women.  

B.5 Institutional support to technical partner structures, including the new MAEP structures set up under the 

PAG, including ATDA4 and the DDAEPs in the project area as well as the OPAs to enable them play their 

respective roles under the project. 

Component C 

Project management 

and coordination  

UA 1,812 million 

(13.9%) 

(i) Coordinating project activities; (ii) administrative, accounting and financial management; (iii) procurement 

of goods, works and services; (iv) implementation of a communication plan; and (v) project 

monitoring/evaluation and ESMP implementation. 



 

4 

 

2.2. Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Explored 

PADEFA-ENA aims to support the entire cashew nut sector. Improving the quantity of RCNs produced and 

the quality of nut processing are the two key challenges for strengthening the competitiveness of the cashew 

nut sector in Benin, which faces stiff competition from its regional neighbours. It was decided to support the 

entire sector, including the thematic (Component A is intended to support the upstream part of the sector, and 

Component B the downstream) or geographical aspect (central and northern regions covered by the ATDA4, 

with 87% of the national cashew tree nurseries covered by the programme alone). PADEFA-ENA will 

contribute to improving the quality and quantity of cashew nuts and almonds produced, increasing 

employment and income in rural areas (farmers, stakeholders in new trades/private service providers (PSP), 

labourers employed by farmers or women workers in processing units, cashew nut collection and marketing 

agents). It will also help to raise the level of carbon sequestration in cashew plantations, while securing rural 

land rights (through support for the existing rural land plan) and enhancing food and nutritional security 

(through the promotion of appropriate food crop systems together with cashew plantations). 

Table II-2: Alternative Solutions Explored and Reasons for their Rejection  

Alternative Solutions Brief Description Reason for Rejection 

Building the project exclusively 

with the cashew nut industry inter-

professional group (IFA)) 

Supporting only members of the 

cashew nut sector inter-professional 

group (IFA) in Benin. 

The impact of the project on many 

stakeholders in the sector will be 

limited and can be equally 

frustrating for major stakeholders 

who are not members of the inter-

professional group. 

Financing activities through grants 
The project will finance the various 

stakeholders through grants. 

Financing processing and marketing 

activities will create disparities on 

the local market, and will penalise 

non-beneficiary private operators. 

The only activities to be subsidised 

are the rehabilitation of old cashew 

plantations and building the capacity 

of stakeholders. 

 

Establish new monoculture 

plantations. 

Plants grown on new plantations 

subsidised under the project are 

spaced in such a way that no other 

crops can be grown. 

Monoculture plantations will 

compete with food crops in the 

project area, implying the failure to 

achieve the project's objective of 

food and nutritional security. 

2.3. Project Type 

The PADEFA-ENA is an investment project financed by the ADF (loan and grant), the Government and 

project beneficiaries. 

2.4. Project Cost and Financing Arrangements 

2.4.1. The project's total cost, excluding taxes and customs duties, is estimated at CFAF 11.624 billion, or 

UA 14.594 billion (UA 1 equivalent to CFAF 796.489 in January 2019), of which UA 4.889 million in foreign 

exchange (33.50% of total project cost). The cost includes a 5% provision for physical contingencies and 3% 

for price escalation yearly. It should be noted that while contingencies for price escalation cover all capitalised 

activities during the five years of project implementation, the situation is different for physical contingencies, 

which do not cover items such as vehicles, operating costs (including staffing), etc. Thanks to this approach, 

project resources are better optimised. The project cost estimates are based on prevailing market prices in the 

country and in relation to the most recent achievements in the various areas of relevance to the project. 

  



 

5 

 

Table 2.4.1 Summary of Estimated Costs per Component 

PROJECT COMPONENTS  
CFAF Thousand  UA Thousand  % F.E. 

L.C. F.E. TOTAL L.C. F.E. TOTAL  

Component A : Resilience of 

cashew nut farmers and 

increase in carbon 

sequestration capacity  4041990  2163260  6205250  5074.76  2715.99  7790.75  34.86  

Component B: Development of 

value chains 1644000  1086000  2730000  2064.06  1363.48  3427.54  39.78  

Component C: Project 

coordination and management 1265080  243500  1508580  1588.32  305.72  1812.01 16.14  

Base cost 6951070  3492760  10443830  8727.14  4385.2  13112.33  33.44  

Physical contingences 212595  127730  340325  266.91  160.37  427.28  37.53  

Price escalation 562474  276988  839462  706.19  347.76  1053.95  33.00  

Total cost 7726139  3897478  11623617  9700.25  4893.32  14593.57  33.53    
 

Table 2.4.2 Summary of Estimated Costs by Expenditure Category 

a. LOAN 

CATEGORIES 

ADF Loan, in CFAF Thousand ADF Loan, in UA Thousand 

Local 

Currency  

Foreign 

Exchange  TOTAL 

Local 

Currency  

Foreign 

Exchange  TOTAL 

Works 

1175340 

 

592905 

 

1768245 

 

1476 

 

744 

 

2220 

 

Services  

683618 

 

344853 

 

1028471 

 

858 

 

433 

 

1291 

 

Miscellaneous (Facilitation Fund, 

FNDA) 

1910518 

 

963768 

 

2874286 

 

2399 

 

1210 

 

3609 

 

Total ADF loan cost 3 769 476 1 901526 5671002 4 732.62 2 387.39 7120 
 

b. GRANT 

CATEGORIES 

ADF Grant, in CFAF Thousand  ADF Grant, in UA Thousand  

Local 

Currency  

Foreign 

Exchange  TOTAL 

Local 

Currency  

Foreign 

Exchange TOTAL 

       

Goods 

889557 

 

448740 

 

1338297 

 

1116,85 

 

563,40 

 

1680,25 

 

Services  

1768467 

 

892109 

 

2660576 

 

2220,33 

 

1120,05 

 

3340,38 

 

Operation 

470854 

 

237524 

 

708378 

 

591,16 

 

298,21 

 

889,38 

 

Total ADF grant cost 3 128 877 1 578 373 4707250 3928.34 1981.66 5910 
 

Table 2.4.3 Summary of Costs by Source of Financing  

SOURCES OF FINANCING 

CFAF Thousand UA Thousand % 

Local 

Currency 

Foreign 

Exchange  Total 

Local 

Currency 

Foreign 

Exchange  Total 
 

ADF  6 898 353 3 479 899 10378252 8660.95 4369.05 13030 89.29 

including: 

          Loan 3 769 476 1 901 526 5671002 4732.62 2387.68 7120.00 48.79 

          Grant 3 128 877 1 578 373 4707250 3928.34 1981.91 5910.00 40.50 

 

Government 689 835 347 990 1037825 866.1 436.9 1303.00 8.93 

Beneficiaries 137951 69590 207541 173.2 87.37 260.57 1.78 

Total Cost 7 726 139 3 897 478 11623617 9700.25 4893.32 14593.57 100.0 



 

6 

 

2.4.4. The project will be financed by a total ADF allocation of UA 13.03 million (CFAF 10.378 billion), 

comprising a loan and a grant of UA 7.12 million and UA 5.91 million, respectively. Therefore, the ADF is 

contributing 89.28% to the overall project funding, the Government CFAF 1.038 billion (10% of the ADF 

contribution and 8.93% of the total project cost) and the beneficiaries CFAF 207.565 million or 1.78% of the 

project cost. The following tables show the project's sources of financing by component and expenditure 

category (in CFAF thousand and UA thousand). 

Table 2.4.4. Expenditure Schedule by Categories  
CATEGORIES/YEARS 

(in CFAF Thousand) (in UA Thousand) 

2019/20  2021 2022 2023 2024 TOTAL 2019/20  2021 2022 2023 2024 TOTAL 

Works 1080901 2071452 974400 614372 549155 5290280 1357.08 2600.73 1223.37 771.35 689.47 6642.00 

Goods 245685 470833 221477 139645 124821 1202461 308.46 591.14 278.07 175.33 156.71 1509.70 

Services  677236 1297863 610508 384933 344071 3314612 850.28 1629.48 766.50 483.29 431.99 4161.53 

Operation 130044 249218 117231 73916 66069 636478 163.27 312.90 147.18 92.80 82.95 799.10 

Base cost 2133866 4089366 1923616 1212866 1084116 10443830 2679.09 5134.24 2415.12 1522.77 1361.12 13112.33 

Non-allocated  148052 423507 236191 179660 192379 1179787 185.88 531.72 296.54 225.6 241.53 1481.23 

Total project cost 
2281917 4512873 2159806 1392526 1276495 11623617 2864.97 5665.96 2711.66 1748.33 1602.65 14593.57 

 

2.5. Project Target Area and Beneficiaries 

The project zone is the area which comprises the agricultural growth pole N ° 4 (AGP 4) managed and 

administered by ATDA4, a public autonomous establishment. AGP 4 spans the entire Donga and Collines 

Divisions (“Départements”), and partly Borgou (South) and Zou Divisions (Djidja Municipal Council), with 

an estimated population of 2,150,000 of whom slightly over 50% are women. The project will cover the 

following fifteen municipal councils: Tchaourou, Parakou, N'Dali, Nikki, Pèrèrè located in the south of 

Borgou Division, Savalou, Bantè, Dassa-Zoumè, Glazoué, Savè, Ouessè municipal councils in Collines 

Division, Djougou, Ouaké, Bassila and Copargo municipal councils in Donga Division, and lastly Djidja 

municipal council in Zou Division. The direct beneficiaries are: (i) cashew nut farmers; (ii) cashew nut traders; 

(iii) raw cashew nut processors; (iv) exporters; and (v) the inter-professional cashew nut sector (IFA) and its 

regional and divisional constituents. The project will indirectly benefit the end consumers, as well as 

stakeholders involved or associated with the project at various levels, namely the Benin Cashew Development 

Authority, ATDA4, the DDAEPs of Borgou, Donga, Collines, Atacora, Zou, and Plateau Divisions, the 

Cashew Research Centre (CRA-Centre)/INRAB; the standardisation and quality support structures (ABSSA 

and ANM); DPV, DLROPEA, ANDF and DQIFE; the Faculties of Agricultural Sciences in Abomey Calavi 

(FSA/UAC), Ketou and Parakou, the National Fund for Agricultural Development (FNDA), and the 

Professional Association of Banks and Financial Institutions of Benin (APBEF). 

2.6. Participatory Approach to Project Identification, Design and Implementation 

Extensive consultations were held on the project at all stages of its preparation. The contacts established during 

the April 2017 identification mission were pursued during the preparation phase in January 2018, both in AGP 

4 and Cotonou. Meetings were held with administrative and local authorities, technical structures, professional 

agricultural organisations (OPAs), women's groups, private partners, as well as ongoing projects and TFPs 

involved in the cashew nut sector. This process will continue and will be relayed in the field by AGP 4 

DDAEPs, who are to serve as facilitators for all stakeholders. Moreover, implementing the project will require 

the establishment of mechanisms that will closely involve and empower the respective stakeholders, especially 

farmers and the private sector (agricultural SMEs). This approach will be pursued during project 

implementation and Bank supervision missions. The sustainability of interventions undertaken, particularly 

with regard to productive capital (ageing plantations and new cashew nurseries), requires full ownership by 

the stakeholders concerned, hence the option to prioritise the targeting of the most committed communities 

that must meet selection criteria (requests, land security, organisation method, contributions, commitments, 



 

7 

 

etc.). A presentation was made on project components and activities during the PADEFA-ENA appraisal 

mission, at a participatory workshop attended by all stakeholders. 

2.7. Consideration of Bank Group Experience and Lessons Learned in Project Design  

2.7.1 The 2017 portfolio review of Bank-financed projects in Benin identified project implementation 

weaknesses, including inadequate reporting or failure to address issues highlighted in audit reports, limited 

availability of quality staff for projects, and irregular physical and financial monitoring of projects. The 

institutional set-up envisaged under the project, namely delegated project management (MOD) and boosting 

of public-private partnership, addresses the underperformance of previous or ongoing projects. Project 

activities as concerns works, services and access to bank credit that fall within the ambit of the private sector 

will be pooled and entrusted, on a competitive basis, to specialise implementing agencies that will play the 

delegated project management role. The same review highlighted the need to: (i) facilitate access to bank 

financing for stakeholders in the sector by using reliable microfinance institutions; (ii) set up an effective 

monitoring and evaluation system; (iii) finance research and development activities; and (iv) provide priority 

support to beneficiaries through sustainable technical structures charged with exercising oversight functions 

on behalf of the State. All these issues were considered and incorporated in the project design during the 

formulation stages to avoid repeating the same mistakes. 

2.7.2. The project design took into account the exposure of the project impact area (PIA) to climate change. 

A study correlated the decrease in cashew nut yields with the increase in temperature and decrease in rainfall, 

predicting a reduction in rainfall amounts by up to 12% by 2050 in the area (Bello et al., 2016). The project 

will help to reduce carbon emissions and strengthen the adaptive capacity and resilience of the rural 

communities and endogenous agricultural production systems in the project area. 

2.8. Key Performance Indicators  

2.8.1 The key performance indicators are provided in the logical framework. Using the project's baseline 

situation, monitoring will mostly cover: (i) the rural poverty index within the project area; (ii) additional CO2 

sequestration; (iii) cashew tree productivity; (iv) average cashew tree and associated food crop production; (v) 

quantity of cashew nuts processed and certified; (vi) number of jobs created in the sector, of which 30% for 

women; (vii) the surface area of rehabilitated or newly created plantations; (viii) number of grafted plants 

produced; (ix) number of infrastructure built or rehabilitated (RCN storage warehouses, number of RCN 

satellite units for cashew shelling/processing, and production of cashew apple juice, etc.); (x) number of 

cooperatives created or structured with at least 30% of women on management committees; (xi) number of 

professional farmers' organisations (OPAs), youths and women trained in various segments of the value chain; 

(xii) number of managers and technical staff trained to supervise stakeholders (30% women); (xiii) additional 

production sold; (xiv) number of women and youths who received support from the project, including nutrition 

awareness; (xv) number of farmers and processors trained on best production or processing practice (30% 

women); (xvi) number of cooperatives and economic interest groups (EIGs) aligned on OHADA, including 

women's cooperatives; (xvii) number of organised and contracted supply networks, number of RCN satellite 

shelling units (100% women) created; and (xviii) number of stakeholders (30% women) trained in 

environmental management. 

2.8.2 Further gender-disaggregated indicators will be added when finalising the monitoring and evaluation 

system, and establishing the baseline situation, using the results-based management approach. These will 

include: (i) the proportion of women in each beneficiary group; (ii) the involvement of women and youths in 

producer and infrastructure management groups; and (iii) the area of cashew tree plantations operated by 

women and youths. Particular emphasis will be placed on monitoring socio-economic impacts (disaggregated 

data for women and youths, monitoring the performance of POs).  

2.8.3  As regards impact indicators, particular emphasis will be placed on targeting the parameters that can 

be monitored and collected internally, and on defining those that relate specifically to women and youths. The 

main indicators are: (i) the percentage of the rural population living on an annual income below the poverty 



 

8 

 

line; (ii) the percentage of the rural population living in food and nutrition insecurity; (iii) the production of 

additional cashew nuts; (iv) the volume and percentage of locally processed cashew nuts; (v) the degree of 

organisation of POs, including the performance of socio-professional organisations; (vi) the number of 

additional jobs created (including 30% for women's groups) in the sector (private service providers, PSP); and 

(vii) the number of additional agricultural businesses/SMEs created in the sector. 

2.8.4. The project’s internal monitoring and evaluation will be conducted by the monitoring and evaluation 

specialist of the Project Management Unit (PMU), in close liaison with all partners. Particular emphasis will 

be placed on targeting the relevant women-specific parameters (systematic disaggregation of data). Using the 

baseline situation, the monitoring will specifically cover: (i) the level of additional production (tonnes) and 

crop yields (t/ha); (ii) the increase in farmers' income, with particular reference to youths and women; (iii) the 

number of jobs created (support for the installation of young PSPs; development of new modern plantations, 

etc.); (iv) rate of infrastructure development (number of storage warehouses built, kilometres of feeder roads 

rehabilitated, etc.); (v) effective organisation of supervision and training (number of professional agricultural 

organisations and persons trained, including gender mainstreaming), (vi) women's involvement in decision-

making bodies and the rate of their access to land (at least 30% in new plantations); and (vii) the project's 

nutritional impact. All selected indicators under the project will be reconciled with those under the PNIASAN. 

MAEP’s DPP will conduct external monitoring jointly with CAA and DGFD. The various supervision 

missions and periodic activity reports will systematically report on progress towards achieving the indicators. 

III. PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1. Economic and Financial Performance 

Table 3.1: Key Economic and Financial Data 

ERR = 29.84% 20% NPV = CFAF 9.319 billion 

The economic analysis was based on direct project costs and benefits. The project is based on the development 

of the cashew nut sector and includes several stages leading to the attainment of its set objectives. Thus, the 

economic analysis is based on the notion of operating cost centres and operating income net of taxes. 

Therefore, the following process steps were considered and analysed: 

i. Cashew nuts production and sales phase (field edge sale), both in terms of old plantations 

(15,000 ha), to be developed by farmers on bank credit financing through the Facilitation Fund 

with the FNDA, and new plantations (3,000 ha) that the project will support; 

ii. The raw material processing stage into cashew kernel and cashew apple juice, requiring both 

semi-industrial and industrial processing; 

iii.  The export sales stage of part of the raw walnut; 

iv. The sales stage of the finished products that constitute the almonds and juice from industrial 

processing, and involves two types of sales(local and export sales); 

v. Only agricultural production and production from semi-industrial and industrial processing 

from the “project” situation were considered. 

The economic analysis was conducted over the project’s 25-year lifespan, taking into account the “project” 

situation and the current level of cashew nut production yields under the project, which will increase from 350 

kg per hectare to 700 kg in the coming years for the plantations developed.  These yields per hectare will 

increase from 1,000 kg to 1,200 kg in the year of full production (full operation) for the new plantations 

established under the project, i.e. around 2027. It is also assumed that the project will start production one 

year after completion, in 2024/25. Furthermore, through the Facilitation Fund to be made available to farmers, 



 

9 

 

the project will only support investments during the implementation phase, in other words over the period 

2020-2024. The table below outlines the activities eligible for the Facilitation Fund hosted by FNDA. The 

Fund amounts to UA 3,608,700 (CFAF 2,874,286,000). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Finally, the unit prices and costs used are those applicable in the country and recorded during the field mission, 

at the level of producers, processors and authorised institutions in the sector. Details of the project economic 

analysis tables and other assumptions used to conduct the economic analysis are given in Appendix B7. 

 At the economic level. The project is economically viable and is relatively responsive to a 10% 
increase in economic expenditure, since the economic rate of return of 29.84%, although 

interesting, drops to 27.41% with an NPV of 6.562 billion, i.e. a decrease of CFAF 2.7 billion 

compared to a decrease of 2.43 points in profitability. Moreover, a 10% drop in income reduces 

economic profitability by nearly 4.30 points or approximately CFAF 4.910 billion.  The 

combination of both has a significant impact on the project's economic profitability: a 

simultaneous increase in operating costs of 10% and a 10% increase in income gives an ERR 

of 22.76% and an NPV of 20% (CFAF 2.126 billion), which indicates that the project remains 

relatively sensitive to these two factors occurring concurrently. Even under this scenario, the 

return on investment would be achieved after 2 to 3 years of project implementation (2027), 

i.e. three years after the project becomes operational – another proof that the project is 

economically viable. The project will also create thousands of jobs for both youths and women 

wishing to participate in the sector (see jobs under project Components A and B). 

 At the financial level. The financial analysis focused mainly on income generated along the 
supply chain by the various stakeholders: nursery growers, cashew nut farmers on old and new 

plantations, processors and raw nut exporters. 

 Nursery growers. The project will give them greater control over grafted plant production 
systems through the series of training sessions that they will undergo, improve their 

farming methods and increase the area under cultivation. Three pricing assumptions for 

the transfer of grafted plants studied on three types of farms will also boost nursery 

growers’ additional income per hectare compared to a no-project situation (see Annex 

B.7 for more details).  

Regarding the income derived by the other stakeholders, the financial gains for all stakeholders amount to 

CFAF 263.287 billion, i.e. an annual income of around CFAF 13.364 billion (see further details in Technical 

Annex B7). 

 In UA Thousand 

Activities to be Financed Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 TOTAL 

A1.3.1  Production of grafted plants in irrigated 

nurseries (15 ha) 0 1.66  1.72  1.77  0  5.15  

A1.3.2  Rehabilitation of old plantations, 

including by grafting (15,000 ha)  0  266.39  342.98  423.93  363.87  1397.17  

A1.3.3 Establishment of new plantations of 

3,000 ha in 2024 with agricultural insurance. 0  466.19  480.17  247.29  254.71  1448.36  

B4.1.3  Strengthening and modernisation of 10 

existing cashew apple juice production units 0  169.73  174.82  0  0  344.55  

B4.1.4  Reinforcement and modernisation of 12 

existing cashew nut production units 0  203.68  209.79  0  0  413.46  

Total 0  1107.65  1209.48  672.98  618.58  3608.70  



 

10 

 

Situation with 

Project 

Farm P1 Farm P2 Farm P3 

Assumption 1: 

CFAF 300/plant 

Additional 

income per 

hectare (CFAF) 

14 482 094 Additional 

income per 

hectare 

(CFAF) 

6 960 000 Additional 

income per 

hectare 

(CFAF) 

13 571 429 

Assumption 2: 

CFAF 500/plant  

Additional 

income per 

hectare 

(CFAF) 

64 482 094 Additional 

income per 

hectare 

(CFAF) 

56 960 000 

 

Additional 

income per 

hectare 

(CFAF) 

63 571 429 

 

Assumption 3: 

CFAF 400/plant 

Additional 

income per 

hectare (CFAF) 

39 482 094 Additional 

income per 

hectare 

(CFAF) 

31 960 000 Additional 

income per 

hectare 

(CFAF) 

38 571 429 

 

3.2. Environmental, Social and Climate Impact 

3.2.1 Environmental and Social 

The Project has been classified under Category 1 according to the Bank's Environmental and Social Safeguards 

Instruments and in compliance with Benin's relevant regulations. Given the project’s specificity, an 

Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was defined and validated at the national level. 

Overall, project activities will have major positive environmental impacts but will also entail some significant 

risks. Activities likely to have negative impacts include rehabilitating and extending cashew plantations, 

setting up socio-economic/community infrastructure, etc. 

Potential negative impacts. The project's negative environmental and socio-economic impacts include 

pressure on land resources and the risk of encroaching on the forest cover. There are very strong pressures on 

land due to the extension of the cultivated area following easy access to inputs and credit. Vegetation is 

destroyed and used to satisfy agricultural, livestock and people’s needs for forest products and derivatives. 

Declining soil fertility and low use of fertilisers for food crops cause the expansion of clearing and burning of 

savannahs and forests, at the expense of crops.  

Potential positive impacts. Therefore, project activities will have considerable positive impacts, among which 

development of production systems that would guarantee farmers significant and sustainable income, in 

addition to helping them to master innovative, value added-generating practices. Other positive outcomes 

include diversification of activities, improvement of the quality of life for youths and women, better access to 

social infrastructure and facilities, expansion of trade and income-generating activities, opening up of 

production areas, improvement of access to basic social services (health agencies, maternities, etc.), 

development of the production and distribution subsectors, etc. It is also worth mentioning the regeneration 

of degraded land, the improvement of the forest cover and the increased carbon sequestration capacity. 

Consultations with various project stakeholders showed high enthusiasm and total support for the project. 

According to them, the project will reduce emigration and foster local development. The project will also 

contribute to strengthening the resilience of people and ecosystems to climate change. 

Mitigation measures. The project provides for the construction of a number of socio-economic facilities and 

infrastructure to improve the population's access to them and open up certain production zones. Various other 

measures are also planned to improve the project's positive impacts, to which must be added the 

recommendations made during consultations. The risk of increasing pressure on land resources and 

encroaching on the forest cover figures among the major project environmental and socio-economic impacts. 

The following measures and recommendations were proposed: information and awareness-raising campaigns 

among all stakeholders; involvement of local authorities and communities, establishment of a consultation 

forum, building the capacity of the various stakeholders in the sector and setting up a programme to support 

the preservation and restoration of natural resources. The Environmental and Social Management Plan 



 

11 

 

(ESMP) has identified various measures, some of which particularly concern the construction of feeder roads 

and support infrastructure. These will be included in the bidding documents and service providers will be 

required to implement them during works. Moreover, in addition to the project, which incorporates the cost 

of certain activities, the ESMP provides for an additional CFAF 430,000,000 to cover environmental and 

social measures, among others. 

3.2.2 Climate Change: Spatial and temporal variations in rainfall are a real concern in undertaking 

agricultural activities in the project area as well as in all of the country's central and northern regions. The 

project would ensure the application of good agricultural practice by promoting the deployment of appropriate 

technical procedures. Where they exist, tools for establishing warning systems, such as collecting, processing 

and communicating climate data to stakeholders, are insufficient and/or obsolete. The project will contribute 

to improving these procedures by building capacity in terms of equipment, data collection and processing in 

the DDAEP areas, as well as ways of communicating with stakeholders. Training DDAEP officers in proper 

data collection is essential, as is the facilitation of a monthly meteorological sheet with trends observed. The 

project will support all activities already carried out in the region by INRAB to disseminate drought-resistant 

varieties of food crops produced on the sites. 

3.2.3 Gender mainstreaming and women's empowerment: the project will promote the inclusive 

approach with the strong involvement of youths, women, disadvantaged groups, local authorities and the 

private sector. 

3.2.3.1 Gender analysis of the cashew nut supply chain. Cashew nut cultivation involves men and women 

throughout the value chain, but with different roles and responsibilities. Given the perennial nature of cashew 

nuts, cultivation is mainly dominated by men because of women's limited access to land, which is a major 

constraint to their access to production. It is estimated that 90% of the plantations are owned by men. The 

presence of women in the sector as regards the production function is 10%, mostly comprising smallholders 

(less than 5 ha). Overall, women process, market and distribute the processed products since they have more 

expertise in conquering the market and the consumer. To overcome the gender inequalities observed, the 

project plans to carry out the following activities:  

3.2.3.2 Strengthen women's productive capacity. The project will provide training for all women directly 

involved in the project and traditional leaders on land security and women's rights to acquire land. An 

awareness-raising campaign on community user rights, conflict prevention and management mechanisms will 

be organised to facilitate support to women cashew nut cooperatives in acquiring land and land title in the new 

plantations. Out of a planned area of 3,000 ha of new cashew plantations, at least 30% will be allocated to 

women. To achieve this, the project will organise women producers into structured and operational groups to 

facilitate access to and use of the allocated plots. Farmers will be sensitised to cultivate some crops in 

association with cashew nut farming (maize, soya and groundnuts) to combat malnutrition and promote 

balanced nutrition. The project also includes a set of integrated services for women to improve their access to 

socio-economic infrastructure and innovative production technologies. The rehabilitation of rural roads, 

construction of storage warehouses, consolidation centres and installation of improved village water supply 

(HVA) will help to overcome the difficulties associated with the evacuation and preservation of cashew apples 

and nuts, and will facilitate access to drinking water in the villages around the sites to be developed. To take 

better account of women's needs in terms of access to factors of production, the project will help women to 

access processing materials and equipment through the Access Facilitation Fund under the FNDA. Women, 

individually or in cooperatives, will be able to benefit from the financing upon presentation of a bankable 

business plan. 

3.2.3.3 Building management, transformation and social life skills. As part of the plan to build technical 

capacity, all women directly involved in the project will receive literacy education, to reduce or eliminate the 

high rate of female illiteracy in the region. To build on the past record of women's leadership and strengthen 

their presence in governance structures in this very weak sector, the capacity of women in cashew apple and 

nut processing cooperatives and that of women farmers will be strengthened, particularly in simplified 

accounting, cooperative management, procurement and inventory management, leadership and 



 

12 

 

entrepreneurship, business plan development, capital mobilization, marketing and networking, to facilitate 

their access to finance. They will also benefit from capacity building in cashew nut and apple processing, as 

well as in equipment maintenance. The project's support for life skills development will focus on reproductive 

health, family planning, nutrition, social cohesion, culture of peace and conflict management. From a 

reproductive health perspective, modules on reproductive health, social cohesion and nutrition will be 

provided during the various training sessions envisaged under the project and dedicated to women. 

3.2.3.4. Improving gender knowledge. PADEFA-ENA will also contribute to strengthening the low level of 

gender responsiveness among stakeholders. To achieve this, a monitoring/evaluation system will be set up as 

part of project monitoring. The system will incorporate gender-disaggregated measurement indicators for 

knowledge enhancement on the different categories of beneficiaries, and for monitoring the impact of 

interventions by gender. Furthermore, a gender organisational audit of stakeholders will be conducted with 

the support of a consultant or a gender consulting firm. This audit will propose a gender-based technical 

capacity-building programme to address identified weaknesses. Support will also be provided for the 

introduction of gender training modules for agronomists and agricultural specialists at the Calavi, Ketou and 

Parakou Agronomic Science Faculties (ASFs) to ensure that gender equity is sufficiently reflected in 

agricultural operations. The feasibility of this curriculum consolidation will be discussed with the heads of the 

universities of Abomey-Calavi, Ketou and Parakou, and will depend on the medium-term training objectives 

of these institutions.  

3.2.3.5 Improvement of women's representation on decision-making bodies. The project will promote 

women’s integration and leadership in management committees and executive boards of professional 

organisations with the objective of attaining a 30% quota of women in decision-making positions. The project 

will also structure at least 50% of women's organisations active in the cashew nut sector. A gender specialist 

will be recruited into the project management unit to carry out and coordinate the proposed activities. 

3.2.3.6. Gender Marker System Categorization. The project is classified under Category 2 of the Gender 

Marker System. Details of comprehensive gender analysis and action plan are given in Technical Annex B.7. 

A CFAF 830 million budget (i.e. UA 1 million) has been set aside for gender promotion and women’s 

empowerment activities.   

3.2.4 Youth and Women's Employment and Inclusion: the project area has a high youth population 

(over 40% of the population). Relatively, more young men are employed (54%) than young women (59%). 

Moreover, young people aged 14-24 represent a significant share of the labour force in the informal sector 

compared to the overall population (91.1%), more so for young men (94.1%). The project will improve youth 

and women’s employment indicators. It will contribute to developing, structuring and financing new trades 

(private service providers, PSP) with a view to creating new jobs in rural areas, increasing cashew nut 

production (nurseries, maintenance specialists, grafters, plant health specialists, storage warehouse managers, 

input distribution kiosk managers, maintenance and care technicians, etc.) and processing (raw cashew nut 

shelling, cashew apple juice manufacturing, cashew shell processing). In this context, the project will finance 

training and contribute to the installation of 300 young PSP volunteers (30% of whom women). This material 

capacity building, combined with technical capacity building, will improve the productivity of young 

agricultural entrepreneurs and subsequently their income. Moreover, during the rehabilitation of old 

plantations and the establishment of new cashew orchards, youths trained by the project will be invited by 

SME promoters to provide remunerated service. The project will support ongoing initiatives in some 

municipal councils in the project area to train and set up young nursery operators. Therefore, an innovative 

financing mechanism will be carefully studied and put in place to facilitate the installation of the young people 

targeted. The technical expertise of the Faculty of Agricultural Sciences (FSA) of the National University of 

Abomey-Calavi will be leveraged in this regard. A consulting firm will also be hired to assist young 

entrepreneurs to prepare their feasibility studies and business plans. Girls must account for at least 30% of the 

young entrepreneurs supported by the project. Furthermore, the project's support for the establishment of 

private agro-industrial units will promote the employment of youths and women in particular. This will be the 

case with the planned establishment of 20 satellite cashew nut shelling units, mainly for women’s 

cooperatives, and the creation and/or modernisation/strengthening of 10 cashew apple juice production units 



 

13 

 

through the Facilitation Fund. The project will facilitate access to financing for these ongoing initiatives and 

encourage new operators to set up business in the various links of the sector. Overall, the project will help to 

generate 10,000 jobs for young people and women in the cashew nut value chain. The group of women 

involved in processing activities will be among the major target groups for nutrition awareness activities, 

linking them to processed products that provide nutritional benefits. 

3.2.5 Forced Resettlement: PADEFA-ENA's activities will not lead to any people displacement or 

resettlement. 

IV. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1. Implementation Arrangements 

4.1.1 Procurement Arrangements. Procurement of goods (including services other than those of 

consultants), works and consultancy services financed by the Bank under the project will be in accordance 

with the Procurement Framework for Bank Group-financed Operations, October 2015 edition, and the 

provisions set forth in the Financing Agreement. More specifically, procurement will be carried out as 

follows: 

 The Borrower Procurement System (BPS): procurement methods and procedures (PMP) 
under Benin's procurement system, including its implementing legislation and decrees (Law 

No. 2017-04 of 19 October 2017 on the Public Procurement Code and its subsequent decrees 

and implementing regulations), using national standard bidding documents or other bidding 

documents as approved during project negotiations for low-complexity works and goods 

contracts provided for under the project and generally available in Benin, for which the 

fiduciary risk is considered relatively low.     

 The Bank's Procurement Methods and Procedures (BPM): the Bank's standard procurement 
methods and procedures, based on relevant standard bidding documents for larger and more 

complex works and goods contracts, as well as consultancy services, deemed most appropriate. 

4.1.2 Procurement Risk and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): country, sector and project risk assessment 

as well as assessment of the executing agency’s procurement capacity were conducted and the results used to 

guide the decision on the choice of the procurement system (Borrower or Bank) for specific activities or set 

of similar activities under the project. The project executing agency is the Territorial Agricultural 

Development Agency of Pole 4 (ATDA4) supervised by the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries 

(MAEP). ATDA4 is a financially autonomous social, cultural and scientific public institution/legal entity. 

ATDA4 is not fully operational because only members of the Board of Directors and some managers have 

been appointed. Consequently, the procurement risk is deemed high. The ATDA4 procurement bodies 

(Procurement Officer, Public Procurement Commission and Public Procurement Control Unit) do not exist, 

and staff of the Project Coordination Unit have not yet been appointed or recruited, including the procurement 

specialist to be dedicated to the project and who would have the necessary qualifications and experience. To 

reduce the risk to "moderate" or even "low", the Government has decided that ATDA4 will use the 

procurement organs of its parent ministry (MAEP) for procurement purposes. An assessment of MAEP’s 

capacity, expertise and experience have revealed that it is competent in this regard, given its experience in 

managing several projects financed by various donors, including the Bank. Moreover, ATDA4 shall recruit a 

procurement specialist dedicated to the project, whose profile and qualifications shall be approved beforehand 

by the Bank. Furthermore, it shall set up its own procurement organs. The Borrower and the Bank shall agree 

on a procurement plan for the first 18 months of the project, which shall be updated annually or as required, 

to take into account actual project implementation needs. Any amendment to the plan shall be subject to the 

Bank's prior approval. Appropriate risk mitigation measures have been included in the PERCA action plan 

indicated in Paragraph B.5.9 of Annex B5. 



 

14 

 

4.1.3 Financial Management and Disbursement. ATDA4 was established on 27 February 2017. 

Appointed by the Council of Ministers on 13 June 2018, its Board of Directors comprises a Director General 

(DG), a Director of Administration and Finance (DAF) and technical staff. The PADEFA-ENA steering 

committee is presided by the Chairperson of the ATDA4 Board of Directors. However, it should be noted that 

ATDA4 still has no financial management system in place to guarantee transparency, traceability and 

accountability regarding the use of project funds. To get to that level, the Beninese Government shall first 

establish and operationalise ATDA4 by taking the following measures: (i) finalise the organisational chart in 

accordance with the principles of internal control, in particular the separation of incompatible functions, with 

the appointment/recruitment of managers, especially those in the Directorate of Administration and Finance 

(Heads of Administration and Maintenance, Accounting and Finance, Procurement) and staff assigned to them 

(Accountant, Cashier). It is worth mentioning that on 17 April 2018, the Government appointed an accountant 

to manage funds for ATDA4 operations. The accountant is under the supervision of the Inspectorate General 

of Finance and the Bureau in charge of analysis and investigation; (ii) prepare the Administrative, Financial 

and Accounting Procedures Manual covering expenditure management cycles (procedures for the 

procurement of goods and services), assets management (fixed assets, stocks), cash flow management (orders, 

disbursement, cash flow monitoring and control) and resource mobilization (capital call, direct payments), the 

accounting, financial and budgetary information cycle, the staff management cycle and the control and internal 

audit cycle; (iii) implement an integrated multi-project and multi-station management system for maintaining 

the project's budgetary, analytical and general accounts; the general accounting should be compatible with 

private commitment-type accounting, in line with SYSOHADA principles and norms; (iv) set up  internal 

audit mechanisms within the General Directorate, by recruiting an internal auditor to ensure that the project's 

internal control system is operational and effective; and (v) establish external audit mechanisms, including the 

recruitment of independent external auditors in accordance with the terms of reference agreed with the Bank 

and in line with the Bank's requirement to submit audit reports by 30 June of the year following the year 

audited. Pending the establishment of project management and operationalisation structures, the overall 

fiduciary risk, including the inherent risk and the risk of non-control, and resulting from the assessment of the 

ATDA4's financial management capacity, will remain high. Details are provided in the Technical Annexes of 

the Appraisal Report. With regard to the line of credit component and/or a guarantee fund to partner banks to 

finance targeted and/or dedicated investments in the cashew nut production, processing and marketing sector, 

an agreement will be signed with the National Agricultural Development Fund (FNDA). An assessment of the 

FNDA has shown that it is relatively new given its date of establishment; its structure is gradually being set 

up. Although not all key positions have yet been filled, there is a recruitment plan in place to address this 

weakness in the very short term. The Fund is supported by the Government of Benin and certain technical and 

financial partners, including the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation, the Belgian Cooperation 

Agency and the European Union Delegation. Through various multifaceted support measures, the structure 

obtained all the management tools required for its operation as of end-2018, particularly the administrative, 

accounting and financial procedures manual, including an organisation chart and job descriptions, an 

operational procedures manual for various windows, and a monitoring/evaluation manual. Furthermore, the 

Fund also set up a computerised accounting and financial management system. However, these tools have not 

yet been put to the test since they were installed quite recently. Therefore, it is imperative that prior to 

allocating resources to FNDA: (i) the recruitment process for key staff must be finalised; (ii) staff must be 

trained on using the management tools and a copy of each manual must be given to every staff; (iii) the 

integrated accounting and financial management system must be configured to record expenditure by activity 

and resources by source of financing, since the FNDA is meant to receive funding from various sources.  

Disbursements: Fund resources will be disbursed in accordance with Bank rules and procedures, particularly 

as contained in the Disbursement Manual. The following three payment methods will be used: (i) direct 

payment for the procurement of works, goods and services; (ii) the special account method for operating 

expenses to be charged to the ADF grant. A special account will also be opened under the ADF loan to receive 

facilitation funds meant for the FNDA; and (iii) reimbursement for expenditures pre-financed by the 

Borrower/Donee, in agreement with the Bank. The FNDA will open a dedicated account only for facilitation 

funds transferred periodically from the dedicated loan account.  Two agreements will be signed in this regard: 

(i) an agreement between the Donee and FNDA specifying the terms and conditions for providing the funds, 



 

15 

 

including FNDA management fees and any interest during reimbursement to the Caisse Autonome 

d'Amortissement (CAA); (ii) an agreement between FNDA and the Caisse Autonome d'Amortissement (CAA) 

specifying the terms and conditions for reimbursing the funds to CAA upon project completion and where 

applicable, after a grace period. FNDA will be required to check the loan applications to be financed, in 

addition to closely monitoring the funds disbursed to financial service providers. Regular reports will be 

prepared and forwarded to both the project and the Bank. Facilitation funds will be disbursed based on a six-

monthly budget through approved applications. Regular periodic reports will be produced and forwarded to 

the project and the Bank. A counterpart account will be opened to receive counterpart funds. The fiduciary 

risk of cash management will remain high if the above provisions, which guarantee the permanent availability 

of counterpart funds, are not adopted. 

4.1.4 External Audit. Project audit shall be carried out by an audit firm acceptable to the Bank, recruited 

for a period of one year renewable, depending on the quality of services delivered and over a period not 

exceeding three financial years. The terms of reference shall require the Bank's approval and include yearly 

audit of funds made available to FNDA, at the same time as the project itself. The auditor shall give an opinion 

on the performance of the special account, its compliance with contractual clauses, the performance of 

agreements and dossiers submitted and financed. Upon project completion, this mission will be entrusted to 

FNDA's external auditor and a copy of the auditor’s reports shall be sent to the Bank. The ATDA4 shall 

forward the PADEFA-ENA audit reports to the Bank latest 30 June of the year following the end of the audited 

financial year. Audit fees will be paid from project resources, using the direct payment method. 

4.2. Monitoring  

4.2.1 The project will be implemented over five years, from the first quarter of 2019. The Bank will 

organise the launch mission when the team is in place and all necessary conditions have been met for a quick 

and efficient start of the project. 

4.4.2 Internal monitoring/evaluation will be provided by the project’s Internal Monitoring and Evaluation 

Department (SSEI), and will cover physical and financial monitoring, by component and expenditure 

category, in addition to assessing the project's impact on beneficiaries and the environment using relevant 

indicators established in a concerted manner. The SSEI will be supported in the beginning by a consultant to 

establish/confirm the baseline situation, and implement a monitoring and evaluation system incorporating 

verifiable indicators. The baseline study will include the gender profile in agriculture, to deepen the knowledge 

of beneficiary groups, especially on socio-economic aspects. This system must be operational latest six months 

after project take-off. In this regard, the project will produce quarterly and annual activity reports highlighting 

implementation status and outcomes of various components, in line with the performance indicators set out in 

the logical framework. 

4.2.3 The MAEP Directorate of Planning and Forecasts (PPD/MAEP) will be charged with external 

monitoring and evaluation, jointly with CAA and DGFD. The project will make resources required for this 

purpose available to the DPP, CAA and DGFD. Provision has been made for a mid-term review to ensure that 

the project is running smoothly and to propose any necessary adjustments. A joint final assessment is also 

scheduled towards the end of the project to draw lessons and build on project achievements. The AfDB 

Country Office in Benin will play an important role and participate in Bank supervision missions and 

monitoring meetings organised by the Government. In addition, the Bank will monitor the implementation of 

project activities through quarterly progress reports submitted by the PMU. Below is a summary of the project 

implementation schedule. 

Table 4.2.3: Implementation and Supervision Schedule 
Appraisal  June 2018 ADF 

Preparation of priority RFPs and BDs June 2019-June 2020 ATDA 4/MAEP 

ADF loan and grant negotiations End-February 2019 GVT/ADF 

ADF loan and grant approval 27 March 2019 ADF 

Signature  April 2019 ADF/GVT 



 

16 

 

PMU recruitment  January-April 2019 Consulting 

Firm/GVT/ADF  

ADF loan ratification  2nd quarter 2019 GVT 

Authorisation of first disbursement 2nd   quarter 2019 ADF 

Project launch  July 2019 ADF/GVT/PMU 

Signing of agreements August-October 2019 PMU/Technical 

Departments  

Preparation of remaining DPs and 

BDs 

2nd semester 2019 PMU/ATDA 4 

Execution of works and services 2019 – 2020 Contractors/Firms/PMU 

Midterm review December 2021 ADF/GVT/PMU 

Project closing date 30 June 2024 PMU/GVT/ADF 

Completion report  1st  semester 2024 ADF/GVT 

4.3. Governance. Progress has been made in economic and financial governance. Reforms have been 

implemented to strengthen public finance management and mitigate fiduciary risks. However, there is still 

need for improvements with regard to domestic resource mobilization, public resource programming and 

allocation. Although progress has been made in aligning the public procurement system with WAEMU 

guidelines, sluggish procurement persists as one of the main weaknesses that hamper the implementation of 

development programmes. 

4.4. Sustainability. The project aims to initiate real sustainable development, by placing sector 

stakeholders at the heart of decision-making while building their capacity to assume new responsibilities. An 

intervention process governed by eligibility criteria will be adopted to ensure the effective involvement of 

beneficiaries and avoid potential conflicts. The project will support communities to enhance their technical 

and organisational capacity, thereby fostering better expertise and ownership. Specifically, committees will 

be set up or revitalised at site for the proper management and regular maintenance of collective socio-

economic infrastructure. Private sector involvement in cashew nut processing and marketing activities is also 

a guarantee for sustaining the dynamics of the value chain. The sustainability issue, including the maintenance 

and management of infrastructure set up, was a central concern during project design. Therefore, measures 

will be taken for each type of infrastructure to ensure proper management and maintenance: maintenance of 

rehabilitated rural roads (comprehensive agreement signed with municipal councils); private sector 

involvement (through a PPP mechanism) in the management of storage warehouses; and the establishment of 

committees to manage improved village water supply systems. 

4.5. Risk Management. The foreseeable inherent project risks include: (i) risk related to land conflict. 

This could be mitigated by supporting the social assessment process for cashew plantations to be rehabilitated 

and new farms to be established. In this regard, the project provides support for land tenure security at the 

sites; (ii) transhumance risk, which could be mitigated by supporting municipal councils in developing 

endogenous conflict management mechanisms; and (iii) risk related to the low level of support from 

stakeholders in the sector, which will be mitigated through information/awareness campaigns and support for 

strengthening cooperatives and trading platforms at all levels of the value chain; (iv) as regards the risk of 

work execution delays, the mitigation measures would include having recourse to suitable procurement and 

parcelling methods, bidding documents for service roads and construction of storage warehouses prepared 

with the assistance of the delegated contracting authority. 

4.6. Knowledge Building. PADEFA-ENA will contribute to the training and knowledge consolidation 

of the various stakeholders, especially producers, through Component B "Develop value chains", especially 

thanks to the support and training provided by technical departments in terms of outreach, structuring and 

organisation. Using inclusive methods, it will also enable young people and women to develop technical and 

entrepreneurial skills, and to set themselves up on lands with infrastructure and modern farming equipment. 

Finally, the project will establish an integrated knowledge management and sharing system for project 



 

17 

 

activities through the regular dissemination of knowledge and experience on its website and that of ATDA4. 

V. LEGAL FRAMEWORK  

5.1. Legal Instrument 

An ADF Loan Agreement and an ADF Grant Protocol Agreement between the Republic of Benin and the 

Bank Group will be the legal framework for the project. 

5.2. Conditions for ADF Involvement 

5.2.1. Conditions precedent to grant and loan effectiveness: "The effectiveness of the Loan Agreement is 

subject to the Borrower fulfilling the conditions set forth in Section 12.01 of the General Conditions 

Applicable to Loan Agreements and Fund Guarantee Agreements. The effectiveness of the Grant Protocol 

Agreement is subject to its signature by the Fund and the Donee as provided for in Section 10.01 of the General 

Conditions Applicable to Grant Agreements of the Fund”. 

5.2.2 Conditions precedent to first disbursement of the grant and loan: The Fund's obligation to make the 

first disbursement of the grant and loan shall be subject to the respective effectiveness of the Grant Protocol 

Agreement and the Loan Agreement, as stated in paragraph 5.2.1 above, and evidence of fulfilling the 

following conditions to the Fund’s satisfaction, both in form and in substance: (a) evidence of finalisation of 

the organization chart of the Executing Agency and of the appointment by Ministerial Order or of the 

recruitment of the following to the Directorate of Administration and Finance of the Executing Agency: (i) 

Director of Administration and Maintenance; (ii) Director of Accounting and Finance; and (iii) Director of 

Procurement; (b) evidence of appointing the following key members of the Project Steering Committee by 

Ministerial Order: (i) a Chairperson, from the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MAEP); (ii) 

a Vice-Chairperson, from the Directorate General for Development Finance (DGFD/MPD); and (iii) a 

Technical Secretary, from the Executing Agency; (c) evidence that the following key project management unit 

members, whose qualifications and experience would have been deemed satisfactory by the Fund, have been 

recruited on a competitive basis: (i) a procurement specialist; and (ii) an administrative and financial officer; 

(d) evidence of the preparation and deployment of a project administrative, financial and accounting 

procedures manual, including procurement procedures, the terms of which would have been deemed 

satisfactory by the Fund; (e) evidence of the appointment or recruitment of an internal auditor and a 

management controller within FNDA, whose qualifications and experience would have been deemed 

satisfactory by the Fund; and (f) evidence of the signature between the Borrower, the Caisse Autonome 

d'Amortissement (CAA) and FNDA, of the agreement to on-lend a portion of the loan resources, the terms and 

conditions of which would have been deemed acceptable by the Fund. 

5.2.3  Other Conditions: Benin shall also provide the Fund, latest three (3) months following the first 

disbursement of the loan and the grant, with evidence of recruiting: (i) a monitoring and evaluation manager; 

(ii) a specialist in promoting producer organisations and gender; (iii) an environmental and social safeguards 

specialist; and (iv) a chief accountant, whose qualifications and experience will be submitted to the Fund for 

prior approval; (ii) evidence of procuring an integrated and computerised system for the financial management 

of PADEFA-ENA activities, as well as evidence that an administrative, financial and accounting procedures 

manual has been prepared; (iii) evidence of signature of a delegated contracting authority (MOD) agreement 

concluded between a delegated contracting authority, recruited on a competitive basis, and PADEFA-ENA to 

build part of the agricultural infrastructure; and (iv) evidence of finalising the recruitment process and filling 

all key positions within FNDA. 

5.3. Compliance with Fund Policies 

The project complies with all applicable Fund policies. It will be implemented as part of the Bank's 

intervention strategy in Benin as outlined in CSP 2017-2021. 



 

18 

 

VI. RECOMMENDATION 

Management hereby recommends that the Board of Directors of the Fund approve the proposal to award an 

ADF loan of UA 7.12 million and an ADF grant of UA 5.91 million to the Republic of Benin to finance the 

Cashew Nuts Sector and Agricultural Entrepreneurship Development Support Project (PADEFA-ENA) in 

Benin, and under the conditions set out in this report 





























































 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND  
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

BURKINA FASO 
 

 

 

 

SUPPORT PROJECT FOR ESTABLISHING  

AN AGRIBUSINESS BANK (PACBA) 
 

 

 

 
 

PROJECT APPRAISAL REPORT  
 

 

 

 

 

  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

Project Information Sheet 

Customer Information 

BORROWER                    :   Burkina Faso 

 

EXECUTING AGENCIES: Ministry of Economy, Finance and Development (MINEFID) and 

Ministry of Agriculture and Water Management (MAAH) 

Financing Plan 

Source Amount (UA million) Instrument 

ADF 7.500 Loan 

   

   

Government of Burkina Faso 0.126 Counterpart 

Contribution 

TOTAL COST 7.626  

 

Key Financial Information on the Loan 

 

ADF 

Loan 

Interest Type* NA 

Interest Rate Margin* NA 

Service Commission* 0.75% 

Other costs (Commitment Fee) 0.50% 

Tenor 40 years 

Timeframe   2058 

Grace Period 5 years 

FRR, NPV (Baseline scenario) NA 

ERR (Baseline scenario) NA 

 

*Where applicable 

Duration – Key Milestones (expected) 

  

Concept Note Approval March 2018 

Appraisal July 2018 

Country Team October 2018 

Project Approval November 2018 

ADF Loan Effectiveness February 2019 

First Disbursement March 2019 

Last Disbursement March 2021 

Completion September 2021 



iii 

 

Project Summary 

Project 

Overview 

Project Name: Support Project for Establishing an Agribusiness Bank (PACBA) 
Geographical Context: Nationwide 

Implementation Timeframe: March 2019 - March 2021 

Project Cost: UA 7.625 million  

Project 

Objectives 

The project goal is to help increase the growth rate of the agricultural sector and improve its productivity in 

order to reduce poverty and strengthen the resilience of Burkina Faso's rural environment. The specific 

objectives of the project are to: (i) improve access to agricultural financing by establishing an agribusiness 

bank known as Banque Agricole du Faso (Agricultural Bank of Burkina Faso) (BADF); (ii) support the 

country's economic transformation by creating an agro-industrial value chain that provides local 

employment; and (iii) help improve the attractiveness of the agricultural sector for bank financing by 

promoting the establishment of an ecosystem that mitigates risks in the agricultural sector, in particular 

agricultural insurance and warrantage. 

Given the importance of the agricultural sector, the structural transformation of Burkina Faso's economy 

will be based on the development of this sector with respect to production and processing, hence the need 

to address the high marginalisation of this sector as regards financing (only 3.5% of bank loans in 2017). 

Accordingly, in addition to establishing this bank, which receives support from the project, the authorities 

intend, in the medium term, to strengthen the agricultural financing mechanism through the Shared Risk 

Facility, following the example of countries such as Nigeria, Togo, Ghana, etc. 

Needs 

Assessment 

Agriculture is the mainstay of Burkina Faso’s economy. However, its contribution to the creation of national 

wealth remains below its potential. While it employs more than 80% of the working population, it 

contributes only slightly more than 30% to the gross domestic product. The sector continues to face 

constraints on its full contribution to the national economy, particularly production, difficulties in accessing 

financing, and transportation of agricultural products to markets. The proportion of financing devoted to the 

sector accounts for barely 3.5% of bank financing, despite the existence of thirteen (13) banks and four (4) 

financial institutions. 

 

In addition, the unavailability of agricultural insurance, which would even out farmers' income and thereby 

encourage them to repay their loans to financial institutions, is a handicap to agricultural financing. 

Project 

Beneficiaries 

The main beneficiaries are farmers and economic operators engaged in processing activities in the 

agricultural sector. The banking sector, in particular BADF, will witness an improvement in its loans to the 

sector following establishment of the agricultural insurance mechanism. 

Outcomes and 

Impact 

The project will help to create enabling conditions for more sustained and inclusive growth through better 

financing of the agricultural sector, which is a pillar of Burkina Faso's economy. It will improve farmers' 

access to credit and promote the financial inclusion of the farming population. Similarly, the project will 

help to reduce the proportion of non-resilient households.  

Value Added 

for the Bank 

The Bank’s value added resides in the fact that by improving access to agricultural financing and ecosystem 

security through agricultural insurance and warrantage, it will increase and consolidate the impact of projects 

by the Bank and other donors in the sector. Similarly, everyone will benefit from agricultural insurance and 

use of the warrantage mechanism. Agrihub projects supported by some donors will also be open to another 

financing window with BADF.  

Knowledge 

Building 

PACBA implementation will help to build several types of knowledge, particularly: (i) best practice in 

agribusiness investment financing; (iii) the creation of agribusiness project databases to promote the 

emergence of agricultural processing units; and (iv) studies to be conducted on agricultural insurance and 

warrantage. The practices will be disseminated within the administration and to non-State actors through 

the documents produced, procedures manuals, and training sessions that will be organised under the project. 



iv 

 

PROVISIONAL PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE  

 

CALENDRIER D’EXECUTION PREVISIONNEL DU PROJET  

 

 

 

 

 



v 

 

RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 

Project Goal: Help increase the growth rate of the agricultural sector and improve its productivity in order to reduce poverty and fragility 

  RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 
MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 
RISKS/MITIGATION MEASURES 

    
Indicator (Including 

CSI) 

Baseline 

Situation 
Target 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Increase in the growth 

rate of the agricultural 

sector and improvement 

in its productivity 

Annual growth rate of 

the agricultural sector  

 

Primary sector 

productivity 

5.% in 2016                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

 

EUR 544 

/share in 

2016 

6.5% in 2020                                                                                                                                                                              

 

 

EUR 816/share 

in 2020 

PNDES 

monitoring reports 

BADF activity 

reports 

  

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

 

Outcome 1.1: Improved 

access to financing for 

the agricultural sector. 

Share of bank credit 

to the agricultural 

sector 

3.5% in 

2017 

4.5% in 2019 and 

5% in 2020  
  

Risks and Mitigation Measures 

(i) Rising socio-political tensions 

Government commitment to continue negotiations to ensure 

that socio-economic and political demands are coherently 

and reasonably taken into account.  

(ii) Increased security risk 

The Government has redoubled its efforts to provide strong 

and sustainable responses, and has resolutely embraced a 

regional counterterrorism framework (G5 Sahel) to address 

the various threats. 

(iii) BADF’s weak human and institutional capacity to 

properly manage the bank 

BADF's management has extensive experience in banking 

and, particularly, in agricultural financing. In addition, the 

technical assistance contract with CNCA of Senegal will 

provide support to BADF in various areas, particularly in 

information systems management and risk management 

systems and procedures. 

(iv) Governance: Strong Government participation in the 

bank’s capital following the Central Bank's request to pull out 

shareholders deemed financially weak. 

Outcome 1.2: Increased 

agricultural processing 

rate  

Increase in the 

agricultural product 

processing rate 16% in 2016 25% in 2020 

PNDES 

monitoring reports  

 

BADF activity 

reports 

Outcome 2: Enhanced 

resilience of agro-sylvo-

pastoral households, 

wildlife and fisheries to 

risks. 

Proportion of non-

resilient agricultural 

households 

42.68% in 

2017 

35% in 2019 and 

25% in 2020  
  

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

Component 1: Support for improving access to agricultural financing 

Output 1.1: BADF's 

capital is 100% 

subscribed 

Government pays its 

share in BADF capital  
Not done 

100% subscribed 

capital in 2019 

MINEFID and 

BADF Annual 

Reports 

Output 1.2: BADF is 

established 
BADF is established Nil 

WAEMU 

Banking 

Commission 

grants 

accreditation to 

BADF 

BCEAO 

Output 1.3: BADF is 

operational 
BADF grants loans Nil 

XOF 34 billion 

of loans to the 

agricultural 

sector in 2020 

and 88 jobs 

MINEFID and 

BADF Annual 

Reports 



vi 

 

created, 30% of 

which were 

created by 

women 

The Burkina Faso Fund for Economic and Social 

Development (FBDES) holds the Government’s participation 

and additional shares owned by organisations considered 

weak by the Central Bank; the Central Bank has requested the 

organisations to pull out of BADF capital. FBDES is 

requested to gradually transfer the shares, as well as the 

Government’s participation, to stakeholders in line with its 

area of activity as soon as possible. In addition, the entry of a 

technical and financial partner is also being considered. 

Independent directors will also be co-opted to the Board of 

Directors to improve the quality of the management structure. 

(v) Risk of strong pressure on management from farmers' 

cooperatives who consider BADF as a bank established on 

their initiative and dedicated to them. 

Strong ownership of the project establishing BADF from the 

outset by farmer organisations, and therefore their 

willingness to ensure the bank's viability. In addition, the 

continued and strong sensitisation of farmer organisations on 

the need for the bank's sustainability. BADF will give priority 

to organised farmers' networks that will help collect customer 

information and, if necessary, collect unpaid debts. 

(vi) Strong competition from existing banks 

Given the strong ownership by farmer organisations, BADF 

will rely on farmer sectors to attract farmer customers. The 

bank's activities will be diversified by financing non-

agricultural sectors. 

 

  

Output 1.4: Gender 

equity in BADF 

operations 

BADF loans to 

women farmers 
Nil 

20% of total 

loans 
Same as above 

Component 2: Support for security of the agricultural financing ecosystem 

Output 2.1: The 

agricultural insurance 

mechanism is 

established and 

operational 

Definition of 

insurance indices and 

products, and 

preparation of 

insurance policies 

 

 

 

Procurement and 

operation of 

automatic weather 

stations that meet 

WMO standards 

Insurance 

indices and 

products not 

defined and 

insurance 

policies not 

prepared 

 

 

No 

automatic 

weather 

stations 

Insurance indices 

and products 

defined and 

insurance 

policies prepared  

 

 

 

 

Automatic 

weather stations 

that meet WMO 

standards 

procured and 

installed 

 MAAE 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MAAE 

Output 2.2: The 

warrantage system is in 

place and operational 

Elaboration and 

adoption of regulatory 

texts 

 

Creation of a 

warrantage database 

 

 

Sensitisation of  

stakeholders 

No texts  

 

Lack of a 

warrantage 

database 

 

Warrantage 

not known 

Regulatory texts 

elaboratd and 

adopted  

 

Warrantage 

database created  

 

Actors sensitised 

on warrantage 

 MAAE 

A
C

T
IV

IT
IE

S
  

    

Components  

Component 1: Support for improving access to agricultural financing 

Component 2: Support for security of the agricultural financing ecosystem 

Resources 

ADF                : UA 7.5 million 

Government    : UA 0.125 million 



1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION BY MANAGEMENT OF THE AFRICAN 

DEVELOPMENT FUND TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS CONCERNING THE 

SUPPORT PROJECT FOR ESTABLISHING AN AGRIBUSINESS BANK (PACBA) IN 

BURKINA FASO 

Management hereby submits this report and its recommendation concerning a proposal to grant an 

African Development Fund (ADF) loan of UA 7.5 million to Burkina Faso to finance the Support 

Project for Establishing an Agribusiness Bank (PACBA). This is an institutional support project that 

will be implemented over the 2018-2020 period to cover Government’s participation in the capital of 

the new bank and establish an agricultural insurance system and a warrantage mechanism in Burkina 

Faso. Therefore, this project will not only strengthen access to agricultural financing but also improve 

the business environment of the agricultural sector and diversify agricultural financing mechanisms. 

 STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE 

1.1. Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives 

1.1.1 The National Economic and Social Development Plan (PNDES) is the national 

reference framework for interventions by the Government and its partners over the 2016-2020 

period for the structural economic and social transformation of Burkina Faso to achieve strong, 

sustainable, resilient, and inclusive growth that will create decent jobs for all and improve social 

well-being (TA A1). PNDES comprises three strategic pillars: (i) Pillar 1: reform institutions and 

modernize the administration, (ii) Pillar 2: develop human capital, and (iii) Pillar 3: boost growth-

oriented sectors for the economy and jobs. PACBA is aligned on Pillar 3, which aims to boost growth-

oriented sectors for the economy, particularly by developing an agricultural, silvicultural, pastoral, 

wildlife and fisheries sector that is productive and resilient. 

1.1.2.  The Bank's intervention strategy in Burkina Faso over the 2017-2021 period is based 

on the country's development framework (i.e. the PNDES), with particular emphasis on the 

structural transformation of the economy. Consequently, the CSP is structured around two 

pillars: (i) promote access to electricity, and (ii) develop the agricultural sector for inclusive 

growth. Under the second pillar, the Bank will focus on the following actions: (a) support reforms in 

the agricultural sector; (b) develop value chains and water management, relying mainly on support 

for the emergence of growth hubs such as Bagré Hub and cotton processing; (c) promote youth 

employment with particular emphasis on the development of agro-business and professional skills; 

(d) access to financing for the sector with institutional and financial support from an agricultural bank 

being established; and (e) construction of access infrastructure to improve the marketing of 

agricultural products and intra-regional trade. In this regard, PACBA is fully aligned on the Bank's 

strategy, particularly with points (i) to (iv) indicated above. 

1.1.3. In addition, by broadening access to economic opportunities for the people, 

particularly farmers, PACBA is aligned on the Bank's Ten-Year Strategy (2013-2022) with 

respect to the objective of inclusive growth. 

1.1.4. PACBA is also consistent with the Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa 

("Feed Africa"), which aims to "transform African agriculture into a competitive and inclusive agro-

industrial sector that can create wealth". 

1.1.5. The project also falls within the Bank's Second Climate Change Action Plan, 

particularly under its pillar relating to intensified financing for adaptation. 

1.1.6  Finally, PACBA falls within the Bank's Financial Sector Development Strategy, which 

aims to "help increase access to financing, deepen African financial institutions and markets in RMCs 



2 

 

and at regional level, and support financial stability", as well as its Gender Strategy (2014-2018) in 

its focus on women’s economic empowerment.  

1.2. Context of the Bank’s Intervention 

1.2.1 With regard to the economic and social context, activity is picking up vigorously after 

a period of economic sluggishness in 2014 and 2015. Burkina Faso's economic growth remains 

strong despite a fragile security context (TA A4-Note on Fragility). Economic growth is estimated 

at 7% in 2018 after 6.7% in 2017 and 5.9% in 2016. The impact of transformative investments under 

the National Economic and Social Development Plan (PNDES 2016-2020), particularly in increasing 

energy supply, has contributed to this economic dynamism. In addition, the performance of the 

extractive industries through increased gold production has provided additional support for economic 

activity. 

1.2.2. In 2018, the Government concluded a three-year programme supported by the IMF’s 

Extended Credit Facility, which seeks to ensure stability of the macroeconomic framework and 

reduce the fiscal deficit to 5% in 2018 and to a maximum of 3% of GDP in 2019, in line with the 

WAEMU convergence criterion.  

1.2.3. As regards execution of the State budget, the Government intends to continue its efforts 

towards controlling current expenditure, consolidating revenue mobilisation reforms, and 

implementing the PNDES. The measures to be taken in 2018 to increase revenue consist in further 

computerisation of tax services (online procedure, digitalisation, etc.), as well as further consolidation 

of business segmentation and reforms to modernise customs administration. 

1.2.4. At the social level, Burkina Faso falls within the category of countries with low human 

development. The latest poverty survey in Burkina Faso (the Permanent Multisector Survey - EMC) 

estimated the poverty rate at 40.1% in 2014 compared to 46.7% in 2009, which corresponds to a 6.6% 

decline. Despite this progress, the prevalence of poverty in rural areas (41%) is higher than that at 

national level and in urban areas (14%).  

1.3. Rationale for Bank Intervention 

1.3.1. Unlocking access to financing for Burkina Faso's key economic sector (TA A3): The 

agricultural sector’s contribution to national wealth creation remains below its potential. While it 

employs more than 80% of the working population, agriculture contributes only slightly more than 

30% to the gross domestic product. The sector continues to face constraints that hamper it from 

contributing fully to the national economy. These constraints include difficulties regarding 

production, accessing financing and transporting agricultural products to markets. Admittedly, the 

financing of the cotton sector is a success story, thanks mainly to the quality of supervision of the 

sector and the smoothing mechanism put in place (TA C4). However, access to agricultural financing 

remains a real handicap, aggravated by the privatisation of BACB, which has created an institutional 

vacuum in agricultural financing. The proportion of financing devoted to the sector accounts for 

barely 3.5% of bank financing, despite the existence of thirteen (13) banks and four (4) financial 

institutions. There are many reasons for the banks' little interest in agricultural financing. One of the 

main reasons is the high risk inherent in such financing but, above all, the lack of control over the 

value chain: the vast majority of operators in the sector can neither offer adequate guarantees nor 

control the storage and marketing schedule for their products.  

1.3.2. Securing the risk environment to ensure BADF viability and promote the attractiveness 

of agricultural financing for commercial banks. The farms face considerable risks (climate, 

markets, health risks, locust invasions, etc.), which can even lead to total production loss. It should 

be noted that the unavailability of agricultural insurance neither allows farmers to even out their 



3 

 

income nor encourages them to repay their debts to financial institutions. Consequently, it is 

necessary to set up an insurance system. Furthermore, the limited diversification of mechanisms to 

promote agricultural financing remains a handicap, hence the need to develop warrantage. In this 

regard, the Ministry of Agriculture in September 2017 prepared a national strategy to guide 

warrantage interventions with the support of the Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA). 

It is now necessary to move from strategy to action. Finally, it should also be noted that banks 

operating in Burkina Faso lack expertise in providing support and advisory services on agricultural 

sector financing. To help it get started and avoid all these pitfalls, BADF has decided to use the 

technical assistance of Caisse Nationale de Crédit Agricole (National Agricultural Credit Fund) 

(CNCA) of Senegal, an institution with more than thirty years' experience in financing Senegalese 

agricultural development.  

1.3.3. Continue and intensify financing actions for agricultural and agrifood SMEs and SMIs 

initiated in sub-projects supported through lines of credit granted by AfDB to Coris Bank (December 

2016) and Fidelis Finance (June 2014). These financial institutions provide significant support for 

agricultural financing, which is neglected by commercial banks. The support will continue and be 

reinforced with BADF, whose medium- and long-term credit forecasts for the agricultural sector is 

estimated at XOF 4.1 billion in 2019 to XOF 14.54 billion in 2024, with an annual growth rate of 

28%. Furthermore, this operation will help to achieve three of the High 5s1 identified by Senior 

Management, namely: "Feed Africa", "Industrialise Africa" and "Improve the quality of life for 

people in Africa", through the financing of agro-industrial projects that will contribute to promoting 

food security and improving living conditions in rural areas.  

1.3.4. Reinforce and consolidate the Bank's involvement in Burkina Faso’s agricultural 

sector: PACBA will reinforce and consolidate the impact of many other existing projects: Support 

Project for Bagré Growth Pole, Participatory Forest Management Project, Cashew Nut Development 

Support Project in Comoé Basin for REDD (PADA-REDD+), Preparation of PPG PGFC/REDD++ 

FIP, Resilience Building Programme (P2RS) and PPF for Youth and Women’s Integration in Agro-

Sylvo-Pastoral Sectors. PACBA falls within the Lending Programme of CSP 2017-2021 and is a 

Pillar II flagship operation.  

1.3.5. Replicating Existing Success Models in West Africa 

1.3.5.1 Banque Nationale de Développement Agricole du Mali (National Agricultural Development 

Bank of Mali) (BNDA) (TA C7), initially based on a fully agricultural banking model, has gradually 

diversified its portfolio to strengthen its viability. At the end of 2017, it had 54% of its portfolio in 

agricultural value chains, and 46% outside the agricultural sector. It is in its 38th year of existence and 

has remained profitable over the past twelve (12) years.  Originally, BNDA was completely State-

owned. After demonstrating its ability to be viable, it attracted several shareholders, including the 

French Development Agency (20% of the capital) and the German Development Finance Agency 

(DEG) (21% of the capital). BADF will be built on this semi-agricultural banking model, with 40% 

of its exposure outside the agricultural sector. This will allow it to mobilise deposits from other sectors 

and mitigate the effects of any crisis in the agricultural sector. In addition, gradual government 

withdrawal from its capital is being considered to make way for financial partners with expertise in 

agricultural financing. 

1.3.5.2. Caisse Nationale du Crédit Agricole du Sénégal (National Agricultural Credit Fund of 

Senegal) (CNCAS) (TA C7), drawing on the lessons learned over the years, has finally found a model 

that guarantees its viability. CNCAS intervention is accompanied by a series of measures to secure 

the agricultural financing ecosystem in Senegal, in particular: (i) agricultural insurance, of which the 

                                                 
1  The five strategic priorities ("High 5s") identified by Senior Management are: "Light up and power Africa", "Feed Africa", "Integrate Africa", 

"Industrialise Africa" and "Improve the quality of life for people in Africa". 



4 

 

Senegalese Government finances 50% of the premiums, enables it to increase the resilience of its 

borrowers, thereby curbing their default rate; (ii) Government’s subsidising of agricultural credit rates 

to allow a greater number of farmers to have access to credit, thereby promoting diversification of 

CNCAS portfolio; and (iii) guarantees to be granted by the Government in financing major 

agricultural projects will allow CNCAS to have sufficient margins under its prudential ratios to 

increase its financing volumes. With PACBA, the Bank intends to support the establishment of a 

secure ecosystem similar to that of CNCAS in Senegal to strengthen BADF’s viability. To that end, 

a technical assistance contract has been concluded between CNCAS and BADF. CNCAS will assist 

BADF in starting up its activity, particularly the information systems, risk systems, and commercial 

strategy. 

1.3.6. Recent Cases of Bank Support for Agricultural Financing 

1.3.6.1 In December 2016, the Board approved a UA 67 million ADF loan for a 40-year period, 

including a 10-year grace period, to the Government of Tanzania to be on-lent to the Agricultural 

Bank of Tanzania. Tanzania Agricultural Development Bank was officially launched and began its 

operations in 2015. It is structured to provide medium- and long-term financing, in the form of loans, 

guarantees and risk-sharing instruments, to fill the financing gaps in agricultural value chains in 

Tanzania. The support for the Tanzania Agricultural Development Bank has not yet been disbursed. 

1.3.6.2. In December 2014, the Board approved a total financial plan of USD 500 million for the 

Federal Republic of Nigeria for the establishment of the Development Bank of Nigeria. The financial 

plan included: (i) an ADF loan of USD 50 million for 30 years, including a five-year grace period; 

(ii) a USD 400 million loan for 20 years, including a five-year grace period, from the Bank's regular 

resources; and (iii) a direct Bank equity participation of up to USD 50 million in the capital of the 

Development Bank of Nigeria Plc (DBN), with a redemption obligation for DBN after 10 years. The 

purchase of the Bank's stake by DBN is guaranteed by the Federal Republic of Nigeria. The Nigerian 

Development Bank has not yet published its first financial performance for preliminary lessons to be 

learned with respect to financial sustainability. 

 

1.4 Aid Coordination 

1.4.1 The Bank plays a key role in coordinating TFP assistance. After chairing the TFP troika from 

2013 to 2014, it was lead partner of the Sector Dialogue Framework for Infrastructure from 2014 to 

2015, and for Water and Sanitation from June 2015 to October 2016, and finally, the Bank was the 

coordinator of TFPs operating in the youth and vocational training sector from 2014 to 2016. 

1.4.2 With respect to overall intervention volume, the Bank is the third-largest development aid 

TFP, after the European Union and the World Bank. The Bank is also Burkina Faso's main partner in 

the infrastructure sector (Annex 3 and TA A6). 

1.4.3. As regards the financial sector, the Bank is Burkina Faso's leading TFP, especially with the 

different lines of credit granted to the country's banks. As for the agricultural sector, the Bank is 

within the TFP average (those between 10% and 50% of the sector's financing). PACBA’s leverage 

effect on the entire agricultural sector will contribute to better complementarity with the actions of 

other TFPs in the sector.  



5 

 

1.4.4 Concerning warrantage, KFW intends to work with the Government for proper 

implementation of the mechanism, thereby creating good complementarity with support provided by 

PACBA in this area. 

1.4.5 Other TFPs are involved, at different levels, in the project’s activity areas (TA A5). 

1.4.5.1 USAID, in partnership with Coris Bank International, held a training seminar on "Financing 

Agricultural Value Chains" on 3-4 December 2016. To narrow the financing gap in the sector, the 

Trade Hub, a USAID programme which, after analysing the financing rate in West Africa by most 

banks to agrifood and agro-industrial sector stakeholders, took the initiative in 2015 to embark on 

expanding its network of banking institutions to facilitate access to credit for small processors and 

exporters. USAID underscored the importance of the Trade Hub Project and for the United States to 

share its experience in credit guarantees for agricultural financing. 

1.4.5.2 Through "Développement International Desjardins (DID)", Canada initiated the Project for 

Professionalisation of Agricultural Credit Methodologies (PMCA). Several MFI networks, supported 

by DID, operate in rural areas and are required to serve this relatively complex market. DID's Project 

for Professionalisation of Agricultural Credit Methodologies (PMCA) essentially aims to support a 

number of the MFIs as follows: (i) promote access to credit for small farmers; (ii) mitigate credit risks 

associated with the sector; and (iii) increase the profitability of MFIs operating in rural areas. 

1.4.5.3 Other TFPs, particularly Proparco and IsDB, have also intervened through lines of credit to 

Société Générale Burkina Faso and Coris Bank International to support private sector development, 

particularly SMEs and SMIs, as well as promote Islamic financing. 

 PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

2.1 Project Objectives and Components 

2.1.1 The project goal is to help increase the growth rate of the agricultural sector and improve its 

productivity in order to reduce poverty and strengthen the resilience of Burkina Faso’s rural 

environment. The specific project objectives are to: (i) improve access to agricultural financing; (ii) 

support the country's economic transformation through the emergence of an agro-industrial value 

chain that provides local employment; and (iii) help improve the attractiveness of the agricultural 

sector for bank financing by promoting the establishment of an ecosystem that mitigates risks in the 

agricultural sector, particularly agricultural insurance and warrantage. 

2.1.2. The project is structured around two components: (i) support for improving access to 

agricultural financing through Government participation in the capital of the newly established 

Banque Agricole du Faso (Agricultural Bank of Burkina Faso) (BADF); and (ii) support for security 

of the agricultural financing ecosystem by establishing an agricultural insurance system and a 

warrantage mechanism. 

2.1.3 Component 1: Support for Improving Access to Agricultural Financing 

2.1.3.1. Through this component, the project will, in view of the high expectations of the population, 

particularly in the agricultural sector, as well as the significant financing needs of agriculture and its 

transformation, enable the Government to play its role as a driving force by acquiring a stake in 

BADF's capital. Considered as a priority in the Bank's 2017-2021 Strategy for Burkina Faso, the 

establishment of this bank will contribute to efforts towards responding to the scarcity of bank 

financing dedicated to the agricultural sector and lay the foundations for effective implementation of 

agricultural value chains. Thus, the Bank will provide financial support to the Government, 

amounting to XOF 5 billion, for the acquisition of a stake in BADF’s capital. It should be noted that 



6 

 

BADF was approved by the Minister in charge of Finance by decree N° 

183/MINEFID/DGTCP/DAMOF on 16 April 2018 after favourable opinion of the WAMU Banking 

Commission on 14 March 2018 and is currently working towards its operationalisation. The Bank’s 

support will be through the reinboursment method (please refer to section 4.1.4.1). 

2.1.3.2  An analysis of the financial sector (TA A2) shows strong expansion of the banking system 

in Burkina Faso, with bank loans increasing by 20% in 2017 and by more than 6% per year on average 

over the 2012-2017 period. The feasibility study on the Banque Agricole du Faso Project2 shows that 

although it is a competitive sector, the prospects for developing the credit market confirm the 

existence of a niche for the establishment of a new bank dedicated to agricultural financing. Since 

ECOBANK's takeover of Banque Agricole et Commerciale du Burkina (Agricultural and 

Commercial Bank of Burkina Faso) (BACB)3 in 2008, there is no longer any credit institution 

specialised in agricultural financing in Burkina Faso. This accounts for the small proportion of bank 

financing to the primary sector, the importance of which can no longer be underestimated. 

Nevertheless, as a precautionary measure, BADF intends to capture only 1% of deposits and loans at 

start-up, and gradually increase its market share to 3% in the fifth year. BADF will provide 60% of 

its assistance to the agricultural sector (particularly agro-industries), with the remaining 40% going 

to the trade and industry sectors. Accordingly, the establishment of BADF will help to increase the 

share of agricultural financing from 3.5% of bank loans in 2017 to 5% in 2020 and 7% in 2022 (or 

EUR 685 million). The establishment of BADF will create 114 new direct jobs4 in 2023 and more 

than 3,000 indirect jobs5 through recruitment in the agricultural companies that will be financed. To 

contribute to gender mainstreaming in agricultural financing, BADF intends to earmark at least 20% 

of its agricultural financing for women farmers, and subsequently increase it by 15% per year. The 

project will help to increase the country's number of bank account holders, which is expected to rise 

from 26% in 2016 to 40% in 2020.6  

2.1.3.3  Once the banking licence has been obtained, BADF will launch its operationaliSation: (i) a 

headquarters has been identified and rehabilitation works are in progress. The towns selected for 

the first two branches outside Ouagadougou are Dédougou and Bobo-Dioulasso; (ii) SOPRA 

Amplitude banking solution has been selected for BADF's IT systems following a competitive 

bidding process; (iii) connections to GIM UEMOA, STAR-UEMOA and SWIFT payment 

platforms are in progress; (iv) staff recruitment, which began with IT staff, will continue with the 

hiring of commercial and credit officers for the headquarters and Dédougou and Bobo-Dioulasso 

branches; and (v) communication is being organised with the creation of a website, the search for a 

logo, and the recruitment of a communication agency to define the bank’s communication strategy.  

2.1.3.4  Detailed Analysis of Banque Agricole du Faso (BADF) (TA C3) 

2.1.3.4.1   Objectives 

2.1.3.4.1.1 The BADF's corporate goal will be to provide its target customers in rural and urban areas 

with a wide range of financial services (credit, savings, insurance, money transfers, etc.) tailored to 

their needs. The target customers will include rural stakeholders (farmers, stock-breeders, fishermen, 

craftsmen, suppliers of agricultural inputs and equipment, agricultural product traders, processors, 

transporters, etc.) and those in other sectors of the national economy. 

                                                 
2  Sponsored by BADF promoters and implemented by ACS consulting firm. 
3  National Agricultural Credit Fund (CNCA), established by the Government in 1979, was transformed in 2002 into BACB, which oper ated as a 

commercial bank and did not grant medium-term loans. It was sold to ECOBANK under the programme with IMF. 
4  Source: BADF feasibility study. 
5  Based on long- and medium-term loans in 2023 resulting in an investment of XOF 120 billion, estimating the average cost of creating a job at XOF 

40 million. 
6  Source: BCEAO. 



7 

 

2.1.3.4.1.2  The specific objectives are to: (i) promote the development of the agricultural sector 

and offer a range of community-based financial services to the rural and urban population 

throughout Burkina Faso; (ii) contribute to the creation of added value in the agricultural sector 

through the financing of value chains; (iii) promote local investment, development and wealth 

creation among the population; (iv) increase the number of bank account holders in Burkina Faso, 

through gradual geographic coverage of the national territory, with the opening of branches in the 

headquarters of urban and rural municipalities that have enormous potential; and (v) become a 

benchmark in rural financing on the banking market in Burkina Faso and WAEMU.  

2.1.3.4.2  Promoters, Shareholders and Management 

2.1.3.4.2.1.  Shareholders: The high government stake in the BADF’s capital is due to: (i) the 

strong government commitment to the establishment of BADF; and (ii) the Central Bank's initial 

remarks on the financial soundness of the benchmark shareholders, particularly farmers’ 

organisations and associations whose financial structure was considered weak by the Central Bank. 

In order not to delay the establishment of BADF, the shares of these shareholders were taken over by 

FBDES pending their reorganisation in accordance with banking regulations. However, given the 

importance of farmer organisations in BADF's business model, they will continue to sit on the Board 

of Directors. 

Structure of BADF’s Share Capital 

 

2.1.3.4.2.2.  Management Team: The majority of the management team will be members of the 

technical committee responsible for managing BADF implementation. The committee has already 

directed the market survey conducted by ACS, and is preparing the application for a banking licence. 

The committee, headed by the Chief of Staff of the Prime Minister and current Chair of the BADF 

Board of Directors, previously a senior executive at BCEAO, is composed mainly of former BACB 

senior executives and representatives of the agricultural community through farmer organisations. 

The General Manager was the last General Manager of BACB7, which he managed for more than 6 

years. In particular, he led the merger and integration of BACB into ECOBANK. He has more than 

thirty years of banking experience. Before joining BACB's General Management, he had held several 

key management positions in the Credit and Commitments Department and the Administrative and 

Financial Department, and was the Deputy General Manager. His long experience in the banking 

sector, particularly in agricultural financing, will be essential to assisting BADF to cope with 

difficulties inherent in a new bank. 

2.1.3.4.3  Governance: BADF is governed by a Board of Directors, whose role is to define 

strategic guidelines for the bank and ensure their implementation. The Board comprises 10 members, 

                                                 
7  Banque Agricole et Commerciale du Burkina  

Actionnaires Part dans le Capital 

Participations publiques 87,56% 

Etat burkinabè (à travers le FBDES) 63,04% 

Sociétés d'Etat 24,52% 

Caisse Autonome de Retraite des Fonctionnaires (CARFO)  14,01% 

Loterie Nationale du BURKINA (LONAB) 10,51% 

Organisations paysannes 0,66% 

Sociétés privées 6,71% 

WATAM SA 4,90% 

CORIS Bank International (CBI) 0,70% 

Autres 1,11% 

Personnes physiques 5,07% 

Total 100% 

 



8 

 

with 4 Government representatives or 5 if the CARFO representative is included. The other 5 

members are as follows: 2 representatives of the farmers' unions (UNPCB and UNPSB), the 

representative of smallholders, the representative of WATAM, and the representative of the rural 

population. It should be noted that three of the four Government representatives, including the Chair 

of the Board of Directors, have no voting rights. However, the Government and its departments retain 

decision-making power with an absolute majority of voting rights. The farmers and the rural 

population are represented by an observer with no voting rights. The Board of Directors does not 

currently have any independent experts in the banking sector, although independent directors will be 

co-opted as time goes on. Similarly, the diversification of shareholders, with the envisaged entry of a 

leading technical and financial partner, could help to remedy the situation. The Board of Directors 

has three standing committees: (i) the Audit Committee comprises at least 3 directors and is in charge 

of the monitoring and control strategy; (ii) the Credit Committee is composed of at least 5 directors 

and has decision-making powers over any commitment exceeding XOF 50 million; and (iii) the 

Selection and Remuneration Committee comprises 3 directors who direct BADF's remuneration and 

selection policy.  

2.1.3.4.4. Strategy: BADF's model consists in mobilising financial resources and then directing 

them mainly towards financing agricultural value chains in Burkina Faso. The end objective is to 

promote the development of the agricultural sector, as well as achieve more inclusive growth by 

unlocking access to financial services and financing for rural people who form the majority of Burkina 

Faso’s population. To fully implement this strategy, BADF intends to mobilise various sources of 

financing, namely: (i) development finance institutions (DFIs) on which BADF intends to rely to raise 

long-term resources at concessional rates for its activity. Since these resources are not included in the 

basic business plan, this leaves BADF some room for manoeuvre as regards its resources; and (ii) 

customer savings, developed and captured for transformation purposes, constitute BADF's total 

resources, excluding equity, over the entire projection period.  

2.1.3.4.5  Financial Analysis 

Capital: The XOF 14.277 billion capitalisation level at start-up is adequate. This provides a risk 

coverage ratio of 48% in the first year, 31% in the second year, and an average of 20% in the 

subsequent three years. BADF's capitalisation level is significantly higher than that required by the 

Central Bank (8%). It is also higher than the national average (9.3% in 2016) and the WAEMU zone 

average (11.3% in 2016). Finally, it is higher than that of CNCAS, whose average over the past three 

years was 16%.  

Assets: BADF expects to attain a credit portfolio of XOF 26 billion at the end of the first year, i.e. 

1% of the total volume of credit at national level. Over the subsequent four years, it expects to post 

an average annual growth of 40%, resulting in a 0.5% increase in the market share to reach 3% of the 

credit market at the end of the fifth year. This volume of credit represents on average 40% of the 

estimated agricultural financing needs in Burkina Faso. The estimate of gain in market share seems 

conservative, given the limited proportion of agricultural sector financing in the existing bank and 

the strong involvement of the farming community in setting up BADF. BADF expects to maintain a 

high quality portfolio with only 1% of loans in default at the end of the first year, and then a 1% 

increase per year subsequently before stabilising at 4% in the fourth and fifth years (compared to a 

national average of 8.8% in 2016). In the long term, it will be essential to secure BADF's environment 

to enable it to maintain such a rate.  

Profitability: BADF expects to post a Net Banking Income (NBI) of XOF 1.4 billion in the first year 

and an average annual growth rate of 60% subsequently, to reach XOF 8.3 billion by 2022. The 

cost/income ratio is expected to improve steadily from 112% in the first year to 39% in 2022, 

reflecting a low delinquency rate, with provisioning charges remaining under control at 16% of NBI 

over the period. As a result, after a first-year deficit of XOF 419 million, BADF is expected to become 



9 

 

profitable in the second year with a net income of XOF 564 million. The net income should then 

increase steadily to XOF 3.1 billion in 2022.  

Liquidity: BADF’s liquidity seems to be comfortable over the entire projection period. The short-

term liquidity ratio8 averaged 150% compared to 100% required by the Central Bank, reflecting the 

preponderance of savings over demand deposits. Over the projection period, term deposits and other 

savings will account for 54% of deposits (46% for demand resources). The long-term structural 

liquidity ratio9 is comfortable over the first two years, at 180% and 132% respectively, compared to 

100% required. It will gradually decline to 106% in 2022, reflecting deposits and savings mostly at 

less than one year. 

2.1.3.4.6. Supervision. Like all WAEMU banks, BADF will be subject to the supervision and control 

of the Banking Commission. In this regard, it is required to comply with prudential and governance 

regulations, as well as all other aspects of WAEMU banking regulations. For all intents and purposes, 

it should be stressed that the regulations are consistent with Basel international norms and standards, 

with a transition phase from Basel 2 to Basel 3 currently underway. 

2.1.3.5  Expected Outcomes of this Component: The expected outcomes include: (i) an increase in 

the share of bank credit to the agricultural sector from 3.5% in 2017 to 5% in 2020; and (ii) an increase 

in the processing rate of agricultural products from 16% in 2016 to 25% in 2020. 

2.1.4 Component 2: Support for Security of the Agricultural Financing Ecosystem (TA C1) 

2.1.4.1 Context  

2.1.4.1.1.  As regards the establishment of BADF, the authorities of Burkina Faso have undertaken to 

establish and operationalise a system to secure the agricultural financing environment. The objective 

is to enable the new bank to operate in a secure environment that allows it to absorb any shocks related 

to climatic hazards and changes in the prices of agricultural products and/or inputs. In addition, given 

the high level of financing needs for agricultural value chains as expressed in PNDES 2016-2020, the 

Government of Burkina Faso hopes to reinforce the attractiveness of the agricultural sector for private 

commercial banks through these mechanisms. 

2.1.4.1.2.  In this connection and through an ADF loan of XOF 888 750 000, PACBA will support 

the operationaliSation of: (i) the agricultural insurance mechanism being designed between Société 

Nationale d'Assurance et de Réassurance du Faso (Faso National Insurance and Reinsurance 

Company (SONAR) and its technical partner, Mutuelle Agricole Marocaine d'Assurance (Moroccan 

Agricultural Insurance Company) (MAMDA); and (ii) warrantage and third-party holding 

arrangements to ensure decent price levels for farmers, even during periods of falling prices. 

2.1.4.4.1.3 A complementary mechanism for securing the agricultural environment is being 

considered, and will be financed by the Government or other donors. The mechanism is the 

Agricultural Credit Security Fund, with funds for natural disasters and interest rate subsidies. 

2.1.4.2 Need for an Agricultural Insurance Mechanism 

2.1.4.2.1. A secure ecosystem is essential to ensure the viability of agricultural banks. An insurance 

mechanism guaranteeing farmers' income in the event of a drop in prices and/or a poor harvest is 

crucial to ensure a minimum income for farmers, enable them to honour their debt repayments and 

thus be able to borrow again to prepare for the new season. In addition, a secure environment will 

                                                 
8  Ratio of outstanding amounts of high-quality liquid assets (cash and quasi-cash) to expected net cash outflows over the next 30 days. This emanates 

from Basel III and is applied in WAEMU zone as from 1 January 2018. 
9  The ratio of stable financing available (equity, long-term debt) to stable financing due. 



10 

 

allow BADF to diversify into several crops, thus avoiding the effects of concentration. In Burkina 

Faso, the examples of the former banks CNCA-B and BACB illustrate this very well. Such a system 

is essential to help BADF maintain a high quality portfolio. In the basic business plan, BADF intends 

to maintain a portfolio with only 1% of loans in arrears at the end of the first year and then 1% increase 

per year subsequently before stabilising at 4% in the fourth and fifth years. The BADF portfolio 

objective in terms of quality is significant when compared to the national average delinquency rate 

of 8.8% over the past three years and the average rate in WAEMU zone at 14.4%. Therefore, an 

agricultural insurance system that can strengthen borrowers' resilience is essential to enable BADF 

to achieve its portfolio quality objectives. 

2.1.4.2.2. Caisse Nationale de Crédit Agricole du Burkina Faso (Burkina Faso National 

Agricultural Credit Fund) (CNCA-B) went through some difficulties in 2002. Those difficulties were 

due to the fall in world commodity prices to below producer prices. Since farmers' income did not 

allow them to meet their loan charges, CNCA was directly affected by the shock due to the lack of a 

safety net. The crisis was exacerbated by the poor organisation of the sectors. Thus, to diversify 

activities and limite risks, the CNCA-B changed its name for Banque Agricole et Commerciale du 

Burkina (Burkina Faso National Agricultural and Commercial Bank) (BACB). 

2.1.4.2.3. Having drawn lessons from CNCA-B, BACB, has focused its exposure on organised 

sectors to facilitate credit collection and limit delinquencies. The cotton sector, which is better 

structured, has benefited the most from BACB financing. In 2007, higher input prices combined with 

poor rainfall affected cotton harvest volumes. Consequently BACB, which had focused on the cotton 

sector, experienced difficulties that led to its acquisition by ECOBANK Group in 2008, although it 

was profitable. 

2.1.4.2.4. In addition, it is necessary to have a secure environment to prevent the agricultural 

bank from being "forced" to move away from its primary role and core business. Better still, by 

securing the agricultural financing environment, the sector will be able to attract commercial banks 

seeking better diversification. The need for such an environment is demonstrated by the success of 

BNDA in Mali and CNCAS in Senegal (TA C7). 

2.1.4.2.5. Finally, it is imperative to reduce the charge of capital of the new agricultural bank to 

enable it to deploy its resources efficiently. The licence granted to the new bank is a generalist bank 

licence that does not take the special nature of the agricultural sector into account. Borrowers in the 

sector have income that are difficult to predict, volatile and very often seasonal. This carries a higher 

risk level, resulting in a much higher charge of capital for agricultural banks. The establishment of an 

insurance fund is crucial to reduce the charge of capital of the new agricultural bank and enable it to 

deploy its resources as effectively as possible and remain competitive with commercial banks. 

Without such a mechanism, the agricultural bank will be constrained in its ability to lend and will 

most often be limited to short-term loans with a requirement for collateral that is difficult for 

agricultural customers to obtain.  

2.1.4.4.3  Agricultural Insurance (TA C1 / C1.1) 

2.1.4.4.3.1 Description: The agricultural insurance mechanism will start with a three-year pilot 

phase in three regions covering 35% of Burkina Faso's agricultural population (Boucle du Mouhoun, 

Centre-West, and East). The pilot phase will involve three crops whose production account for about 

86% of Burkina Faso's annual food consumption (white and red sorghum, rice and maize). As regards 

the production volume, the pilot phase will cover 1,639,800 tonnes, or 36% of annual national 

production volumes. The mechanism will have two specific parameters to trigger compensation - 

performance coupled with climate data (local weather records). This will increase the mechanism’s 

reliability. Triggering compensation that closely reflects the reality of claims is vital to ensure 

credibility of the system.  No mechanism that combines meteorological data and yields has so far 



11 

 

been established in Burkina Faso. Planet Guarantee, in collaboration with Alliance, has launched two 

insurance products since 2011: (i) one for maize based solely on rainfall; and (ii) the other for cotton 

based solely on yield. Unlike the Planet Guarantee system, the mechanism under this project will be 

based on meteorological data collected locally (through mini weather stations) by the National 

Meteorology Agency (ANM). The installation of an adequate number of mini weather stations in the 

pilot phase areas will help to enhance the reliability of the data collected. The mechanism will 

compensate for any errors made by the current weather stations and take into account all types of 

disasters affecting agricultural production, particularly insects.      

2.1.4.3.2  Implementation Arrangements and Actors: This component of the project will be 

implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture. The main actors and their respective roles in the project 

implementation include the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Management (MAAH), Mutuelle 

Marocaine d’Assurances Agricoles (Moroccan Agricultural Insurance Company) (MAMDA), 

Société Nationale d’Assurance et de Réassurance (National Insurance and Reinsurance Company) 

(SONAR-IARD), and the National Meteorological Agency (ANM). The activities supported under 

the project are as follows: (i) definition of insurance indices and products, and preparation of 

insurance policies; and (ii) procurement and operation of automatic weather stations that meet the 

standards of the World Meteorological Organization (WMO). 

2.1.4.3.2  Status: To date, an inter-ministerial technical committee has been set up (end of 2017) 

for the definition of indices and insurance products, and the development of insurance policies. This 

technical committee has since worked with the technical partner MAMDA, the National Agency for 

Meteorology and Société Nationale d’Assurance et de Réassurance (National Insurance and 

Reinsurance Company) (SONAR). The AfDB support expected at this level relates to the financing 

of the work of the committee set up for this purpose. This includes the financing of the continuity of 

the different wokshops already started by the Committee since its set up end of 2017. 

Agricultural Insurance Scheme 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Government
Insurance premium 

subsidy, 50%

Farmers,
Premium, 50 
compensation

Farmers,
Premium, 50 

compensation

Government
Insurance premium 

subsidy, 50%

Moroccan Agricultural 
Insurance Company

Definition of insurance policies
Billing
Insurance products

Install and run meteorological stations
Make data available

Carry and pool the risk with (1)
the other local companies (2) 
the rest at international level via 
reinsurance

National Insurance and 
Reinsurance Company

Sale of insurance product

National Meteorological 
Agency



12 

 

 

 

 

2.1.4.4.   Warrantage and Third-Party Holding Mechanism (AT C1 / C1.2) 

2.1.4.4.1  Description: 

Warrantage (or storage credit) is a loan 

granted to a producer/farmer and 

guaranteed by his/her product harvest. 

The main purpose is to allow the 

farmer/producer to sell his crop when 

price conditions are most favourable. 

Three actors are involved in this 

mechanism: (1) the third party holder 

who offers storage services; it receives, 

stores and manages conservation of the 

agricultural produce under the 

warrantage throughout the transaction; 

(2) in exchange for his produce, the 

farmer receives from the third party 

holder a certificate which shows storage of his/her produce; (3) the bank, in exchange for the 

certificate held by the farmer, makes available to the latter a loan for an amount equivalent to the 

value of the produce stored by the third party holder.  The operation is closed when the farmer sells 

his produce and repays to the bank the amount borrowed.  

2.1.4.4.2  Objective: Create favourable conditions for the successful development of community 

warrantage and third party holder activities. This mechanism allows farmers to access bank loans 

based on the value of their harvest.  

2.1.4.4.3.  Implementation Arrangements and Actors: The project will be implemented 

through the Ministry of Agriculture; the implementation team is still to be set up. The implementation 

will be conducted with the assistance of the German Cooperation Agency through KFW, which has 

shown interest in providing technical support to the Government of Burkina Faso, particularly in the 

area of professional storage credit. The proposed project activities under warrantage are as follows: 

- Identify, prepare and ensure validation of the draft regulatory texts; 

- Submit the draft texts for adoption; 

- Disseminate the adopted regulatory texts; 

- Create a network of all existing warrantage storage facilities; 

- Disseminate storage and agricultural product standards; 

- Build the capacity of warehouse inspection and control mechanisms; and 

- Establish warrantage cooperatives. 

2.1.5.  Project Cost 

The table below provides cost estimates of the various project components. Component 1 has only 

one operation, namely financing of Government's participation in BADF's share capital, for a total 

XOF 5 billion (or UA 6,367,642.19). Component 2 consists of two sub-components: Sub-component 

Warrantage Scheme 

PREPARATION
- Current status
- Information-sensitization
- Planning

NEGOTIATION
PREPARATION OF STORES 
AND STORAGE

50%-80% monetary value of 
the warrantage stock at 

harvest

CREDIT

AGR Development Consumer credit

Farmers’ organizations
BADF

CREDIT REIMBURSEMENT

HARVEST

NO

YES

On-farm
consumption

Stock 
marketing

STOCK RECUPERATION

INDIVIDUAL OR GROUP 
SALE FOR REIMBURSEMENT



13 

 

2.1 "Establishment of an agricultural insurance mechanism"; and Sub-component 2.2 "Assistance to 

the development of the warrantage activities". 

Table 2.1-1 

Project Components and Cost Estimates in UA Thousand 

Sub-Components Description of Components 

Component 1: Support for improving access to agricultural financing 

UA 6,368 thousand  Financing of the share capital 

Component 2: Support for security of the agricultural financing ecosystem  

Establishment of an agricultural 

insurance mechanism  

UA 846 thousand 

 Procurement and installation of automatic weather stations10  

 Definition of insurance indices and products, and preparation of 

insurance policies 

Development of community 

warrantage and third-party 

holder activities  

UA 380 thousand 

 Identify, prepare and ensure validation of the draft regulatory texts; 

 Submit the draft texts for adoption;  

 Disseminate the adopted regulatory texts; 

 Create a network of all existing warrantage storage facilities; 

 Disseminate storage and agricultural product standards; 

 Build the capacity of warehouse inspection and control mechanisms; 

 Establish warrantage cooperatives. 

Project Audit UA 32 thousand 

TOTAL COST UA 7,626 thousand 

 

2.2 Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Explored  

2.2.1 During dialogue with various stakeholders (Government, BADF, farmers’ organisations, 

etc.), several options were presented regarding activities to be supported to improve the agricultural 

financing environment in light of the multiple constraints and challenges. With regard to the project 

implementation arrangements, although the institutional setup was not a problem since it was 

determined by decree for all Burkina Faso projects, there were several possibilities for the 

establishment and management of an implementation unit. The decisions taken were based on the 

need to focus the project on its ambitions in line with the financial package and synergies with other 

Bank projects in the sector, as well as the interventions of other TFPs. 

 

 

                                                 
10

  Measurement of temperatures, air humidity, rainfall and wind speed. 



14 

 

Table 2.2.1 

Alternatives Considered and Reasons for their Rejection 

Establishment of a 

project 

implementation unit  

Establish a project 

implementation unit 

comprising experts recruited 

for the project implementation 

and fully dedicated to the task 

The decree establishing the institutional set-up for projects in 

Burkina Faso determines the de facto financial and technical 

supervisory authority and, in the case of PACBA, it is the 

Ministry of Economy, Finance and Development (MEFD) 

and the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Management 

(MAAH), respectively. MAAH has qualified technical and 

human resources to carry out agricultural insurance and 

warrantage activities. Furthermore, any additional support in 

this regard would be provided as part of the counterpart 

contribution. 

Consider all 

components 

required to improve 

the agricultural 

financing 

environment 

In this respect, the Government 

provides for several actions, in 

particular agricultural 

insurance, warrantage, the 

establishment of a subsidy 

fund and an agricultural 

security fund 

Despite their relevance, the establishment of a subsidy fund 

and an agricultural security fund were not retained, mainly 

because of limited reflection on the tools and their 

complexity, as well as their high financial costs. In addition, 

as regards relevance, urgency, maturity and cost, agricultural 

insurance and warrantage tools are more appropriate for 

support through PACBA. 

2.3 Project Type 

PACBA is an institutional support project financed from ADF resources by a loan intended to: (i) pay 

the Government's participation in the capital of the new BADF amounting to XOF 5 billion; and (ii) 

finance, for an amount not exceeding XOF 888 750 000, the establishment of agricultural insurance 

and warrantage to improve the agricultural financing environment by reducing credit risks inherent 

in this sector in a country like Burkina Faso. 

2.4 Project Costs and Financing Arrangements  

The total project cost, excluding taxes and customs duties, is estimated at UA 7.626 million (about 

XOF 5.988 billion), all in local currency. The cost does not take into account any physical 

contingencies and/or price escalation, which will be borne by the Government of Burkina Faso. The 

ADF contribution to the project financing is UA 7.5 million and covers the financing of Government's 

participation in the capital of BADF (UA 6.368 million) and the cost of establishing an agricultural 

insurance and warrantage mechanism (UA 1.131 million). The tables below provide more details on 

the overall project cost by component, expenditure category and source of financing. The detailed 

cost table is presented in the Technical Annex. 

Table 2.4-1 

Project Cost Estimate by Component 

Components/Sub-Components 
Cost in XOF Billion Cost in UA Million 

% F.E. 
F.E. L.C. Total F.E. L.C. Total 

1. Support for improving access to agricultural 

financing 
 5.000 5.000  6.368 6.368 83.5% 

2. Support for security of the agricultural 

financing ecosystem 
 0.963 0.963  1.226 1.226 16.1% 

3. Project Audit  0.025 0.025  0.032 0.032 0.4% 

TOTAL BASE COST  5.988 5.988  7.626 7.626 100% 

Provision for price escalation (2%)        

Provision for physical contingencies (3%)        

TOTAL PROJECT COST  5.988 5.988  7.626 7.626 100% 

 



15 

 

Table 2.4-2 

Cost Estimate by Source of Financing (in UA Thousand) 

Source of Financing 
Foreign 

Exchange 

Local 

Currency 

in XOF 

Base Cost 

in UA 

Total 

Cost 

ADF   7,500.00 7,500.00 

Government  125.76  125.76 

Other Sources of Financing     

Total  125.76 7,500.00 7,625.76 

Table 2.4-3 

Project Cost by Expenditure Category (in UA Thousand) 

Expenditure Categories 
Foreign 

Exchange 

Local 

Currency 

Total 

Cost 
% Total 

A. Goods 720.00  720.00 8.6% 

B. Services 32.00  32.00 0.4% 

C. Training 209.00  209.00 2.5% 

D. Operating Costs 297.00  297.00 3.6% 

E. Other: Financing of the Government’s 

participation in BADF's share capital 
6,368.00  6,368.00 84.9% 

Total Base Cost 7,626.00  7,626.00 100% 

Provision for implementation contingencies     

Provision for price escalation     

Total Project Cost 7,626.00  7,626.00 100% 

 
Table 2.4-4 

Expenditure Schedule by Component (in UA Thousand) 

Components/Sub-Components 2018 2019 2020 2021 Total 

1. Support for improving access to agricultural financing 6,368     

Financing of Government’s participation in the share capital 6,368     

2. Support for security of the agricultural financing ecosystem  1,226   1,226 

2.1 Establishment of an agricultural insurance mechanism   846   846 

2.1.1 Definition of insurance indices and products, and preparation of 

insurance policies  126   126 

2.1.2 Procurement and operation of automatic weather stations that meet 

the standards of the World Meteorology Organisation (WMO)  720   720 

2.2 Assistance to the development of the warrantage activities  UA 

410,710  380   380 

2.2.1 Preparation of regulatory texts  19   19 

2.2.2 Validation of the proposed texts  13   13 

2.2.3 Workshop for ownership/dissemination of adopted texts  83   83 

2.2.4 Creation of a warrantage database for networking  66   66 

2.2.5 Standards dissemination workshop  59   59 
2.2.6 Sensitisation on the establishment of warrantage 

cooperatives  67   67 

2.2.7 Support for constituent general meetings of warrantage 

cooperatives  73   73 

3. Project Audit  10.6 10.6 10.6 32 

TOTAL COST 6,368 1,236.6 10.6 10.6 7,626 

 



16 

 

2.5 Project Area and Beneficiaries  

PACBA covers the entire territory of Burkina Faso. Consequently, under BADF, not only will its 

products, particularly loans, be open to all agricultural activities in the country, but it will gradually 

open branches nationwide. Agricultural insurance product will start with a pilot phase for three 

regions, while warrantage will cover the entire national territory. By improving agricultural 

production through productivity and processing, as well as the creation of agricultural value chains 

through increased access to agricultural financing, PACBA will benefit all people in Burkina Faso, 

particularly those living in rural and agricultural areas, young people and women, economic 

operators, and particularly agricultural organisations and leaders (TA C5). In addition, by improving 

the business environment for agricultural financing through agricultural insurance and warrantage, 

PACBA will benefit BADF and the entire banking system. Finally, Government’s participation in 

BADF capital will help to complete its financing and bring the capital up to the minimum level 

required by WAEMU banking regulations. 

2.6 Participatory Approach to Project Identification, Design and Implementation  

At project preparation and appraisal, the main stakeholders were consulted, including farmers’ 

organisations, the association of banks and financial institutions, as well as microfinance and 

insurance institutions, and BCEAO. The same applies to the BADF Design and Establishment 

Committee, set up since July 2016 and chaired by the Prime Minister, BADF Management, the 

consulting firm that prepared the BADF accreditation documents, BADF’s technical partner (Crédit 

Agricole du Sénégal) and the Burkina Fund for Economic and Social Development. At Government 

level, meetings were held with the Ministry of Economy, Finance and Development (MINEFID) and 

the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Management (MAAH). Based on these consultations, the 

project challenges and content were determined and PACBA designed.  

2.7 Bank Group Experience and Lessons Reflected in Project Design 

2.7.1 As at 28 February 2018, the total portfolio volume in Burkina Faso was UA 440.09 million, 

for 17 active projects. The overall disbursement rate was estimated at 50% at that date, for an average 

age of 2.8 years. The sector breakdown of the active portfolio comprises transport (52%), agriculture 

(16.1%), energy (14%), water and sanitation (7.7%), private sector (7.9%), and multi-sector projects 

(2.3%). As regards performance, the Bank's portfolio in Burkina Faso is deemed highly satisfactory 

with an overall score of 3.04 on a scale of 1 to 4, and does not contain any problematic projects. Two 

operations are ongoing in the financial sector: (i) a line of credit for UA 2 million granted in 2014 to 

Fidelis Finance, which was used to finance SMEs operating in various sectors, including agrifood; 

and (ii) a line of credit for UA 32 million approved in 2016 and granted to Coris Bank International 

to finance SMEs operating mainly in the agricultural processing sector. Since these operations are 

still active, there are no completion reports for the sector yet. The project design team also drew 

lessons from the Bank's recent experience in establishing the Tanzania Agricultural Bank and the 

Nigerian Multisector Development Bank. 

2.7.2. Overall, the Bank's portfolio in the agricultural sector in Burkina Faso is significant with 4 

operations and 1 PPF amounting to UA 58.88 million. This represents about 15% of the total project 

portfolio (Annex 2). Ongoing operations include: (i) the Bagré Growth Pole Support Project; (ii) the 

Project to Build Resilience to Food and Nutritional Insecurity; (iii) the Classified Forests Participatory 

Management Project (PGFC) and the Comoé Basin Cashew Nut Development Support Project. 

2.8 Key Performance Indicators 

2.8.1 The key performance indicators identified for measuring expected outcomes upon project 

completion are included in the results-based logical framework. The indicators are essentially:    



17 

 

 Project Impact: The annual growth rate of the agricultural sector is expected to 
increase from 5.9% in 2016 to 6.5% in 2016.  

 Project Outcomes: (i) The proportion of bank credit to the agricultural sector is 
expected to increase from 3.5% in 2017 to 5% in 2020; (ii) the processing rate of 

agricultural products is expected to increase from 16% in 2016 to 25% in 2020; and 

(iii) the proportion of non-resilient households active in the agro-sylvo-pastoral, 

wildlife and fisheries sub-sectors is expected to fall from 49% in 2010 to 25% in 2020. 

 Component 1 Outputs: (i) The Government pays its share in BADF's capital, allowing 
for the capital to be closed and for compliance with the prudential standards of 

WAEMU Banking Commission; (ii) BADF is established and operational, and targets 

XOF 34 billion loans to the agricultural sector in 2020; (iii) gender equity in BADF's 

operations with 20% of total loans granted to women in 2020; this figure is expected 

to increase substantially when BADF launches its special product for women. 

 Component 2 Output: (i) the agricultural insurance mechanism is established in 2020; 
and (ii) warrantage is operational in 2020. 

2.8.2 Progress towards achievement of outcomes will be measured at regular intervals, through a 

variety of activities, including regular Bank supervision missions, and quarterly progress reports and 

audits. Objectively verifiable evidence of progress to the highest targets will be obtained from the 

reports of the quarterly portfolio monitoring meetings organised by COBF with the Bank's project 

implementation units in Burkina Faso. 

 PROJECT FEASIBILITY  

3.1 Economic and Financial Performance   

3.1.1  As an institutional support project, PACBA does not generate direct income to be used in 

determining the financial return. However, through the direct and indirect effects of improving access 

to agricultural financing and the degree of processing agricultural products, PACBA would achieve 

economic and social performance. 

3.1.2  Furthermore, with regard to BADF (TA C3) itself, the analysis, based on the documents sent 

to the Central Bank for the 5-year business plan, shows a profitable banking model from the second 

fiscal year, driven by: (i) sustained growth in Net Banking Income (NBI), +60% on average per year 

to XOF 8 billion at the end of the fifth year; the NBI is driven by the portfolio volume whose average 

annual growth of 40% helps to give the bank 3% of the credit market share at the end of the fifth year, 

(ii) optimised operating expenses with a steadily decreasing operating ratio before stabilisation at 

39% from the fourth year onwards; and (iii) a portfolio maintained at a very high quality, with an 

average default rate of 4% as from the fourth year of operation.  

3.2 Environmental and Social Impact 

3.2.1 Environmental Impact (TA B7) 

3.2.1.1 By nature, PACBA is a financial sector project. The sub-projects to be financed by BADF 
will be projects with medium, minimal and/or no negative social or environmental impacts (agrifood, 

services, and soft services). Consequently, it has been classified under Category 4 (2) by the teams in 

charge of verifying the environmental and social compliance of Bank projects (SNSC). BADF is in 

the start-up phase and has not yet started its operations. However, as recommended by SNSC, the 

project will establish an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) in close 



18 

 

collaboration with SNSC teams. BADF will submit the final ESMS to the Bank for opinion and 

approval. 

3.2.2 Impact on Climate Change 

3.2.2.1 Since the project is in the financial sector, it is not in itself vulnerable to climate change, 
neither is it eligible for categorisation by the Bank's Climate Protection System. The sub-projects are 

in the agricultural sector, which is highly exposed to climatic hazards – droughts and floods caused 

by heavy rains and successive rainy days. Local measurements of these climatic hazards will 

contribute to measuring them more appropriately and providing proportional insurance. There are 

risks that other hazards that affect agricultural production may not be taken into account. Such is the 

case with capricious and staggered rainy seasons, their abrupt end not allowing for full maturation of 

crops (shorter duration of the rainy season). 

3.2.3 Social Impact 

3.2.3.1 The social impact of PACBA has many dimensions. First, by increasing agricultural 
productivity and production, it will increase the income of farmers, many of whom are young people 

and women, as well as enhance food security. Better still, not only will income increase but it will 

also be stabilised through agricultural insurance. Similarly, the number of jobs created is expected to 

increase and, thanks to the securing of agricultural income, the jobs will steadily become less 

precarious. These are key factors for settling the rural population, and thereby avoiding massive rural 

exodus due mainly to poverty, droughts or sudden floods. Finally, PACBA opens new windows of 

investment opportunities for the private sector.  

3.2.4 Gender (TA A5) 

3.2.4.1 Burkina Faso ranked 146th under the Gender Equality Index in the 2016 Human 

Development Report, out of 188 countries surveyed. This is due to inequalities based on social 

perceptions and practices that restrict women's rights and reduce their access to economic and social 

opportunities in comparison to men (financial inclusion or political involvement). Women make up 

55% of the agricultural labour force, but only 40% of them own land. Consequently, access to 

property likely to be mortgaged as collateral with the banking system is a discriminatory factor against 

women's access to credit, as well as lack of knowledge of the procedures for obtaining credit. As a 

result, women have less access to credit than men (8% compared to 15% for men). 

3.2.4.2. The PACBA project is classified in Category 3 of the Bank's gender categorisation system. 

Specifically the project will: (i) improve women's access to financing, as well as financial and non-

financial services; (ii) increase women farmers' productivity and income; and (iii) facilitate women's 

financial inclusion by supporting access to credit and financial education programmes for women. 

During the start-up period of the bank's activities, it is expected that 20% of the loans will be allocated 

to women. This figure is expected to double rapidly as BADF intends to introduce a specific product 

for women. In this regard, BADF plans to apply for a line of credit from potential donors. Under the 

project, efforts would be made to collaborate with AFAWA to provide strategic advice and services 

to BADF for better access for women.  

3.2.5 Involuntary Settlement 

3.2.5.1. The PACBA project will not lead to involuntary population displacements. However, the 

ESMS will allow for environmental and social screening of sub-projects that will subsequently be 

financed by AfDB to determine whether they will eventually lead to involuntary population 

displacements requiring the preparation of a resettlement action plan in line with AfDB's integrated 

safeguards system. 



19 

 

 IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1 Implementation Arrangements  

4.1.1 Institutional Arrangements (TA B3)   

4.1.1.1  The institutional framework is based on Decree No. 2018-0092/PRES/PM/MINEFID of 15 

February 2018 defining general regulations governing development projects and programmes 

implemented in Burkina Faso. 

4.1.1.2  Financial supervision of the project will be provided by the Ministry of Economy, Finance 

and Development (MINEFID) through the General Directorate of the Treasury and Public 

Accounting (DGTCP). Its role is to mobilise financial resources required for project implementation. 

Technical supervision will be provided by the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Management 

(MAAH) through the General Directorate for Promotion of the Rural Economy (DGPER), which will 

be in charge of the project management. Therefore, it will ensure its effective implementation. The 

project is linked to the "Agricultural Economy" budget programme, one of the operational 

objectives of which is to improve access to financing. 

4.1.1.3  The Budget Programme Officer will be the Project Coordinator. He/she will ensure 

permanent monitoring of project implementation, particularly the expected outcomes. 

4.1.1.4  The Review Committee will steer the project. It will contribute to project implementation by 

adopting and approving key documents. In this capacity, it will be the project’s decision-making 

body. 

4.1.2. Applicable Procurement Policy and Framework (TA B4) 

4.1.2.1  All goods and consultancy services financed by the Bank's resources will be procured in 

accordance with the Procurement Framework for operations financed by the Bank Group approved 

in October 2015. In accordance with the framework and following various evaluations conducted, it 

was agreed that all goods and consultancy services will be procured in accordance with the Bank's 

procurement system using the Standard Bidding Documents (SBD) provided for that purpose and 

based on the Bank's Procurement Methods and Procedures (PMP) specified in the Procurement Plan. 

More specifically, procurements will be made as follows: 

(i) All goods required for the project and to be procured using the PMP will be in 

accordance with the provisions of Article 8.5 of the Bank Group Procurement Policy 

document; and 

(ii)  All consultancy services required for the project and to be procured using the PMP 

will be in accordance with the provisions of Article 8.6 of the Bank Group 

Procurement Policy document. 

4.1.2.2  Procurement Risks and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): To take into account the specific 

aspects of the project, the Bank has assessed: (i) the risks at national, sector and project level; and (ii) 

the capacity of the executing agency. The results of the assessments showed that the procurement risk 

was "moderate" and helped to determine the appropriate risk mitigation measures included in the 

PRCA action plan indicated in para. B.5.9 of Annex B5.    

4.1.3. Financial Management Arrangements 

4.1.3.1  PACBA financial management will be provided by the General Directorate for Promotion 

of the Rural Economy (DGPER) of the Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Fisheries Resources, 



20 

 

which has been appointed the Project Executing Agency. The project will be managed by a DGPER 

Project Implementation Unit that will be established and its capacity strengthened in terms of project 

management and compliance with Bank rules and procedures. The DGPER Director General will be 

responsible for the overall project financial management, and will be assisted in this regard by the 

DGPER Administrative and Financial Director. The fiduciary risk following the assessment is 

deemed substantial (See the Technical Annex for more details).   

4.1.3.2. The project will prepare and submit quarterly reports (financial and technical) to the Bank 

within 45 days following the end of each quarter. The Internal Accounts Inspectorate of the 

supervisory Ministry should include the financial operations of the project in its annual audit 

programme as part of its role as the project internal auditor.   

4.1.4  Disbursement Arrangements   

4.1.4.1   Throughout the component 1, the Bank’s support will be through the reinboursment method. 

Sice obtaintion the approval of the new bank is a prerequisite for the support provided by the Bank 

through the PACBA, the reinboursement method will be used to enable the Bank repay, up to five (5) 

billion FCFA, the State of Burkina Faso for the expenses it incurred as part of its participation in the 

capital of BADF. These expenses concern those incurred in order to obtain the favourable opinion of 

the WAMU Banking Commission obtained on March 14, 2018 and the approval of the Minister in 

charge of Finance obtained on April 16, 2018 by Order N ° 183/MINEFID/DGTCP/DAMOF which 

dedicates the effective creation of the BADF. It should be recalled the the Bank's support was 

requested to reimburse the State of Burkina Faso's stake in the capital of a bank, called Banque 

Agricole du Faso. Since the Agricultural Bank of Burkina Faso started to exist as a bank only after 

the authorization obtained on April 16, 2018, this date is used as the date on which the Burkinabe 

State's expenditure on the operation acquisition of a stake in the capital of BADF was incurred. For 

all intents and purposes, the timeline for the creation of the Agricultural Bank of Faso was as follows: 

i. On October 4, 2017 and September 21, 2017, the Burkinabe State, like the other shareholders, 
disbursed the amount corresponding to its planned share in the capital of BADF in two 

blocked bank accounts registered in the name of the "Société en formation (company in 

constitution) Banque Agricole du Faso"; 

ii. On October 13, 2017, Banque Agricole du Faso was created as a public limited company. 
This step is a prerequisite for the review of the BADF application by the UEMOA Banking 

Commission. Thus, at this stage, the BADF does not yet have the status of a bank and is not 

yet registered on the list of WAEMU banks. 

iii. On April 16, 2018, the limited company Banque Agricole du Faso is approved as a bank and 
registered under the number C 0207 J on the list of banks of the UEMOA. 

 

4.1.4.2. Disbursements and Cash Flows: Disbursements from ADF resources will be made in 

accordance with the Bank’s disbursement prodecedures. Three (3) disbursement methods will be 

used:  

1) The reimbursement method: it will be used to enable the State of Burkina Faso to request 
repayment to the Bank of the exepenses, ocuring starting April 16, 2018, related to its 

participation in the capital of the BADF for a total amount not exceeding UA 6,368 million as 

stipulated in the paragraph 4.1.4.1 of the evaluation report referring to the retroactive financing. 

Repayment by the Bank may be made upon receipt of a request for reimboursement 

accompanied by evidence of pre-financing by the State of its participation in the capital of 

BADF. The amount reimboursed will be up to the amount of shares owned by the State of 

Burkina Faso and held in the capital of the BADF. 



21 

 

2) The special account method: it will be used to finance the operation and the training and 
workshop activities organized by the project implementation unit. The provisions of the 

disbursement manual will be fully applicable for the management and justification of resources 

disbursed to the special account. A special account will be opened at the National Treasury with 

the Central Bank of West African States (BCEAO) for the Bank financing. The special account 

will operate under the principle of double signature. This account will receive the funds to pay 

the eligible expenses on the counterparty. 

3) The direct payment method: it will be used for the payment of contracts and for expenses related 
to the implementation of component 2 "Support for Securing the Agricultural Financing 

Ecosystem", notably for payments in respect of the procurement of the weather stations and 

their maintenance contract. 

4.1.4.3. In addition, disbursements from counterpart funds will be made at national level through a 

special counterpart funds account opened at the treasury and operating under the double signature 

principle. The account will receive the funds intended to pay for eligible expenses from the 

counterpart funds.  

4.1.5 Audit Arrangements  

The project's financial statements will be audited yearly by an independent audit firm acceptable to 

the Bank. The audit report, together with a management letter, will be submitted to the Bank within 

six months following the end of the fiscal year in accordance with the Bank's terms of reference. The 

cost of the audit will be borne by the project.  

4.2 Monitoring and Evaluation 

4.2.1 The physical implementation of the project will cover 25 months, from December 2018 to 

December 2020.  

4.2.2  Upon effectiveness of the loan agreement, a launching mission will be organised to train 

BADF officials in the Bank's procedures. Supervision missions will be organised at least twice a year. 

Quarterly and annual activity reports will also be prepared and submitted to the Bank.  

4.3 Governance 

Burkina Faso has made significant progress in governance over the past three years. At the political 

level, the progress made is in terms of the creation and strengthening of republican institutions, the 

consolidation of the rule of law, and the reinforcement of human rights. As regards corruption, 

according to Transparency International's Corruption Perception Index in 2016, the country is ranked 

72nd out of 172 countries in the world, and among the top 10 least corrupt African countries. With 

respect to public financial governance, Burkina Faso has, with IMF support, implemented major 

reforms to improve transparency and efficiency in public resource management. With regard to 

BADF, it should be noted that as a bank approved by BCEAO, it will be subject to the supervision of 

the WAEMU Banking Commission and will have to comply with the banking regulations in force in 

WAEMU.   

4.4 Sustainability 

4.4.1 PACBA will naturally be sustainable because, given its agricultural insurance mechanism, 

it comprises major actions to reinforce the sustainability of BADF in particular, and agricultural 

financing in general. In addition, the authorities' clear intention to consolidate the PACBA mechanism 



22 

 

by establishing an Agricultural Credit Security Fund, namely the Natural Disasters Fund and the 

Interest Rate Subsidy Fund, will strengthen, complement and replicate the impact of PACBA. 

4.5 Risk Management 

Table 4.5 

Potential Risks and Mitigation Measures 

Risks Level Mitigation Measures 

Rising socio-political unrest Moderate Government commitment to continue negotiations with a view to taking socio-

economic and political demands into account. 

Increased security risks 
Moderate 

The Government has redoubled its efforts to provide strong and sustainable 

responses, and has resolutely embraced a regional antiterrorism framework (G5 

Sahel) to address the various threats. 

BADF’s weak human and 

institutional capacity to properly 

manage the bank 

Moderate 
BADF's managers have extensive experience in banking and, particularly, in 

agricultural financing. In addition, the technical assistance contract with CNCA 

of Senegal will provide support to BADF in various areas, including IT systems 

management and risk management systems and procedures. Similarly, the entry 

of a technical and financial partner into BADF's capital is still under 

consideration.  

Governance: Strong Government 

participation in the bank’s capital 

following the Central Bank's 

request to pull out shareholders 

deemed financially unsound.  

Moderate  
The Burkinabe Fund for Economic and Social Development (FBDES) holds the 

Government’s participation and additional shares owned by organisations 

considered weak by the Central Bank; the Central Bank has requested the 

organisations to pull out of BADF capital. FBDES is also requested to gradually 

transfer the shares, as well as the Government’s participation, to stakeholders in 

line with its area of activity as soon as possible. In addition, the entry of a 

technical and financial partner is still being considered. Independent directors 

will also be co-opted to the Board of Directors to improve the quality of the 

management structure. 

Risk of strong pressure on 

management from farmers’ 

cooperatives who consider BADF 

as a bank established on their 

initiative and dedicated to them 

Moderate  
Strong ownership of the project establishing BADF from the outset by farmers’ 

organisations, and therefore their willingness to ensure the bank's viability. In 

addition, the continued and strong sensitisation of farmers’ organisations on the 

need to ensure the bank's sustainability. BADF will give priority to organised 

farmers' networks that will help to gather customer information and, if necessary, 

collect unpaid debts.  

Strong competition from existing 

banks 

Moderate  BADF will address segments not covered by existing banks. Given the strong 

ownership by farmer organisations, BADF will rely on farmers’ networks to attract 

agricultural customers. The bank will also diversify its activities by financing non-

agricultural sectors.  

4.6 Knowledge Building 

PACBA implementation will help to build several types of knowledge, particularly: (i) best practice 

in agribusiness investment financing within an innovative context; (ii) the adoption of appropriate 

instruments and an attractive deposit remuneration system to substantially improve the mobilisation 

of national savings; (iii) the creation of agribusiness project databases to promote the emergence of 

agricultural processing units and improve agricultural value chains in Burkina Faso; and (iv) studies 

to be conducted on agricultural insurance and warrantage. The practices will be disseminated within 

the administration and to non-State actors through the documents and procedures manuals produced, 

procedures manuals, as well as training sessions that will be organised under the project. The 

knowledge will be acquired through producing the following reports: technical assistance reports, 

activity reports prepared by the executing agency, supervision reports, project completion report, and 

"discussion and working documents" of the Bank's Office in Burkina Faso. Finally, the knowledge 

and lessons learned will be disseminated within the Department, the Bank and in the host country by 

the AfDB through seminars and IDEV reports. 



23 

 

 LEGAL FRAMEWORK 

5.1 Legal Instrument 

PACBA will be financed from ADF resources by a loan of UA 7.5 million, for which a loan agreement 

will be concluded between the African Development Fund and Burkina Faso (the Borrower). 

5.2 Conditions for Intervention by the African Development Fund 

 Conditions Precedent to Effectiveness 

Effectiveness of the loan agreement shall be subject to the Borrower's fulfilment of Section 12.01 of 

the General Conditions Applicable to Loan Agreements and Guarantee Agreements of the Fund 

(Sovereign Entities). 

 Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement of the Loan  

In addition to effectiveness of the loan agreement, the first disbursement of loan resources shall be 

subject to the Borrower's fulfilment of the following conditions: 

(i) Provide evidence of the appointment of the Project Coordinator whose experience and 
terms of reference would have been deemed satisfactory by the Fund; and 

(ii) Provide evidence of the attachment of the project to the review committee of the 
program “Agricultural economy” (écnomie agricole) which will ensure continuous 

monitoring of project implementation, particularly the adoption and approval of key 

documents and the expected outcomes. 

 Environmental and Social Safeguard Clauses 

The Borrower undertakes to implement an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 

to ensure that the new Banque Agricole du Faso (Agricultural Bank of Burkina Faso) identifies and 

implements environmental and social management measures for its sub-projects before the loans or 

investments are approved by BADF, and that BADF also applies the required level of sub-project 

control during the loan period.  

 Other Undertakings 

(i) Provide evidence of BADF’s establishment of a computerised management system 
(accounting and financial management software) and training staff in its use latest by 

31 March 2019; 

(ii) Prepare and submit to the Fund an Administrative, Accounting and Financial 
Procedures Manual for the project unit, and train staff in its use latest by 31 March 

2019; 

(iii) Prepare and submit to the Fund a BADF Operational Business Plan latest 30 
September 2019; and 

(iv) Provide to the Fund, by December 31st of each year, evidence of the budgeting of the 
annual tranche for the following year of the borrower's contribution to the starting 

fiscal year 2020.  



24 

 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

This project complies with applicable Bank policies. 

 RECOMMENDATION 

Management recommends that the Board of Directors approve the proposal to grant Burkina Faso an 

ADF loan of UA 7.5 million to finance the Support Project for Establishing an Agribusiness Bank 

(PACBA) under the conditions set out in this report. 

 


































 

 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 

 

 

 
 

 

BURUNDI 

 

 

 

 

 

AGRICULTURE AND LIVESTOCK VALUE CHAINS  

SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT (PADCAE-B) 

 

 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



November 2020 

  
  
  
  
 

Project Brief  

 

Client Information 

DONEE/BORROWER    : Republic of Burundi 

 

EXECUTING AGENCY : MINEAGRIE  

 

Financing Plan 

Source Amount (UA Million) Instrument 

ADF  

TSF (Pilar I)                                             

9.37 

5.63 

Grant  

Grant 

Government  

Beneficiaries                         

 1    

 0.39  

Own Resources 

TOTAL COST                   16.39 
 

Key ADF/TSF Financial Information 

Grant Amount:                           UA 9.37  million (ADF) 

UA 5.63 million (TSF) 

NPV (Baseline Scenario) USD 50.27 million 

IRR (Baseline Scenario) 16.3% 

ERR (Baseline Scenario) 25.2% 

Period – Main Milestones (expected) 

Concept Note Approval February 2020 

Appraisal  June 2020 

Project Approval  November 2020 

Effectiveness December 2020 

Completion December 2025 

Grant Closing June 2026 



 

iv 

Project Summary  

Project Overview: In Burundi, agriculture and livestock are among the priority sectors set out 

in the PND (2018- 2027) which aims to promote intensive and modernised agriculture to ensure 

food security and foster market agriculture. The Agriculture and Livestock Value Chains 

Development Support Project in Burundi (PADCAE-B), financed by the African Development 

Bank, is in line with this dynamic. The project will be implemented in Gitega, Kirundo and 

Muyinga Provinces in northern Burundi, with a total population estimated at 2,956,784 people 

(24% of the national population), a land area of 1,671 ha (or 18% of the national total) and a 

population density of 553 inhab/km².  

The overall objective of PADCAE-B is to contribute to the sustainable improvement of food 

and nutrition security and increase in the incomes of the populations. Project interventions will 

focus on a limited number of value chains (rice, maize, goats, pigs and fish) identified by 

beneficiaries, articulated around 4 components: (i) land development, integrated land 

management, land restoration and security; (ii) development of climate-resilient agriculture 

and support for nutrition (iii) institutional, capacity building and agricultural entrepreneurship 

support.; and (iv) project management and coordination. When implemented, the project will 

help to fight food and nutrition insecurity, promote youth employment and gender, boost 

agricultural output through resilient and sustainable agriculture, encourage the structuring, 

organisation and capacity and building of cooperatives, private sector stakeholders and 

operational State structures, and improve land management. PADCAE-B, to be implemented 

over a period of 5 years (2020-2025) for a total cost of UA 16.39 million will affect 138,060 

individuals, 56% of them women.   

Needs Assessment: In Burundi, over 90% of the population and 80% of women practise 

agriculture. This sector accounts for 44% of the country’s GDP and 95% of its export earnings. 

Close to 90% of developed land is used for food cultivation (banana, cassava, sweet potato, 

maize, beans, peas, sorghum and rice). These crops contribute 80% of the Agricultural GDP, 

with the farmers themselves consuming 80% of their production. Despite its many strengths (a 

hardworking agricultural workforce, the possibility of having several crop cycles annually, 

varied ecosystems and abundant watercourses), agriculture is fraught with both structural and 

functional constraints (poor soil fertility, inadequate use of agricultural inputs, fluctuating 

agricultural production due to climate change, insufficient technical and technological 

innovations, strong demographic pressure, limited human resources, and unsuitable regulatory 

and policy instruments, etc.). 

Bank’s Value Added: This added value stems from its experience through its interventions in 

the rural and agricultural sector. The project is consistent with the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy 

(2013-2022) and will help to achieve 3 of its 5 strategic priorities, namely Feed Africa, Improve 

the quality of life for the people of Africa and Industrialise Africa. The project is also in line 

with “Feed Africa: Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa” (2016-2025); the Multi-

Sectoral Nutrition Action Plan; the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy; and the Feed Africa 

Response to COVID-19 (FAREC). It is also aligned with the ADF 15 operational and strategic 

priorities. Lastly, the project has adopted the objectives of the Technologies for African 

Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) Programme which aims to deploy technologies to boost 

output and production in the targeted agriculture and livestock value chains. The project 

activities through increased productivity will contribute to (i) improve food and nutrition 

security through crop diversification and promotion of high nutritional value crops, and (ii) 

secure and reduce post-harvest losses thus contributing to increase the income of the 

beneficiaries in the 3 provinces. Finally, the project will help promote agricultural 

entrepreneurship, gender, youth employment, digitalization of agriculture and land governance. 



 

v 

Knowledge Building: Thanks to TAAT compacts, the project will ensure the transfer of 

technology and knowledge to national R&D structures and onward to the field actors of the 

agriculture and livestock value chains. These technological aspects include the development of 

resilient seeds, the rational use of fertilisers and improvement of genetics and nutrition of 

livestock. To improve beneficiaries’ livelihoods and build their resilience to recurrent external 

shocks and crises, the project will adopt the Centre de Rayonnement C Collinaire 

(CRC)approach and Resilience Fund (CdR) which encompasses three dimensions: a 

productive/technical dimension, financial/economic dimension, and a social dimension.  

Lastly, the project will promote the digitisation of agriculture and land tenure by (i) setting up 

an Automated and Decentralised Monitoring and Evaluation (SEAD) mechanism and an 

agricultural database in MINEAGRIE, (ii) digitising agricultural advisory services, (iii) 

interconnecting different value chain stakeholders (production, processing and marketing), and 

(iv) strengthening good governance (control of supply channels, tracking of inputs supplied to 

farmers) and setting up land management system. One of the project aspects will be the 

promotion of youth entrepreneurship articulated around training (nurseries) and opening an 

employability support fund and a guarantee fund to resolve the acute problem of youth 

financing.



 

vi 

 

Results-Based Logical Framework  

Country and Project Name: Burundi: Agriculture and Livestock Value Chains Development Support Project in Burundi 
Project Goal: Contribute to the sustainable improvement of food and nutrition security and resilience of the target populations 

RESULTS CHAIN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS  

MEANS OF VERIFICATION 
RISKS/ 

MITIGATION MEASURES Indicator  Baseline Situation  Target (2025) 

IM
P

A
C

T
 Contribute to strengthen food and 

nutrition security and build the 

resilience of the rural populations of 

Ngozi, Kirundo and Muyinga Provinces 

-Prevalence rate of poverty   
-Rate of food insecurity 

-Prevalence rate of chronic malnutrition on the hills 

-72.1% (ECVMB 
2014) 

-49% (EFSA 2017) 

-63.2%% (EDS 2018) 

-60% 
-24% 

-50% 

 
Surveys of the Institute of 
Statistics and Economic 
Studies of Burundi 
 

 
 

E
F

FE
T

S 

Outcome 1 : Productivity, processing 

and marketing of the targeted crops 

increased. 

1.1 Percentage increase in food crop (yield/ha), animal 

(kg) and fish-farming production and output                                                                            

      - Rice   

      - Maize 
      - Pigs 

      - Goats/sheep 

      - Fish-farming 
1.2 Proportion of agricultural and animal production 

processed and/or sold 

 
 
-1.5 
- 0.9 
- 50 to 70 
- 15 to 18 
- 5 
 
- ND 

 
 
- 5 
-2.5 
- 80 to 120  
- 20 to 25  
- 100 
 
- 40-60% 
 
2.1. 3,500(2,000/1,500) 
 
 
2.2. 1,000,000/855,000 
 
 
2.3 50% 
 
2.4 50% 
 

 

 

 

 
MINEAGRIE reports and 

statistics 

 
Baseline surveys and project 

completion reports 

 

Risk: The target population’s unfavourable 

attitude towards change.  

- Extreme weather events affecting productivity 

- Lateness in the provision of fertilisers 

 

Mitigation: Conduct information, education and 

communication sessions; Choose climate-resilient 

crops, involving PNSEB in the supply process. 

 
Outcome 2: Jobs and economic 

opportunities (IGA) for building the 

resilience of the populations including 
young people and women, created. 

2.1 Number of jobs (including green jobs) created for 
youth (M/W) in the value chains 
 
2.2 Yearly income earned by men/women (BIF) from 
subsistence farming 
 
2.3 Yearly income increased per fish-farm 
 
2.4 Number of households increasing their income 
through solidarity chains 
 

2.1. ND 
 
 
2.2. 540,000/300,000 
 
 
2.3. NA 
 
2.4. NA 
 

 Component 1 :  Integrated Territorial Development and Management, Land Restoration and Security 

P
R

O
D

U
IT

S
 

Output 1.1: Irrigation infrastructure 
developed and watersheds protected 

 

 
 

 

Output 1.2 : Land reclaimed and 
certified 

 

 
 

1.1.1. Reclaimed marshland (ha) for men/women 
 

1.1.2. Area covered by pilot hill irrigation (ha) for 
M/W  
1.1.3. Area of protected watersheds 
 
1.1.4 Number of beneficiaries/cooperatives installed on 
developed infrastructure (M/W) 
 
1.2.1 Restored land area (ha) 
 
1.2.2 Number of land certificates issued for M/W  
 

1.1.1 0 
 

1.1.2 0 

 
1.1.3 0 

 

1.1.4 0 
 

 

1.2.1 0 
 

1.2.2 0 
 

1.1.1 1,390 (600/790) 
 

1.1.2 800 (300/500) 

 
1.1.3 3,064 ha  

 

1.1.4 180 (80/100) 
 

 

1.2.1 300 
 

1.2.2 300 (140/160) 
 

  
 

Bank supervision reports 

 
 

Annual reports and statistics of 

MINEAGRIE 
 

Project reports  

Risk: Ineffective service providers, suppliers of 
goods and contractors and lack of beneficiary 

incentives 
 
Mitigation: Strictly select service providers and 

IEC for beneficiaries 
 
 

Component 2 : Improvement of Climate-Resilient Productivity and Support for Nutrition 



 

vii 

Output 2.1: Value chain developed   

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
Output 2.2: Agricultural and livestock 

products development, processing and 

marketing infrastructure constructed 
and functional 

 

Output 2.3 : Strengthening of 
community food nutrition hygiene 

surveillance  

2.1.1 Percentage (%) of beneficiary farmers using 

certified seeds and fertilisers (56% of them women) 

2.1.2 Number of operational seed multiplication 
cooperatives (56% led by women) 

2.1.3. Number of Centre de rayonnement d’élevage 

caprins/porcns 
 

2.2.1 Number of storage, processing and marketing 

infrastructure rehabilitated/constructed and functional 
2.2.2 % of identified cooperatives benefiting from the 

infrastructure 

2.3.1 Number of FARN/FANs supported and 
functional 

 

2.3.2 % of children detected and monitored by 
FAN/FARNs 

2.1.1 0 

 

2.1.2 0 
 

2.1.3.0 

 
 

2.2.1 0 

 
2.2.2 0 

 

2.3.1 0 
 

 

2.3.2.0 
 

2.1.1 100%    

 

2.1.2 15 
 

2.1.3. 43/12 

 
 

2.2.1 9 

 
2.2.2 23 

 

2.3.1 20 
 

 

2.3.2 100% 
 

 

 

 
 

 

Bank supervision report 
 

 

 
MINEAGRIE annual reports 

and statistics  

 
Project reports 

 

Annual report of the Ministry 
in charge of Health 

 Risk: Poor penetration of technological solution 
among young people and women  
Mitigation: Train and sensitise stakeholders 
including young people and women 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Risk: Low attendance of FARNs and FANs 
Mitigation : Sensitise and involve local 
communities 

Component 3 : Institutional, Capacity Building and Agricultural Entrepreneurship Support 

Output 3.1: Research, outreach and 

advisory support Services strengthened 

 
Output 3.2: Structuring of farmers’ 

groupings effective 

 
 

Output 3.3: Young people and women 
trained in agricultural entrepreneurship 

and settled. 

 
Output 3.4 : IT solution for the 

digitisation of agriculture and livestock 

data rolled out and effective 

3.1.1 Number of beneficiary research, outreach and 

advisory support services 

3.2.1 Number of groupings supported (M/W) 

3.3.1 Number of young people and women trained in 

agricultural entrepreneurship 

3.3.2 Number of young people benefiting from 

Guarantee Fund financing (M/W) 

3.3.3. Number of youth cooperatives benefiting from 

Guarantee Fund financing in support of agricultural 

entrepreneurship kits (M/W) 

3.4.1 % beneficiaries using digitisation services  
 

3.1.1: 0 
 
3.2.1: 0 
 
3.3.1: 0 
 
3.3.2: 0 
 
3.3.3: 0 
 
 
3.4.1: 0 
 
 

3.1.1: 5 

 

3.2.1: 150 (66/84)  
 

3.3.1: 3000 (2000/1000) 

 
3.3.2: 250 (100/150) 

 
3.3.3: 30 (13/17) 
 

 

3.4.1: 100% 

 
 

Bank supervision report 

 

 
 

Annual reports and statistics of 

MINEAGRIE 
 

Project reports 

Risk: Lack of beneficiaries or structured 
groupings having the required basic training; 
unavailability of data; and weak capacity to 
establish the IT solution 
 

Mitigation : Build capacity and sensitise 
beneficiaries and staff of State technical services. 

Component 4 : Project Coordination 

A
C

T
IV

IT
É

S
 C

LÉ
S

 

COMPONENTS RESOURCES 

Component 1:  Land Development and Integrated Management, Restoration and Land Security 

• 1.1 Land development 

• 1.2 Land restoration and security 
Component 2: Improvement of Climate-Resilient Productivity and Support for Nutrition  

• 2.1 Support for value chain development 

• 2.2 Product development infrastructure 

• 2.3 Nutrition support 
Component 3: Institutional, Capacity Building and Agricultural Entrepreneurship Support 

• 3.1 MINEAGRIE capacity building 

• 3.2 Support for cooperatives 

• 3.3 Support for job creation and the economic and social empowerment of women 
Component 4: Project Coordination and Management 

Component 1 :  UA 6.5 millions UC (39.67%) 

Component 2 : UA 5.73 million (34.94%) 
Component 3 : UA 2.52 million (15.38%) 

Component 4 : UA 1.64 million (10.00%) 

 

 

 



 

viii 

PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE  

No. ACTIVTIES 
 2020 2021 20122 2023 2024 2025 

Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 

1 Appraisal                        

2 Negotiation of TSF and ADF Grants                        

3 Board Approval                        

4 Signature of Grant Agreement                         

5 Fulfilment of Conditions Precedent to 1st Disbursement                         

6 Recruitment of Additional PMU Staff                         

7 Publication of the General Procurement Notice                         

8 PADCAE-B Commencement Workshop                         

9 
Procurement Goods for PMU and Agencies (Vehicles, IT 

Equipment, etc.) 

 
                  

    

10 Update of Project Baseline Situation                          

11 Signature of Contracts with Partner Structures                        

12 Preparation of Annual Work Plan (AWP)                         

13 Marshland Engineering Studies                         

14 Recruitment of Service Providers                         

15 BD and Watershed Management (WM)                         

16 BD and Hill Irrigation                         

17 BD Development Infrastructure (tracks; stores, processing units)                         

18 Contract with Financial Institutions                         

19 Contract with Partner Structures                         

20 Rice Value Chain Development                        

21 Maize Value Chain Development                        

22 Livestock and Blue Economy Value Chain Development                        

23 Nutrition Support                        

24 Training of Stakeholders                        

25 Establishment of PIUs, AVECs and CdR                        

26 Works Control and Supervision                        

27 Monitoring and evaluation                         

28 Annual External Audit                         

29 Completion Report                        

 

 



 

1 

MANAGEMENT REPORT AND RECOMMENDATIONS TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS 

CONCERNING A PROPOSAL TO AWARD A GRANT TO THE REPUBLIC OF BURUNDI TO FINANCE 

THE: 

 

AGRICULTURE AND LIVESTOCK VALUE CHAINS SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT 

SUPPORT PROJECT IN BURUNDI (PADCAE-B)  

 

Management hereby submits this report and recommendations concerning a proposal to award a Grant 

of UA 15 million (9.37 million under the ADF Window and 5.63 million from the Pillar 1 of the TSF 

resources) to the Republic of Burundi to finance PADCAE-B. 

I –  STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE 

1.1 Project Linkages with the Country Strategy and Objectives  

1.1.1 In Burundi, over 90% of the population practise agriculture which accounts for around 40% of 

the country’s GDP and 80% of export earnings1. Despite numerous assets (a hardworking agricultural 

workforce 80% of whom are women, the possibility of several crop cycles in one year, the existence of 

varied ecosystems and abundant watercourses), agriculture is constrained by structural and functional 

factors (lack of fertile soils, marginal use of agricultural inputs, fluctuating agricultural production due 

to the effects of climate change, insufficient technical/technological innovations, high demographic 

pressure, limited human resources, and unsuitable regulatory and policy instruments). Agriculture is 

characterised by complex traditional systems of hill polyculture (banana, beans, root crops and tubers, 

maize) and congested marshy valleys where tuber crops, beans, maize and rice are grown using 

exclusively manual techniques. Indeed, the agrarian landscape is saturated in very densely populated 

provinces and communes. The country is characterised by high demographic pressure and rapid 

population growth (3.1 to 3.3% yearly), one of the highest in the world. This induces: (i) a decrease of 

average farm sizes, (ii) a larger number of landless farmers, and (iii) the degradation of natural resources. 

This is compounded by the impact of climate change which not only disturbed the farming seasons but 

also impacted agricultural productivity in the country. As a result, yields are low and, despite three 

annual crop cycles, production is insufficient to cover the food needs of an ever-growing population. 

1.1.2.  The project is consistent with the country’s economic and social development policy papers. It 

is in line with the National Development Plan (2018-2027) under Thrust 1 (Development of agriculture, 

livestock and strengthening of food security2) of Strategic Area 1 (Revitalise growth-bearing sectors), 

whose actions target intensive and modernised agriculture to ensure food security and promote market 

agriculture. The project is also consistent with the National Agricultural Investment Plan in force (PNIA 

2012-2017 updated to 2016-2020) which comprises four (4) priority programmes: (i) Sustainable 

increase of food production and security; (ii) Professionalisation of farmers and promotion of 

innovation, (iii) Development of subsectors and agribusiness; and (iv) Strengthening of public 

institutions. Lastly, the project is in line with the objectives of strategic livestock guidance documents 

(DOS, 2014) which set out guidelines for the sector by 2030 and the National Employment Policy 

through Strategic Areas 1(Develop skills and employability) and 4 (Promote the employment of young 

people, women and persons living with disabilities and labour market inclusion). Finally, the climate 

change resilience component of the project is in line with the nationally determined contribution (NDC) 

of the country, as part of the implementation of the Paris agreement on climate change. 

 

 
1  Thus, nearly 90% of the developed land is allocated for food crop cultivation (banana, cassava, sweet potatoes, maize, 

beans, peas, sorghum and rice) which account for 80% of Agricultural Gross Domestic Product (AGDP) with farmers 

themselves consuming 80% of their production. 
2  Thrust 1 is divided into 3 strategic objectives: SO1: Strengthen institutional and organisational capacity, SO2: 

Sustainably increase agricultural, animal and fishery production, and SO3: Promote market agriculture. 



 

2 

 1.2 Rationale of the Bank Intervention  

1.2.1. The Bank’s Strategy in Burundi aims to build the country’s resilience by creating conditions 

for strong inclusive growth induced by greater buoyancy of the productive sectors of the economy. The 

Country Strategy Paper (CSP) for 2019-2023 has two pillars: (1) support for agricultural development 

and transformation; and (2) improvement of transport and energy infrastructure. The project is in line 

with the objectives of Pillar 13.  

1.2.2 The project is also in line with the Regional Integration Strategy Paper for the period 2018-2022 

(DSIR) in its Pillar II (Strengthening institutional and strategic frameworks for market integration, 

investment and value chain development). Indeed, the project promotes a value chain development 

approach and aims at strengthening institutional capacity to equip the country with frameworks and 

institutions contributing to economic transformation and value chain development. 

1.2.3.  The targeted operation is well anchored in the Bank Strategy for Addressing Fragility and 

Building Resilience in Africa for quality engagement in States in transition. Poverty was aggravated by 

the intensity of the drivers of fragility in Burundi.  

1.2.4  The project is consistent with the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (2013-2022) and is expected to 

contribute to achieving 3 of its High 5s, namely, Feed Africa, Industrialise Africa, and Improve the 

quality of life for people in Africa. The project is also in line with the Bank’s Feed Africa: Strategy for 

Agricultural Transformation in Africa (2016-2025); the Multi-Sectoral Nutrition Action Plan; the Jobs 

for Youth in Africa Strategy; and the Feed Africa Response to COVID-19 (FAREC) which builds on 

the broader foundations of the COVID-19 Rapid Response Facility (CRF). Lastly, the project 

encompasses the goals of the Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) 

Programme that aims to apply technology to boost productivity and production in the target agriculture 

and livestock value chains.  

1.2.5  The project is in line with the ADF-15 operational and strategic priorities which aim to create 

a conducive environment for inclusive and sustainable transformation, decent jobs and stronger 

resilience. It integrates the two strategic pillars of ADF-154. 

1.3 Aid Coordination  

1.3.1 After over a decade of inaction, sector consultation frameworks are gradually being re-

established. These rely on PND’s institutional monitoring and evaluation arrangement built on sector 

groups, common consultation and programming platforms. The "Agriculture and rural development" 

Group is being formalised. The Bank, in association with other key partners of this sector, namely FAO, 

IFAD and the World Bank, is playing an active role in its restoration. Pending the effective 

commencement of the group, regular consultations are still held with TFPs to improve the 

complementarity of their interventions, and thus create synergy to maximise project impacts on 

economic and social development.  

1.3.2  The following table shows the main amounts currently committed by sources of financing in 

the agricultural sector in Burundi.  

 

 

 
3 PADCAE-B replaces PIPARV-B which was an agricultural project included in the CSP while keeping the same 

objectives. 
4 The 2 strategic pillars of ADF 15 are: (i) Develop quality and durable infrastructure to lend impetus to job-creating 

private sector investments and foster sustainable development, and (ii) Build human, governance and institutional 

capacities to enable individuals to participate in and benefit from job-creating opportunities for inclusive growth. 



 

3 

    Table 1.3.1: Some agriculture sector financing data since 2013 

Sector or sub-sector* 

Scope 

GDP Exports Labour 

Agricultural sector 37% (2017) 80% 90% 

Stakeholders – Public Expenditure (Ongoing programmes or projects) 

Government Donors Amounts (USD Million) Period 

BIF 35.5 billion annually World Bank 185 2016-2022 

(2015-2018 average) BANK                            37.3 2010-2023- 

Or 3.5% of State budget CTB 27.8 2011-2017 

 

Kingdom of the 

Netherlands 
                          27.1 2016-2021 

 IFAD                       212.5 2014-2019 

 FAO 9.7 2013-2018 

Level of Aid Coordination 

Existence of thematic working groups Partial 

Existence of an overall sector programme Yes 

1.3.3 AT ALL STAGES OF PROJECT APPRAISAL, BROAD CONSULTATIONS WERE 

HELD WITH ALL THE TFPS OPERATING IN THE AGRICULTURE SECTOR (WB, FAO, 

WFP, UNDP, EU, UNICEF) TO ENSURE SYNERGY OF INTERVENTIONS, AVOID 

DUPLICATION AND SHARE EXPERIENCES. 

II PROJECT DESCRIPTION  

The sector objective is to help to sustainably strengthen food and nutrition security and build the 

resilience of the rural populations of Ngozi, Kirundo and Muyinga Provinces. The specific objectives 

are: (i) land development, integrated land management, land restoration and security, (ii) development 

of climate-resilient agriculture and livestock value chains and support to nutrition and (iii) institutional, 

capacity building and agricultural entrepreneurship support. 

2.1 Project Components  

2.1.1 Project Design: It is based on developing or adopting innovative integrated practices and using 

climate-resilient technology and systems associated with the development of agriculture and livestock 

value chains. The TAAT approach was used since it helps to significantly boost agricultural productivity 

and production through the dissemination of low-carbon eco-friendly technologies. Synergy and 

complementarity will be created with other partners operating in the agriculture and livestock sector5.  

2.1.2 Summary of Components: Project implementation will span a period of five years (2020-

2025) and comprise three components whose main outputs are detailed in Annex B3 and summarised 

in the following table: 

 
5 It was agreed that synergy and complementarity will be strengthened with (i) FAO to support the opening of resilience 

funds, and (iii) IFAD through their PIPARV-B project which is in the same project area and has similar activities.  



 

4 

Table 2.1.1: Components and activities 

Components 

 Cost 

Estimates 

(UA) 

Description of Components and Sub-components 

Component 1 :  
Land 
development, 

integrated land 

management, 

land restoration 

and security 

 UA6.5 

millions UC 

(39.67%) 

 The component aims to contribute to the intensification of agricultural production 

on hills and in marshland through the development of irrigation infrastructure. This 

component has 2 sub-components: 

 1.1. Land development:  (i) Rehabilitation of 1,390 ha of marshland, (ii) 

development of 3,024 ha of watersheds, (iii) establishment of 800 ha of hill 

irrigation and rainwater collection systems;  

1.2. Land restoration and security: (i) Land restoration and erosion control 

(300 ha), (ii) Training in sustainable land management practices, and (iii) land 

certification and digitisation. 

Component 2 : 

Improvement of 

Climate-

Resilient 

Productivity and 

Support for 

nutrition  

 UA 5.73 

million 

(34.94%) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

This component aims to support the promotion and development of agriculture, 

livestock and fisheries value chains. It comprises 2 sub-components: 

2.1 Support for value chain development  

2.1.1 Promotion of agriculture value chains: Rice (i) Introduction of new rice 

and maize varieties and provision of improved seeds; (ii) Establishment of 

multi-stakeholder innovation platform; (iii) Training of IP facilitators, (iv) 

Supervision in rice production, (v) Introduction and piloting of RiceAdvice; 

Maize: (i)  Control of armyworm; Soil fertilisation: (i) Support for soil 
fertility restoration/enhancement (fertilisers) to benefit 23,010 households, (ii) 

e-voucher technical solution to monitor and trace fertiliser use;   Centres de 

Rayonnement collinaires (CRC), AVEC and Resilience Fund (CdR) : 

Establishment of 100 CRC, 100 AVECs and 50 CdRs; Support of 

TAAT compacts: Support of AfricaRice and AATF to implement the project. 

2.1.2 Promotion of livestock and fish-farming value chains: 

Livestock:   Establishment of 43 Centres de rayonnement collinaire élevage 

caprins  : (i) Purchase of 10 800  goats, (ii) Introduction of 360  improving he-

goats, (iii) Procurement of 5,000 banna grass cuttings per CRC; (iv) 

Procurement of fodder seeds, (v) Purchase of veterinary products, (vi) 

Purchase of 360 spray pumps;  Establishment of 12 Centres de rayonnement 

collinaire élevage porcins  : (i) Purchase of 630 sows, (ii) Purchase of 90 

improving boars, (iii) Purchase of concentrated feed for pigs, (iv) Purchase of 

muriers, (v) Purchase of disinfectants, (vi)  Establishment of forage crop, (vii) 

Purchase of veterinary products and materials, (viii) Purchase of concentrated 

feed for pigs. Fishery: Provision of feed and brood stocks 

2.2 : Product development infrastructure: Agricultural products: (i) 

Construction of 1 regional store room with capacity of 5,000t ; , (ii) Installation 

of a tomato processing unit 3t/h; (iii) Access to deployment of post-harvest 

maize technologies,; Livestock and fish-farming: Construction of a livestock 

feed unit; Fish farming: (i) Construction of 3 integrated aquaculture villages 

and one hatchery; (ii)  Installation of 3 drying tents, (iii) Installation of 3 Shore 

Call ovens;   

 2.3 Nutrition support: (i) Building of the nutrition surveillance capacity of 

light mothers in FARNs and teaching FFS (screening equipment and kits, etc); 

(ii) Manufacture and distribution of improved stoves to 3,000 vulnerable 

households, (iii) Support for the development of secondary crops of high 

nutritional value;  (iv) Sensitisation on food diversification and hygiene, and 

the fight against water-borne diseases. 



 

5 

2.2 Technical Solutions and Alternatives Explored  

2.2.1  Inclusive Value Chains: Project interventions will focus on a limited number of value chains 

(rice, maize, pigs, goats and fish) based not only on priorities defined by stakeholders and existing 

demand, but also on their contribution to the national economy and potential impact on (i) food and 

nutrition security, (ii) agriculture household incomes, and (iii) youth and women’s employment. The 

project aims to increase the output of agriculture and livestock products, optimise processing operations 

and facilitate farmers’ access to markets.  

2.2.2  Agricultural Intensification and Land Management: Burundi is characterised by a high 

population density and no agricultural land reserves. Due to these two factors, increasing agricultural 

productivity must necessarily require the intensification of agricultural practices. This intensification 

will be through (i) a rational use of land resources, (ii) the promotion and use of improved seeds and 

fertilisers, (iii) the genetic improvement of livestock through the introduction of improved breeds, (iv) 

improved animal feed and environmental protection through the promotion of fodder and the 

production of food with a high nutritional value, (v) the setting up of Centre de rayonnement  

collinaireand resilience funds at the level of cooperatives to train farmers on good agricultural 

practices and facilitate access to financing.     

2.2.3  Digitisation of agriculture and land tenure: The project will lay special emphasis on digitising 

this sector, notably through support for the monitoring and evaluation mechanism, the collection and 

analysis of agricultural data, the dissemination of weather information, the introduction of agricultural 

practices driven by agricultural information, stakeholders’ access to agricultural information to facilitate 

decision-making and strengthening of links among stakeholders. Digitising land tenure will help to 

strengthen good governance in the sector and promote private investments therein. 

 
6 To support youth entrepreneurship development in the three provinces, an incubator will be recruited to: (i) support the 

establishment of provincial hubs, (ii) ensure the technical and vocational training of young people in various crops and 

value chain segments, (iii) provide technical support to young people in setting up SMEs, (iv) offer support in preparing 

business plans, and (v) facilitate marketing and interconnection with markets etc. 

Component 3 : 

Institutional, 

capacity 

building and 

agricultural 

entrepreneurship 

support 

  

UA 2.52 

million 

(15.38%) 

 

(i) Support to technical structures and building of MINEAGRIE (BPEAE) 

capacity to implement the project; (ii) Establishment of 7 communal agropastoral 

centres; (iii) Support for research/development and seed certification institutions 

(ISABU, ONCCS) (iv)  Support, structuring and professionalisation of 

cooperatives with installation of 17 solar-powered grain plants + provision of 

solar panels, 51 Cube -Volcani for seed conservation (capacity 300 kg), and 34 

threshing-vanning machines; (v)  Support for seed multipliers through training; 

(vi) Production and distribution of 3,000 seedlings of new export crops 

(macadamia and cashew) (vii) Opening of a guarantee fund for youth and women, 

(viii) Opening of a youth employability fund for the grant of SME start-up kits for 

best projects; (ix) Support for the establishment of three provincial hubs, two 

training nurseries and support for the integration of young people in various 

segments of agriculture and livestock value chains6 (x) Establishment of 

digitisation solutions in agriculture and land tenure to facilitate data collection and 

access to agriculture information (e-dissemination) and strengthen good 

governance in agriculture and land tenue; (xi) Support for the implementation of 

the Gender Action Plan to strengthen  women’s economic and social 

empowerment. 

Component 4:  

Project 

coordination 

and 

management 

   

UA 1.64 

million 

(10.00%) 

 

 

(i) Coordination of project activities, (ii) Administrative, accounts and 

financial management, (iii) Procurement of goods, works and services, (iv) 

Establishment of a communication plan, (v) Monitoring and evaluation of 

project implementation ; (vi)  Implementation of the project’s environmental 

and social safeguards, and (vii) Audit 



 

6 

Table 2.2.1: Alternatives solutions and reasons for rejection 

 

 Alternatives Succinct Description Reason for Rejection 

 

Soil fertilisation  

This involves using organic fertilisers 

prepared with natural animal or plant 

material. Organic fertilisers are 

obtained from livestock or 

agricultural products or sub-products 

without adding any mineral or 

chemical substances 

Stockbreeding is not practised in the PA 

to facilitate the collection of sufficient 

quantities of animal dung to treat all 

areas to be exploited. This option is 

sometimes considered on a small scale 

for secondary crops with a high 

nutritional value. Training will be done 

through CRC. 

 
Intensive stockbreeding of pig 

and goat pure breeds 

This consist in importing high yield 

exotic breeds 

This alternative is costly, unsustainable 

and not suited to stockbreeders’ low 

level of technicity. 

 

E-voucher, paper version 

The e-voucher helps to enhance good 

governance in the agriculture sector 

by guaranteeing the traceability of 

inputs 

The disadvantage of the e-voucher, 

paper version, is its impact on the 

environment. It also does not guarantee 

sustainable conservation and the real 

time  transmission of data. 

2.3 Project Type  

PADCAE-B is a stand-alone investment project in the form of an ADF and TSF-financed Grant.  

2.4 Project Cost and Financing Arrangement  

2.4.1 The total project cost, net of taxes and customs duty, is estimated at about UA 16.47 million 

(USD 22.73 million) including 27% in foreign exchange and 73% in local currency. The project will be 

financed thus: UA 9.37 million in the form of an ADF Grant; UA 5.63 million in the form of a TSF 

Grant and the remainder, UA 1.39 million, being the counterpart contribution of the Government and 

beneficiaries. Project activities will span a period of five (5) years. The summary of project cost, funding 

allocation and expenditure schedule are presented in Tables 2.4 -2.6.2.4.2. The Bank Grant will finance 

100% (tax exclusive) of works, including infrastructure. Goods and services will be financed 100% 

following the attached Financing Plan, while Government will take charge of staff salaries and part (1/3) 

of office rental costs. The counterpart of the beneficiaries will be represented by their contribution to 

the National Fertilizer Subsidy Program as well as by their participation in the earthworks on the ridges 

of the hills. 

 
  



 

7 

Table 2.4: Cost estimates by component [in UA and USD Thousand] 

COMPONENTS 

(USD ‘000) (UA ‘000) % 
For. 

Exch. 

% Base 

Cost Local 

Currency  

Foreign 

Exchange 

Total Local 

Currency 

Foreign 

Exchange 

Total 

1. Land development, integrated 
land management, land restoration 
and security 6,678 1,670 8,348 4,839 1,210 6,049 20 38 

1.1. Land  development 5,478 1,370 6,848 3,970 992 4,962 20 32 

1.2. Land restoration and certification 1,200 300 1,500 870 217 1,087 20 7 

2. Development of climate-resilient 
agriculture and livestock value 
chains and support for nutrition  6,218 1,567 7,785 4,506 1,135 5,641 20 36 

2.1. Support for value chain 
development 3,119 780 3,899 2,260 565 2,825 20 18 

2.2. Support for product development 
infrastructure 2,907 739 3,646 2,106 536 2,642 20 17 

2.3. Nutrition support 192 48 240 139 35 174 20 1 

3. Institutional, capacity building 
and agriculture entrepreneurship 
support 1,670 1,711 3,382 1,210 1,240 2,451 51 16 

4. Project coordination and 
management 1,304 902 2,206 945 653 1,598 41 10 

Total BASE COSTS 15,870 5,849 21,720 11,500 4,239 15,739 27 100 

Physical contingencies 369 106 475 267 77 344 22 2 

Price escalation 285 135 419 206 98 304 32 2 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 16,523 6,090 22,613 11,973 4,413 16,386 27 104 

Table 2.5: Project cost by expenditure category, [in UA and USD ‘000] 

EXPENDITURE CATEGORIES 
(USD ‘000) (UA ‘000) % 

For. 

Exch. 

%  

Base C. Local Cur.  For. Exch. Total Local Cur. For. Exch. Total 

Works 8,272 2,268 10,540 5,994 1,644 7,638 22 49 

Goods 1,148 559 1,707 832 405 1,237 33 8 

Services 4,807 3,022 7,830 3,484 2,190 5,674 39 36 

Operating costs 1,642 - 1,642 1,190 - 1,190 - 8 

Base Cost 15,870 5,849 21,720 11,500 4,239 15,739 27 100 

Physical contingencies 369 106 475 267 77 344 22 2 

Price escalation 285 135 419 206 98 304 32 2 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 16,523 6,090 22,613 11,973 4,413 16,386 27 104 

Table 2.6 : Sources of financing  

Sources of Financing 
(UA ‘000)  (USD ‘000) % 

Total For. Exch. Local Cur. Total For. Exch. Local Cur. Total 

 TSF 1,231 4,399 5,630 1,698 6,071 7,769 34.4 

 ADF 3,152 6,218 9,370 4,350 8,581 12,931 57.2 

 GOVT 30 1,000  1,030 42 1,380 1421.4 6.3 

Beneficiaries    
- 357 357 - 

492.66 

 

492.66 

 
2,2 

TOTAL  4,413 11,973 16,386 6,090 16,523 22,613 100.0 

 

  



 

8 

Table 2.7: Expenditure schedule by component [in UA ‘000] 

Components 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 TOTAL 

1. Integrated territorial development and management, land 
restoration and security 690 1,682 1,678 1,620 830 6,500 

2. Development of climate-resilient agriculture and livestock 
value chains 1,079 2,832 984 689 142 5,726 

3. Institutional, capacity building and agricultural 
entrepreneurship support 519 614 735 476 177 2,521 

4. Project coordination and management 690 287 159 240 264 1,639 

TOTAL 2,978 5,414 3,556 3,025 1,413 16,386 

2.5 Project Area and Beneficiaries  

2.5.1 The project area (PA) covers Kirundo, Muyinga and Ngozi Provinces situated in northern 

Burundi with a total estimated population of 2,743,366 people, making 24% of the national population, 

and covering a land area of 1,671 ha (or 18% of the total land area of the country). It spans across 18 

hills and the following 9 communes: (i) Kirundo Province: Busoni, Vumbi and Bwambarangwe; (ii) 

Ngozi Province: Gashikanwa, Kiremba and Tangara; (iii) Muyinga Province: Giteranyi, Gasorwe and 

Gashoho. These three provinces are among those with the highest population density in the country, 

estimated at 553 inhab/km. 

2.5.2 The provinces and communes were selected by common agreement with the populations and 

provincial/communal authorities, based on the following criteria: (i) prevalence of chronic malnutrition7, 

(ii) rural population density8, (iii) potential for development through watersheds and marshlands, (iv) 

per capita investment from other projects9. The PA population are among the poorest in the country; the 

monetary poverty rates in Kirundo and Muyinga Provinces are higher than the national average (64.6%). 

2.5.3 The project has several beneficiaries at the central and decentralised levels. It will benefit 

directly 138,060 people, 56% of them women, and indirectly all 2,743,366 inhabitants of the 3 

provinces. At central level, the key beneficiaries are the Ministry in charge of Agriculture and its 

technical departments and allied structures such as R&D and training institutions. At the devolved and 

communal level, project implementation will benefit provincial departments of agriculture and 

livestock, sector cooperatives and value chains stakeholders’ organisations, agricultural households, 

particularly very vulnerable groups including young people and women, hill-agriculture 

supervisors/monitors, animal health workers as well as private enterprises. 

2.6 Participatory Approach in Project Identification, Design and Implementation 

2.6.1 At all study stages (identification, preparation and appraisal), PADCAE used a broad participatory 

and inclusive approach. Consultations were held with governmental authorities, the technical services 

of ministries involved (MINEAGRIE, Ministry of Finance, Budget and Development Cooperation, the 

Ministry of Health, the Ministry of National Education and Scientific Research), the relevant agriculture 

value chain stakeholders including the private sector (FOMI, Edenred, Mediabox) as well as Technical 

and Financial Partners with interventions in the agriculture sector (WB, FAO, IFAD, UNDP, UNICEF, 

WFP and the EU). Field visits paid during various project design missions revealed realities on the 

ground and made it possible to consult directly with stakeholders concerned (producers’ associations, 

women’s cooperatives, youth groups, local authorities and devolved technical services). Due to COVID-

19, the appraisal mission was conducted remotely via videoconferencing in which all stakeholders 

participated. However, the PATAREB coordination was able to have meetings and discussions in the 

field with the beneficiaries. 

 
7 Considered as indicator of prevalence of poverty and vulnerability 
8 Considered as indicator of pressure on natural resources 
9 2017 Update Report of the PNIA financing database, MINEAGRIE, 2017. 



 

9 

2.6.2 These visits and consultations spotlighted major weaknesses in (i) production (difficulties 

obtaining input supplies, limited advisory support, weak organisation, unsuitable cultural practices, 

under-equipment, etc); (ii) processing (poor organisation, under-equipment, limited access to 

financing); and (iii) marketing segments. These were compounded by the absence of communication 

among value chain stakeholders. Consultations will continue with them during project implementation 

to ensure that interventions are efficient, effective and sustainable.  

2.6.3 This participatory, inclusive and holistic approach is based on lessons learned from similar 

projects and aims to lay a common foundation for participation in the project implementation stages, 

promote sustainable practices, facilitate the exchange of views among stakeholders, leverage 

information and generate supplementary knowledge within stakeholders. It helps to create a body of 

knowledge for informed and responsible decision-making, provide robust support for such decisions 

and collective ownership of problems and solutions, build local capacity, and facilitate experience 

exchanges and collaboration with other TFPs’ interventions for greater synergy.   

2.7.  Bank Group Experience and Lessons Reflected in the Project Design  

2.7.1  On 30 June 2020, the Bank’s active portfolio in Burundi comprised 19 ongoing public sector 

projects for a total commitment of UA 282.77 million. Its distribution is aligned with the priority thrusts 

of the Country Strategy Paper (CSP 2019-2023) and Burundi’s National Development Plan (PND) and 

covers the following areas: Transport (58.47%), Agriculture (4.24%), Energy (33.03%), Social (3.24%), 

Multi-sector (1.02%). According to the CPR, the performance of the active public sector portfolio is 

deemed satisfactory with an IP score of 3.3 on a scale of 1 to 4 for 8 operations. However, this score 

hides a poor performance resulting from multiple extensions of the implementation timeframes of most 

portfolio projects. The performance rating fell slightly (from 3.36 to 3.34) between March 2019 and 

March 2020. 

2.7.2  The portfolio review revealed persistent difficulties that negatively affect public portfolio 

performance: (i) poor quality of technical studies which led to a few adjustments of the initial design of 

some projects during the implementation phase ; (ii) weakness in mainstreaming cross-cutting issues 

(environment, gender and fragility) in project design, BDs and contractors/consultants’ contracts and 

during implementation of road and energy projects; (iii) late commencement of projects; (iv) weak 

capacity of the Administration’s technical structures to support the project design and implementation 

process; (v) poor performance of PIUs; (vi) poor performance of some contractors and consultants; (vii) 

long time taken to response to requests for the Bank’s NOO; (viii) long procurement time frames; (ix) 

multiple extensions of project closing deadlines; (x) late submission of audit reports; (xi) lateness in 

reimbursing and/or justifying special accounts balances; (xii) late submission of quarterly financial 

monitoring reports; (xiii) late payment of Government’s counterpart contribution. 

2.7.3  The project design reflects lessons learned from difficulties with PATAREB being 

implemented, including the known weaknesses in project governance and file processing delays 

attributable to the Bank and PMU. In order to speed up the processing of files, the Government has 

undertaken an institutional evaluation of the PATAREB with a view of taking appropriate measures for 

better functioning. At the level of project management, fiduciary-related risks will be mitigated mostly 

by using the fiduciary management system within PATAREB and building PMU’s procurement and 

financial management capacity10. 

2.7.4  Lastly, the project study process factors in the lessons learned from the IDEV11 evaluation of 

the Bank’s support for agricultural value chain development, whose recommendations concern five core 

principles: (i) analyse the entire value chain; (ii) prepare a strategy to ensure inclusiveness ; (iii) nurture 

 
10 Following the resignation of the Procurement Officer and the Accountant, the recruitment process to replace these experts has been launched and is 
well underway. 
11 Independent Development Evaluation.  IDEV. AfDB support for agricultural value chain development: Lessons for the “Feed Africa” Strategy 

Summary Report, March 2018. 



 

10 

capacity to adapt to market trends; (iv) think in terms of profitability with value added; and (v) prepare 

plans to create lasting impact. 

2.8 Key Performance Indicators  

2.8.1. The key performance indicators to be monitored from the baseline situation to project 

completion are described in the following paragraphs: 

2.8.2.  Agriculture and value chains: the key indicators are the following: (i) area of marshland or 

watersheds rehabilitated/developed; (ii) area covered by hill irrigation, (iii) level of additional 

production (tonnes) and crop yields (t/ha); (iv) level of food insecurity and malnutrition, (v) number of 

infrastructure constructed (storage facilities of products and inputs, processing and development units 

etc.); (vi) number of farmers per type of gender-disaggregated works supported; (vii) area of new export 

crops; (viii) area covered by fruit plans; (ix) animal weight gain rate, etc. 

2.8.3.  Income and employment: (i) poverty level, (ii) level of income increase including that of 

women and young people; (iii) number of jobs created for young people and women in entrepreneurial 

initiatives in the various agricultural, animal and fisheries sectors; (iv) number of producers, processing 

agents and traders trained and organised in cooperatives.  

2.8.4.  Environment and land management: (i) land area restored, (ii) number of land certificates 

issued. 

All selected project indicators were aligned to the key indicators of CSP, PND and PNIA. 

III – PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1 Economic and Financial Performance  

3.1.1  A project financial assessment was conducted with the aid of activity models and based on 

market prices. The main assumptions underlying the analyses include: (i) 50,000 farmers actively 

engaged in agriculture at full project capacity; (ii) the project will generate an additional 25% increase 

in incomes, (iii) farmers will adopt a variety of improved maize and rice seeds as well as improved 

livestock breeds, (iv) a period of 20 years was used to measure incremental benefits from the project; 

(iv) the opportunity cost of capital used to update future benefits was estimated at 12%.   

3.1.2  For economic analysis, (v) the value of salaried work force was adjusted by a conversion factor 

of 0.75; (vi) the rehabilitation of the seedlings system will ensure national supply of quality seeds. These 

analyses were done with the financial and economic costs generated using Costab 32. The summary 

financial and economic analysis is attached as Annex VII and developed in Annex B4 of Volume II of 

the Appraisal Report. 

Table 3.1: Key economic and financial data 

IRR: 16.3% NPV (baseline scenario) equivalent to USD 17.24 million  

ERR: 25.2% NPV (baseline scenario) equivalent to USD 33.02 

million 

 

 Note: Calculations are detailed in Annex B7 

3.1.3 Financial Analysis: Based on the above assumptions, the financial analysis generated a Net 

Present Value of USD 17.24 million and an Internal Rate of Return of 16.3%, as indicated in the 

Technical Annexes (B4). As a result, the project is deemed financially viable. The IRR of 16.3% is 

higher than the opportunity cost of capital (12%). 



 

11 

3.1.4 Economic Analysis: The economic analysis used the same approach as the financial analysis, 

based on the negotiable reference prices of goods and the total project cost. Other indirect expected 

benefits were, among other things, smaller post-harvest losses, the provision of a service centre for 

agricultural equipment, a reliable system of information on soils for mixing fertilisers, an effective 

system of input distribution via the farmers’ database system and lower transport costs of goods and 

services. However, it was difficult to assess these supplementary benefits in monetary terms due to the 

limited scope of this report. Under such circumstances, the economic analysis revealed an NPV of USD 

33.02 and an IRR of 25.2%, as indicated in the Technical Annexes. 

3.2 Environmental, Social and Climatic Impact  

3.2.1 Environmental and Social Impact 

3.2.1.1  Categorisation: The project categorisation, as confirmed and approved on 21 February 2010, 

is Category 2 based on the Bank’s Integrated Safeguards System and the national legal framework 

governing environmental assessment. This categorisation is justified by the project activities which will 

be implemented in an ecosystem dedicated to these types of activities and without major risk of 

destroying new natural spaces. The significant environmental risks will be the effects of the poor use of 

phytosanitary products. Resettlement issues are foreseen in the context of land acquisition for 

infrastructure and development, but it will affect a fairly limited number of people. 

3.2.1.2  Necessary Environmental and Social Assessments: Two environmental and social safeguard 

instruments were proposed for project implementation: (i) the Environmental and Social Impact 

Assessment (ESIA) to cover project risks/impacts linked to support for the improvement/increase of 

agricultural production and the livestock sector, in particular small-scale animal husbandry as well as 

aquaculture; and (ii) the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to cover project 

risks/impacts linked to the construction/rehabilitation of rural infrastructure for storage/conservation 

(sheds), processing, transport and marketing of products, and support for income generating activities 

(IGA) for women and young people. The implementation of these activities will require the acquisition 

of land, but the localities where they will be carried out in the selected provinces are still unknown. The 

ESMF will propose procedures for assessing various risks (environmental, social including relocation) 

during the project implementation phase. Public consultations took place in July 2020 during preparation 

of these instruments and involved all stakeholders (all institutions concerned, representatives of potential 

beneficiaries: farmers of marshlands, farmers’ cooperatives around Lake Rweru and the inhabitants of 

the expected site of the hillside reservoirs). Thanks to the consultation, the populations’ opinions and 

views were taken into account in the project’s environmental and social assessment process. The 

populations expressed concern mainly about: (i) land insecurity in the marshes, (ii) the risk of conflicts 

related to the sharing of water, (iii) the sustainability of irrigation infrastructures, and (iv) the fight 

against erosion. 

3.2.1.3.  Project’s Potential Environmental and Social Impacts: The project will have several positive 

environment and social impacts, including: (i) the creation of temporary jobs on development sites; (ii) fewer 

conflicts due to better circulation of water in marshlands and consultations among peers in the PIU and AVECs 

(Rural Thrift and Loans Associations); (iii) availability of water through hill irrigation; (iv) increase of 

agricultural production and farmer incomes; (v) better organisation of farmers and harmonisation of crops and 

sowing/planting dates in the marshes; (vi) reduction of soil erosion on hills, floods and silting in the marshes; 

(vii) improvement of farmers’ living conditions; (viii) better protection of the buffer zone of Lake Rweru. The 

project’s potential negative impacts concern: (i) the loss of land portions in the marshes and on the hillside 

reservoir; (ii) economic loss if development occurs during the crop season; (iii) pollution of soil and water 

resources through increased use of phytosanitary products; (iv) the risk of drowning at the hillside reservoir; 

(v) the risk of social conflicts due to the influx of workers in the area; (vi) the risk of poisoning following the 

use of pesticides; (vii) increased vulnerability of soils to erosion on hills; (viii) occupational health and 

industrial safety risks in processing units and development sites; (ix) more problems of gender-based violence; 

and (x) greater risk of the populations contracting STDs/HIV, malaria and Covid19 . 



 

12 

3.2.1.4.  Mitigation Measures: Measures to manage these impacts/risks are proposed in the 

Environmental and Social Management Plan and the Environmental and Social Management 

Framework. Some of these specific measures are: (i) prioritise local manpower; (ii) sensitise the 

population to wear protective equipment when using phytosanitary products; (iii) develop marshes 

during the dry season to limit economic losses; (iv) put hygiene, health and safety measures in place on 

construction sites; (v) secure the limits of water reservoirs; (vi) compensate the populations in case of 

economic loss; (vii) raise awareness on STD/HIV, malaria and Covid19  issues and aspects that can lead 

to social conflicts; (viii) carry out environmental and social screening of sub-projects and requisite 

studies when necessary; and (ix) prepare an abbreviated RAP, as appropriate, to manage the social 

impacts of infrastructure development sub-projects.   

3.2.1.5  Cost and Institutional Arrangement for the Implementation of Safeguard Measures: The cost 

of implementing environmental and social impact mitigation measures, building borrower’s capacity 

and strengthening the management mechanism stands at USD 390,000. It is included in the project cost 

and detailed in the attached project implementation cost matrix. The resettlement estimated at the current 

stage at 50,000 dollars will be borne by the national party. An Environmental Safeguards Officer and 

Social Development Officer should be recruited to support the Project Coordination Unit. There are 

plans to provide technical and financial support to the Office Burundais de Protection de 

l’Environnement (Burundi Environmental Protection Authority) to monitor environmental and social 

safeguard instruments. 

3.2.2.   Climate Change  

PADCAE is classified in Category II. Agriculture is one of the five most vulnerable sectors identified 

in Burundi, including forestry, water resources, energy and health. The climatic risks identified are 

linked to: (i) the availability of water for irrigation; (ii) soil erosion; (iii) the impact of extreme weather 

conditions (heavy rains and intense heat); (iv) the sustainability of physical infrastructure; (v) farming 

and irrigation techniques & systems; (vi) livestock feed (fodder/feed); (vii) sustainability of stock 

breeding systems; and (viii) the prevention and control of parasites and animal diseases. The potential 

impacts include: the modification of the farming seasons and calendar; lower crop yields due to 

increased erosion; faster land degradation and loss of soil fertility due to very heavy rains and more 

frequent disasters linked to extreme weather events (flooding of marshes and shallows, mudslides and 

landslides, hail, storms, etc.).  PADCAE will build climate resilience through the choice of agricultural 

technologies and climate-resilient seeds, the training of senior staff/agents of institutions and farmers as 

well as reforestation, thereby contributing to climate finance. 

3.2.3. Gender and Women’s Empowerment  

3.2.3.1  The project is classified in Category 2 according to the Gender Marker System since many of 

its key outcomes contribute to bridging gender inequalities. Since the project’s objective is to sustainably 

boost agricultural productivity and production, women, who form the bulk of the agricultural work force, 

should be its prime beneficiaries.   

3.2.3.2  Project activities aim to further empower women economically and socially. If implemented, 

the project will facilitate: (i) women’s better access to production tools (notably land), (ii) women’s 

socio-economic empowerment, (iii) a greater male/female participation in promoting agribusiness in the 

project area, (iv) the equitable access of women and young people to project resources; (v) women’s 

increased participation in the decision-making process, (vi) greater technical capacity of MINEAGRIE 

and other key stakeholders to mainstream gender in their policies, strategies and activities, and (vii) a 

better understanding of gender specificities through the Country Gender Profile with special emphasis 

on the links between poverty, the agriculture sector and women’s empowerment. The project will also 

support activities related to monitoring and evaluation information disaggregated by gender in the 

reports generated. The major risks concern: (i) domestic conflicts caused by land certification, (ii) the 

unequal distribution of project gains favouring men and/or exclusive male control of the project, (iii) 



 

13 

the risk that the training given to MINEAGRIE officials and other partners does not translate into 

gender-sensitive interventions, (iv) the risk that the pro-women access to credit is usurped by their 

spouses, and (v) resistance to women’s participation in highly profitable value chain segments or in high 

income crops, subsequently generating social conflicts. The solutions to optimally mitigate these risks 

are described in the Technical Annexes (Volume II). 

3.2.4 Social  

PADCAE’s contribution to improving the populations’ living conditions is undeniable. It contributes to 

higher productivity, better organisation/relations among various agriculture and livestock value chain 

segments, better access to basic infrastructure (agricultural tracks, storage facilities, market), improved 

nutritional value of agricultural and livestock products, and gender inclusion (56% of beneficiaries are 

women). Furthermore, it will foster better living conditions for beneficiaries and improve the nutritional 

status of the population, particularly women and children. Digitising agriculture and the land tenure 

system will help to strengthen good governance, reduce social tensions and promote private sector 

investments in agriculture. By creating jobs for young people through the promotion of agricultural 

entrepreneurship, the project will help to reduce unemployment, fight against migration and rural exodus 

among the youth, and reduce the social inequalities of which they are a victim. Finally, the project will 

help reduce the risks12 associated with the factors of fragility affecting the country, as identified in the 

study report on Burundi's fragility and make the agricultural sector the engine of growth and the fight 

against poverty 

IV – IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1.  Implementation Arrangements 

4.1.1.  Implementation Arrangements-Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanism  

4.1.1.1  The Ministry of Environment, Agriculture and Livestock (MINEAGRIE) is the oversight 

authority of the project. Project activities will be managed, coordinated, monitored and supervised by 

the Management Unit of PATAREB located in the DPAE of Kirundo which includes: a coordinator, a 

rural engineering specialist, a procurement specialist, an agronomy/value chain specialist, a socio-

economist, an administrative and financial officer, an accountant, and a cashier. The Bank's preparation 

mission conducted in June 2019 concluded that the profile and experience of these staff members was 

acceptable after reviewing and analyzing their resumes. However, it did identify communication 

problems among team members that impede the optimal functioning of the PMC. A recent performance 

evaluation of project staff led to the non-renewal of the contract of the Administrative and Financial 

Manager for lack of results. The Government has also recently launched an evaluation of the PMU, the 

results of which and the actions resulting from it will help improve the project's performance. The Bank 

will also conduct close supervision missions that will contribute to better operation of the PMC. In 

addition, the PMU will also be strengthened by additional staff recruited on a competitive basis and 

including a PADCAE-B Project Manager, an environmental expert, a procurement assistant and an 

accountant. The selected activities will be implemented by the MINEAGRIE Provincial Bureaux of 

Agriculture and Livestock (BPAE) and service providers under specific contracts. Project focal points 

will be designated in the two BPAEs (Ngozi and Muyinga) to ensure liaison and monitoring.. At the 

central level in Bujumbura, PADCAE-B will use the PATAREB Project’s antenna to liaise with the 

supervisory Ministry, the project’s Technical and Financial Partners, the Administration’s central 

services, and research and development institutions. 

4.1.1.2  For the sake of coordination and harmonization, the framing and orientation of the execution, 

review and approval of work programs, annual budgets (PTBA), and activity reports of the PADCAE-

 
12 The risks identified relate to (i) land tenure security, (ii) low productivity in the agricultural sector and food insecurity , 

(iii) weak land use planning and infrastructure, (iv) social inequalities and unemployment, particularly among young 

people and women, and (v) exposure to natural disasters. 



 

14 

B project will be ensured by the same Steering Committee as that of PATAREB which will be enlarged 

with : (i) the Governors of the Provinces of Ngozi and Muyinga; (ii) the Provincial Directors (BPEAE) 

of Ngozi and Muyinga; (iii) the representatives of producers or agricultural producer organizations 

(OPAOs) of the Provinces of Ngozi and Muyiga; and (iv) a representative of the Forum of Agricultural 

Producers' Organizations of Burundi (FOPABU). 

4.1.1.3  In designing the project’s monitoring and evaluation system, account will be taken of the 

targeted indicators selected for project components/activities as well as the expected impact, outcomes 

and output indicators. For better coordination and harmonisation, the Results-based management (RBM) 

monitoring and evaluation arrangement will be incorporated in the Automated and Decentralised 

Monitoring and Evaluation (ADME) system used by MINEAGRIE and the PNSADR-IM Project 

financed by IFAD. Internal monitoring and evaluation will be conducted by the project’s Monitoring 

and Evaluation Unit, while external monitoring and evaluation will be conducted by DGPAE and the 

Ministry of Finance. The Bank will field annual monitoring and supervision missions while its Country 

Office in Burundi will monitor the project, maintaining ongoing dialogue with the country’s authorities, 

and Technical and Financial Partners. According to Bank rules and requirements, quarterly, annual, 

progress and audit reports will also be prepared and submitted to the Bank, pursuant to agreements 

signed.  

4.1.2.  Procurement Arrangements  

4.1.2.1  The national public procurement system in Burundi is currently governed by Law No. 1/04 of 

29 January 2018 amending Law No. 1/01 of 4 February 2008 instituting the Public Procurement Code 

(PPC). The legislative and regulatory framework of procurement is made up of the law and decrees 

laying down the establishment, organisation and operation of the Public Procurements Regulatory 

Authority (ARMP), the National Directorate of Public Procurement Control (DNCMP) and Public 

Procurement Management Units (CGMP) as well as ordinances defining procurement thresholds, 

control and publication of contracts. The scope of the PPC covers all procurement by contracting 

authorities as well as all types of public contracts without waivers, with the exception of contracts which 

are of a secret nature incompatible with any form of competition or publicity, or where the protection 

of the fundamental interests of national security so requires.   

4.1.2.2  The assessment of Burundi’s national public procurement system (NPS) led to the qualification 

of its procurement risk as moderate. This generic country risk was reviewed in the context of 

implementation of activities under the Agriculture and Livestock Value Chains Sustainable 

Development Support Project in Burundi (PADCAE-B) to be considered in determining the project's 

global procurement risk. The overall project procurement risk rating (PPRR) at the time of the 

assessment is deemed moderate.   

4.1.2.3  Consequently, NPS will be used for the procurement of goods, works and consultancy services 

for amounts not exceeding the thresholds defined in Annex B5 of the Technical Annexes and the Public 

Procurement Plan and which do not entail a significant risk for the project considering their value, 

specificity and availability on the national market. Other procurements with a significant risk if NPS is 

used, will be awarded using the Bank’s Procurement Methods and Procedures (PMP) pursuant to the 

Procurement Policy for Bank Group-funded Operations, dated October 2015 and using the Bank’s 

relevant standard bidding documents (SBD). 

4.1.3. Procurement Capacity and Risk Assessment (PCRA)  

Risks at country, sector and project levels and the Project Executing Agency’s (PEA) procurement 

capacity were assessed. A market analysis was also conducted notably to obtain information on the 

market characteristics, bills that could affect competition and the key players on sector markets. The 

assessment results and market analysis served to guide the decision to choose NPSNPS for certain 

project activities and PMP for other activities entailing significant risk. They also made it possible to 



 

15 

plan procurements, structure contracts, choose the best procurement methods and procedures (MPA or 

NPS) suited to the goal sought, define the framework of Bank review and supervision. Appropriate risk 

mitigation measures were included in the Procurement Risks and Capacity Assessment (PERCA) action 

plan set out in Annex B5. A procurement audit will be performed by an independent firm under the 

supervision of ARMP. The project will also support ARMP to build the procurement capacity of the 

staff of MINEAGRIE’s Public Procurement Unit and the Project Implementation Unit. A Global Action 

Plan for Improving the Procurement System is detailed in Annex B5 of the technical annexes. 

4.1.4. Financial Management and Disbursement  

Financial Management: Responsibility for the project’s administrative, accounting and financial 

management will be entrusted to the coordination unit of PATAREB whose capacity will be built with 

the recruitment of additional staff whose qualifications are specified in the Technical Annexes (Volume 

II). The institutional analysis showed that the Project Management Unit’s current financial management 

systems are not satisfactory overall and that the overall fiduciary risk is significant due to the absence 

of: (i.) a budget coupled with the schedule of activities, (ii.) an administrative, financial and accounting 

procedures manual, (iii.) an accountant and cashier, (iv.) distribution of financial tasks, (v.) fixed asset 

register and fuel tracking table, (vi.) an improved missions tracking table, (vii.) room and metal cabinets 

for accounting vouchers, (viii.) a cost accounting plan and specific budget accounting plan for the 

project, (ix.) an accounting software, (ix.) a cashflow forecast plan, (x.) quarterly and biannual progress 

reports comprising interim financial statements, and (xi.) an external audit firm to audit the project. To 

address these constraints, the Project Management Unit will: (i) upon project launching and at the 

beginning of the year, prepare a budget plan coupled with a provisional schedule of activities; (ii) finalise 

before project commencement the contract of the consultant tasked with preparing the administrative, 

financial and accounting procedures manual. The consultant will also design templates of the fuel 

tracking table, missions tracking statement and maintenance/repairs monitoring statement; (iii) finalise, 

before Project commencement,  the recruitment of the Accountant and Cashier; (iv) after the recruitment 

of the Accountant and Cashier, distribute financial tasks as mentioned above; (v) after project 

commencement, assign an office and procure secured metal cabinets for accounting vouchers to be 

arranged by year and sequentially; (vi) immediately draw up a fixed assets register initialled and 

containing the number, designation, amount and location thereof; (vii) immediately draw up a weekly 

fuel tracking table; (viii) immediately improve the missions tracking table; (ix) upon project 

commencement, prepare specific cost and budget accounting plans for the project; (x) before project 

commencement, procure a software with built-in modules for general and cost accounting and budget 

management. The software contract should provide for staff training and technical assistance; (xi) upon 

Grant effectiveness, open a special foreign exchange account and two special accounts in Burundi 

Francs, one of which for the national counterpart contribution, in an acceptable bank in Burundi ; (xii) 

upon project commencement, establish a petty cash fund for amounts not exceeding BIF100,000, or 

EUR 50; (xiii) upon first disbursement, draw up a cashflow plan; (xiv) upon project commencement and 

at the beginning of the year, prepare a budget coupled with a schedule of activities; (xv) within three 

and six months of project commencement, prepare quarterly and biannual progress reports incorporating 

interim financial statements and transmit same to the Bank, the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock 

and the Steering Committee; and (xvi) upon project commencement, recruit an external audit firm. 

Lastly, during the launching of the project, the Bank (AfDB) is expected to train the Coordinator, Head 

of the Administrative and Financial Service, the Accountant and Cashier on Bank financial management 

procedures. 

Disbursements: Pursuant to the provisions of the Disbursement manual in force at the Bank. On ADF 

resources: the proposed disbursement methods are: (a) the special account method (for operating 

expenses, capacity building activities and the management of some partnership agreements) and (b) the 

direct payment method for payment of works, goods and service provision contracts. As concerns TSF 

resources: (a) the special account method (for operating expenses, capacity building activities, and the 

management of some partnership agreements) and (b) the direct payment method for the payment of 

works, goods and service provision contracts. The reimbursement method will be used when eligible 



 

16 

expenses for TSF Grant resources have been pre-financed by the Government with the Bank’s approval. 

The project will open the following special accounts in the name of PADCAE-B, in local currency (BIF), 

in financial institutions deemed acceptable to the Bank. One special account will be opened per source 

of financing. Disbursement arrangements are detailed in the Technical Annexes (Volume II) 

4.2 Monitoring  

 

Table 4.2.1: Implementation and supervision schedule 
ACTIVITIES PERIOD RESPONSIBILITY 

Appraisal  June 2020 Bank 

Negotiations  September 2020 Govt/Bank 

Board approval 28 September 2020 Bank 

Signature AFD Grant agreements December 2020 Govt/Bank 

Fulfilment of conditions precedent to  first 

disbursement 

March 2021 Govt 

Authorisation 1st disbursement March 2021 Bank 

Project commencement April 2021 Govt/Bank 

Signature of conventions with partners June 2021 Govt 

Execution of works and services July 2021 Govt/Service Provider 

Mid-term review July 2023 Govt/Bank 

Completion of activities December 2025 Govt/Bank 

Completion report December 2025 Govt/Bank 

Audits Annually Govt 

Project closing date June 2026 Govt/Bank 

4.3 Governance  

4.3.1 Since the 2015 crisis, the country has made significant progress in consolidating economic and 

financial governance. Several structural reforms to improve and consolidate the macroeconomic and 

budget framework in terms of resource mobilisation and streamlining of public spending were carried 

through. The new government scaled down the State apparatus by reducing the number of ministries 

from 21 to 15. However, improvements are needed to mobilise internal resources to tackle the ever-

growing expenditure and to programme and allocate public resources to achieve the PND objectives. 

The public procurement system was marked by several reforms to enhance the transparency of the 

system. Despite this progress, improvements are still necessary in the areas of implementation, slowness 

of procedures, and disputes management to make the system compliant with the relevant standards.  

4.3.2  The persistence of customs and traditions governing land access and inheritance in a modern 

economy context hinders investments in the agricultural sector. By digitising the land tenure system and 

issuing land certificates, the project will contribute to good governance in this sector, thus fostering 

private sector investments and easing social tensions. The digitised management of the fertilisation 

system will improve the efficiency of the supply mechanism and strengthen good governance. Lastly, 

the project will use an Automated and Decentralised Monitoring and Evaluation system to allow for the 

regular monitoring of field activities and launch of alerts and warnings whenever necessary following a 

vertical approach for all project stakeholders.  

4.4  Sustainability   

4.4.1  The project aims to initiate a truly sustainable development, by placing the targeted value chain 

players at the centre of decision-making and building their capacity to take on new responsibilities. The 

design of this project is based on value chain stakeholders’ demand jointly expressed throughout the 

process and which helped to guarantee their full ownership of the project. All the retained crops and the 

associated value chains exist in the project zones. The project intervention aims to amplify and 

perpetuate existing initiatives through technological innovations and link up the various value chain 

segments. 



 

17 

4.4.2  The sustainability of investments and expected benefits build on participatory entrepreneurial 

approaches involving capacity building. These include: (i) the structuring and professionalisation of 

farmers’ cooperatives and other value chain stakeholders based on expressed demand, (ii) the 

empowerment of provincial technical services to implement project activities; (iii) the inclusion and 

empowerment of women and young people through training and funding access mechanisms; (iv) the 

choice of tested technologies that can be controlled locally; (v) participation and empowerment of value 

chain stakeholders and local communities in the management of constructed infrastructure; (vi) capacity 

building and empowerment of provincial and communal technical Directorates of MINEAGRIE and 

other ministries and research and development institutions in the areas of implementation of project 

activities and monitoring; and (vi) the setting up of well-trained water users’ associations (WUA) in 

irrigated areas. This will allow for good sustainable management and regular maintenance of works.  

4.5 Risk Management  

Table 4.5.1: Risk management 

No. Potential Risks  Level  Mitigation Measures 

1 Socio-political: 

- Persistence of dissensions with certain 
opposition parties 

 

Moderate 

 

- The May 2020 elections were held in a peaceful environment and the new authorities 
are striving to strengthen stability and peace.  

2 Fiduciary: 

Corruption Perception Index 

High -The institutional mechanism must be strengthened; At project level, the management 

unit is autonomous and control is done before and after disbursements by audits 

missions, and the Bank’s central services 

3 Climate change: 

Weather vagaries affect the farming 

calendar and productivity of some seeds 

Moderate - Information on the crop calendar and training of farmers; Promotion of climate-

resilient crop varieties; Diversification of production to build the populations’ 

resilience 

4 -Population’s reticence to engage in 

climate-resilient activities 

Moderate -Dissemination of techniques in Farmer School Fields enables farmers to observe under 

real conditions the importance and benefit of the proposed practices and varieties 

promoted, thereby facilitating their adoption 

5 

 

Environmental: 

-Pressure on natural resources 

- Intensity of erosion 

High 

 

-Training and sensitisation of the population on natural resources conservation;  

- Strengthening of erosion control measures; Promotion of an integrated land 

management approach 

6 Implementation:  

-Slow disbursements 

-Unqualified consultancy firms and 

contractors 

-Weak stakeholder capacity at local level 

 

 

Moderate 

- Strengthening of procurement training; Putting in place of a quality-assurance system 

for BDs 

- Recourse to international expertise to be twinned with national expertise to strengthen 

ownership; Training sessions are planned at all levels of the value chains. 

- More inclusive implementation arrangement to strengthen consultation, information 

swaps and ownership by all parties involved 

4.6 Knowledge Building  

4.6.1  The project ensures technology/knowledge transfer to national research and development 

institutions, and from them to agriculture and livestock value chain stakeholders in the field, via the 

TAAT stakeholder intervention mechanism. These technology aspects include the development of 

resilient seeds, the rational use of fertilisers and the genetic improvement and feeding of livestock. In 

collaboration with AfricaRice, the project will pilot the use of the digital RiceAdvice tool to help rice 

farmers to better monitor crops and improve yields and their incomes through personalised advice on 

management and good agricultural practices.  

4.6.2  The use of new technologies will be built into the project, thanks to the Digitisation for 

Agriculture (D4Ag) concept and approach. Through D4Ag, the project will contribute to: (i) the 

establishment of SEAD, helping to strengthen the monitoring and evaluation mechanism, (ii) the 

establishment of MINEAGRIE’s agriculture database and digitisation of the advisory support system, 

(iii) the connection of different value chain stakeholders (production, processing and marketing), (iv) 



 

18 

the strengthening of good governance ensuring control over supply channels and traceability of inputs 

supplied to farmers with the adoption of e-vouchers, and (vi) setting up of the land management system 

(land certification). 

4.6.3  To improve beneficiaries’ livelihoods and build their resilience to recurrent shocks and crises, 

the project will adopt the Farmer Field School (FFS) approach and Resilience Fund (CdR) that capitalise 

on individual and collective expertise, knowledge, skills and capacity to better understand and exploit 

agro-ecosystems. Bad habits are gradually transformed into springboards for good agricultural, 

nutritional, economic and social practice. The Resilience Fund approach is community-centred and 

contains three dimensions: a productive/technical dimension (use of sustainable agricultural practices), 

a financial/economic dimension (access to credit), and a social dimension (strengthening of social 

cohesion and solidarity by creating or strengthening farmers’ or women’s associations). This approach 

aims to gather and diversify the production assets and knowledge of vulnerable agro-pastoral 

smallholders facing food insecurity, especially women. The approach is innovative since the support 

provided targets the three dimensions in a complementary manner, which opens up more opportunities 

for beneficiaries and enables them to better prepare themselves for multiple risks.  

4.6.4  With regard to gender, the project will prepare an updated diagnosis of all gender disparities in 

different domains – Country Gender Profile, with special emphasis on the links between poverty, 

agriculture sector and women’s empowerment. 

V. LEGAL FRAMEWORK  

5.1. Legal Instrument  

The legal instruments to be used will be (i) a protocol of agreement for an ADF grant between the 

African Development Fund and the Republic of Burundi ("the Recipient ") and (ii) a protocol of 

agreement for an TSF grant between the African Development Fund and the African Development Bank 

acting as Trustees of the TSF (the Bank and the Fund, together referred to as the "Fund")  and the 

Recipient. 

5.2. Conditions for Fund Intervention  

5.2.1  Conditions Precedent to Grant Effectiveness: The effectiveness of the two TSF and ADF Grant 

Agreements shall be subject to their signature by the parties. 

5.2.2  Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement of the Grants:  

The Bank’s obligation to perform the first disbursement of the Grants shall be subject to (i) the 

effectiveness of the two TSF and ADF Grant Agreements, in accordance with the provisions of 

paragraph 5.2.2 above, and (ii) evidence of Recipient having fulfilled to the Fund’s satisfaction, the 

following conditions as to form and substance: 

(i) Provide the Fund with proof that the Project Management Unit ("PMU") of the 
PATAREB Project has the mandate to be in charge of the management of the Project; 

(ii) Provide to the Fund evidence of appointment of the Coordinator of PATAREB Project 
as the Coordinator of PADCAE-B within the PMU (cf. 5.2.1); 

(iii) Provide the Fund with evidence of the recruitment of the PADCAE-B Project Manager, 
Procurement Assistant and Accountant within the PMU, whose qualifications and 

experience will have been previously submitted to the Bank for approval (see 5.2.1).; 

5.2.3 Other Conditions: In addition, the Recipient must provide to the Fund not later than six 
(6) months after the first disbursement of Grant resources: 



 

19 

(i) Conventions with partner structures (ISABU, ONCSS, Directorate of Subsectors, 
Directorate of Plant Protection, Provincial Bureaux of the Environment, Agriculture and 

Livestock (BPEAE)). 

5.2.4.  Conditions Precedent to Disbursement for Works involving Resettlement. Subject to the 

provisions related to effectiveness and the Conditions precedent to first disbursement, the Fund’s 

obligation to pay resources for works involving the use of an Environmental and Social Management 

Framework (CGES) shall be contingent on fulfilment by the Recipient  of the following additional 

conditions:  

a)  the submission for a specific site of an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment 

(ESIA), Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and abbreviated 

Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) approved by the Recipient for the Work, prepared in 

accordance with the ESMC and the Fund's Safeguards Policies and satisfactory in form 

and substance to the Fund;).  

(b)  the submission of satisfactory evidence that all persons affected by the Project (Project 

Affected Persons or PAPs) in the area of the Work have been compensated and/or 

relocated in accordance with the Environmental and Social Management Framework 

(ESMF) developed for a specific site, the Abridged Relocation Plan (ARP) developed for 

a specific site and/or the Work and Compensation Schedule developed and the Fund's 

Safeguards Policies, prior to the commencement of such Work and in all cases prior to 

the relocation and/or taking possession of the PAP lands and/or related property; or 

(c)    in lieu of paragraph (b) above, the submission of satisfactory evidence that the resources 

allocated for the compensation and/or relocation of the PAPs have been deposited in a 

dedicated account in a bank acceptable to the Fund, where the Recipient can prove to the 

satisfaction of the Fund that the compensation and/or relocation of the PAPs, in 

accordance with paragraph (b) above, could not be fully or partially realized for the 

following reasons : 

  (i) identification of the PAPs by the Recipient is not feasible or possible ; 

  (ii) there are ongoing disputes involving the PAPs and/or affecting the 

compensation and/or relocation exercise; or 

          any other reason beyond the control of the Recipient, as discussed and agreed 

with the Fund. 

5.2.5. Commitments 

The Recipient undertakes to provide by 15 July of each year proof of the inclusion in the Finance Act 

for that year of the budget of the National Fertilizer Subsidy Program in accordance with the schedule 

agreed with the Fund. 

5.2.6 Environmental and Social Safeguards: The Recipient must and will force the Executing Agency, 

all its contractors, sub-contractors and agents to:  

a) Implement the project pursuant to the Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) developed for a specific site, and where applicable the abbreviated 

Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) developed for a specific site, and/or the work and 

compensation schedule, the Fund's Safeguards Policies and applicable national legislation 

in a manner satisfactory to the Fund in form and substance; and, the Bank requirements 

and the applicable national legislation in a manner that is satisfactory to the Fund both in 

form and content;  



 

20 

b) Prepare and submit to Fund, as part of project reports, half-yearly reports on ESMF 
implementation developed for a specific site and the RAP if applicable, including any 

implementation failures and related remedies;  

c) Refrain from taking any action that would prevent or impede the implementation of the 
ESMF, including any modification, suspension, waiver and/or cancellation of any 

provision thereof, in whole or in part, without the prior written consent of the Fund; and 

d) Cooperate fully with the Fund in the event that the implementation of the project or a 
change in its scope results in a hitherto unforeseen population displacement and/or 

resettlement, and undertake to only commence work in the affected area, when all project 

affected persons (PAPs) in these areas have been compensated and/or resettled pursuant 

to an abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) to be prepared by the Recipient . 

5.3  Compliance with Bank Policies  

The project complies with all Bank Group Policies. 

VI – RECOMMENDATION 

Management hereby recommends that the Board of Directors of the Fund approve the proposal to award 

a Grant of UA 15 million (9.37 million from ADF and 5.63 million from the Pilar I of the TSF resources) 

to the Republic of Burundi, to finance the Agriculture and Livestock Value Chain Sustainable 

Development Support Project in Burundi and according to the conditions set out in this report. 

 






















































 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 

 

 

 

 

 

BURUNDI 

 

 

 

SUPPORT TO AGRICULTURE TRANSFORMATION IN THE 

BUGESERA NATURAL REGION PROJECT (PATAREB) 

 

 

 

 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

November 2017 

 
       

 

PROJECT DOCUMENT 

CLIENT RECORD 

 

BENEFICIARY   Republic of Burundi 
 

EXECUTING AGENCY  Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MINAGRIE) 

 

Financing Plan 

Source  Amount Instrument 

 

TSF (Pillar I) 

 

 UA 12 million 

 

Grant 

Government  UA 0.00 M.  - 

TOTAL COST  UA 12 M.   

 

Key information on TSF financing 

 

TSF Grant Currency 

 

$US 

Commitment fee: % per annum on undisbursed amounts 

Service Commission 0%  of outstanding amount per  year 

  

TRE (baseline scenario) 

TRI (baseline scenario) 

NPV 

23.01% 

20.17% 

BIF 89,72 billion 

 

Time Frame - Main milestones (Expected) 

Preparation August-September 2017 

Concept Note Approval October 2017 

Project appraisal October 2017 

Project approval December 2017 

Entry into Force January 2018 

Closure of loan December 2022 

Last Disbursement June 2023  
 

 



 

iii 

 

Project Summary  
 

General overview of the project: The Support to Agriculture Transformation in the Bugesera 

Natural Region Project (PATAREB) covers Bugesera natural region comprising seven (07) 

municipalities in Kirundo Province and Gitreranyi municipality in Muyinga Province. These 

municipalities cover an area of 2 100 km ², that is 7,5 % of the national territory, and has a 

population of 1 004 907 inhabitants (2017 estimates), 519 665 of them women, or more then 

51,71% of the population within the project intervention zone (PIZ). The project targets 

economically, socially and environmentally fragile and disadvantaged communities, who 

possess significant agricultural and fish farming potential  and whose sustainable development 

will contribute to improving food and nutritional security, increase the income of vulnerable 

small-scale producers, alleviate the impact of poverty on rural households and strengthen the 

resilience of populations, including women and youth.  With a total cost of UA 12.00 million, 

fully funded from Pillar I (additional support) resources of the Transition Support Facility 

(TSF), the project will be implemented over a five-year period in  three (03) components: (i) 

Support to Agricultural Infrastructure Development; (ii) Promotion of Agricultural 

Transformation and Improvement of the Living Conditions of inhabitants; and (iii) 

Management and Coordination. PATAREB will directly benefit more than 650,000 people, 

51% of them women, and approximately 355 000 residents within the area of intervention. In 

order to ensure sustainability of investments, the participative and inclusive approach adopted 

during preparation and evaluation will continue during execution in order to associate all the 

recipients and to allow the durability of the investments. Similarly, an innovative approach to 

participative development of agricultural values chains and streams will be adopted to address 

the key constraints to durable financing of agricultural entrepreneurship within the framework 

of public-private partnerships (PPP) and improve the access to markets, guaranteeing a better 

price for producers. 

 

Needs Assessment: Burundi's agricultural sector engages more than 94% of the active 

population and accounts for more than 39% of the GDP, more than 80% of foreign exchange 

earnings and provides 95% of the dietary intake. It also accounts for 25% of government 

spending. The financing needs of the sector were estimated at approximately BIF 145 billion 

during the evaluation mission, to achieve the objectives of the National Plan for agricultural 

investment (NAIP-2012-2017) in terms of increased production and productive capital, 

organization of producers, developing profitable sectors and strengthening institutions 

providing technical support to rural areas. In 2017, the resources are estimated to be BIF 59.28 

billion, a significant deficit of over BIF 85.70 billion. The TSF resources, approximately BIF 

29.28 billion, will help to significantly reduce the financing gap, especially in the eight (08) 

municipalities in Kirundo and Muyinga Provinces. Moreover, the control of water for irrigation 

in the project area requires significant resources, as well as the dissemination of new 

technologies, creation of added value in the main agricultural sectors, sustainable promotion of 

young agricultural entrepreneurs, and strengthening resilience of socio-ecological systems. 

 

Added value for the African Development Bank: PATAREB supports the Bank's Ten Year 

Strategy 2013-2022 and the priority intervention areas funded by TSF in Burundi will support 

food and nutritional security, value chains and strengthen resilience. In particular, the project 

will contribute to reducing the Agricultural Financing Gap, serving as a catalyst for agricultural 

development of the area, by promoting a better control of water, reinforcing economic 

infrastructures, promoting appropriate technologies for food production, processing and 

marketing. In addition, PATAREB reinforces the Bank’s role in financing the agricultural 

sector in Burundi while taking into account the Bank's previous experience in similar projects. 

Lastly, it implements the Bank strategy to “remedy fragility and reinforce resilience in Africa 



 

iv 

 

2014-2019” by consolidating the role of communities, the private sector, and local NGOs in 

reinforcing resilience, local governance and citizen monitoring. This intervention will help build 

resilience and reduce situations of fragility that characterize the targeted Provinces. The project is 

also aligned to the Bank's Gender Strategy 2014 - 2018, in strengthening their right to ownership 

of developed land, economic empowerment through income generation and strengthening their 

capacity in management and in entrepreneurship. 

 

Knowledge management PATAREB will establish a baseline for land surveys (including on 

value chains), which will serve to establish a reliable database, disaggregated by gender, to 

measure results indicators and the impact of the project. A geo-referenced map will be created 

to provide information on developed sites and completed infrastructure. Specific impact 

assessment studies (quick and in-depth) will be carried out by competent firms and the results 

will feed into the project database. This information will be made available on a web site and 

will be shared with all stakeholders. The project will also support training and capacity building 

for diverse local actors, including, in the first instance, farmers within the reclaimed wetlands 

and women in charge of processing and marketing food products. The project will seek to 

disseminate good practices for conservation and storage of agricultural products. In the field of 

irrigation, the project will develop expertise in hillside irrigation using solar energy, and 

resilience to climate change, disseminating innovative actions promoting local know-how, 

including by women. Communication mechanisms and capitalization of project outcomes, 

value addition processes benefiting women and youth through development of value chains, as 

well as participatory assessment and evaluation by the civil society integrated within the project 

implementation mechanism, is part of knowledge management. 



 

v 

 

RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
(*): Baseline indicator data will be updated at the end of the baseline survey. 

COUNTRY AND NAME OF 

PROJECT: 

Burundi : Support to Agriculture Transformation in the Bugesera Natural Region Project (PATAREB) : 

PROJECT PURPOSE:  Stimulate  agricultural development of Bugesera natural region by setting up production infrastructure, promoting agricultural value chains and suppo rt to social safety nets. 
 

RESULTS CHAIN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS VERIFICATION 

METHODS 
RISK MITIGATION MEASURES 

Indicators (including ISP) S. of Reference Target 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Long term  2017 2022 and beyond 

Stat. INSAE, 

EMICOV/EDS 

 

Food and nutritional security 

improved and incidence of 
poverty reduced 

Average prevalence of food insecurity in the project intervention zone 

(PIZ) 

12%  5%  / 8% ( 2020) 

Prevalence of chronic malnutrition (children 5-59 months) in the PIZ 50.8% 25% / 35% (2020) 
SCRPIII Studies / 
Survey 

Proportion of population in poverty within the PIZ, disaggregated: M/F 39% 25% / 30% (2018) AGVSA Reports 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

Medium Term  2015 2020  Risks 

 Unclear land and demesnial issues may bring 
difficulties in highlighting sites to be developed 

and compromise project objectives in terms of 

food security and the fight against poverty 

particularly for women and youth. 

 

Mitigation measures 

 Support to the project in terms of planning and 
land management which will result in the 
establishment of tripartite agreements  (rights 

holders of the common lands, professional 

organizations) and cooperatives in order to 
mitigate  conflicts  

1. An increase in agriculture, 

food , vegetables and fish 

production 

Average productivity for rice and sorghum respectively (T/Ha) ≤ 2 and 0.8 ≥ 10 and 2  Agricultural statistics 

 Project Monitoring 
Reports 

 Mid-term review report  
and project completion 

report 

Average productivity of maize and cassava respectively (T/Ha) ≤ 1 and 4.5 ≥ 2.5 and 12 

Average productivity for vegetables (T/Ha) ≤ 2 ≥ 2.5 and 12 

Commercial fish production volume / year (T) 700 2.200 

2. Improved  income for 
producers in rural areas, 

including women and young 

farmers 

Income/year for food crop production managed by men/women (BIF) 540000/300000 1000000/855000 

Income/year for horticulture production men/women (BIF) 90000/171000 1905000/2175000 

Income per year for fish farm run by men/women (BIF) ND 1260000/1065000 

3. Access to income and social 

services improved for very poor 

households 

Number of households benefiting from social transfers ND 1500 

% of social transfer beneficiaries  with a current integrated farm plan. ND 100% 

3. Establishment of a pro-youth 
agri-business promotion 

framework  

Number of operational companies with promoters H/F ND ≥ 12/11 

Number of bankable agri-business projects developed for H/F* ND 100/88 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

Short Term  2017 Before 202  Risks  

 Climatic hazards may aggravate ecosystem 
degeneration (drought, flooding, etc.) leaving 
inhabitants more vulnerable and promoting 

conflict. 

 Restricted ownership and management of rural 
infrastructures 

Mitigation Measure: 

 Irrigation, protection of areas at risk, opening 
up production zones, integration of climate 

information in designing projects, and 
safeguarding incomes will alleviate this risk. 

I. SUPPORT TO DEV. OF 

AGRICULTURAL 

INFRASTRUCTURE 

1.1 Reclaiming wetlands 

Reclaimed wetland areas (ha) for the benefit of men/women 618 1150 
 Project activity report 

 Monitoring unit reports 

 Contracts signed with 
the companies 

 Civil Society Activity 
Report 

 

1.2 Development of hillside 

irrigation 
Area covered by pilot highland irrigation (ha) for the benefit of M/F 0 30/20 

II. AGRICULTURAL 
TRANSFOMATION AND 

Area (ha) developed using new technologies for M/F  ND 3.382 / 2.200 



 

vi 

 

RESULTS CHAIN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS VERIFICATION 

METHODS 
RISK MITIGATION MEASURES 

Indicators (including ISP) S. of Reference Target 

IMPROVEMENT OF 

LIVING CONDITIONS 

 

2.1 Support to Development 

of Value Chains 

Member of contact groups  formed in the Farmer Field Schools (FFS)  and 

Demonstration Units (DU) on  technological innovations: M/F 

0 105 / 105  Capacity building in conflict management for 
municipalities 

Number of stores (post-harvest inputs) built managed by M/F 0 4 / 6  CARDER Reports 
Agreements and 

protocols signed 

Project activity report 

Risks 

 Lack of follow-up of  technological 
innovations by communities 

 Weakness of follow-up by municipalities (MOD), 
delays in procurement, low capacity in technical services 

and of companies. 
Mitigation Measures: 

 Take committed and participatory steps in 
involving, organizing and training local actors 

 Financing a capacity building program for all 
actors. 

Person-days of training in technological review workshops : M/F 0/0 1450/1450 

Number of peasants trained in fine with resilient 

technologies 
ND 1750 / 1750 

Number of producers of improved seeds assisted: M/F 0 20/10 

Length of tracks built post-harvest (km) 0 13  

Number of beneficiaries from the Funds for CVA Promotion : M/F 0 12,600/8,400  

2.2 Promotion of Youth 

Entrepreneurship 

Number of business incubators supported 0 5≤ 

 DGPAE/MINAGRIE 
performance report 
 Civil Society 

Organizations report 

 MFI Report 
 Project Activity 

Report 

Number of Youth Employability support beneficiaries 0 / 0 365 / 135 

Number of PO and female EIG for transformation strengthened M/F 0 / 0 0 / 30 

Number of innovative youth initiative support fund beneficiaries: M/F 0/0 105/105 

Number of MFI that have signed agreements for rural financing 0/0 1 

Number of young producers benefiting from support in fish farming M/F: 0/0 85 / 25 

2.3 Support to Social Safety 

nets 

Area (ha) of catchment areas developed for the benefit of  M/F 0/0 2.500 / 910 

Area (ha) of catchment areas afforested for the benefit of  M/F 0/0 1.000 / 650 

Number of operators  (M/F) benefiting from livestock breeds:  0/0 350 / 200 

Number of operators (M/F) beneficiaries of agricultural inputs:  0/0 7.000 / 5.000 

Number of operators (M/F) beneficiaries of IGA: 0/0 950 / 1.500 

A number of social transfers beneficiaries taking part in awareness raising 
actions 

0/0 2100  
 

      

III. PROJECT 

MANAGEMENT 

Numbers of work plans and budget (AWB) produced and carried out 0/0 5  MPP 

 SAP System 

 Audit Reports 

 Activity Reports 

 Mission aide-
memoire 

 Impact assessment 
report 

Risks 

 Institutional weakness of MINAGRIE in 
management and monitoring-evaluation. 
Mitigation Measures: 

A capacity building program for MINAGRIE 

and the PMU in project administration, 
procurement and financial management will 

mitigate this risk. 

Number of quarterly reports / approved annual audit reports 0/0 20/5 

Numbers of PPM plans produced and updated /rate of disbursement 0/0 5 / ≥ 95% 

Number of steering committee meetings held 0/0 10 

Number of supervision missions carried out by project supervisors /the 

Bank  
0/0 20 / 10 

Number of mid-term review /completion reports produced 0/0 1/1 

 Number of mid-term review /completion reports produced  0/0 1/1 

K
E

Y
 

A
C

T
IV

IT
IE

S
 

COMPONENTS INPUTS  

Component 1: Support to Dev. of agricultural Infrastructure:  UA 3.38 million (28.20%) 

Component 2: Transf. Agricultural and improvement of living Cond.: UA 7.46 million (62.19%) 

Component 3: Project Management    UA 1.15 million (9.61%) 

TOTAL UA 12.00 million (100%) 

Total cost of  project: UA 12.00 million 

TSF Grant UA 12.00 million  (100%) 

Burundi Government UA 0.00 million (0.00%) 

(**)  M/F: Male / Female 
  



 

vii 

 

 

Indicative calendar of Project Execution 

 
 

No. ACTIVITIES 
2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 

T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 

1 TSF Grant Negotiations                         

2 Signature of grant agreement                          

3 Satisfaction of conditions precedent to 1st disbursement                          

4 Publication of general procurement notice                          

5 Recruitment of PMU staff                          

6 PATAREB launching workshop                          

7 
Procurement of PMU goods and offices (vehicles, IT equipment 

etc.) 
                  

      

8 Update of project baseline                           

9 Signature of agreements with partners organisations                         

10 Development of the Annual Work Plan(PTA)                          

11 Installation of management unit                          

12 Recruitment of service providers                           

13 Hillside irrigation: DAO                          

14 
Installation of post-harvest infrastructure (tracks, storage 

warehouses, processing units): DAO 
                   

      

15 Agreement with Micro-finance Institutions                          

16 Agreement with Partner Organisations                          

17 Development of Rice Value Chains                         

18 Development of Sorghum Value Chains                         

19 Development of Maize Value Chains                         

20 Introduction of Blue Economy Value Chain                         

21 Training of  actors                          

22 Watershed Management (ABV)                         

23 Support to Social Safety Nets                         

24 Development of Markets and Marketing                         

25 Monitoring and Supervision of Work                         

26 Development & Implementation of Monitoring-Evaluation System                          

27 Annual external audit                         

28 Completion report                         



 

1 

 

PROPOSAL AND RECOMMENDATION OF MANAGEMENT TO THE BOARDS OF 

DIRECTORS OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP CONCERNING  

A TRANSITION SUPPORT FACILITY GRANT TO THE REPUBLIC OF BURUNDI 

TO FINANCE THE SUPPORT TO AGRICULTURE TRANSFORMATION IN THE 

BUGESERA NATURAL REGION PROJECT (PATAREB) 
 

Management submits this proposal for a UA 12 million TSF grant to the Republic of Burundi, 

to finance the Support to Agriculture Transformation in the Bugesera Natural Region Project 

(PATAREB). 

 

I. Strategic Orientation and justification 
 

1.1. Linkages with the Country's Strategy and Goals 
 

1.1.1.  PATAREB is in line the implementation framework strategy of Government overall 

development policy, as captured in the "Burundi Vision 2025" document and in the 2 phase of 

strategic framework for growth and poverty reduction (PRSP II). At the sector level, it  at the 

same time supports implementation of the national Plan for agricultural investment (NAIP) 

linked to Burundi's National Agricultural Strategy (NAS)  of the implementation of the national 

policy on social protection, as well as the national employment policy These strategies aim at 

a high and inclusive growth likely to promote  improvement in the quality of life of vulnerable 

populations, by addressing food and nutritional security constraints, increasing incomes and 

creating employment particularly for the youth, by making agriculture more attractive. In 

addition to structural investments in water control, development of wetlands and afforestation 

of ridges, the project will contribute to the development of agricultural value chains targeted 

through new growth areas in Bugesera region and taking into account agro-industrial needs 

(rice, maize, sorghum, horticultural products, fish), as well as strengthening household 

resilience towards climate change. The project will also contribute directly to the objectives of 

the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) of Agenda 2063 of 

the African Union and Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), related notably to food security 

et improvement of nutrition, promotion of sustainable agriculture discernible by production, 

productivity and greater value addition, youth employment, infrastructure, promotion of gender 

equality and empowerment of women as well as climate change. 

 

1.2. Justification of the Bank's involvement 
 

1.2.1  Agriculture financing remains insufficient as a result of reduction of external financing 

but also because the Government has not increased the proportion of national resources reserved 

for the agricultural sector. The share of the national budget reserved for agriculture was, on 

average, 5.2% between 2012 and 2014, compared to 10% of the national budget agreed upon 

during the Maputo declaration and the PNIA review conducted in 2015 showing a gap of 450 

billion BIF, which did not meet the target objective of inclusive growth, poverty reduction and 

strengthening of nutritional and food security. Considered in the past as the breadbasket of 

Burundi, Kirundo province, the project intervention zone is seriously affected by irregular 

rainfall patterns. As a result, it is one of the main emigration areas in the country. Climate 

analysis shows that the rainy season regularly experiences altered rainfall patterns and when 

this happens during the main farming seasons, the fall in agricultural production is considerable, 

increasing the rate of food insecurity which may be as high as 60%. On average, water deficit 

is estimated at more than 40%, which makes the choice offered by the development of swamps 

and hillside irrigation the best strategies to ensure a good harvest. In addition, due to a 

combination  of several factors such as (i) the sharp drop in agricultural production resulting 



 

2 

 

from climate change, (ii) the precariousness of populations, exacerbated by the widespread 

practice of selling of standing crops s causing a sharp drop in prices paid to producers, (iii) the 

high level of unemployment and underemployment, especially of the youth,  Kirundo province 

is among the poorest in the country with a  poverty index of 69.2% (ECVMB 2014) and a rate 

of malnutrition of children under 5 years, at more than 60%. In a context where 85 percent of 

the possesses land of less than or equal to 50 Ares and an average more than 6 children per 

household, efforts must be made to improve agricultural productivity, support the resilience the 

most vulnerable populations by allowing them to have access to employment and methods of 

financing income-generating activities. 

 

1.2.2  As a result of drought experienced in Kirundo Province in recent years which have had 

a negative impact on living conditions, the Government has implemented an ad hoc working 

group to propose a lasting solution to this situation. Within this context, the Bank was requested 

to support this program by financing PATAREB, for an amount of UA 12 million, to strengthen 

the resilience of the people of this region. This TSF support will help reduce the deficit in 

agricultural investment within the region, in particular by implementing the NIPA of the SAN. 

Consistent and high rates of agricultural growth resulting from high productivity are therefore 

necessary for increase in incomes and to accelerate poverty reduction. By targeting this 

disadvantaged area with significant agricultural potential, and by supporting  development of 

infrastructure and agricultural entrepreneurship, the TSF intervention will help reduce poverty, 

social disparities, promote employment of the youth, mitigate  fragility, and build resilience to 

climate change. In the project design, the prism of fragility has been applied so that the main 

sectoral fragility factors identified in the project implementation zone are taken into account by 

project activities, as indicated in annex IV. Finally, the project fits within the strategy of some 

agribusiness companies who have opted for the substitution of imported raw materials with 

local products, which will contribute to the improvement of the country’s trade balance.    

The Bank's intervention through this project is justified by the vision and objectives of the 

transformation strategy for agriculture "Feed Africa" which is part of the High 5s of the Bank. 
The project will indeed contribute to the objectives of the strategy "Feed Africa" by: (i) poverty 

reduction through the financing of investment in facilities, infrastructure and equipment likely to be 

valued for the generation of income by the beneficiaries; (ii) promoting the transformation of agricultural 

products by agricultural value (CVA) chains; and (iii) the promotion of export of agricultural products 

by market development and the implementation of systems of market information. It also integrates the 

priority of the Bank "Improving the lives of people in Africa" insofar as it will contribute to: (i) eradicate 

famine by high quality and high volume food production; (ii) safeguard basic income through 

employment created within the framework of development work and income generating activities 

initiated in particular by households living in extreme poverty. Finally, through activities in support 

of Youth entrepreneurship, the project will contribute to the implementation of the Bank’s 

strategy for Youth employment in Africa 2016-2025. At the national level, the project is aligned 

to the Bank’s Country Strategy Paper for Burundi (2012-2016) which has been extended to the 

end of 2017, mainly on the Pillar II: Improvement of the infrastructure that integrates related 
activities oriented toward the fight against vulnerability and exclusion of vulnerable groups with the aim 

to contribute to mitigate the factors of fragility. Specifically, the project will contribute to results 4 to 7 

of Pillar 2 namely: (i) contribution to the promotion of food security (ii) protection of the environment 

and sustainable management of soil and water, (iii) creation of jobs and (iv) adaptation to climate 

change. 

1.3. Aid Coordination 
 

1.3.1  The framework for aid coordination is based on the institutional mechanism of follow-

up and evaluation of the LRCS2, articulated around the sectoral groups, which are frameworks 

for synergies and cooperation. Despite suspension of aid by some donors, the  "agricultural and 



 

3 

 

rural development" and "social protection” sectoral groups have remained operational. The 

Bank actively participates in arrangement of consultations and dialogue which brings together 

non-governmental organizations involved in these sectors. The meetings are organised on a 

quarterly basis to facilitate discussions on subjects relating to policies, and to conduct, in a 

concerted manner, discussions relating to planning and programming of various projects and to 

ensuring regular monitoring of  activities in the different sectors. This coordination mechanism 

allows improvement of complementarity of interventions by different PTFs, thus creating a 

natural synergy to multiply the impact of projects on the economic and social development of 

Burundi. 

 

1.3.2  In the agricultural sector, the Bank financed the Bugesera natural region rural 

infrastructure support project which wrapped up its activities in 2016. The other donors 

involved in this sector are the World Bank, IFAD, the Kingdom of the Netherlands and 

Belgium. In the field of social protection, the Bank has financed capacity-building projects in 

the past few years which have allowed the setting up of institutional structures in charge of 

employment and social protection while at the same time supporting a project for strengthening 

entrepreneurial capabilities of the youth and women. The main stakeholders in the social 

protection sector are the World Bank, WFP and UNICEF. With respect to youth employment, 

the only active project is the one financed by IFAD. The table below presents the main amounts 

by sources of funding currently active in the agricultural sector in Burundi. The table below 

presents the principal amounts by sources of funding currently active in the agricultural sector 

in Burundi. 

 

 Table 1.1  Principal amounts active in the sector since 2012 

Sector or sub-sector* 
Proportion 

GDP Exports Labour Force 

Agricultural sector 39% (2016)  80% 90% 

Stakeholders - Public Expenditure (programs or projects in progress) 

Government Donors Amounts (USD million ) Duration 

BIF 28.5  billion per year World Bank 155 2016-2022 

(Average 20012-2014) BANK                        - - 

That is 5.2% of the 

National Budget 
BTC 27.8 2011-2017 

 

Kingdom of the 

Netherlands 
                          27.1 2016-2021 

 IFAD                       144 2014-2019 

 FAO 9.7 2013-2018 

Aid Coordination level 

Presence of thematic working groups Yes 

Presence of a global sectoral program No 

 

1.3.3  Burundi and its partners have made progress in terms of aid efficiency, particularly in 
predictability of aid and its inclusion in the budget. Efforts are still to be made with regard to 
incorporation of gender equality into the development plans and in the use of national public 
finance management systems and procurement. In Burundi, the use of national public 
procurement systems by the Bank in its operations remains rather limited. However, since 2013, 
it has begun to use the national procedures for the award of contracts in the framework of the 
national tenders (AON) on a pilot basis. The on-going revision of the Code of Public 
Procurement (CPP) and Standard Bidding Documents for National Tenders (DTAON), which 
benefits from the Bank’s assistance, the World Bank and the Belgian Technical Cooperation, 
will allow the systematic recourse to the national procurement system. In terms of alignment to 
national systems and procedures, all projects are managed directly by permanent structures, 
within the supervising ministries. With regard to capacity building, the Bank works closely with 



 

4 

 

the Government, in organizing training in key areas such as financial management, 
disbursements and procurement with a view to the efficient and effective implementation of the 
portfolio by the CEP.  

 

II. Project Description 
 

2.1 Components of the project 
 

The overall objective PATAREB is to contribute to the improvement of populations 

livelihood through agriculture development and transformation. The specific objective of the 

project is to stimulate inclusive agricultural development in the Bugesera natural region by 

putting up production infrastructure, promoting agricultural value chains and support to social 

safety nets. Scheduled for 5 years, the project comprises the following three (03) components: 

(i) Support to Agricultural Infrastructure Development; (ii) Promotion of Agricultural 

Transformation and Improvement of Populations Livelihood; and (iii) Management and 

Coordination. The activities are summarized in table 2.1 below: 

 

Table 2.1: Components of the project 
 

No. COMPONENT 
COST 

(UA 000) 
DESCRIPTION OF COMPONENTS 

A. 

 

SUPPORT  TO AGRICULTURAL 

INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT 

3,384.40 

(28.20%) 

A1. Completion of wetland development 

(i) Development of Nyavyamo swamp (300ha) 
(ii) Development of Kabuyenge swamp (232 ha) 
A.2. Development of the hillside irrigation 

(i) Bugabira municipality (20 ha on Cohoha Lake) 
(ii) Busoni municipality (10 ha on Lake Cohoha and 10 ha on 

Lake Rweeru) 

(iii) Kirundo municipality (10 ha on Lake Cohoha) 
. 

B. 

PROMOTION OF THE 

AGRICULTURALTRANSFORMATION 

AND IMPROVEMENT OF 

POPULTATIONS LIVELIHOOD 

 

7 462.95 

(62.19%) 

B1. Support to Development of Value Chains 

(i) Rice, maize and sorghum value chains 
(ii) Horticultural products value chain 
(iii) Subsistence agriculture value chain 
(iv) Blue economy value chain 
(v) Study on promotion of Banana, Maize and Horticulture 

value chains 

B2. Promotion of Youth Entrepreneurship 

(i) Business incubators; 
(ii) Support for Youth Employability 
(iii) Support to financing of young entrepreneurs; 

B3. Support to Social Safety Nets 

(i) Watershed Management - Labour intensive work  

 Gradual grading and agroforestry 1800 ha at 
Nyavyamo and 1550 ha at Kabuyenge 

(ii) Food security support  for  very poor and vulnerable 
households (few livestock and agricultural inputs) 

(iii) Support for income-generating activities 
(iv) Support to the strengthening of human capital;  



 

5 

 

No. COMPONENT 
COST 

(UA 000) 
DESCRIPTION OF COMPONENTS 

C 
MANAGEMENT AND 

COORDINATION OF PROJECT 

1 152.65 

(9.61%) 

 

(i) Organization of  strategic and operational planning of 
project 

(ii) Coordination of the project activities  
(iii) Administrative , accounting and financial management  
(iv) Acquisition of goods, works and services,  
(v) Institutional support, 
(vi) Establishment of a training and communication plan 
(vii) Monitoring and evaluation of project execution 

 TOTAL 12,000.00  

 
 

2.2 Adopted technical solutions and substitution solutions studied  
 

2.2.1  The technical solutions adopted are based on the lessons learned from similar 

achievements, including the PAIRB and the PABVARC, adapted to the specific context of the 

area of intervention of the project.  Thus the choice of gravity irrigation which involves watering 

the crops by dripping water through open conduits connected to a reservoir upstream which 

could be either a dam with a water pipe from the river or a water container has been preferred 

for Nyavyamo and Kabuyenge swamps..  This technical choice was motivated by the fact that 

the cost of construction of a gravity irrigation system is 3 to 4 times lower than that of a 

pressurised one and does not require a source of energy 

 

2.2.2  Regarding hillside irrigation, the chose option was photovoltaic energy on the basis of 

the following benefits: (i) solar energy is inexhaustible and non-polluting (clean and does not 

emit greenhouse gases); (ii) it supplies energy needs in a sustainable manner and with 

significant savings; (iii) the costs of maintenance and operation of a thermal installation are 

relatively low; (iv) the energy performance is positive once configuration has been carried out 

in relation with the irrigation needs. 

 

2.2.3  The choice of the "Cash for Work” approach  has been prioritized with regard to support 

to social safety nets, in order to meet both the needs of protection of watersheds and access to 

income for the most vulnerable households. In addition, the transfer of agricultural inputs and 

support for income-generating activities naturally helps these households to emerge from 

vulnerability in a sustainable way. 
 

Table 2.2: Alternative solutions considered and reasons for rejection 
Alternative solution Brief Description Reason for rejection 

Pressurised irrigation 

system, with an efficiency 

that can reach 80% to 90% 

of irrigation system 

In addition to irrigation system 

install a pumping system to 

distribute water in the reservoirs. 

This option is outside the project framework  which requires 

involvement of individuals and local cooperatives in the 

implementation of hydro-agricultural developments to be 

installed at a community level. In addition, this solution is too 

expensive for all communities 

Pressurised irrigation using 

thermal energy (diesel or 

petrol) 

Pressurised irrigation using a 

pumping station operated by a fossil 

fuel energy source (diesel or petrol) 

This option is considered too expensive, because of the cost 

of fuel. The source of energy is not aligned with the 

framework, in compliance with environmental standards  

Recruit a private provider 

to perform all of watershed 

development works. 

A service provider is recruited to 

complete the watershed 

development works for the benefit 

of inhabitants. 

This option does not allow the service provider company to 

use the local labour force which will then access income 

benefits intended for the most vulnerable households. 

 

2.3 Type of Project 
 

PATAREB is an investment operation financed by a Pillar I grant from the Transition 

Support Fund. Burundi does not implement project and programs using the sectoral approach 



 

6 

 

due to institutional constraints. Consequently, the project approach has been considered more 

axed towards the framework of this proposal, to guarantee achievement of results and ensure 

effectiveness and efficiency in the use of resources allocated to the project.  

 

2.4 Cost of project and financing arrangements 
 

2.4.1  Cost of project. The total cost of the project is estimated at UA 12.00 million (BIF 

29.28 billion) excluding taxes and duties. This cost is distributed as follows:  UA 5.76 million 

(BIF 14.06 billion) in foreign currency and UA 6.24 million (BIF 15.23 billion) in local 

currency. This costs includes contingency reserves and for increase in costs which are estimated 

to be at 5% and 4% respectively on average. The provision for an increase in prices has been 

estimated on the basis of  current levels and projected from rates of inflation  in local currency 

and in foreign currencies at 3.2% and 1.8% respectively , per year on average. The provision 

for physical contingencies is estimated at between 0 and 7 %, a summary of the estimated cost 

of the project by component and by expenditure account is presented in Tables 2.3, 2.4 and 2.5 

below, while the details are provided in the technical annex of project appraisal report. 
Table 2.3: 

Summary of Estimated Costs by Component 

 COMPONENTS 
(Million BIF) (UA '000) 

% 

FE 

% 

BC 
Local 

Cur. 

For. 

Exch Total 

Local 

Cur. 

For. 

Exch Total 

A. SUPPORT TO DEV OF AGRICULTURAL 

INFRASTRUCTURE 2,710.50 4,734.00 7,444.50 1,110.79 1,940.04 3,050.82 64 28 

 Completion of Wetland Rehabilitation 2,410.50 4,034.00 6,444.50 987.85 1,653.17 2,641.02 63 24 

 Development of Hillside Irrigation 300.00 700.00 1,000.00 122.94 286.87 409.81 70 4 

B AGRICULTURAL TRANSF. & IMPROV. 

POP. LIVE 9,841.00 7,022.99 16,863.98 4,032.93 2,878.08 6,911.01 42 63 

 Support to Value Chain Development 4,656.76 2,437.67 7,094.43 1,908.38 998.98 2,907.36 34 26 

 Promotion of Youth Entrepreneurship 2,486.75 325.00 2,811.75 1,019.09 133.19 1,152.28 12 10 

 Support to Social Safety Nets 2,697.49 4,260.31 6,957.80 1,105.46 1,745.91 2,851.37 61 26 

C. MANAGEMENT AND COORDINATION 

OF PROJECT 1,652.09 1,006.85 2,658.94 677.04 412.62 1,089.66 38 10 

TOTAL BASIC COSTS 14,203.59 12,763.84 26,967.42 5,820.76 5,230.74 11,051.50 47 100 

 Physical Contingencies 438.72 788.53 1,227.25 179.79 323.14 502.94 64 5 

 Financial Contingencies 583.81 503.45 1,087.26 239.25 206.32 445.57 46 4 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 15,226.11 14,055.81 29,281.93 6,239.80 5,760.20 12,000.00 48 109 

 

 

Table 2.4: 
Summary of Project Cost by Category of Expenses 

 CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURES 
(Million BIF) (UA '000) 

% 

FE 

% 

BC 
Local 

Cur. 

For. 

Exch Total 

Local 

Cur. 

For. 

Exch Total 

 I. INVESTMENT 11,839.33 12,393.36 24,232.68 4,851.87 5,078.91 9,930.78 51 90 

 A. WORKS 3,770.04 8,796.76 12,566.80 1,545.00 3,604.99 5,149.99 70 47 

  Developments 2,898.99 6,764.31 9,663.30 1,188.03 2,772.08 3,960.11 70 36 

  Irrigation 300.00 700.00 1,000.00 122.94 286.87 409.81 70 4 

  Construction & Rehabilitation 32.55 75.95 108.50 13.34 31.13 44.46 70 - 

  Post-Harvest Infrastructure 538.50 1,256.50 1,795.00 220.68 514.93 735.61 70 7 

 B. GOODS 650.91 1,291.69 1,942.60 266.75 529.35 796.10 66 7 

  1. VEHICLES 72.50 217.50 290.00 29.71 89.13 118.84 75 1 

  2. FACILITIES, EQUIPMENT & INPUTS 578.41 1,074.19 1,652.60 237.04 440.21 677.25 65 6 

 C. SERVICES 4,268.38 2,304.90 6,573.28 1,749.22 944.57 2,693.79 35 24 

  Training 726.00 484.00 1,210.00 297.52 198.35 495.87 40 4 

  Technical Assistant 85.50 484.50 570.00 35.04 198.55 233.59 85 2 

  Studies 150.88 184.40 335.28 61.83 75.57 137.40 55 1 

  Contractual Services 3,249.75 1,083.25 4,333.00 1,331.78 443.93 1,775.70 25 16 

  Audit 56.25 68.75 125.00 23.05 28.17 51.23 55 - 

 D.MISCELLANEOUS 3,150.00 - 3,150.00 1,290.90 - 1,290.90 - 12 

II. OPERATIONS 2,364.26 370.48 2,734.74 968.90 151.83 1,120.72 14 10 

 A. STAFF 1,849.65 - 1,849.65 758.00 - 758.00 - 7 

 B. TRANSPORTATION ALLOWANCE 97.00 - 97.00 39.75 - 39.75 - - 



 

7 

 

 CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURES 
(Million BIF) (UA '000) 

% 

FE 

% 

BC 
Local 

Cur. 

For. 

Exch Total 

Local 

Cur. 

For. 

Exch Total 

 

C. MAINTENANCE, OPERATION AND 

REPAIR 157.73 283.85 441.59 64.64 116.33 180.97 64 2 

 D. GENERAL COSTS 259.88 86.63 346.50 106.50 35.50 142.00 25 1 

TOTAL BASIC COSTS 14,203.59 12,763.84 26,967.42 5,820.76 5,230.74 11,051.50 47 100 

 Physical Contingencies 438.72 788.53 1,227.25 179.79 323.14 502.94 64 5 

 Financial Contingencies 583.81 503.45 1,087.26 239.25 206.32 445.57 46 4 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 15,226.11 14,055.81 29,281.93 6,239.80 5,760.20 12,000.00 48 109 

 

 

 

 

Table 2.5:  

Expense Calendar by component (in thousands of UA) 

COMPONENTS 
PROJECT YEARS 

Total 
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 

A. SUPPORT TO DEV OF OF AGRICULTURAL 

INFRASTRUCTURE 91.01 1,523.28 1,583.35 92.79 93.97 3,384.40 

 Completion of Wetland Rehabilitation 91.01 1,069.46 1,583.35 92.79 93.97 2,930.58 

 Development of Hillside Irrigation - 453.82 - - - 453.82 

B. AGRICULTURAL TRANSF. & POP. LIVELIHOOD 

IMPROV. 1,019.76 2,519.72 2,802.57 871.94 248.95 7,462.95 

 Support to Development of Value Chains 376.72 1,550.49 588.78 369.22 211.76 3,096.99 

 Promotion of Youth Entrepreneurship 628.82 216.42 308.02 18.51 18.54 1,190.30 

 Support to Social Safety Nets 14.22 752.81 1,905.77 484.21 18.66 3,175.66 

C. MANAGEMENT AND COORDINATION OF 

PROJECT 449.43 188.83 180.61 165.97 167.81 1,152.65 

TOTAL PROJECT COSTS 1,560.20 4,231.84 4,566.53 1,130.71 510.73 12,000.00 

 

 

2.4.2 Financing facility: The costs shall be entirely financed by a TSF grant amounting to 

UA 12 million.  Counterpart contributions by the government were not feasible for this project, 

given that Burundi is recovering progressively but with major challenges from the 2015 socio-

political crisis, hardly mobilising contributions for recent and on-going operations.  This 

situation gave the Country-Team no other choice but to recommend a financial arrangement 

without counterpart state funds, if at all feasible. Within this context, the project was designed 

to allow financing of all activities from TSF resources. Distribution of financing of expenses 

by source of funds and list of goods and services is recorded in tables 2.6 and 2.7, here below. 

 
Table 2.6:  

Project Financing Plan 

FINANCING SOURCES 
(Million BIF) (UA '000) 

% 
Local Cur. For. Exch Total Local Cur. For. Exch Total 

 TSF Grant 15,226.11 14,055.81 29,281.93 6,239.80 5,760.20 12,000.00 100.0 

 Government of Burundi 0.00 -0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 - 

Total 15,226.11 14,055.81 29,281.93 6,239.80 5,760.20 12,000.00 100.0 

 
Table 2.7:  

Allocation of Project resources by Source of Financing (in thousands of UA)  

LIST OF GOODS AND SERVICES 
TSF Grant (‘000 UA) 

LOCAL CURRENCY FOREIGN CURRENCY TOTAL 

A. WORKS 1,545.00 3,604.99 5,149.99 

 Developments 1,188.03 2,772.08 3,960.11 

 Irrigation 122.94 286.87 409.81 

 Construction and Refurbishment 13.34 31.13 44.46 

 Post-harvest infrastructure 220.68 514.93 735.61 

B. GOODS 266.75 529.35 796.10 

 Vehicles 29.71 89.13 118.84 

 Facilities 237.04 440.21 677.25 

C. SERVICES 1,749.22 944.57 2,693.79 

 Training 297.52 198.35 495.87 



 

8 

 

LIST OF GOODS AND SERVICES 
TSF Grant (‘000 UA) 

LOCAL CURRENCY FOREIGN CURRENCY TOTAL 

 Technical Assistance 35.04 198.55 233.59 

 Studies 61.83 75.57 137.40 

 Contractual Services 1,331.78 443.93 1,775.70 

 Audit 23.05 28.17 51.23 

D. MISCELLANEOUS 1,290.90 - 1,290.90 

E. STAFF 758.00 - 758.00 

F. OPERATION 210.89 151.83 362.72 

Non-allocated 419.04 529.46 948.51 

Total 6,239.80 5,760.20 12,000.00 

 

2.5 Area and beneficiaries targeted by the project 
 

2.5.1  The project intervention zone (PIZ) covers the natural region of Bugesera extending 

over all the seven communes of Kirundo Province and the Gitreranyi Commune of Muyinga 

Province.  It is bordered to the North and the West by the Republic of Rwanda and Ngozi 

Province. To the South and East, it shares a common border with Muyinga Province. Its surface 

area of 2,100 km2 represents 75% of the national territory. The population of the Province in 

2017 is estimated at 1,004,907 inhabitants, of whom 519,665 are women. Despite having a high 

agricultural potential, the region’s agricultural yields are low not only because of the limited 

use of chemical fertilisers, but also the rudimentary farming techniques, lack of inputs, 

degeneration of seeds, etc. the dominant cultivation system is the combination of crops with the 

exception of rice cultivation, which is carried out in monoculture in swamps.  

 

2.5.2   The project will directly benefit a population of 900,000 people (51% women) 

composed mainly of agri-pastoralists. The latter will be supported through activities aimed at 

developing rice, maize and sorghum value chains and supporting the development of the blue 

economy. The development of these value chains will also benefit private sector companies 

engaged in the processing of agricultural products. In addition, special attention will be paid to 

vulnerable populations as well as the youth. Vulnerable populations will benefit particularly 

from the “Cash-for-work” approach developed through watershed management, transfer of 

agricultural inputs and support for the development of income-generating activities. This 

population group will benefit from 20% of parcels that will be developed in the Nyavyamo 

swamp. The project will also prioritise youth through related activities related to 

entrepreneurship promotion to enable self-employment. The choice of beneficiaries will be 

made in close consultation with the populations and the local Administration.  

 

2.6 Participatory approach for the identification, design and implementation of the 
project 
 

The Bank has adopted the participatory approach in its assistance to Burundi to 

formulate the request for TSF financing and throughout the project preparation process. This 

has resulted in the organisation of workshops and discussion meetings with public institutions, 

non-state actors, producer organizations, civil society including organizations working in the 

field of gender, private sector, TFPs and beneficiaries. This approach made it possible to better 

understand the major issues, to identify the appropriate solutions, and to reach a broad 

consensus on its design and the implementation modalities of the project. Thus, the producers 

reaffirmed the need to take into account the current rights holders in the allocation of developed 

swamp parcels. Rural women in the PIZ emphasised their access to developed perimeters, and 

new processing and marketing technologies. The Kirundo Governor and Local Authorities 

expressed their specific needs to address the vulnerability of inhabitants, by supporting social 

safety nets, improving agricultural production conditions and mitigating conflicts related to 

land competition. As for the youth, they insisted on vocational training and their successful 



 

9 

 

establishment as modern agricultural entrepreneurs targeting the markets. The project will 

continue this participatory approach so that local actors take ownership of activities and 

implementation during implementation. Good communication will be developed to ensure 

visibility of achievements and impacts and wide dissemination of project achievements. 
 

2.7 Consideration of Bank Group experience and lessons learned in project design 
 

2.7.1  In October 2017, the Bank's portfolio in Burundi consisted of 17 operations, of which 8 

were national, at a total amount of UA 121.4 million (USD 171.2 million). The agricultural 

sector does not have an active project, the only project in the sector having closed on 

31/12/2016. The overall performance of the portfolio is assessed as satisfactory with a rating of 

3.5 in scale from 1 to 4.  The portfolio review conducted in 2016 highlighted shortcomings that 

were taken into account to ensure the project's performance. These include:  (i) Lack of 

familiarity with the Bank's procurement and internal control rules and procedures within the 

PIUs delays in setting up key project staff; (ii) delay in setting up key personnel, (iii) delay in 

the development of technical studies and poor synchronization of input procurement and  

weather patterns, (iv) low ownership of project achievements by beneficiary organizations; (v) 

delay in the provision and / or insufficiency of counterpart funds which severely hampers the 

implementation of the Bank’s projects. In addition, the project took into account lessons learned 

from the Bank's Strategy and Program Appraisal Report for Burundi 2004-2015, which focused 

on (i) insufficient targeting to ensure that vulnerable populations are taken into account in the 

various projects as well as (ii) a weak integration of job creation support activities, especially 

for the youth and environmental conservation. 

 

2.7.2  The design of PATAREB took into account the lessons learned from the Bank’s projects 

in Burundi and those of the Bank's TSF portfolio, as shown below: 

 

Table 2.8:  
Consideration of the Bank Group experience and lessons learned 

Key lessons and experiences  Actions taken in the PATAREB design 

Lack of familiarity with the Bank's 

procurement and internal control rules 

and procedures within the PIUs. 

Provide proper training in Bank procurement and financial management 

procedures at project launch to PIU members and executives from partner 

administrative structures involved in project management. 

Delay in setting up key project staff. Adoption of the pre-procurement process in order to quickly set up the 

PIU and launch the various procurement processes.  

 
Delays in the development of technical 

studies.  

 

Low synchronisation of agricultural 

input acquisition and the rhythm of the 

seasons. 

The project will adopt community procurement for agricultural input 

acquisitions to ensure compliance with growing seasons. 

 

Low ownership of project achievements 

by beneficiary organisations. 

Right from the start of the project; recruit a local operator (NGO) with 

the necessary expertise to: (i) structure and strengthen the organisational 

capacities of producer organisations, (ii) provide support for improving 

good governance of POs, and (iii) support development of agricultural 

production. 

  

Late and/or insufficient provisions of 

counterpart funds severely handicap the 

implementation of the Bank’s projects. 

Limited use of counterpart funds to finance key activities to address 

current fiscal challenges. 

 

Insufficient targeting of vulnerable 

populations. 

The NGO providing support from the beginning of the project will 

support the process of targeting vulnerable households.  



 

10 

 

Key lessons and experiences  Actions taken in the PATAREB design 

 Some fragility factors such as 

environmental protection, employment, 

especially of youth are not sufficiently 

taken into account in Bank operations in 

Burundi. 

A sub-component has been set aside to support the creation of youth 

employment and the protection of the environment will be taken into 

account in watershed management and reforestation.  

 

2.8 Key performance indicators  
 

The main performance indicators to be monitored from the baseline are:  (i) number of 

rehabilitated dams; (ii) developed areas with partial and total control; (iii) level of additional 

production (tonnes) and crop yields (t/ha); (iv) number of VA infrastructure completed (market 

sheds, km of farm tracks, warehouses for products and inputs, etc.); (v) number of operators by 

type of development supported disaggregated by gender; (vi) number of technology reviews 

and multi-stakeholder platforms completed and the percentage attributed to women; (vii) level 

of income growth including that of women and youth; (viii) number of youth jobs and women 

created in entrepreneurial initiatives; (ix) number of producers, processors and traders trained 

and organized into cooperatives in accordance; (x) degree of involvement of women in 

decision-making bodies and their rate of access to land after development; (xi) number of 

installed transformation units; and (xii) malnutrition rate in the beneficiary population. All the 

indicators selected for the project have been aligned with the main CSP indicators and those 

retained within the framework of the NAIP.  

 

III. Project feasibility 
 

3.1 Economic and financial performance  
 

3.1.1  The financial and economic analysis of the project was carried on the basis of 

cost/benefit analysis of the expected outcomes of the project, comparing the with and without 

project situations, over the life cycle of investments in promotion of agricultural transformation 

or project's lifespan  (Project life), estimated at 25 years. The expected benefits of the project 

come from the transformation of agriculture into the project intervention zone (PIZ), based on 

the preservation of natural resources and other livelihoods, including: (i) the sustainable 

promotion of agricultural value chains by intelligent agriculture, for productions in the project 

area such as rice, sorghum, maize, cassava, beans and farm produce. (ii) promotion of the blue 

economy (pond culture, cage and above-ground bins); (i) sustainable promotion of value chains 

of non-timber forest products (NTFPs), such as honey (beekeeping), pods, almonds, seeds and 

natural fruit, leaves and bark used in the traditional pharmacopoeia; (iv) improving the 

ecological balance and maintaining a habitat conducive to wildlife development that also offers 

environmental opportunities; (v) improving the well-being of the population by preventing 

drought and famine, improving food security, reducing the medical bill with the regulation of 

climatic conditions, reducing the hardship of the population; the work of families, especially 

women and vulnerable groups, improving people's life expectancy, better incomes for access 

to health care and education, etc. (vi) improvement of animal and livestock production, because 

of the quality and abundance of pasture and water; (vii) spin-offs from carbon dioxide 

sequestration (carbon credit, including bio-carbon); and (viii) the creation of temporary and 

permanent jobs, resulting from project achievements. The detailed assumptions of the economic 

and financial analysis, the tables of production and exploitation models (situation without and 

with the project) and the financial and economic flows are detailed in the technical annexes 

(Annex B8). 

 

 



 

11 

 

 

Table 3.1: Key economic and financial factors 
 

NPV (baseline scenario) 89.72 billion BIF 

TRI (baseline scenario) 20.17% 

Economic NPV (baseline scenario) 92.01 billion BIF 

TRE (baseline scenario) 23.02% 

 

3.1.2  Financial performance: The additional revenues resulting from the various models of 

development and exploitation retained are the following: (i) development of marshes 

(floodplains with water control) allows double rice cultivation (10 T/ha in total per year), 

corresponding to about BIF 1 509 000/ha, or BIF377 000  per farmer with 51 % of women 

beneficiaries; (ii) facilities also used for market gardening in rotation, for a production value 

BIF 7,474,000/ha or BIF 1,868,500 per male farmer, including women beneficiaries; (iii) 

cultivation of sorghum and maize in family farming on plateaux and watersheds BIF990 000 

/ha per farmer; (iv) the development of fish farming on and around Cohoha and Rweru lakes, 

for an estimated annual income per farmer of BIF845,000  (see Annex B7 for the typology of 

farm size and overall additional revenues released, thus contributing to increased value added 

through the project). The internal financial rate of return (IRR) is estimated at BIF 89.72 billion. 

The sensitivity tests established on the basis of simulations of successive decreases in prices or 

agricultural yields from 2.5% to 35%, show that the IRR falls more slowly than prices and 

yields, with a break-even value that is set at a drastic price reduction of more than 27.25%. As 

a result, the IRR is stable, with the effect of reducing the incidence of poverty in the IPA. 

 

3.1.3  Economic performance: The basic economic rate of return is 23.01% for a net present 

value (NPV) of BIF 92.01 billion. The other economic impacts of the project can be 

summarized as follows: (i) the upstream effects of additional revenues on providers (NGOs, 

companies, suppliers, consulting firms); (ii) the downstream effects of generating additional 

income on traders and processors who are predominantly women, thus contributing to women's 

empowerment and economic empowerment; (iii) lowering foreign exchange costs by 

significantly reducing the import bill for rice in the country's trade balance and currency 

balance; (iv) the impact on wealth creation in the country through the increase in GDP induced 

by the generation of additional value added. For households, the benefits of the project will 

result, inter alia, in better nutrition for vulnerable groups (children, women of childbearing age 

and the elderly), a reduction in the medical bill, the arduous task of agricultural workers, 

particularly women, reducing the incidence of monetary and non-monetary poverty, enhancing 

livelihoods and household resilience to food insecurity and the effects of climate change, and 

in the long run, increase in life expectancy and improvement of the human development index. 
 

3.1.4  The results of the financial and economic analysis show that PATAREB is financially 

and economically viable.  
 

3.1.5  Sensitivity Analysis: The sensitivity analysis was carried out on the basis of scenario 

analysis to simulate the financial performance indicators (NPV, IRR and A/C Ratio) from the 

most sensitive endogenous variables of the analysis model used, namely the price and output 

of the productions. The simulations thus carried out show that, as the prices of products fall , 

the financial performance indicators also drop, but much more slowly. On the basis of this 

result, it can be concluded that the financial performance of PATAREB can be considered as 

stable, although the project's financial results are sensitive to lower prices. In addition, the 

switch-over threshold linked to the price decrease is over -27.5%. Therefore, prices need to fall 

drastically by more than 27.5% for the internal rate of return (IRR) to be equal to the opportunity 



 

12 

 

cost of Capital estimated at 12%. The successive decline in yields is also reflected in a drop in 

the values of the financial performance indicators (IRR, NPV, A/C ratio), as in the previous 

situation with the fall in prices. Similarly, the break-even point of return is -27.88% decline in 

yield. The scenario synthesis is presented in Annex B8, as indicated above. 
 

3.2 Environmental and social impact 
 

3.2.1  PATAREB is a follow-up to the Bugesera Natural Region Rural Infrastructure Support 

Project (PAIRB), which focused on major developments.  The activities planned during this 

second phase of the Project will complement those that were not completed during the first 

phase and will focus on improving value chains, social safety nets and youth entrepreneurship. 

The project is classified in Category 2. In line with Bank procedures, the summary of the ESMP 

was posted at least one month ahead of expected Board consideration. 

 

3.2.2  The planned activities will be mainly carried out in rural areas, outside the dwellings, 

on agrosilvopastal areas. They are not likely to generate negative impacts or major risks, or lead 

to significant asset losses or population displacements. These impacts and effects will be of 

minor magnitude and could be mitigated by application of different mitigation measures and 

good practices. The negative impacts will be small, and will be mainly related to the generation 

of waste, the risks of pollution, the risk of accidents and gas emissions during the realisation of 

certain developments. 

  

3.2.3  An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) has been developed in line 

with the Bank's environmental and social policies and guidelines, and in accordance with 

Burundi's regulatory framework in the field. The ESMP recommended different measures, 

mitigation and enhancement, but also provisions to be made during the implementation of the 

project, as well as the costs associated with these different measures. 

 

3.2.4  An Ordinance of the Minister in charge of the environment had set up a Technical 

Committee in charge of the implementation of the ESMP of Phase I of the project. This 

Committee could be renewed taking into account the new sub-components (social safety nets 

and youth entrepreneurship), and by integrating the provincial and municipal structures 

responsible for the environment, social development, gender, youth, etc. During the 

implementation of the project, the Project Management Unit (PMU) will be responsible for 

coordinating the activities of the Environmental Monitoring Committee and providing them 

with administrative, technical and financial support; etc. 
 

3.2.5  Climate change: CO2 emissions per capita (metric tons) in Burundi are estimated at 

0.03 tons (2013), compared with 1.1 in Africa and 3.0 in developing countries. Burundi is also 

experiencing a significant reduction in ODS (ozone depleting substances) consumption, from 

26.76 tonnes weighted in the 2000-2004 period to 7.0 tonnes in 2015. However, there is a sharp 

decline in forest area on the national territory. From 11.3% in 1990, it represented only 6.7% 

in 2010, and fell to a proportion of just 5.5% in 2015. The current rate is 64.54 square kilometres 

of annual loss of the area covered by forests, or more than 2% of annual average. 

 

3.2.6  In relation to climate change, the project area is mainly confronted with recurring 

droughts, sometimes alternated by periods of heavy rains that have led to swamps flooding, 

lake level rise, siltation some lowlands, soil erosion, etc. These natural phenomena negatively 

impact ecosystems, production systems and food security. In this context, the activities planned 

by the project will to a large extent enhance the resilience of ecosystems and communities to 

climate change, through the implementation of a series of actions that will contribute to the 



 

13 

 

improvement of the production systems , the reduction of the practice of the extensive system, 

the restoration of ecosystems through the application of good agricultural practices, 

reforestation actions, the establishment of green belts, bank protection activities, etc.  

 

3.2.7  The project activities align with the options and priority activities identified in Burundi's 

National Action Program for Adaptation to Climate Change (NAPA). The project should 

benefit from the "SAP-Burundi" project (early warning system) to integrate climate information 

into the agricultural calendar, the management of works, etc. As part of the National Program 

of Reforestation, Burundi is committed to increase carbon dioxide sinks by reforestation of 

4,000 hectares per year for 15 years from 2016. The PATAFI, which has planned a major 

reforestation program and the establishment of green belts, etc., will contribute to achieving the 

set objective.  
 

3.2.8 Gender: Women (about 52%) and youth (average age of the provincial population, 20.5 
years and median age, 16.0 years) represent a large majority of the population in the project 

area. Despite the existence of large hydro agricultural resources and potential, the population 

of the project area is among the poorest in the country (76% on a national average of 64%). 

Farming and farming systems are still traditional and weakly intensified.  

 

3.2.9 The consultations revealed that the agricultural sector, in which a large majority of 
women are involved, faces the following main constraints: very high pressure on land and 

fragmentation of agricultural parcels (average 0.5 ha); difficulties for producers and especially 

for women to access land and inputs; work overload due to household chores, strong 

responsibility for child rearing, household operation and management; weak management and 

programs on improving and diversifying production systems, leadership and entrepreneurship; 

difficulties related to the conservation, the processing and the sale of the products, etc.  

 

3.2.10 Despite the efforts made, there is still inequality and discrimination against women in 
terms of equitable access to land and other factors of production; and decision-making bodies. 

 

3.2.11 The PATAREB, whose main activities target women, in particular, will contribute to 
improving their access to factors of production such as credit and land, conservation, 

processing, production flow, etc. The project will thus make a significant contribution to 

improving women's living conditions by improving agricultural production systems and 

sectors, increasing production and income, and strengthening their capacity; etc.  

 

3.2.12 The consultations also revealed that they spend most of their income on the family, 
especially children. Increasing women's incomes will help improve household food security 

and well-being. The project will ensure that women and women benefit equally from other 

project benefits. 

 

3.2.13 The Ministry of National Solidarity, Human Rights and Gender (MSNDPHG) is in 
charge of the promotion of women and gender equality. To carry out its mission, the 

MSNDPHG includes within it a Directorate General for the Promotion of Women and Gender 

Equality, structured in two departments: the Department for the Promotion of Women and the 

Department of Gender Equality. The Ministry also relies on deconcentrated structures called 

Family Development Centers (FDC), which are located at the level of each Province. The latter 

are relays of the ministry to communities on all aspects related to gender and other missions. 

 



 

14 

 

3.2.14  Provincial and municipal bodies and structures dealing with gender issues will have to 
be integrated into the bodies responsible for project management (technical committee, 

monitoring committee, etc.). Gender-related indicators will be taken into account in the project's 

monitoring and evaluation system based on disaggregated data by sex, etc. 

 

3.2.15 Social: With 84.7% for Muyinga and 76.2% for Kirundo respectively, the provinces in 
the area of influence of the project had poverty rates well above the national average (64%). In 

terms of nutrition, the province of Kirundo has a global acute malnutrition rate of 5%, that of 

chronic malnutrition at47.9% which is above the critical threshold of 40% set by WHO. 

 

3.2.16 In such a context of poverty and vulnerability, by improving agricultural production 
systems and the development of value chains, the positive impacts and effects of the project 

will be considerable on local and even national development in different sectors, activities and 

on all social categories (adults, youth, women, etc.). The project will contribute to improving 

agricultural production and incomes, enhance food security, foster the creation of local 

employment opportunities, contribute to poverty reduction and the vulnerability of targeted 

populations, reduce unemployment and youth migration, contribute to the empowerment of 

women, etc.  

 

3.2.17 However, the works could generate nuisances and inconveniences (noise, dust, exhaust 
gases, etc.) that could affect the health (respiratory diseases) of the workers and the populations 

who would be exposed to it. The mixing of populations in the work areas can also contribute to 

the proliferation of sexually transmitted diseases (STI/HIV AIDS). Rigorous safety, awareness 

and good practice measures are advocated to minimize and reduce these risks.  
 

3.2.18 Youth employment and promotion of agricultural entrepreneurship: This 
component will help develop the entrepreneurial culture of young project leaders to increase 

incomes and create decent jobs for youth and women. The project will assist the emergence of 

small clusters of young promoters and will directly reach 1,200 young girls and boys trained in 

agricultural entrepreneurship, and installed in all links of the value chain: production activities 

in developed marshes, farms fish farming, processing, trade and services. This initiative aims 

ultimately, by its multiplier effect to reach nearly 3,600 young men and women.  

 

3.2.19 To this end, the project will work in partnership with the Kirundo Trade Centres (CEM 
Kirundo) and the Mutwenzi Centre in the identification, selection and training of beneficiaries.  

These institutions will receive project support, and will work with the Microfinance Institutions 

(MFIs) present in the project area for the financing needed for business development. Thus, the 

supervision of young promoters will be done in the incubation Centres, mentioned above, also 

responsible for mobilising aggregators and private operators. They will help youth to make their 

credit reports more reliable in order to better access the available financial resources. The 

project will also facilitate youth's access to developed perimeters and equipment in the form of 

basic kits, according to their business plans and areas of specialisation. Finally, the project will 

promote partnerships between all actors for better integration of value chains (production, 

processing, inputs, markets, etc.). The operational modalities of agricultural entrepreneurship 

and financial incentives will be defined following a specific study at the start of the project. 

 

3.2.20 Forced relocation: The activities of PATAREB do not induce any displacement of 
populations nor their resettlement. They contribute to the development of the affected territories 

and to maintain the populations in their zones 

 



 

15 

 

IV. Implementation  
 

4.1 Provisions for implementation: 
 

4.1.1 Implementing rules: In line with the Presidential Directives N°02/2015, the Country 
should take all necessary steps to fast-track the start-up of the project. The Ministry of 

Agriculture and Livestock (MINAGRIE) will be in charge of the project management and 

coordination.  A multi-sector project steering committee (PSC) will also be established to 

ensure guidance and orientation of the project implementation, as required. As part of the 

coordination of project activities, MINAGRIE will be supported by a full-time Project 

Management Unit (PMU), under the supervision of the Kirundo Provincial Directorate of 

Agriculture and Livestock, which has its headquarters in Kirundo. The PAIRB Administrative, 

Financial and Accounting Procedures Manual will need to be adapted to affirm the enhanced 

role of DPAE in the management of PATAREB. 

 

4.1.2 The PMU will be mainly in charge of the coordination, monitoring and evaluation of 
project activities. It will be composed as follows: (i) a Project Coordinator; (ii) an Internal 

Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist; (iii) an Irrigation Engineer; (iv) a Procurement 

Specialist; (v) an Agronomist; (vi) a youth entrepreneurship specialist, (vii) a socio-economist, 

(vii) an administrative and financial manager; and (viii) an accountant. In addition, there needs 

to be an option for using MINAGRIE's internal expertise for positions whose capacities exist 

within. In accordance with the results of the consultations of the preparation and evaluation 

missions, these positions are those of the Coordinator and the Monitoring and Evaluation 

Specialist. For each of the two positions, three CVs will be submitted to the Bank, which will 

validate the evaluation report of the proposals made by the Ministry. The use of the expertise 

of the previous project was also retained. Thus, the Rural Engineering Expert should be 

reappointed if he is still available to fill this position. This proposal is justified by the fact that 

development and infrastructure development play a significant role in PATAREB. For all other 

positions, recruitment will be done through a call for applications. 

 

4.1.3 The project will also have support staff recruited as needed. In Bujumbura, the PMU 
will be supported by a Project Antenna responsible for liaising with the Home Ministry and the 

technical partners of the project and central services of the Administration to carry out activities 

requiring coordination with these Organisations. The PMU will also be supported by one-off 

technical assistance. 

 

 

4.1.4 Value chain development activities will be carried out under agreements to be signed 
with IRRI for the rice value chain and ISABU for the maize, sorghum and food value chains, 

respectively.  

 

4.1.5 In order to deal with the problems of agricultural financing in the project area, a 
Guarantee Fund will be established and an agreement signed with UCODE and an MFI with 

satisfactory capacities and of which more than 70% of the credits distributed go to the 

agricultural sector to enable beneficiaries to have easy access to credit.   

 

4.1.6 Procurement: All purchases of goods (including non-consulting services), of works 
and consultancy services, financed by the Bank under the project, will be made in accordance 

with the “Procurement Policy for Funded Operations by the Bank Group” as of October 2015 

and in accordance with the provisions set out in the Financing Agreement. More specifically, 



 

16 

 

procurement will be carried out according to the Bank's Procurement Methods and Procedures 

(MPA) based on the relevant standard tender documents (DSAO) for all markets.    

 

4.1.7 Procurement Risk and Capacity Assessment (ERCA): The risk assessment at the 
country, sector and project levels as well as the acquisition capability of the Executing Agency 

(EA) for the project was conducted and the results were used to guide the decision of the choice 

of the procurement system (Borrower, Bank, or Third Party) used for specific activities or a set 

of similar activities in the project. In addition, a market analysis was conducted with a view to 

obtaining information on market characteristics, the factors that may affect competition and the 

main players in the sectoral markets. The results of the evaluations and market analysis notably 

made it possible to carry out procurement planning, market structuring, the choice of the best 

procurement methods and procedures (MPA) adapted to the desired objective, and the 

establishment of the review and supervision framework by the Bank.  

 

4.1.8 Appropriate risk mitigation measures were included in the Procurement Risk and 
Capacity Assessment Action Plan (PERCA) as outlined in Section B.7.9. of Annex B7.    
 

4.1.9 Financial management: The Project Management Unit (PMU) will be responsible for 
the overall coordination and financial management of the project. Its financial management 

staff will include the Project Coordinator, the Administrative and Financial Officer, the 

Accountant and the Cashier, all recruited in accordance with the procurement provisions of the 

project.  
 

4.1.10 The financial management systems of the PAIRB Management Unit whose structures 
will be used under the PATAREB framework are not generally satisfactory and the overall 

fiduciary risk is substantial due to the absence of: (i) a Coordinator and the financial staff 

indicated above; (ii) an administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual; (iii) an 

operational computerized accounting and financial management software; and (iv) financial 

management tools and terms of reference.  
 

4.1.11 Consequently, the PMU must make the following arrangements: (i) Establish, as soon 
as the Project is launched, a budget plan coupled with the provisional calendar of activities; (ii) 

recruit, from the start of the Project, a consultant responsible for drawing up the Administrative, 

Financial and Accounting Procedures Manual (MPCF), and another consultant responsible for 

setting up the computerized accounting and financial management system (CCIS); (iii) allocate 

financial tasks as soon as financial staff are recruited; (iv) put in place the financial management 

framework and instruments (see Annex B 6 of Volume II). 
 

4.1.12 Disbursements: The disbursement methods to be used to mobilize the financing of the 
TSF Grant are: (i) the direct payment method; (ii) the special account / working capital method 

and (iii) the repayment method. Direct payments will be made in accordance with work 

contracts, goods and services signed between the recipient and the suppliers in accordance with 

the Bank's procurement rules and procedures and the national procurement legislation. The 

special account method will be used for the payment of operating expenses, training costs, field 

mission expenses, and so on. This will result in the opening of a Special Account at the Central 

Bank of Burundi, which in turn will, for all the funds received from the TSF, supply the bank 

account of the CGP opened in a bank acceptable to the AfDB. The repayment method will be 

used when eligible expenditures on the resources of the TSF Grants have been pre-financed 

with the prior approval of the Bank. These disbursements will be done in accordance with the 

list of goods and services and the Bank's rules and procedures as described in the disbursement 

manual. The disbursements modalities are detailed in the technical annexes. 



 

17 

 

 

4.1.13 Audits: An independent and competent external audit firm will audit the reliability of 
the consolidated annual financial statements prepared by the CGP once a year and assess the 

functioning of the internal control system for the entire project. He will be recruited according 

to the terms of reference and the competitive bidding procedures recommended by the Bank. 

The audit costs will be financed by the TSFGrants. Audit reports must be sent to the Bank every 

year, no later than 6 months after the end of the audited financial year. Audits will be conducted 

in accordance with IFAC's International ISA Auditing Standards and the Bank's comprehensive 

terms of reference, which will be communicated to the project. 

 

4.2 Monitoring 
 

4.2.1  Monitoring mechanisms: A Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be set up. It is 

chaired by the Minister of Agriculture and Livestock or his representative, and composed of a 

representative of the Ministry of Finance, the Permanent Executive Secretariat of the National 

Commission for Social Protection, the Governor of Kirundo, the DPAE, two (02) Beneficiary 

Representatives, a Private Sector Representative and a Civil Society Representative.  The PSC 

will meet at least twice a year in regular sessions to approve the budget and validate the results 

of the project performance. The PSC Secretariat shall be provided by the DGPAE. The 

responsibilities of the PSC shall be as follows: (i) major guidelines based on the coherence 

between the strategic framework and the execution of the project; (ii) ensuring that the results 

and recommendations of the external evaluation reports are taken into account in the execution 

of the project; (iii) directives to the PMU for the eventual reorientation of the Project; (iv) 

approval of the project's annual work program and budget (AWPB) prior to submission to the 

Bank's no-objection notice; and (v) guaranteeing project development objectives. 

 

4.2.2 Internal monitoring and evaluation will be carried out by the Project Monitoring and 

Evaluation Unit, while external monitoring and evaluation will be provided by the DGPAE and 

the Ministry in charge of Finance. The external monitoring and evaluation is to measure the 

effectiveness and efficiency of outputs (products) of the project and their contributions to the 

achievement of development results that are the effects and impacts of the project. This be 

ensured with the involvement of other stakeholders, in addition to the two annual supervision 

missions organized by the Bank. The mid-term review will be conducted in the 3rd year. At the 

end of the project, the Bank and the Government will produce a completion report in due time. 

The main stages of implementation are summarized below. 

 
Table 9: Indicative Project schedule 

No. ACTIVITIES OFFICIALS DEADLINE 

1 Evaluation BANK October 2017 

2 Negotiations GVT / BANK November 2017 

3 Presentation of the  project to the Board  BANK December 2017 

4 
Signing the Memorandum of Understanding for  

TSF Grants  
GVT / BANK December 2017 

5 Fulfilment of conditions GVT January 2018 

6 Authorization of the 1st disbursement. BANK    January 2018 

7 Signing of agreements with  partners GVT    January 2018 

8 Project launch  GVT / BANK January 2018 

7 Submission of deliverables Deliverables 
February 2018-Dec. 

2022 

8 Midterm review GVT / BANK June 2020 

9 Completion of activities Governments / BANK October 2022 

10 Completion report   Governments / BANK December 2022 

11 Audits : GVT Annually 



 

18 

 

 

4.3 Governance 
 

4.3.1 In the area of economic and financial governance, Burundi has achieved encouraging 

results since the 2015 crisis, initiating a number of structural reforms in public financial 

management, and the mitigation of fiduciary risks. However, improvements are needed for 

domestic resource mobilization, programming and allocation of public resources. Although 

there has been progress in bringing the public procurement system up to standard, slowness in 

the procurement system is still one of the major shortcomings in project implementation. At the 

project level, risks related to fiduciary issues will be mitigated, including the use of a public 

financial management system and the strengthening of the PMU's procurement and financial 

management capacity. 

 

4.3.2 With regard to land, the dualism of modern and customary rights is a major handicap in 

promoting investments in agriculture in Burundi and to local peace. PATAREB will improve 

land governance by providing support for land planning and management, as well as 

strengthening municipalities' capacity to manage them. Tripartite agreements will be 

established between land claimants, municipalities and professional organizations, and 

collective agreements will mitigate conflicts.  
 

4.4 Durability 
 

4.4.1  The project is based on a participatory approach for better ownership of activities. Rural 

communities, local authorities and decentralized technical services have indeed been involved 

in the design of the project, and therefore will participate in all the developments they benefit 

from and will be reinforced to prevent and manage conflict linked to resource exploitation. 

They will bring their own knowledge and perceptions on the phenomena of climate change.  

 

4.4.2  The sustainability of the program is also based on the participation of the beneficiaries 

in the project. The PMU will work in collaboration with these organizations to ensure land 

tenure security, strengthen the capacities of farmers' organizations (OPs) for the technical and 

financial management of infrastructure, and initiate sustainable mechanisms for the recovery of 

infrastructure maintenance and renewal costs. Watershed protection activities will be carried 

out as part of the social safety nets. Support for para-agricultural trades (mechanization, 

maintenance, advisory support, etc.) will also help to ensure the long-term provision of services 

necessary for the viability of the activities undertaken. The simplicity of the planned 

infrastructure and the capacity building of the beneficiaries favour the sustainability of the 

investments. In particular, their realization will take into account the reliable climatic 

information collected. 
 

4.4.3  The use of the “value chain” approach with the consideration of aspects of processing, 

storage and marketing of products will make it possible to link production to markets more. 

Thus, the creation of small processing units of economically, financially and technically viable 

products will be a guarantee of the sustainability of the achievements of the project. The project 

will ensure the development of gender sensitive infrastructures and technologies to promote the 

sustainable economic empowerment of vulnerable people (women and youth) and the 

diversification of their sources of income. Sustainability of project interventions will also be 

ensured through the effective involvement of the local private sector, MFIs and aggregator 

enterprises in the approach to achieving sustainable settlement of young entrepreneurs and 

access to markets.  
 



 

19 

 

4.5 Risk management  
Table 10:  

Risks and mitigation measures 

RISKS LEVEL MITIGATION MEASURE 

Unclear land and state-owned land issues can 

lead to difficulties in exploiting the sites to be 

developed and compromise the objectives of the 

project in terms of food security and the fight 

against poverty, especially for women and young 

people. 

Means Project support for planning and land management 

that will result in the establishment of tripartite 

agreements ( having land rights, municipalities, 

professional organizations) and collective 

agreements to mitigate conflicts 

 Climatic hazards that can accentuate the 
degradation of ecosystems (drought, floods, etc.), 

make communities more vulnerable and promote 

conflict. 

 Limited ownership and management of rural 
infrastructure 

Means  Irrigation, the protection of vulnerable areas, the 
opening up of production areas, the integration of 

climate information into the design of works, the 

securing of income, will mitigate this risk; 

 Capacity building of municipalities, 

 Lack of monitoring of technological innovations 
by communities 

 Weakness in monitoring by municipalities 
(MOD), slow procurement, low capacity of 

technical services and low capacity of enterprises 

Means  Participative approach and involvement, 
organization and training of local actors 

 Funding of a stakeholder capacity building 
program 

The institutional weakness of MINAGRIE in 

terms of management and monitoring and 

evaluation 

Means The capacity building program of MINAGRIE and 

the PMU on project administration, procurement 

and financial management will mitigate this risk 

 

4.6 Knowledge Development 
 

The project will be a disaggregated database, according to the type of reference that will 

be used to establish the baseline situation. Then a map will be produced with geo referencing 

of the activities carried out. This information will be networked and posted on a website to be 

shared with all stakeholders. The same will be true for the results of the independent (rapid and 

in-depth) impact assessments. The actions included in the project that will also lead to 

knowledge development are the popularization of innovative technologies, technology review 

workshops, innovation / multi-stakeholder platforms and exchange visits and support for 

innovative product processing experiments as part of a private partnership / OP; and promoting 

innovative youth and women's employability actions and resilience building activities for 

vulnerable groups. Finally, the project will put in place an integrated knowledge management 

system on project activities through the regular dissemination of acquired knowledge. 
 

V. Legal framework 
 

5.1 Legal instrument 
 

The legal framework of the project will be a TSF Grant Memorandum of Understanding 

signed between the Republic of Burundi and the Bank.  

 

5.2 Conditions associated with the intervention of the Bank  
 

5.2.1 Conditions precedent to entry into force: The entry into force of the TSF Grant 
Memorandum of Understanding is subject to signature by the parties. 
 

5.2.2 Prerequisites for the first disbursement of the donation: The obligation for the Bank 
to make the first disbursement of the donation will be subject to the entry into force of the TSF 

Donation Memorandum of Understanding, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 5.1.7 



 

20 

 

above, and proof of fulfilment by the recipient, to the satisfaction of the Bank, both formally 

and substantively, of the following conditions: 
 

(i) Provide the Bank with proof of the opening of a Special Account with the Central Bank 
of Burundi for the Project intended to receive the Project funds in US dollars and the 

opening by the PMU with a bank acceptable to the Bank, a BIF Account for the Project 

intended to receive the Grant's resources (see 5.1.10); 

 

(ii) Provide the Bank with evidence of the recruitment of the Coordinator and the Project 
Administrative and Financial Manager, whose qualifications will be submitted for prior 

approval by the Bank (5.1.1); 
 

5.2.3 Other conditions: The Recipient must also provide the Bank with the following, no later 
than six (6) months after the first disbursement of the Grant's resources: 

 

(i) Proof of the recruitment of the Procurement Specialist, the Monitoring and Evaluation 
Specialist and the Accountant, whose qualifications and experience will have been 

previously submitted to the Bank for approval (see 5.1.2); 
 

(ii) Agreements with Partner organisations (ISABU, IRRI, UCODE, CEM & 
MITUWENZI). 
 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 
 

This project complies with all applicable Bank policies. The Board of Directors is requested to 

approve the TSF Grants. The project will be implemented as part of the Bank's intervention 

strategy in Burundi defined in the 2012-2016 CSP, which was extended at the end of 2017. 

 

VI. Recommendation 
 

Management recommends that the Boards of Directors approve the granting to the Republic of 

Burundi of Pillar I resources of the Transition Support Facility (TSF), a Grant of a maximum 

amount of not exceeding UA 12 million, for the purpose and under the conditions set out in this 

report. 



 























































 

 
 

 
AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 

 

 
 
 

CHAD 
 
 

PROJECT TO BUILD RESILIENCE FOR FOOD SECURITY AND 
NUTRITION IN CHAD’S RURAL COMMUNITIES 

 
 

 
 

APPRAISAL REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
November 2018 

 
 
Project Information Sheet  

Client Information  
Borrower    :  Republic of Chad 
 
 
EXECUTING AGENCY:  Ministry in charge of Agriculture 
 
Financing Plan  
 
Source Amount (in USD) Instrument 
GEF 5,329,452 Grant 
ADF 15,045,800 Grant (already 

approved) 
TOTAL COST 20,375,252  

 
Key Financing Information  

 
Grant Currency  

 
USD 

Duration  36 Months 
ERR, NPV (baseline scenario) 13% 

*if need be  
 
Timeframe  – Main Milestones (expected) 
 

 
GEF Project Information Sheet (PIS) approval  

 
April 2015 

Project validation by the  GEF Chief Executive 
Officer  and  Chairperson  

September 2017 

AfDB Board Approval   
Signing of Grant Agreement   
Effectiveness   
Mid-term Review  
Date of Last Disbursement   
Completion  31 December 2022 
Last Reimbursement  N/A 

 



 

iv 
 

Project Executive Summary 

1.1 Project Overview: A Global Environment Facility (GEF) grant of USD 5,329,452 (UA 
3.807 million) was mobilized to finance the project entitled “Building Resilience for Food 
Security and Nutrition in Chad’s Rural Communities ”. This co-financed grant will be used to 
maximize the impact of the Programme to Build Resilience to Food and Nutrition Insecurity 
in the Sahel (P2RS), funded with African Development Fund (ADF) resources. P2RS, 
approved by the Board of Directors in October 2014, was designed for a 20-year period 
tosustainably increase agro-sylvo-pastoral and fisheries productivity in the Sahel. In addition 
to the regional component, some countries are implementing their own national projects. P2RS 
Project 1 involves seven Sahel countries most affected by food crises, including Chad. The 
project will serve as a basis for GEF co-financing. The P2RS-Chad component, placed under 
the supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture, specifically aims to strengthen the resilience of 
rural communities through the development of agriculture and livestock, irrigation systems and 
regional markets for agricultural inputs and livestock products. The implementation of P2RS 
Project 1 is under way and involves both central and decentralized entities responsible for 
agriculture, animal resources, the environment and nutrition. GEF’s co-financing, which 
targets the same objectives as the initial P2RS, will be implemented concurrently with the Chad 
component. The GEF Project Identification Form (PIF) was approved on 28 April 2015 and 
endorsed by its Chief Executive Officer and Chairperson on 13 September 2017. The aim of 
the GEF project is to help restore and maintain the basic productivity of the natural resources 
on which people depend. The idea is to strengthen food security and nutrition by using 
sustainable and resilient agro-sylvo-pastoral systems in the target regions. 

1.2 The underlying concept of the GEF project is that resilience in the Sahel will be 
impossible if equal attention is not paid to both  the rational and sustainable management of 
the natural systems that support rural livelihoods. The proposed project will also seek to restore 
and maintain the productivity of natural assets in fragile ecosystems through: (i) the 
improvement of agro-sylvo-pastoral productivity in arid zones; (ii) the promotion of integrated 
ecosystem management to protect biodiversity; and (iii) knowledge building and monitoring 
and evaluation. It aims to build the resilience of communities and households regularly affected 
by climate-related extreme events, through a sustained increase in the productivity of natural 
resources, thus helping to enhance food security and nutrition in Kanem and Bahr el Ghazal 
provinces. Therefore, the project will enable stakeholders to contribute to the restoration of 
biodiversity in fragile ecosystems. On this basis, the GEF project will be implemented in the 
regions targeted by the initial P2RS over a four-year period. The Ministry of Agriculture, which 
oversees the initial P2RS, will remain the executing body for the GEF project. The activities 
will be implemented by the existing Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and managed by the 
same steering committee. It should be noted that the GEF project has already been approved 
by the GEF Chief Executive Officer and Chairperson, and has now been submitted to the Board 
of Directors for approval. 

1.3 Needs Assessment: In line with the rural development, environmental management 
and climate change priorities and the Chad Vision 2030 for Development, whose main 
objective is to make Chad an emerging country by 2030, the Government has developed and 
launched a number of sectoral policies and national development strategies, including the 
National Development Plan 2017-2021, which succeeds the previous National Development 
Plan 2013-2015, the National Poverty Reduction Strategies I and II, the National Biodiversity 
Strategy and Action Plan (2014 - 2020) and the National Adaptation Programme of Action on 
Climate Change (NAPA, 2009). The project interventions will help to reduce land degradation 
and promote sustainable management of natural resources, thereby building economic, social 
and climate resilience. As such, it is in line with thrust 4 of the Vision 2030 paper, which aims 



 

v 
 

to improve the quality of life of the Chadian people by creating a healthy environment with 
preserved natural resources. 

1.4 Target Beneficiaries: The project’s direct beneficiaries are the 11,000 smallholder 
farmers who engage in subsistence agriculture and livestock farming on marginal lands and 
derive their income from agriculture, livestock farming or the gathering of wood and non-wood 
products. Through the various activities that will be initiated, the project will help to bolster 
their resilience to food and nutrition insecurity and improve access to agro-pastoral and 
transhumance resources, which should be developed with an emphasis on resource 
sustainability and diversification.  

Professional organizations, grassroots community organizations and actors at both local and 
central levels involved in the implementation of the planned activities will have their capacities 
strengthened through the activities proposed by the project. 

1.5 Bank’s Value Added: The Bank will build on and develop implementation approaches 
and principles based on its long experience in the Sahel, especially in water mobilization and 
control, sustainable natural resource management and resilience-building among vulnerable 
groups. In Chad,, the Bank has developed and implemented a number of projects in the rural 
development sector, including the Surface Runoff Water Enhancement Project (PVERS), the 
Natural Resources Management Project in the Sudan Region (PGRN-ZS) and the Food Crops 
Cultivation Project in the Sudan Region (PCVZS). These have shown that technical support 
for production through the dissemination of appropriate soil fertility management techniques 
and access to water, accompanied by adequate medium- and long-term investments in a 
participatory approach are necessary to cope with shocks and reduce the adverse effects of 
climate change. Through this GEF financing, the Bank will draw on this wealth of experience  
to undertake more sustained investments in support of the organization of farmers, women and 
young people, focusing on the mainstreaming of environmental, climate issues and nutrition 
issues.   

1.6 Knowledge Building: The project will support environmental awareness and 
stakeholder capacity-building, focusing on improving integrated landscape management and 
agro-sylvo-pastoral planning. The project will also comprise sustainable land and forest 
management technologies as well as the dissemination of best practices in Sahelian agriculture 
and biodiversity conservation to stakeholders. The knowledge that will result from the 
implementation of these approaches and techniques, as well as the lessons learned therefrom, 
will be capitalized for dissemination and development  during the design and management of 
future projects.  

Lessons learned will be captured in quarterly and annual progress reports, technical reports 
and the mid-term review and completion reports. 

 



 

vi 
 

Results-Based Logical Framework (Project’s Logical Framework/ Matrix) 
 

Country and Project Name: CHAD –  Project to Build Resilience for Food Security and Nutrition in Rural Communities 
Project Goal: Strengthen Food and Nutrition Security through Sustainable and Resilient Agro-Sylvo-Pastoral Systems in the Sahel Regions of Chad 

RESULTS-CHAIN  
 PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 

MEANS OF 
VERIFICATION RISKS /MITIGATION  MEASURES  Indicator 

 (including CSI) Baseline Data  Goal  

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Impact:  Improvement 
of the quality of life for 
the people of the 
project area. 
Contribute to the 
reduction of the food 
and nutrition insecurity 
and to the growth of 
the agricultural sector.   

Incidence of food insecurity  
High rates of global acute 
malnutrition  
Child and infant mortality  
- Share of the agricultural 

sector in the GDP  

18.5% (2016) 
 

13.9% (2017) 
 
133 (2015) 

23% 
(2015) 

5% (2030) 
 

 
5% (2030)              

 
 

100 (2030) 
 
Increase by +5.4 (2021) 
 

- National strategies 
review report 
(ANADER).  

- Statistics Directories, 
- Reports by the 

Ministry of Health. 
- Reports by the 

Ministry in charge of 
the Plan and National 
Economic Statistics 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S 

Outcome 1.1: 
Sustainable increase in 
agricultural and 
livestock production to 
support food security 
and resilience 

Surface area of degraded 
land recovered. . 

Not available 7,000 ha of degraded arable 
land under SLM 

Project monitoring systems, 
reports by local monitoring 
teams, P2RS, joint project 
monitoring reports, project 
mid-term  and  completion 
reviews 

Risk 1: The people may not use the new 
techniques correctly, although they know 
the benefit of adopting them  
 
Mitigation measures: Constant 
awareness-raising in local communities so 
that they may focus on the proper use of 
land and natural resource technologies. 

 
Risk 2: Different groups with opposing 
interests (e.g., herders/grazing versus 
farmers/agricultural production) may 
disrupt the project implementation 
 
Mitigation Measures: Focus at each stage 
on the overall  complementarity of project 
activities and benefit of integrated 
management 

Volume of natural fodder 
available on rangelands 

Not available 3,000 ha under rangeland 
pastoral management 

Project monitoring systems, 
reports by local monitoring 
teams, P2RS, joint project 
monitoring reports, mid-
term review and project 
completion review 

% increase in agricultural 
and livestock production due 
to better land and ecosystem 
management 

Not available 5 micro-projects using 
suitable land conservation and 
regeneration techniques and 
mixed cropping systems 
implemented by farmers and 
stockbreeders 

Project monitoring systems, 
reports by local monitoring 
teams, P2RS, joint project 
monitoring reports, mid-
term review and project 
completion review 



 

vii 
 

Number of land users trained 
in the use of  INRM/SLEM 
of best practices 

Not available 11,000 land users trained in 
INRM and SLEM 

Project monitoring systems, 
reports by local monitoring 
teams, P2RS, joint project 
monitoring reports, project 
mid-term and completion 
reviews  

 

Number of staff trained in 
INRM policies and practices 

Not available 150 local staff trained in 
sustainable INRM policies 
and practices 

Project monitoring systems, 
reports by local monitoring 
teams, P2RS, joint project 
monitoring reports, project 
mid-term and  completion 
reviews  

Output 1.2: 
Development of  
irrigation and pastoral 
infrastructure and 
adapted agro-sylvo-
pastoral techniques to 
improve livelihoods 
and reduce 
vulnerability 

No. of ponds and boreholes 
drilled 

Not Available  
 

15 ponds and 15 boreholes Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports   
 
Acceptance and allocation 
reports 
 
Design reports 

Risk 1: Failure by herders and  farmers to 
agree on the location of water points 

 
Mitigation measures: Ensure everyone's 
participation in the project, from launch to 
implementation  
 
Risk 2: Reluctance of engineers to comply 
with new guidelines and designs 
 
Mitigation measures: Organize training in 
a timely manner, implement activities and 
learn lessons quickly. 
 

No. of water points created   

 

Not available 20 village water points -   

 

Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports 

 
Allocation reports 
 
Design reports 

Land area in hectares 
managed for irrigated crops 

Not available Controlled irrigation on 345 
ha on an exposed site 

Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports  
 
Allocation reports 
 
Design reports 



 

viii 
 

Quantity and variety of 
improved seeds planted and 
rate of increase in crop 
productivity 
 

Not available Resilient seed varieties 
identified, produced and 
distributed to about 100 
households and farmers' 
organizations  
 

Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports, reports 
on field extension services  
 
Allocation reports 
 
 
Acceptance reports 

Number of sustainable 
income-generating activities 
developed and % increase in 
incomes 
 

Not available 6 other income-generating 
activities (3 in the agricultural 
sector and 3 in the livestock 
sector)  
 

Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports 
 

No. of cereal banks created  
 

Not available 30 grain banks Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports, reports 
on field extension services 
Acceptance reports 

No. of input  shops built Not available 20 agricultural input shops Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports , 
reports on field extension 
services  
Allocation reports 
Acceptance reports 

No. of livestock feed stores 
set up   
 

Not available 30 livestock feed stores set up Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports , 
reports on field extension 
services  
Allocation reports 
Acceptance reports 



 

ix 
 

Outcome 1.3: 
Improving agro-
systems management 
methods to generate 
sustainable flows of 
services related to the 
agricultural and 
forestry ecosystem 
 

 
 No. of hectares of woodlots, 
community forests, nurseries, 
 
No. farmers practising 
agroforestry 

Not available  

 

Not available 

5,000 ha of woodlots, 
community forests, nurseries 
and agroforestry 
 
 
50% in both regions 
 

Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports, 
extension services reports 

 

Risk 1:  Current policy prohibiting tree 
cutting, for whatever reason, may 
discourage tree planting activities. 

 
Mitigation Measures: Farmers-
Government discussions to reach an 
agreement on how farmers will benefit 
from reforestation 
 

 
Risk 2: Risk that the battle for water will 
divert resources to "priority areas", such as 
livestock and food crops. 
 
Mitigation measures: Water supply is 
provided before or simultaneously with 
other project activities so that there is 
enough water to meet all needs 

 
No. of producer groups  
 

Not available 10 local producer groups 
(including a minimum of 5 
women's groups)  
 

Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports, 
extension services reports 
 

Outcome 2.1: 
Improving integrated 
landscape planning to 
ensure the resilience 
and protection of 
habitats 
 

No. of integrated land-use 
plans  
 

Not available Integrated land-use plan at 
each project site 

Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports, 
extension services reports 
 

Risk: Lack of political commitment to 
mainstream climate change issues and 
integrated natural resource management 
into development processes, with the 
primary aim of preserving existing gains 
from core development programmes. 
 
Mitigation measures: Organize training, 
carry out activities and draw lessons 
quickly to demonstrate the benefits. 
 

Area subject to sound land-
use management  
 

Not available Appropriate management of 
all farmland in the project 
area, with maintenance or 
increase of vegetation cover 

Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports, 
extension services reports 
 

Outcome 2.2: A 
favourable 
environment through 
land conservation 
mechanisms, wood 

No. of SLFM Plans 
 

Not available SLFM is implemented in all 
sections of the project area 

Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports, 
extension services reports ,  
SLFM plans 

Risk: Lack of political commitment to 
mainstream climate change issues and 
integrated natural resource management 
into development processes, with the 
primary aim of preserving existing gains 



 

x 
 

biomass and 
biodiversity 

Certification system in place Not available Certification system (Plan 
Vivo) in place 

Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports, 
consultation reports, 
certification documentation 
developed  

from core development programmes. 
 
Mitigation measures: Identification and 
acquisition by the project of the services of 
a consultant with technical skills, 
interested, available and willing to work 
with communities and the Government in 
the context of participatory monitoring, 
while building local capacities to ensure 
sustainability.  

No. of areas and hectares 
assessed for protection 

Not available Assess the feasibility of 
creating a protected area for 
eco-regions of the Sahelian 
acacia savannah or the flooded 
savannah of Lake Chad  

Project monitoring systems, 
regional reports , 
consultation reports, 
delimitation maps 
 

 
Outcome 3.1: The 
lessons learned are 
recorded and 
knowledge 
disseminated  
 

Best practices knowledge 
products available, shared 
and in use 

Not available At least 10 major knowledge 
products acceptable by 
international publication and 
information standards, and are 
adapted to local needs clearly 
used in training 

Project monitoring systems, 
project implementation 
reports, publications  
 

 

 

Outcome 3.2: The  
project impact 
ismonitored and 
evaluated  

Involvement of communities 
in vulnerability monitoring 

Not available A series of indicators for 
monitoring community 
vulnerability and resilience is 
adopted and intensely used 

Community monitoring 
reports, project monitoring 
systems, district reports, 
participatory monitoring, 
evaluation, reflection and 
learning (PMERL) report   

 
 
 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S 

Output 1.1: 
Land degradation is 
decreasing: 7,000 ha of 
degraded agricultural 
land under SLM and 
3,000 ha under 
rangeland management  
 

1. Ha of degraded arable 
under SLM and km of 
managed pastoral land  

0 7 000 ha of degraded farmland 
under SLM, 3 000 ha of 
degraded land under rangeland 
management 

Supervision reports and 
M&E reports, national data 
and regional reports 

 

2. No. of micro-projects using 
land-based conservation and 
regeneration techniques and 
mixed cropping systems 
implemented by farmers and 
herders 

0 5 micro-projects  

2. . Capacity of the agro-
sylvo-pastoral actors built 

0 11,000 land users trained in 
the INRM and the SLWM 
 

-  

3.  No. of local staff trained in 
sustainable INRM policies 

0 150  -  



 

xi 
 

and practices at workshops 

Output 1.2: 
Investments are being 
made in SLM, rural 
hydro-agricultural 
infrastructure, crop 
diversification, 
income-generating 
activities and grain 
banks 

No. of investments in SLM 
and rural hydro-agricultural 
infrastructure 

0 20 village water points, 
controlled irrigation on 345 
ha on exposed sites) 

Supervision reports and 
M&E reports, national data 
and regional reports 

-  

2. Appropriate crop species 
and varieties of disseminated 

0 Resilient seed varieties 
identified, produced and 
distributed to about 100 
households and farmers' 
organizations - 
 

-  

3. No. of income-generating 
activities promoted 

0 3 agricultural and 3 livestock 
activities identified and 
implemented jointly with 
households - 

-  

4. No. of grain banks, farm 
input stores and livestock 
feed stores established   

0 30 grain banks, 20 farm input 
stores and 30 livestock feed 
stores set up 

-  

Output 1.3: Increased 
SFM area, training in 
SFM and arable land 
management and 
diversification of local 
producer groups  
 

1. Area (ha) of land under 
SFM 

0 5,000 ha of woodlots, 
community forests, nurseries, 
agroforestry, etc.  

Supervision reports and 
M&E reports, national data 
and regional reports 

-  

2. Capacity-building in SFM 
and land management at 
district and local levels 

0 Farmers, landholder groups, 
local authorities, etc., trained 
in SFM and land management 

-  

3. Diversification of income 
sources  through agroforestry 
and sylvo-pastoral activities 

0 10 groups of local producers 
(at least 5 women's groups) 
diversify their sources of 
income through agroforestry 
and sylvo-pastoral activities 

-  

Output 2.1: 
Demonstration of 
participatory land-use 
planning, integrated 
land use planning for 
priority 
agroecosystems, and 
effective land-use 
management 
 

1. Demonstration of 
participatory land-use 
planning 

0 Number of participatory land 
restoration and land-use/NRM 
plans developed with local 
authorities and communities 
 

Supervision reports and 
M&E reports, national data 
and regional reports 

-  

2. Integrated land use plans 
for agroecosystems 

0 Number of local land use 
plans in targeted areas that 
mainstream  INRM  and the  
conservation and sustainable 
exploitation of biodiversity 

-  



 

xii 
 

 3. Surface area of well-
managed arable land, with 
maintenance or increased 
vegetation cover  

0 Number of hectares of 
properly managed arable land 

-  

Output 2.2: 
Intensification of  
SFLM practices and 
introduction a 
certification system for 
forest and agroforestry 
products 
 

1. Integration of SFLM 
practices 

0 Intensification of land-use 
systems by integrating SFLM 
practices, which will improve 
soil condition and carbon 
sequestration (and avoid 
deforestation and land 
degradation) 

Supervision reports and 
M&E reports, national data 
and regional reports  
 

-  

2. Establishment of SFLM 
support mechanisms over 
wider areas, and appraisal and 
implementation of benefit-
sharing mechanisms to raise  
SFLM awareness  at 
community level. 

0 300 improved cooking stoves 
are distributed 

-  

3. Introduction of a 
certification system for 
forest/agroforestry products, 
as well as management 
systems with third-party 
implementation 

0 Plan Vivo system and standard 
used for certification of forest 
and agroforestry products - 

-  

4. Assess the feasibility of 
creating a protected area for 
the ecoregions of the Sahel  
acacia savannah or the 
flooded savannah of Lake 
Chad  

0 Assess the feasibility of 
creating a protected area for 
the ecoregions of the Sahel  
acacia savannah or the flooded 
savannah of Lake Chad 

-  

Output 3.1: 
Assessment of 
biodiversity and 
conservation needs, 
development of an 
awareness campaign 
framework, including 
dissemination guides 
and kits 

1. Information on biodiversity 
and conservation needs in the 
Kanem and Bahr el Ghazal 
ecoregions and possible 
response mechanisms 

0 Assessment of biodiversity 
and conservation needs in the 
Kanem and Bahr el Ghazal 
ecoregions and possible 
response mechanisms 
 

Supervision reports and 
M&E reports, national data 
and regional reports  
 

-  

2. Awareness campaigns and 
training in ecosystem 
management aimed at raising 
consciousness and creating 

0 Framework developed for 
awareness campaigns and 
training to raise consciousness 
and  create an enabling 

-  



 

xiii 
 

 
  

an  enabling environment environment for ecosystem 
management 

3. Guides and kits on 
innovative INRM and 
biodiversity conservation 
practices in drylands 

0 Development and 
dissemination of guides and 
kits on innovative INRM and 
biodiversity conservation 
practices in drylands 

-  

Output 3.2: 
Establishment of a 
project monitoring 
system, including an 
M&E system to enable 
analysis of land 
degradation and 
biodiversity impacts, 
and the conduct of the  
mid-term review and 
final evaluation 
 

1. Systematic information on 
the progress made towards 
achievement of outcomes 
and outputs  

0 Adoption of the project 
monitoring system  
  

-  -  

2. M&E system for analysing 
the trend of land degradation 
and the socio-economic and 
biodiversity impacts 

0 M&E system for analysing the 
trend of land degradation and  
socio-economic and 
biodiversity impacts 

-  

3. Mid-term and final 
evaluations 

0 Mid-term and final 
evaluations conducted 

-  

 

Contributions: 
Component 1: : Improving agro-sylvo-pastoral productivity in aridlands:        
Component 2:  Promoting of an integrated ecosystem management system for building resilience and biodiversity:  
Component 3: Knowledge management and M&E: 
Project management cost 

 
USD 2,525,000  
USD 1,750,000 
USD 800,668  
USD 253,784  



 

xiv 
 

Project Implementation Schedule  
 

 
No. 

 
Description of Activities  

2019 2020 2021 2022 
Quarter 
1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 

0.0 Preparatory activities, Signature/ Effectiveness of Grant                 
1.0 Component 1: Improving Agro-sylvo-pastoral Productivity in Dryland                 
1.1 Improving agricultural, livestock and pasture production to support food security and resilience                 
 1.1.1 Decrease of land degradation: 7,000 ha of degraded farmland under SLM and 3,000 ha under pastoral 

management 
                

 1.1.2 Five (5) micro-projects using environment-adapted soil conservation / regeneration techniques and mixed 
cropping systems practiced by farmers and herders 

                

 1.1.3 Strengthenthe capacity of agro-sylvo-pastoral actors: 11,000 land users trained in INRM and SLWM                 
 1.1.4 150 local employees trained in sustainable INRM policies and practices through workshops                 
1.2 Improving agro-pastoral techniques and access to productive assets to enhance livelihoods and reduce vulnerability                 
 1.2.1 Investments in the SLWM: rural hydro-agricultural infrastructures (30 ponds and boreholes, 20 village water 

points, controlled irrigation on 345 ha on exposed sites) 
                

 1.2.2 Crop diversification and farming of appropriate species: Resilient seed varieties are identified, produced and 
distributed to about 100 households and farmers' organizations 

                

 1.2.3 Six (6) other income-generating activities (3 agricultural, 3 livestock) identified and implemented by 
households  

                

 1.2.4 Thirty (30) grain banks, 20 farm input stores and 30 livestock feed stores established                 
1.3 1.3 Improving forest management and/or reforestation generates sustainable flows of agricultural and forest 

ecosystem services 
                

 1.3.1 Increase in land under SFM: 5,000 ha of arable land, woodlots, community forests, nurseries, agroforestry, 
etc. 

                

 1.3.2 Training in SFM and farmland management at the district and local levels (farmers, landholder groups, local 
authorities, etc.) 

 
 

               

 1.3.3 Ten local producer groups (including at least 5 women's groups at least) diversify their income through and 
sylvo-pastoralism 

                

2.0 Component 2: Promoting Integrated Ecosystem Management to Enhance Resilience and Biodiversity                 
2.1 2.1 Improving integrated landscape planning for habitat resilience and preservation                 
 2.1.1 Participatory land-use planning demonstration: No. Participatory restoration and exploitation/NRM plans 

developed with local authorities and communities 
                

 2.1.2 Integrated management plans for priority agroecosystems: Number of local land use plans in targeted areas, 
concerned with INRM practices and the conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity 

                

 2.1.3 Hectares of cultivated land properly exploited, with maintenance or increase of the vegetation cover                 
2.2 Enabling environment improved through land conservation mechanisms, woody biomass and biodiversity                 
 2.2.1 Intensification of land-use systems by integrating SLFM practices, improving soil condition and carbon 

sequestration (deforestation and land degradation avoided) 
                



 

xv 
 

 
No. 

 
Description of Activities  

2019 2020 2021 2022 
Quarter 
1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 

 
 2.2.2 Support mechanisms created for SLMF in larger landscapes, including assessment and implementation of 

benefit-sharing mechanisms to promote SLM practice at the community level, and 300 improved stoves distributed  
                

 2.2.3 Evaluation and introduction of a "sustainable forest management" certification system for forest products, 
agro-forestry or third-party certified management systems 

                

 2.2.4 Assess the feasibility of creating a protected area for the ecoregions of the Sahel acacia savannah or the 
flooded savannah of Lake Chad 

                

3.0 Component 3: Knowledge Management and Monitoring and Evaluation                 
3.1 Lessons learned, recorded and knowledge disseminated                 
 3.1.1 Assess biodiversity and conservation needs in the Kanem and Bahr el Ghazal ecoregions, and possible 

response mechanisms 
                

 3.1.2 Framework developed for awareness campaigns and training to raise awareness and promote an enabling 
environment for ecosystem-based management 

                

 3.1.3 Development and dissemination of guides and kits on innovative INRM practices and biodiversity 
conservation in drylands 

                

3.2 Monitoring and evaluation of project  impact                 

 3.2.1 Establishment of a project monitoring system, which provides systematic information on progress towards 
achievement of outcome and output targets 

                

 3.2.2 M&E systems for analysing the evolution of land degradation and associated socio-economic and biodiversity 
impacts. 

                

 3.2.3 Mid-term review and completion review conducted                 
 



 

1 
 

MANAGEMENT’S REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION TO THE BOARD OF 
DIRECTORS CONCERNING A PROPOSAL TO  FINANCE  FROM GEF 

RESOURCES  THE PROJECT TO BUILD RESILIENCE FOR FOOD SECURITY 
AND NUTRITION IN CHAD’S RURAL COMMUNITIES 

 

Management hereby submits the following report and recommendation for a GEF grant 
of USD 5,329,452 (UA 3.518 million) as additional resources to finance the Project to 
Build Resilience for Food Security and Nutrition in Chad’s Rural Communities, as part 
of the P2RS Programme. 

1. STRATEGIC THRUSTS AND RATIONALE 

1.1 Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives 

1.1.1 The Government's development programme is set out in the Vision 2030, the objective 
being for Chad to "become an emerging middle-income country by 2030, whose economy is 
driven by diverse sustainable sources of growth and value-added activities". The National 
Development Plan (NDP 2017-2018) is the first operational planning paper of the Vision 2030. 
It replaces the NDP 2013-2015 and the successive national poverty reduction strategies (2003-
2006; 2008-2011), which give priority and special attention to agriculture and rural sector 
development, with a view to increasing food production and improving the incomes of rural 
communities. The Programme to Build Resilience to Food and Nutrition Insecurity in the Sahel 
(P2RS) was designed to sustainably increase agro-sylvo-pastoral and fisheries productivity in 
the Sahel, thus facilitating the achievement of Vision 2030. The three main components of 
P2RS are (i) rural infrastructure development; (ii) value chains and regional markets 
development; and (iii) project management and coordination. The initial P2RS will serve as 
the basis for GEF co-financing. The project is  in line not only with Chad's Country Strategy 
Paper (CSP) 2015-2020,  focused on "the development of infrastructure to promote robust and 
more diversified economic growth", but also  with the objectives of the Bank's Ten-Year 
Strategy since it will help Chad to move along a growth path that protects livelihoods, promotes 
greener growth and stimulates economic development. The project is also consistent with two 
of the Bank's five priorities, namely: “Feed Africa” and “Improve the quality of life for the 
people of Africa”. 

1.1.2 The GEF Project Identification Form (PIF) was approved in April 2015 and validated 
on 13 September 2017 by the Facility’s Chief Executive Officer and Chairperson for an amount 
of USD 5,329,452. The project aims to build the resilience of communities and households 
regularly affected by extreme weather events, through sustained growth in natural resource 
productivity, which will help to improve food security and nutrition in Kanem and Bahr el 
Ghazal provinces. The project will thus enable stakeholders to contribute to the restoration of 
biodiversity in fragile ecosystems. The GEF project is fully aligned with national strategies and 
P2RS, in that it aims to reduce and reverse trends in desertification, land degradation and 
biodiversity loss, which will improve productivity and food security while preserving the 
natural resources that support agro-ecological production. 

1.2 Rationale for the Bank’s Involvement 

1.2.1 Chad is increasingly confronted with problems of environmental degradation and 
extreme weather events, which are much more pronounced in such sectors as agriculture, 
livestock, fisheries and health. All policy papers (Vision 2030, National Development Plan, 
poverty reduction strategies) highlight the importance of protecting natural resources in a 
context of worsening weather phenomena in Chad, and the need to implement actions that 



 

2 

promote food security and build the adaptive capacities of affected populations. However,  
capacity to sustainably managenatural resources in the face of climate change is limited due to 
the shortage of human and financial resources in existing administrative entities (ministries, 
government agencies and local governments). 

1.2.2 The project is in line with the Bank's Ten-Year Strategy (2013-2022), the ultimate 
goal of which is sustainable inclusive growth. The focus is on protecting livelihoods, enhancing 
water, electricity and food security, promoting the sustainable use of natural resources, creating 
jobs, stimulating innovation and developing the economy. It will help to achieve the objectives 
of the Ten-Year Strategy by strengthening agro-sylvo-pastoral productivity and promoting 
integrated ecosystem management and inclusive growth. Undertaken in the Sahel, a region that 
attracts particular attention because of the difficult living conditions and vulnerability of its 
rural populations, but also because of its agricultural potential, the project will have an impact 
on agriculture and food security, thus helping to achieve two of the Bank’s “High 5s”. Given 
that the project also aims to promote innovative production techniques such as agroforestry and 
sylvo-pastoralism, activities that are mainly carried out by women, it will also help in the 
implementation of the Bank's Gender Strategy. Through its adaptation actions, the project will 
also help in the implementation of the Bank's 2016-2020 Climate Change Action Plan (CCAP), 
contributingapproximately 80.21% of the budget of components (1) and (2). 

1.2.3 As on 1 October 2018, the African Development Bank has 15 operations in Chad, with 
a net commitment of UA 214.23 million. Under the CSP 2016-2020, the Bank's support is 
based on two pillars: (i) infrastructure development to promote inclusive green growth; and (ii) 
promotion of good governance to increase the effectiveness of public actions and make the 
economic framework more attractive.  The Bank's strategic approach is to help create 
conditions conducive to more inclusive economic growth and to improve the country's 
integration into a sub-regional economy. Since the project's interventions aim to reduce land 
degradation and promote sustainable natural resource management, this will improve socio-
economic resilience while strengthening agro-pastoral and transhumance resources, which 
should be developed to enhance sustainability and diversify growth in the country. 

1.3 Donor Coordination  

1.3.1 A Technical and Financial Partners Committee, established in April 2011, is 
responsible for harmonizing donor interventions in Chad. The committee is composed of nine 
thematic groups and is chaired by France. The committee acts as a platform for dialogue, 
consultation and collaboration on development issues and on bilateral and multinational 
cooperation between Chad and its partners. A State/partners committee has also been set up to 
encourage dialogue with national authorities and improve aid management. A matrix of 
interventions for 2018-2021, which presents all partners’ planned interventions, has helped to 
better assess their areas of intervention and improve the division and coordination of work. Aid 
coordination has facilitated co-financing with technical and financial partners such as BADEA, 
the OPEC Fund, BDEAC, UNDP, EU and IsDB. 

2. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

2.1 Objectives of P2RS (Core Project) and GEF Project  

2.1.1 Objectives and Components of the Initial P2RS: The P2RS Chad project served as a 
basis for mobilizing co-financing for the GEF project. The P2RS programme aims to eliminate 
the structural causes of acute and chronic food and nutrition crises by helping vulnerable 
households to increase their production and income, secure access to basic social infrastructure 
and services, and increase their livelihood options. It was designed for a 20-year period in four 



 

3 

phases, the first of which (Project 1) will be implemented over a five-year period, from 2015 
to 2019. The overall cost of P2RS Project 1, which covers seven CILSS countries, amounts to 
USD 271.77 million funded by ADF-XIII in the form of grants and loans, representing 85% of 
the total cost of Project 1. The remaining 15% is funded by (i) the governments of the countries 
involved in this first phase (Burkina Faso, Chad, the Gambia, Mali, Mauritania, Niger and 
Senegal); (ii) the Permanent Interstate Committee for Drought Control in the Sahel (CILSS); 
and (iii) beneficiaries. 

2.1.2 In Chad, P2RS is under the technical supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture. The 
project strategy  is based on the development of agricultural and livestock farming products, 
the promotion of irrigation systems, accessibility to input markets and capacity-building for 
private and public institutions and communities in the agricultural sector. In that regard, the 
project is  constructing  pastoral and village water infrastructure in targeted rural districts and 
will help vulnerable households to not only improve their productivity through rational and 
sustainable management of natural resources but also to have better access to markets. A value 
chain approach based on growth sub-sectors is currently being used to ensure, maintain and 
increase access to and the marketing of agricultural products. The basic project will be 
implemented through three components, covering: 

(i)  Rural infrastructure development: This component aims to increase and improve 
agricultural production, processing and marketing infrastructure, which is 
indispensable for increasing the competitiveness of promising agricultural 
sectors and strengthening the resilience of agricultural operations in the Sahel. 
The main activities focus on the development of pastoral infrastructure and 
facilities, conservation, processing and marketing infrastructure, and basic 
social infrastructure. 

(ii)  Development of regional value chains and markets: This component aims to 
increase on a sustainable basis the production and productivity of the main agro-
sylvo-pastoral farming systems and to strengthen nutrition.  

(iii)  Programme management: The last component aims to define and deliver the 
institutional architecture for the management and coordination of all project-
related aspects, including procurement, monitoring and evaluation, and 
communication. 

2.1.3 A standing committee, composed of representatives of the central administration of 
the rural sector and all the actors involved in the development of the regions within the project 
area, is responsible for managing and making decisions concerning P2RS. 

2.1.4 Objectives and description of the GEF project: Entitled "Building Resilience for Food 
and Nutrition Security in Rural Communities in Chad", the GEF project will be based on the 
activities planned under the original project, to increase their impact on the environment and 
on the people. The activities are grouped into three components: (i) improvement of agro-
sylvo-pastoral productivity in drylands; (ii) promotion of integrated ecosystem management to 
enhance resilience and biodiversity; and (iii) knowledge management and monitoring and 
evaluation, in accordance with the GEF eligibility criteria for the areas of intervention under 
which this project is funded, namely land degradation, biodiversity and sustainable forest 
management. The components and activities are presented in Table 2.1 below. 

The GEF project’s main expected outcomes  are as follows: (i) improvement of rural 
communities’ agricultural production practices and the management of natural pasture to 
support food security and resilience; (ii) use by rural communities of improved agro-pastoral 



 

4 

technologies and their access to production assets for enhanced livelihoods and reduced 
vulnerability; (iii) improved  management of forests  and/or reforestation areas, to generate 
sustainable flows of ecosystem services; (iv) enhanced integrated landscape planning for 
habitat resilience and preservation; (v) enabling  natural environment is enhanced through 
mechanisms for the conservation of land, woody biomass and biodiversity, (vi) lessons learned 
are captured and knowledge is disseminated; and (vii) the project impact is monitored and 
evaluated. 

2.1.5. The first objective of the initial P2RS is to develop rural infrastructure, value chains 
and regional markets. The additional GEF project will build on the first objective (development 
of rural infrastructure) to undertake investments in irrigation schemes development,  establish 
cereal banks, agricultural input shops and livestock feed shops, and ensure sound land and soil 
management (soil conservation/regeneration techniques and sustainable forest management). 
The second objective of the initial P2RS (development of value chains and regional markets) 
will be strengthened in the additional GEF project through crop diversification, identification 
of resilient seed varieties and selection of other income-generating activities. The additional 
GEF project will therefore increase the attention given to sustainability and resilience in the 
initial P2RS. Its purpose is to enable stakeholders to restore and maintain the productivity of 
natural resources and biodiversity in fragile ecosystems, in order to ultimately improve their 
livelihoods and the natural resources on which they depend. This approach is based on the 
premise that agro-sylvo-pastoral systems are essential for improving food and nutrition 
security. 
 
2.2 Project Components 
 

Table 2.1: Project Components and Costs 
 

Component 1: Enhancing agro-sylvo-pastoral productivity in drylands  

Outcomes Outputs GEF 
financing  

Co-financing 

1.1. Improved 
agricultural, rangeland 
and pastoral 
production in support 
of food security and 
resilience 

1.1.1 Land degradation is reduced: 7,000 ha of 
degraded cropland in sustainable land 
management mode and 3,000 ha in rangeland 
pastoral management mode.     

764,974 2,575,000 

1.1.2 Five micro-projects on soil and associated 
crop management and restoration techniques are 
being implemented by farmers and herders 
1.1.3 The capacities of agro-sylvo-pastoral actors 
are improved: 11 000 land users trained in 
integrated management of natural resources and 
sustainable land and water management 
1.1.4 150 local employees trained in sustainable 
integrated natural resource management policies 
and practices through workshops 

1.2 Improved agro-
pastoral technologies 
and access to 
production assets for 
enhanced livelihoods 
and reduced 
vulnerability 

1.2.1 Investments in sustainable land and water 
management: rural hydro-agricultural 
infrastructure (30 ponds and boreholes; 20 rural 
water points; controlled irrigation system on 345 
ha on exposed sites) 

1,264,820 3,258,000 

1.2.2 Crop diversification and cultivation of 
appropriate species: resistant seed varieties 
identified, produced and distributed to 100 
households and farmers’ organizations (FOs) 
1.2.3 Six alternative income-generating activities 
(3 agricultural and 3 livestock activities) are 
identified with households 



 

5 

1.2.4 30 cereal banks, 20 input stores, and 30 
fodder banks are set up 

1.3 Improved forest 
management and/or 
reforestation generate 
sustainable flows of 
agro- and forest 
ecosystem services 

1.3.1 Increased land area in sustainable forest 
management mode: 5,000 ha of forests, 
community forests, nurseries, agroforestry, etc. 

495,206 1,167,000 

1.3.2 Training in sustainable forest management 
and cropland management at the local level 
(farmers, land user groups, local authorities, etc.) 

1.3.3 10 local producer groups (at least 5 women's 
groups) diversify their income through 
agroforestry and sylvo-pastoralism 

Component 2: Promoting integrated ecosystem management for enhanced resilience and biodiversity 
conservation 
Outcomes Outputs GEF 

financing 
Co-financing 

2.1 Enhanced 
participatory 
landscape planning for 
habitat preservation 
and resilience 

2.1.1 Demonstration of participatory land-use 
planning: Number of participatory restoration and 
land use /natural resource management plans 
developed with local authorities and 
communities. 

633,186 1,809,103 

2.1.2 Land-use plans for priority agro-
ecosystems: Number of local plans for land-use in 
targeted areas including both integrated natural 
resource management and conservation and 
sustainable use of biodiversity 
2.1.3 3 ha of agricultural land under effective 
land-use management with maintenance or 
increase of vegetation cover 

2.2 Enabling 
environment enhanced 
through land, 
biodiversity and 
woody biomass 
conservation 
mechanisms 

2.2.1 Increase in participatory land management 
systems includes sustainable land and forest 
management practices, resulting in improved soil 
conditions and carbon sequestration (avoided 
deforestation and land degradation) 

1,116,814 3,190,897 

2.2.2 Support mechanisms for sustainable land 
and forest management are established in larger 
areas, including the evaluation and 
implementation of benefit-sharing mechanisms to 
encourage sustainable land and forest 
management practices at the community level, 
and 300 improved stoves distributed 
22.2.3 Evaluation and establishment of a 
certification system for forest and agro-forestry 
products or management systems with 
implementation by a third party 
2.2.4 Evaluation of the feasibility of creating a 
protected area for Sahel Acacia forest stands or 
the floodable ecoregions of the Lake Chad 
savannah 

Component 3: Knowledge management and monitoring and evaluation  
Outcomes Outputs GEF 

financing 
Co-financing 

3.1 Lessons learned 
captured and 
knowledge 
disseminated 

3.1.1 Biodiversity and conservation needs in the 
Kanem and Bahr el Ghazal ecoregions and 
possible response mechanisms are evaluated 

462,514 1,210,000 

3.1.2 Framework developed for awareness and 
training campaigns to increase awareness and 
promote an environment for ecosystem 
management 



 

6 

2.3 Project Type 

2.3.1 The proposed project aims to consolidate and increase the benefits of the existing 
P2RS project. It will be financed from the resources of the GEF Special Fund and implemented 
as part of the P2RS-Chad project. 

2.4 Project Costs and Financing Arrangements  

2.4.1 The overall cost of the GEF project is estimated at USD 5.329 million (UA 3.807 
million) for a period of four (4) years. It will be financed by the GEF and will cover 100% of 
the total project cost, net of taxes, fees and/or charges in Chad. The cost allocations, as extracted 
from the letter of approval from the GEF Chief Executive Officer and Chairperson, are 
presented in the tables below. 

Table 2.2: Summary of project cost by component 

Component  USD UA 
Cost in: Local 
Currency 
(CFAF) 

A) Improving agro-sylvo-pastoral productivity on arid land 2,525,000 1,666,887 1,427,938,000 
B) Promoting integrated ecosystem management to improve 
resilience and biodiversity 1,750,000 1,155,268 

989,660,000 

C) Knowledge management and monitoring and evaluation 800,668 528,564 452 793,767 
Total base cost  5,075,668 3,350,719 2,870,391,767 
Project management cost (Project Management Unit) 253,784 167,536 143,519,928 
Total project cost 5,329,452 3,518,255 3,013,911,695 

 
Table 2.3: Sources of financing and contribution percentage (%) 

Source of Financing Amount (USD) and Contribution Percentage (%) 

 Foreign Exchange % 
Local 
Currency 

% Total % 

GEF Special Fund 5,329,452 100 - - 5,329,452 100 
Government - - - - - - 
Beneficiaries - - - - - - 
Overall  project cost 5,329,452 100 - - 5,329,452 100 

  

3.1.3 Innovative guides and tools on biodiversity 
conservation and integrated natural resource 
management practices in drylands are developed 
and disseminated 

3.2 Project impact 
monitored and 
evaluated  

3.2.1 Project monitoring system established, 
providing systematic information on progress 
made towards achieving the targeted outcomes 
and outputs 

338,154 885,800 

3.2.2 Monitoring and evaluation system for the 
analysis of land degradation trends and related 
socio-economic issues and impacts on 
biodiversity 
3.2.3 Mid-term and final evaluations are carried 
out 



 

7 

Table 2.4: Project cost – Expenditure categories 

Expenditure Category 
Amount Expected from the GEF Special Fund (USD) 
Cost in Foreign Exchange Cost in Local 

Currency 
Total 

A. Goods 
666,497 

- 
666,497 

B. Works 2,555,014 - 2,555,014 
C. Services 1,048,862 - 1,048,862 
D. Operating costs 805,295 - 805,295 
E. Retained 253,784 - 253,784 
Overall  project cost 5,329,452  5, 329,452 

 
Table 2.5: Expenditure Schedule by Component (USD)  

Component Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Total 
1. Improving agro-sylvo 
pastoral productivity on 
dryland 

757,500 883,750 631,250 252,500 2,525,000 

2. Promoting integrated 
ecosystem management to 
strengthen resilience and 
biodiversity 

525,000 612,500 437,500 175,000 1,750,000 

Knowledge management and 
monitoring and evaluation 

240,200 280,234 200,167 80,067 800,668 

Total base cost  1, 522,700 1,776,484 1,268,917 507,567 5,075,668 
Retained amount 76,135 88,824 63,446 25,378 253,784 
Overall project cost  1,598,835 1,865,308 1,332,363 532,945 5,329,452 

2.4.2 Experiences and lessons learned by the Bank: The AfDB has been active in the Sahel 
for many years, mainly in the following areas: water management and control, development of 
agriculture, livestock farming, fisheries, and natural resource management. Its experience 
shows that investing in the medium and long terms in the resilience of rural households is 
essential for helping them to cope with shocks (famine, drought, conflict, etc.) and for reducing 
their vulnerability. As at 1 October 2018, the Bank's net commitments in Chad for active 
operations amounted to UA 214.23 million. After a portfolio review conducted in 2013, key 
lessons were learned from previous CSPs and ongoing rural development initiatives. These 
include: the need for greater selectivity in terms of country allocation, division of labour and 
implementation capacity; the need for greater economic integration, stronger partnerships and 
co-financing (to increase the economic and social impact of interventions); the need to 
consolidate governance gains and build Chad's institutional capacities; and the need to promote 
the role of the private sector, particularly in the agricultural sector. 

2.5 Project Impact Area  

2.5.1 The proposed project will be implemented in the Sahel regions of Kanem and Bahr el 
Ghazal, where food insecurity is most acute in Chad, mainly due to difficult agro-ecological 
conditions and high malnutrition rates. The project beneficiaries will be smallholder farmers 
engaged in subsistence agriculture and livestock farming on marginal land, and who derive 
their income from agriculture, stock-breeding or the gathering of wood products. The project 
will specifically target 11,000 land operators who will receive training in integrated natural 
resource management (INRM) and sustainable land and water management (SLWM) with 
demonstrations. It will also train 150 local employees in sustainable INRM policies and 
practices, distribute resilient seed varieties to 100 households, and assist 10 local producer 
groups (including at least five women's groups) to diversify their incomes through agroforestry 
and sylvo-pastoral activities. As the land on which they depend is characterized by sand dunes 
and low-productivity wadis, the beneficiaries live on non-irrigated agriculture. The project will 



 

8 

address this issue by promoting sustainable land management, site-specific soil conservation 
systems and mixed cropping systems, the construction of rural hydro-agricultural 
infrastructure, and crop diversification with the cultivation of appropriate species. Low 
agricultural productivity, lack of income opportunities and lack of rural socio-economic 
infrastructure are the main causes of poverty in these areas. Poverty and insecurity are further 
exacerbated by the weakness of community-based organizations, coupled with inefficient 
service delivery, lack of resources (especially land in the wadis) and weak decision-making 
power and scarcity of information. 
 
2.6. Participatory Approach for Project Identification, Design and Implementation 
 
2.6.1 During the identification of the core programme, extensive consultations were held, 
and a participatory approach was adopted for the development of the programme. During the 
preparation and appraisal phases, discussions and a workshop were held with key institutions 
and stakeholders, including national institutions responsible for agriculture, fisheries, 
livestock, environment, health and water (20 September 2016 to 5 October 2016). The 
consultative process was extended to civil society (NGOs, including women's organizations, 
farmers' organizations, etc.). Meetings were held with communities, key actors in production 
systems, and administrative and local authorities, which provided an opportunity not only to 
share information on the project and collect data on impact areas, but also to discuss planned 
activities. Women's organizations were involved in these meetings to better understand the 
difficulties they face and better capture their challenges and needs. These elements were fully 
reflected in the design of the intervention and this participatory approach will be maintained 
during the project implementation. Various stakeholders will also be involved in the 
development of the envisaged monitoring and evaluation system to ensure smooth 
implementation and achievement of goals. 

2.7 Consideration of Bank Group’s Experience and Lessons Learned in Project 
 Design 

2.7.1 The Bank has extensive experience in resilience-building programmes in the Sahel 
region. For instance, it implemented a USD 4 billion (2014) grant operation aimed at promoting 
stability and economic growth in the region. In addition, the Bank, through the African Water 
Facility (AWF) established in 2006, has funded 9 national and 11 multinational projects 
focusing on capacity-building for integrated water resources management, and established 
appropriate frameworks for collaborative water management, for example for Lake Chad, 
among other interventions. Several statements have been made on the issue of water security 
in the Sahel, reiterated as a priority for the Bank. The lessons learned from these previous Bank 
interventions, as well as the P2RS design, and the actions implemented during the design of 
the proposed project, are presented below in table form: 
 
  



 

9 

No. Lessons Learned Consideration in Project Design 
1. Institutional and organizational 

weaknesses 
The project is based on existing structures, including 
P2RS, and on national project implementation bodies, 
which allows for smooth implementation. 

2 Importance of taking into account 
conflicts between farmers and herders 

Mediation efforts and specific activities that take into 
account their realities and needs, which are distinct yet 
are closely linked 

3 Community conflicts around the project Establishment of consultation mechanisms and 
organization of awareness-raising activities, including a 
communication plan and workshops, and development of 
a capacity-building and training programme 

4 Weakness of the management and 
evaluation system that undermines the 
assessment of progress in 
implementation  

Inclusion in the project design of participatory and 
regular monitoring and evaluation activities with 
sufficient financial allocation 

 
2.8 Key Performance Indicators  
 
2.8.1. The impact, outcome and output indicators are those mentioned in the logical 
framework, which will be measured using the existing monitoring and evaluation (M&E) 
system developed under P2RS. The impact indicator, which will serve as a gauge for the 
development objective, is the improvement of food security and nutrition following the 
adoption of sustainable and resilient agro-sylvo-pastoral systems in the Sahelian regions of 
Chad. Monitoring tools reflecting the multifocal nature of the project will also be developed 
for the GEF project activities, in accordance with the requirements of this institution. 

3. PROJECT FEASIBILITY  

3.1 Economic and Financial Performance  

3.1.1 Economic and financial analyses carried out were based on the premise that incentive 
measures, sustainability considerations and an enabling environment are essential for the 
success of any intervention, all of which conditions the P2RS and the proposed project plan to 
fulfil. The measures envisaged in this regard are: (i) a multi-stakeholder participatory process, 
the creation of three nurseries, the construction of hydro-agricultural infrastructure, the 
establishment of land-use plans and the provision of training in sustainable land and water 
management; (ii) the establishment of pilot areas, training of beneficiaries, promotion and use 
of improved stoves, and the adoption of a forest certification system to encourage the 
sustainable use of land and forests; (iii) the development of grazing plans, the reseeding of 
grazing land, the adoption of species testing based on extension services to ensure the 
availability of healthy animals; (iv) fencing to prevent crop destruction, seed trials, extension 
services and cereal banks to improve crop productivity; (v) pilot/learning sites for training 
activities to encourage soil conservation; and (vi) identification, training and prioritization of 
IGAs to improve livelihoods, mainly for women and young people. 

3.1.2 The implementation of the GEF Project in parallel with the core project (P2RS) is 
expected to build food security and improve nutrition in the project areas. The adoption of 
sustainable and resilient agro-sylvo-pastoral systems will improve agricultural production and 
enhance the availability of fodder resources for livestock. Similarly, integrated space 
management will increase land availability for crops and restore soil condition. The 
dissemination and use of improved stoves, the promotion of related IGAs will reduce the 
pressure on wooded areas and curb deforestation and land degradation. The implementation of 
project activities focused on building resilience and food security will amplify the economic 
benefits of the project, as well as the positive impacts on living conditions and the quality of 
life.  



 

10 

3.1.3 A number of socio-economic benefits should stem from the project, including: (i) 
greater food and nutrition security resulting from the overall increase in agricultural and 
livestock products; (ii) reduced vulnerability due to crop diversification and the cultivat ion of 
resistant seed varieties; (iii) constant flows of agricultural and forest ecosystem services with 
improved habitat resilience and preservation; (iv) the introduction of a sustainable forest and 
IGA management certification system, which will further stabilize incomes; and (v) increased 
awareness and a more favourable environment for managing the ecosystem and combating 
climate change. 

3.2 Environmental and Social Impacts  

3.2.1 Environment: P2RS, the core project, is classified in Environmental Category 2 and 
has undergone Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA), in accordance with the relevant 
procedures of the Bank, as well as its policy and regulatory framework. The purpose of the 
SEA is to integrate environmental, socio-economic and institutional concerns into the design 
and implementation of P2RS. For instance, P2RS-funded infrastructure investments will have 
short-term negative environmental impacts specific to the area. The assessment led to the 
development of an Environmental and Social Management Framework Plan (ESMFP) 
outlining the various mitigation and enhancement measures. The GEF Project specifically aims 
to increase the attention devoted to environmental protection in the core project, which should 
produce a generally positive environmental impact. 

Assessment of environmental conditions during the field visits confirmed that the proposed 
project will have positive impacts. A number of negative environmental impacts are 
foreseeable in the construction and works implementation phases, but they will be limited, 
reversible and controllable, subject to monitoring and the implementation of appropriate 
mitigation measures. These measures will comprise the preparation and validation of a sub-
project selection procedure that is consistent with Chad's regulations, the establishment and 
monitoring of land-use plans in each council or municipality within the project impact area, 
the development of environmental and social project management guides, and the promotion 
of best practices in agriculture and natural resource management. 

3.2.2 Climate Change 

To combat climate change, Chad is committed to reducing its greenhouse gas emissions 
unconditionally by18.2% and conditionally by 71% by 2030, through adaptation and mitigation 
measures. Climate change adaptation is a major concern for the country, which has developed 
its National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA), among other documents, in an effort 
to reduce its climate vulnerability. 

The GEF Project is committed to promoting climate resilience by improving food and nutrition 
security. Livelihoods will be diversified through the introduction of mixed cropping systems, 
crop diversification, agroforestry and the identification of alternative activities that would 
generate incomes while at the same time contributing to climate change adaptation. The project 
will support resilience by promoting (i) sustainable agriculture and livestock production, 
including sustainable management of grazing areas; and (ii) better planning of landscape 
development to ensure the resilience of communities and ecosystems. To build the capacity of 
beneficiaries, the project will support the setting up of micro-projects to demonstrate 
appropriate soil conservation techniques, train local staff in sustainable integrated natural 
resource management (INRM), provide training in sustainable forest management and arable 
land management, and a demonstration of participatory land-use planning to better adapt to 
climate change and reduce climate vulnerability. The project will also contribute to mitigation 
actions through reforestation and the establishment of agro-forestry plantations. It will also 



 

11 

foster the implementation of the Bank's 2016-2020 Climate Change Action Plan (PACC2) by 
mobilizing external climate financing. 

3.2.3 Gender: Chad is ranked 150th out of 187 countries on the Gender Parity Index. While 
discrimination against women is clearly prohibited, the principle of equality is undermined by 
resistance and the existence of de facto inequalities between men and women. Barriers rooted 
in traditional practices favour men, thereby hindering the internalization and appropriation of 
laws. The proposed project will mainstream gender-related issues by specifically targeting the 
implementation of activities usually dominated by women, and for which they have recognized 
know-how (trade, market gardening, rice cultivation, small livestock breeding, traditional 
poultry farming, processing, marketing, etc.) and from which they can derive an income. At 
least five women's organizations will benefit from income diversification assistance through 
agroforestry and sylvo-pastoral activities. The project will also have to ensure that women have 
access to project resources by identifying other income-generating activities to be implemented 
in association with households, and that they are fairly represented in project management and 
executing bodies. 
 
3.2.4 Social: A number of socio-economic impacts are envisaged, including: (i) reduced 
vulnerability to climate and other shocks; (ii) diversification of activities, income generation 
and job creation; (iii) better access to socio-economic services; and (iv) food production 
security. The increased resilience of the population brought about by the new infrastructure 
and techniques will improve the socio-economic situation of the beneficiaries, mainly women. 
Improving the delivery of ecosystem goods and services and building resilience will help 
ensure overall food and nutrition security. 

3.2.5 Inclusive green growth: Within a context of diversified, pro-poor growth in a healthy 
environment that preserves natural resources, the project will promote inclusive growth by 
equitably allocating resources to activities, which will benefit all participating communities at 
all levels. The project will help men, women and young people in rural areas to improve dryland 
productivity on the basis of a sustainable and environmentally-friendly agro-ecological model. 
Improved agro-pastoral techniques, such as rural hydro-agricultural infrastructure and grain 
banks, will also provide opportunities for rural men, women and youth to participate in non-
agricultural activities, thereby improving their livelihoods and reducing vulnerability. 

3.2.6 Involuntary Resettlement: The project activities will not entail any involuntary 
resettlement and land acquisition since they will be implemented within the existing P2RS 
areas in the Kanem and Bahr el Ghazal regions. 

3.3 Project Rationale 

3.3.1 Given the extent of poverty in Chad, there is a tendency to forget that improving the 
exploitation of natural resources can enable the country to use the huge assets at its disposal to 
bring sustainable solutions to the recurrent food and nutrition insecurity that prevails in its 
territory and to the problem of environmental degradation. While the unavailability of arable 
land is an obstacle, it may be resolved by investing in integrated natural resource management 
and strategic actions for resilience. 

3.3.2 The funding being sought is supposed to benefit the inhabitants of the Kanem and 
Bahr el Ghazal regions. The project will have positive socio-economic impacts as well as 
generate many benefits for the biophysical and human environment. The GEF funding will 
contribute to rebuilding Chad's fragile ecosystems by enabling local communities and 
institutions to rehabilitate degraded lands and forests and preserve biodiversity, while building 
resilience and ensuring food and nutrition security.  



 

12 

3.4 Project Objectives and Description 

3.4.1 P2RS, the core project, aims to increase on a sustainable basis agro-sylvo-pastoral and 
fisheries productivity in the Sahel. The GEF project strengthens this core component by adding 
to it substantial environmental benefits and a sustainability dimension. 

The expected outcomes of the financing may be outlined as follows:  

x Improved agricultural, rangeland and pasture production in support of security 
and resilience; 

x Improved agro-pastoral technologies and access to production assets for 
enhanced livelihoods and reduced vulnerability; 

x Improved forest management and/or reforestation to generate sustainable flows 
of agro – and forest ecosystem services; 

x Enhanced integrated landscape planning for habitat resilience and preservation; 

x Enhanced enabling environment through mechanisms for the conservation of 
woody biomass and biodiversity; 

x Lesson learned captured and knowledge disseminated; and 

x  Project impact monitoring and evaluated.    

3.4.2 This multi-focal project contributes directly to GEF Objective LD-1: Maintain or 
improve flow of agroecosystem services to sustain food production and livelihoods. As part of 
this objective, the project contributes to GEF Outcome 1.1 (Improved agricultural, rangeland 
and pasture production in support of security and resilience), Output 1.2 (Improved agro-
pastoral technologies and access to production assets for enhanced livelihoods and reduced 
vulnerability) and Output 1.3 (Improved forest management and/or reforestation generate 
sustainable flows of agro – and forest ecosystem services).   

3.4.3 It also contributes to GEF Objective LD-3 which seeks to: reduce pressures on natural 
resources from competing land uses in the wider landscape, through Outcome 2.1 (Enhanced 
integrated landscape planning for habitat resilience and preservation). 

3.4.4 Under GEF Objective LD-4 (“biodiversity” focal area), which deals with the 
conservation of biodiversity and its sustainable use in marine and terrestrial areas and in sectors 
of economic activity, the project will manage the human-biodiversity interface through 
Outcome 2.2 (Enhanced enabling environment through mechanisms for the conservation of 
land, woody biomass and biodiversity).   

3.4.5 The fourth GEF objective is SFM-2: Enhance forest management: Maintain flows of 
forest ecosystem services and improve resilience to climate change through sustainable forest 
management by means of Outcome 1.3 (Improved forest management and/or reforestation to 
generate sustainable flows of agro – and forest ecosystem services).  
  



 

13 

4.  IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1 Implementation Arrangements  

4.1.1 The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) that is currently executing the P2RS Project 
will be the same for the proposed project, and no other one will be set up. The PIU will also be 
responsible for implementing the three components of the GEF additional project.  

Due to the interdisciplinary and inter-institutional nature of the project, its Implementation Unit 
will comprise representatives of institutions implementing related agreements, such as those 
involved in rural development support, agricultural production, pastoral systems, food and 
nutrition techniques, and forestry and agricultural research. Representatives of leading 
government institutions in the sectors of agriculture, food security, water, livestock, 
infrastructure, etc., will also be involved.   

4.2 Procurement Procedure 

4.2.1 All procurements of goods, works and consultancy services financed by the Bank's 
resources shall be made in accordance with the Procurement Policy for Operations financed by 
the Bank Group ("Procurement Policy" of AfDB "), October 2015 edition and in accordance 
with the provisions mentioned in the Financing Agreement. In accordance with this policy and 
following the various evaluations conducted, it was agreed that: (a) all the following Goods 
and Works acquisitions: (i) cooking stoves, (ii) goods for micro-projects, (iii) mobiles materials 
and, work on (i) the development of small irrigated areas and ponds, (ii) the construction of 
water points, (ii) the construction of cereal banks, input shops, shops for animal feeding;(ii) the 
rehabilitation of the program’s headquarters will be in accordance with the country's 
procurement system ("National System") embodied by Decree No. 2417 / PR / PM / 2015 of 
December 17th, 2015 on the Public Procurement Code (PPC); (b) the following acquisitions 
(i) all selections of consultants; (ii) community-based contracts; and (iii) the acquisition of the 
Plan Vivo system and standard used for certification of forest products and agroforestry will 
be in accordance with the Bank's procurement system ("System of Procurement" of AfDB ").  

4.2.2 The use of the National System improves efficiency through, inter alia, the following 
actions: (i) better ownership of the procurement system to be used by the executing agency; 
(ii) a saving of time with the absence of a second control (after that of the national entities) that 
represents, the a priori review of the Bank. However, the Bank reserves the right to ask the 
borrower to return to the use of the Bank System if: (a) the legal framework for Chadian public 
procurement changes to evolve into a system unsatisfactory for the Bank; (b) the provisions in 
force were not complied with by the executing agency or (c) the appropriate risk mitigation 
measures included in the Risk Assessment Action Plan were not complied with. . It is indicated 
that the procurements funded by the GEF are subject to respect for the rule of origin. A waiver 
will be asked to have the same rules for the procurements funded by the GEF and the 
procurements funded by the ADF grant already approved. 

4.2.3 Procurement Risk and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): In order to take into account the 
specificities of the project, the Bank assessed: (i) risks at the national, sectoral and project 
levels; and (ii) the capacities of the implementing agencies. The results of these evaluations 
concluded at a Moderate risk level for contracting and determined, subject to the application 
of proposed mitigation measures, the group of acquisitions to be concluded under the Bank's 
system and those acquisitions likely to be implemented, without major risk, according to the 
National System. 
 
  



 

14 

4.3 Financial Management and Disbursement Procedures  

4.3.1 Financial Management: This GEF funding integrates the P2RS objectives with more 
substantial environmental benefits and a sustainability dimension. The P2RS Management Unit 
(PMU), set up within the Ministry of Agriculture, will therefore be responsible for 
implementing these activities as well as financial management. It has its own accounting and 
financial administrative procedures manual (it will be updated accordingly). The financial 
management system is composed of an Administrative and Financial Manager (AFM) and an 
Accountant. TOMPRO multi-project accounting software is operational and in use. This 
software allows i) to keep the accounts of several projects at once, ii) to generate the main 
accounting sheets and journal, general ledger and account balance and iii) to prepare the 
consolidated and specific financial statements. The RAF and the Accountant are trained on its 
use. The interim and annual reports produced for the P2RS are satisfactory and show that they 
effectively control the use of the software. The accounting system in place is therefore adequate 
and can produce accurate and reliable information. The GEF complementary financing accounts 
will be integrated into the P2RS accounts with the possibility of disaggregation of expenditures 
by source of financing. This allows for accurate and specific financial information on GEF 
funding. 
 
4.3.2 Audit: The Audit of Accounts, relating to activities financed from GEF resources, will 
be carried out as part of the audit of the P2RS annual accounts. Thus, the consolidated and 
specific accounts for all financings will be audited each year by the same independent external 
audit firm, meeting the required criteria and in accordance with the terms of reference (TOR) 
acceptable to the Bank. The audit report must reach the Bank no later than six months after the 
close of the financial year concerned.  

4.3.3 Disbursement procedure: The project will use the Bank's disbursement methods, 
namely: (i) direct payment, (ii) special account (SA), and (iii) reimbursement methods, in 
accordance with the rules and procedures set out in the Disbursement Handbook. A separate 
foreign exchange special account will be opened for the project with the Central Bank of Chad 
and a local currency account with the same bank, which will be used by the Project 
Implementation Unit to finance operating and other recurrent costs, eligible under the project. 
To facilitate the payment of eligible operating costs, a separate local project sub-account, to be 
managed by the Ministry of Agriculture through the Project Implementation Unit, will be 
opened at a commercial bank acceptable to the Bank, in accordance with existing rules and 
regulations. The management of bank accounts, including the payment of eligible expenses, the 
preparation of requests for the withdrawal of funds from the special account (SA) and the 
documentation of all direct payments, will be subject to the existing procedures within the 
executing body (EB), and placed under the general responsibility of the Director-General of the 
Ministry in charge of Agriculture. The Bank will issue a Disbursement Letter, the content of 
which will be reviewed and agreed upon during the negotiations. 

4.4 Monitoring 

4.4.1 The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of progress towards achieving project 
outcomes and objectives will be conducted on the basis of the goal and outcome indicators 
identified in the results framework and annual work and budget plans of the project. M&E 
activities will be performed in line with M&E policies and guidelines of the Bank and GEF. 
The day-to-day monitoring of project implementation will be the responsibility of the Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU) and will include the preparation and implementation of annual 
work plans and budgets, and the drafting semi-annual progress reports (SAPRs) of the project.  



 

15 

4.4.2 Specific reports that should be prepared as part of the monitoring and evaluation 
programme are: the project launch report, the annual work plan and budget, project progress 
reports; the annual project implementation review, technical reports, co-financing reports, and 
a completion report. In addition, GEF monitoring tools for the land degradation (LD), 
biodiversity (BD) and sustainable forest management (SFM) focus areas will be updated and 
supplemented by the project team at the mid-term and the final evaluations. 

It is extremely important for the project to use internationally recognized results-based 
monitoring and evaluation frameworks throughout the project implementation process. 
Responsibility for monitoring will rest with the Ministry of Agriculture, which will be 
supported by the Ministry of the Environment. This work will be done in collaboration with 
the Bank and the project team. The information collected through M&E will be taken into 
account in the activities to help to ensure knowledge management, identify and share best 
practices, identify problems and constraints, and promote sustained improvement of the project 
and its contribution to the implementation of national and regional strategies on food security 
and rural development.   

4.4.3 The M&E mechanism will be fine-tuned to ensure that it mainstreams gender issues, 
with special emphasis on the definition of specific parameters for women and young people. 
The parameters to be monitored and evaluated will include, for example, the level of women's 
involvement in decision-making bodies, and the number of young people trained. 
 

Schedule Milestone Quarter Monitoring Process (Feedback Loop) 
Year 1 (2018) Annual work plans and 

budgets (AWPB) 
Semi-annual progress reports 
(SAPR) 

Q1 
 
Q3 

National project coordinator and external audit firm 
(Annually) 
 

Year 2 (2019) Annual work plans and 
budgets (AWPB) 
Semi-annual progress reports 
(SAPR) 
Mid-term review  

Q1 
 
Q3 
 
Q4 

National project coordinator and external audit firm 
(Annually) 
 
Communities, beneficiaries, Ministry of Environment and 
Agriculture, and consultant 

Year 3 (2020) Annual work plans and 
budgets (AWPBs) 
Semi-annual progress reports 
(SAPR) 

Q1 
 
Q3 

National project coordinator and external audit firm 
(Annually) 
 

Year 4 (2021) Annual work plans and 
budgets (AWPB) 
Semi-annual progress reports 
(SAPR) 
Project completion report  

Q1 
 
Q3 
 
Q4 

National project coordinator and external audit firm 
(Annually) 
 
Communities, beneficiaries, Ministry of Environment and 
Agriculture, and consultant 

 
 

4.5 Governance 

4.5.1 In Chad, governance is still a cause for concern in the area of public finance 
management, including public procurement. In addition to using the direct agreement method, 
the procurement process is extremely slow. The existing institutional and organizational 
framework does not function properly due partly to non-compliance with applicable rules and 
procedures and partly to the weak human resource capacity of the entities in charge of this 
process.  

To address these issues, supervision missions, financial and procurement audits will be 
conducted to ensure that the services provided and the works performed are consistent with the 
disbursements made. 



 

16 

4.5.2 Mitigation measures provided to address these issues include: (i) the development of 
a tailored-made financial management procedures manual that will provided the  staff of the 
Project Implementation Unit with programme implementation guidelines; (ii) the use of 
MoFL's internal audit services to conduct project pre-audits; and (iii) the acquisition of serial 
accounting software to capture and process transactions and to interface with IFMIS so as to 
facilitate timely financial reporting, considering the IFMIS-related operational problems; and 
(iv) the implementation of a system of timely submission of the interim quarterly progress 
report (IQPR). 

4.6 Sustainability 

4.6.1 Carrying out activities and building infrastructure that are economically, financially 
and technically viable will enhance the sustainability of project interventions. Sustainability 
factors include: proper sizing and targeting of infrastructure, stakeholder participation and 
ownership (men and women), and beneficiary involvement at all stages of planning and 
implementation, the quality of facilities and equipment, and viable production activities adapted 
to the agro-ecological zone. To ensure post-project sustainability, preference will be given, in 
the conduct of each operation, to reliable and simple but resilient mechanisms, which will 
enhance the scope and coherence of the actions implemented.  

4.6.2 The project aims to build resilience by improving food security and nutrition through 
the enhancement of agro-sylvo-pastoral productivity in drylands. Training in integrated natural 
resource management (INRM), sustainable land and water management (SLWM) and the 
proposed awareness campaigns will provide tools and approaches for maintaining commitment 
and sustainability after the project completion. All stakeholders will be involved in the 
implementation of project activities, including beneficiary communities, to ensure ownership 
and commitment, as well as the viability of improved agro-sylvo-pastoral production 
infrastructure. The project will strengthen the principles of sustainability which lay emphasis 
on the use of a participatory approach during project preparation. This is important as it helps 
to ensure the relevance of the investments and to build institutional capacity at the community 
level in order to guarantee the sustainability of planned activities. The sustainability will be 
achieved by strengthening and consolidating the institutional framework using existing national 
systems. 

4.6.3 The project will lay a great emphasis on building the capacity of beneficiaries and 
strengthening their institutions, such as interest groups, associations or cooperatives. 
Beneficiaries will be mobilized, organized into viable autonomous entities, trained and 
empowered, so they may view their activities as a business rather than a means of survival. 
Awareness and training on gender mainstreaming at the community and local government 
levels will ensure that women and young people continue to participate in and benefit equitably 
from all project activities.    

4.7 Risk Management 

Description Classification Mitigation Measures  

Climate risks, exemplified by the 
recurrent droughts and floods, rainfall 
deficits, extreme heat, which expose the  
country’s natural resources to severe 
degradation. Indicators of this situation 
include land degradation, desertification, 
deterioration of vegetation cover, 
increasingly frequent conflicts between 
farmers and herders, the decimation of 
wildlife, the drying up of Lake Chad and 

2 (moderate) The project’s special emphasis on resilience, for 
example, agricultural practices, crop diversification, 
heat-resistant species, and water management. This will 
gradually reduce the impacts of climate variability. The 
planned project activities will help rural communities to 
better adapt to shocks and improve resilience. 



 

17 

Description Classification Mitigation Measures  

food insecurity. The sectors most 
severely affected by climate risks are 
agriculture, livestock, fisheries, health 
and housing.  
Institutional and organizational 
weaknesses: Exemplified  by 
insufficient coordination between 
governance structures at national, local 
and community levels   

2 (moderate) Strengthen existing structures, particularly those of 
CILSS and national project executing bodies, encourage 
cooperation and communication between the structures 
to allow smooth implementation of the project. 

Agriculture, livestock and fisheries - 
Declining productivity in these sectors 
may impoverish the people and expose 
them to food insecurity. In the 
agricultural sector, for example, fallow-
free cultivation, poor agricultural and 
land-use practices have reduced soil 
fertility, decreased crop yields and led to 
wind/soil erosion. Fishing, on the other 
hand, is threatened by substantial 
desiccation of important water resources, 
attributed to frequent recurring droughts, 
reduced vegetation around watercourses, 
deforestation and overgrazing.  

2 (moderate) Improved crop varieties and hardy livestock, control of 
livestock population levels to ensure that they match the 
carrying capacity; training in improved land-use 
practices; diversification of livelihoods and construction 
of transport infrastructure. 

Conflicts between farmers and 
herders: The project area has been 
identified as a transhumance area, 
although agriculture continues to be 
practised in the wadis. The source of the 
conflict lies mainly in the increasingly 
fierce competition for land and natural 
resources (pasture and water), due to the 
increased frequency of droughts and 
rainfall deficits.  

2 (moderate) Mediation efforts, activities that are tailored to the 
requirements of each group, bearing in mind their 
distinct but closely related realities and needs 
 
 

Conflicts between the project and the 
communities: Poverty and insecurity are 
exacerbated by weak community 
organization, coupled with inefficient 
service delivery, lack of resources and 
weak decision-making powers and 
information facilities. 
 

2 (moderate) Establishment of broad-based consultation mechanisms 
and awareness programmes, including a communication 
plan, development of capacity building/training 
programmes and organization of workshops. 

Environmental impacts - natural 
resources and biodiversity. The P2RS 1 
core project is classified in 
Environmental Category 2 (AfDB 
Environmental and Social Safeguards). 
 

1 (low) Project activities may have negative impacts ranging 
from low to moderate, which should be outweighed by 
the overall environmental benefits  
 
Compliance with Chadian regulations, preparation and 
monitoring of land-use plans, preparation of sub-project 
ESMPs, promotion of agricultural and natural resource 
management best practices 

Health, Nutrition and Hygiene - Risk of 
epidemics, malnutrition and poor hygiene 

2 (moderate) Early warning mechanisms, hygiene programmes, 
improved nutrition programmes, improved and 
increased livelihoods and rural communities assets 

Energy and transportation 
infrastructure facilities - These will 
include irrigation infrastructure, 
boreholes and socio-economic 
infrastructure. These infrastructure 
facilities should minimize the effects of 
extreme droughts and floods  

2 (moderate) Development of climate-resilient energy sources, 
diversification of energy sources, construction of 
climate-resilient infrastructure  

4.8 Knowledge Building  

4.8.1 The project should generate substantial knowledge that will add value to the overall 
design and management of future similar interventions. The lessons and experiences will be 
shared within the Bank and other institutions interested in implementing similar projects, 



 

18 

through project progress reports, audit reports, the mid-term review report and the completion 
report, especially as they will be part of the knowledge transfer and dissemination tools. The 
project will promote community participation and management of agro-sylvo-pastoral 
infrastructure. It will work closely with women's organizations and key stakeholders to ensure 
the sharing of information and learning materials dealing with empowering women and young 
people to build resilience for food and nutrition security. The project will also focus on building 
the capacity of key staff, and the beneficiaries will be fully involved in the implementation of 
planned activities. Exchanges with project beneficiaries will also be an opportunity to acquire 
the valuable knowledge that will be shared. The project will also collaborate with local NGOs 
and community-based organisations (CBOs) to increase their capacity and knowledge so that 
they may be able to continue to carry out sustainable activities for the promotion of food and 
nutrition security. Knowledge-building information will be systematically collected and 
documented in monitoring/evaluation and supervision reports, as well as in the periodic reports 
that will be shared at the Bank. 
 
5. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY  

5.1 Legal Instruments 

5.1.1 The funding instrument will be a GEF grant agreement between the Republic of Chad 
and the AfDB to finance the costs of the Resilience Building Project for Food Security and 
Nutrition in Rural Communities in Chad. 

5.2 Conditions Associated with Bank Intervention  

5.2.1 Conditions precedent to the entry into force of the GEF grant: The GEF grant 
agreement will enter into force on the date of its signature by both parties. 

5.2.2 Commitment to disbursement of subsequent tranches of the GEF grant: In addition to 
the conditions relating to the grant effectiveness, the disbursement of the first tranche of the 
grant resources will be subject to the fulfilment of the following condition:  

 (i) Recruitment of an Environmental Expert in the Project Implementation Unit and 
whose qualifications and terms of reference must have been deemed acceptable 
by the Bank. 

5.2.3 Undertakings: 

 (i) Each year, to provide a copy of the  annual progress report for the fiscal year 
that ends on 30 June, accompanied by an annual work plan at the latest 3 months 
after the end of the relevant fiscal year; 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

5.3.1 The activities planned to be financed with the GEF resources are in line with all 
applicable Bank and GEF policies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 

19 

6. RECOMMENDATION 

6.1 Management recommends to the Board of Directors: 

- to grant the Republic of Chad, under the resources of the GEF, an amount of 5 329 452 
United States dollars for the financing of the project to Build Resilience for Food Security and 
Nutrition in Chad’s Rural Communities, subject to the conditions set out in this report; 
 
- to decide that the acquisitions of goods, works and services which are financed under 
the resources of the GEF grant will be open to all countries, including those which are not ADB 
States Members. 





































AFRICAN  DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CONGO 

 

INTEGRATED AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS 

DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (PRODIVAC) 

 

 

 

 

 


November 2019 

 

 

 


  

Project Information Sheet 

 

Client Information 

 

Borrower       : Republic of Congo 

Executing Agency      : Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries Rural  

    Development 

 

Financing Plan 

 

Source 

 

Amount 

 

Instrument 

 

AfDB 

 

EUR 73.2 million 

 

AfDB loan 

Government EUR 7.3 million  

Beneficiaries EUR 4.9 million  

TOTAL COST EUR 85.4 million  

 

 

Key AfDB Financing Information 

 
 

ADF Loan currency Euro 

Interest Type Floating 

Interest rate margin 60 pb + financing margin of the Bank  

NPV amount:  

ERR (baseline scenario) 

NPV 

20.1% 

EUR 104.4 million 
 

 

Timeframe – Main Milestones (projected) 

  

Project approval 21 November 2019 

Signature of the Agreement 21 February 2020² 

First disbursement 21 May 2020 

Completion End May 2025 

Last disbursement End December 2025 

Final Repayment Mid-August 2045 



ii 

 

Project Summary 

1. The Integrated Agricultural Value Chains Development Project in Congo 
(PRODIVAC) will primarily focus on the corridors of the major commercial centres of 

Brazzaville and Pointe Noire, and the farming basins in the departments of Plateaux, Pool, 

Bouenza, Cuvette and, Niari. PRODIVAC is consistent with the National Development Plan 

(PND 2018-2022) drawn up by the Government of Congo and which targets agriculture as one 

of the main pillars of diversification, growth, competitiveness, sustainable job creation and 

poverty reduction, in response to the poor performance of the oil sector. The general objective 

of the project is to contribute to the improvement of food and nutrition security as well as 

diversification of the national economy. Its development objective is to promote competitive 

and resilient agriculture by developing agrifood value chains in Congo. Project activities will 

focus on four value chains (cassava, maize, poultry and fish) that have been prioritized by the 

direct stakeholders concerned, based on market demand, their contribution to the national 

economy (import substitution) and their potential impact on farming households, youth and 

women. 

2. PRODIVAC activities will benefit 355,000 persons, 40% being women and 40% 
being young people in various segments of targeted agricultural value chains. The project 

comprises the following components: (i) skills development and promotion of agricultural 

entrepreneurship; (ii) improvement of the productivity and resilience of agricultural production 

systems; (iii) institutional development and public-private dialogue; and (iv) project 

coordination and management. The total project cost over a six-year period is estimated at 

EUR 85.4 million (CFAF 56 billion), financed through a loan of EUR 73.2 million from the 

Bank and contributions of EUR 7.3 million from the Government of Congo and EUR 4.9 

million from beneficiaries.  

Needs Assessment.  

3. Development of the four agricultural value chains targeted by the project is plagued 
by several constraints. For cassava, these are: (i) low yields of approximately 8 tonnes per 

hectare (t/ha), relative to a potential of more than 25 t/ha; (ii) unregulated rudimentary and 

hygienic conditions for processing cassava into flour and "chikwangue"; and (iii) the lack of 

transport means, inaccessibility to farming areas and harassment on the highways. For the 

poultry (chickens and eggs) sector, the constraints are: (i) difficulties in the supply of day-old 

chicks, livestock feed (mainly maize as well as vitamin and trace element supplements); and 

(ii) weak veterinary advisory support services. For maize, which is the main raw material in 

the manufacture of animal feed, the constraints are: (i) the limited (technical and 

entrepreneurial) capacities of small producers; (ii) difficult access to quality seeds and other 

technologies; and (iii) insufficient infrastructure and equipment for production and marketing. 

Finally, for fish, the constraints are: (i) inaccessibility to production basins; (ii) insufficient 

advisory support; (iii) poor organisation of sector stakeholders; and (iv) supply difficulties for 

improved fish feed, good quality fry and other plant ingredients. These four value chains are 

equally hamstrung by significant financing constraints. 

4. Value-Added of the Bank: The Bank's added value comes from its experience gained 

through operations in the rural and agricultural sector. The project took into account the lessons 

learned from assessment of the report from the Bank's Independent Evaluation Department 

(IDEV) on AfDB support for AVC1 development, which includes recommendations on the 

following key principles: (i) analyse the entire value chain; (ii) develop a strategy to ensure 

                                                 
1  Independent Development Evaluation (IDEV): The African Development Bank's Support for Agricultural Value Chains 

 Development: Lessons for the Feed Africa Strategy. Summary Report, March 2018 



iii 

 

inclusiveness; (iii) maintain adaptability to market changes; (iv) think in terms of profitability 

with added value; and (v) develop plans to create a sustainable impact. PRODIVAC is 

consistent with the strategic objectives of inclusive and sustainable growth found in the Bank's 

2013-2022 Ten-Year Strategy, Pillar 1 on “Promoting agro-industrial value chains” of the 

2018-2022 Country Strategy Paper (CSP). Furthermore, this operation constitutes a major 

contribution2 to implementation of the National Agricultural Development Plan (PNDA) 2018-

2022, whose operational budget has been estimated at over CFAF 1000 billion, with a financing 

gap of over CFAF 959 billion, or nearly 84% of needs. PRODIVAC's conceptual approach took 

the guidelines of the "Feed Africa" strategy into consideration, including the flagship 

programmes on Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT), youth 

entrepreneurship development in agriculture and agribusiness, risk-sharing mechanisms in 

agricultural finance, and the Africa Climate-Smart Agriculture (ACSA) flagship programme. 

The project's design is also consistent with the guidelines of the Subregional Forum on Boosting 

the Rural Economy in Central Africa, jointly organized by the Bank and the International 

Labour Office (ILO) in February 2019 in Brazzaville.  

5.  Knowledge Development: PRODIVAC will generate knowledge on themes related 

to improving the economic environment of the various crop sectors (inclusive sector policies, 

promotion of local products and development of standards, trade and tariff policy, development 

of appropriate financial products and trade ties, financing of innovations, incubation of 

agricultural enterprises and financing of innovations, etc.). The development of financing 

mechanisms in partnership with financial institutions will produce positive experiences as well 

as best practices and approaches that could be used in other value chains and countries to 

support the development of financial products tailored to youth enterprises and the financing 

needs of small, medium and large enterprises. As part of knowledge management, an electronic 

library containing all relevant documents from the agricultural sector, an inventory of best 

practices, local knowledge and innovations will be set up and made accessible to stakeholders 

and the public. This activity will be developed as part of institutional support to the Directorate 

for Studies and Planning (DEP) in the Ministry of Agriculture. The project's monitoring and 

evaluation system and a communication strategy will be developed to produce and disseminate 

the information developed. The knowledge generated by the Project will improve the 

interventions of ongoing projects, enhance the design of new projects and boost participation 

in policy dialogue. 

  

                                                 
2  The Bank's expected contribution to the agro-industrial sector during implementation of the CSP is estimated at UA 290 

 million, or about CFAF 232 billion, representing 24% of the financing gap. 



iv 

 

Results-based Logical Framework 

 

                                                 
3 Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 

Country and Project Title: Republic of Congo - Integrated Agricultural Value Chains Development Project (PRODIVAC) 

Project goal               :  Promoting competitive and resilient agriculture  

RESULTS CHAIN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 

MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS/ MITIGATIVE 

MEASURES 

Indicator (including ISCs) Baseline Situation Target   

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Food and 

nutritional 

security and 
economic 

diversification 

are sustainably 
improved. 

1. Chronic malnutrition rate for under-
five children (*) 

 
2. Agricultural sector growth rate  

 

3. Contribution to imports ((a) poultry 
and eggs; (b) fish) 

1. 21% (2015) 

 

2. 7% (2016) 
  

3. (2016) 

(a) 50% 
(b) 40 %  

1. 18% (2025) 

 

2. 11% (2025) 
 

3. (2025) 

(a) 35% 
(b) 23% 

MICS
3
 

 Demographic and 

Health Surveys (DHS); 
Appraisal Reports of 

the National 

Development Plan 
(NDP) 2018-2022 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

The agrifood 

value chains are 

efficient 
(productivity, 

value and 

marketing) and 
resilient  

1.1. Producers' access rate to resilient 

technologies (*)  

1.2. Volumes marketed (*): (a) cassava; 
(b) maize; (c) poultry; (d) fish  

1.3. Post-harvest/capture losses and 

mortality: (a) cassava; (b) maize; (c) 
poultry (mortality); (d) fish  

1.4. Crop sector yields (kg/ha) (*): (a) 

cassava; (b) maize 
1.5.  Percentage of cassava flour fortified 

with micronutrients  

1.7. Percentage of children aged 6-23 
months with minimum food diversity 

1.1. 0% 

1.2. (a) 0; b) 0; (c) 

0; (d) 0 

 

1.3. (a) (52%); (b) 

(15%); (c) 
(Mortality: 30%); 

(d) 50 

 
1.4. (a) 10t/ha; (b) 

1.5t/ha 

1.5. TBD 
 

1.6. 7 24% 

1.1. 40% 

1.2. (a) 43%; (b) 56%; 

(c) 82% of fowls; (d) 
60% 

 

1.3. (a) (20%); (b) 
(10%); Mortality: (c) 

15%; (d) 50  

1.4. (a)  
20t/ha, (b) 3.5t/ha 

 

1.5.  TBD 
 

1.6. 30% 

Reports of midterm and 

project completion 

surveys. 
 

 

 
MICS surveys 

 

Risk: Vulnerability to 

climate change 
.  

Mitigative measure: 

Dissemination of smart 
agricultural technologies 

(community agroforestry, 

short-cycle and attack-
resistant seeds, etc.) 

 

The business 

environment is 
favourable to the 

promotion of 

profitable small 
and medium-

sized agricultural 

enterprises 

2.1. Rate of access to finance for 

agricultural value chain stakeholders (*) 
2.2. Rate of supported micro, small and 

medium agricultural enterprises 

(MSMAEs) that survive after 3 years of 
creation (*).  

2.3. Rural Women's Empowerment Index 

(1 = low and 5 = high) 
 

2.1. 2% 

2.2. To be 
determined - 

benchmark study  

2.3. 1  
 

2.1. 6% 

2.2. 40% 
2.3. 3.5 

 

 Risk: Weak capacities of 

support systems for budding 
enterprises and value chain 

stakeholders 

Mitigative measure: 
Strengthening of ties 

between agricultural 

entrepreneurs and 
agricultural chambers/trades 

whose capacities will be 

strengthened  

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

Component 1: Development and promotion of agricultural entrepreneurship 

1.1. Value chain 

stakeholders are 
professionalized 

1.1.1- Number of new sustainable and 

equitable business partnerships 
established and implemented (*) 

1.1.2. Number of organisations and 

platforms of stakeholders supported 
(created/reactivated)  in the various crop 

sectors (*)  

1.1.1. 0 

1.1.2. 0 

1.1.1. 150 

1.1.2. 400 
  

 

 
 

 

 
Quarterly and annual 

progress reports, 

midterm review reports 
and project completion 

reports 

Monitoring-evaluation 
reports. 

Risk: Limited interest 

shown by financial 
institutions in the 

development of specific 

financial products  
 

Mitigative measure: 

Promotion of internal value 
chain financing mechanisms 

and financial education of 

beneficiaries  
Technical assistance to 

financial institutions 
including training and 

involvement of loan officers 

in the agricultural 
entrepreneurship process 

1.2. Youth skills 

and 
entrepreneurship 

are developed 

1.2.1. Number of youth innovations and 

start-ups supported (*) 
1.2.2 Number of micro, small and 

medium-sized enterprises developed in 

the AVCs (*) 
1.2.3. Number of incubation and 

vocational training centres for young 

people supported 

1.2.1. 0 

1.2.2. 0 
1.2.3. 0 

1.2.1. 400 (including 

35% for women) 
1.2.2. 200  

1.2.3. 7 

1.3. Women’s 
economic 

empowerment is 

stepped up 

1.3.1 Number of cassava processing units 
for women 

1.3.2. Number of women trained 

(nutrition education, literacy, etc.) 
1.3.3. Number of women’s groups or 

cooperatives supported 

1.3.1. 0 
 

 

1.3.2. 0 
 

1.3.2. 0 

2.3.1. 200 
 

 

1.3.2. 50,000 
 

1.3.2. 200 

1.4. Access to 

agricultural 

financing is 
facilitated 

1.4.1. Monitoring/evaluation mechanism 

established and operational  

1.4.2. Number of business plans financed 
by financial institutions (*) 

1.4.1. 0 

1.4.2. 0 

  

1.4.1. 1 financial 

mechanism is 

established and is 
operational: 

1.4.2. 150 



v 

 

[1] World Bank (economic situation of the Republic of Congo, Sep.2017;[2] PNIASAN;[3] (PND-Multi-year priority action programme);[4] 
(Master Plan (FAO) 
(*) gender- and sex-disaggregated 

RESULTS CHAIN 

PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 
MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS/ MITIGATIVE 

MEASURES 

Indicator (including ISCs) 
Baseline 

Situation 
Target   

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

COMPONENT 2: Improvement of value chain productivity and resilience 

2.1. Climate-smart 

agricultural 
technologies are 

disseminated 

2.1.1 Number of rural producers 

reached in the dissemination of new 
technologies and best practices (*)  

2.1.2. Number of producers trained in 

production practices and/or climate-
smart technologies (*)  

2.1.3 Number of operational seed 

companies  
2.1.4 Surface area of agricultural land 

covered by agroforestry 

2.1.1- 0 

2.1.2- 0 
2.1.3- 0 

2.1.4- 0 

2.1.1- 50,000 of which 

at least 30% are 
women  

 2.1.2- 13000 of which 

at least 30% are 
women  

2.1.3- 10 

2.1.4- 15,000 ha 

 

 
Quarterly and 

annual progress 

reports, midterm 
review reports and 

project completion 

reports 
Monitoring-

evaluation reports. 

 

Risk:  Risk: Reluctance of 

smallholders to innovate 
  

Mitigative measure: 

Adoption of demonstration 
farms for farmers to promote 

peer training 

 
 

Risk: Limited capacity of 

service providers 
 

Mitigative Measures: 
Involvement of beneficiaries 
and local stakeholders in the 

monitoring of works  

 

 

 

2.2. Backbone 

infrastructure is 
developed 

2.2.1 Number of km of rural roads 

rehabilitated, maintained and resilient 
to climate change 

2.2.2 Number of sub-projects 

supporting private initiatives in 
business plans (drinking water supply, 

energy supply to processing units, 

storage facilities, markets, etc.)  

2.2.1- 0 

2.2.2- 0 

2.2.1- 300 

2.2.2- 100 units 

COMPONENT 3: Institutional development and policy dialogue 

3.1. The capacities 

of the technical 
services and 

communities 

concerned are 
strengthened  

 

3.1.1 Feasibility studies for an agro-
industrial centre in Bouenza 

 

3.1.2. Development of an electronic 
library at the Ministry of Agriculture 

 

3.1.3. Farmer registration and Farm 
digitalization Model developed  

 

3.1.4. Number of local development 
plans developed 

3.1.5. Number of technical services 

upgraded 
3.1.6. Additional climate funds raised  

3.1.1- 0 

3.1.2- 0 
3.1.3- 0 

3.1.4- 0 

3.1.5- 0 
3.16- 0 

 

3.1.1- 1 

3.1.2- 4 
3.1.3- 1 

3.1.4- The electronic 

library of the Ministry 
is operational  

3.1.5 – 10 

3.1.6- USD 20 Million 

 

 
 

 

 
Quarterly and 

annual progress 

reports, midterm 
review reports, 

project completion 

reports and 
monitoring-

evaluation system 

Risk: Lack of 

communication between the 
stakeholders concerned 

 

Mitigative measure: 
Technical assistance 

Monitoring of the release of 

funds by the parties 
concerned; Development of 

performance contracts for 

staff and for service 
providers and partners 

3.2. An enabling 

environment for the 

development of 
agricultural 

entrepreneurship is 

established 

3.2.1. Number of operational multi-

stakeholder consultation frameworks 

3.2.2. Number of chambers of 
agriculture and professional 

agricultural organizations strengthened 

3.2.3. Voluntary guidelines or best 
practices on responsible agricultural 

investments, agricultural insurance, 

social protection are disseminated 

3.2.1- 0 

3.2.2- 0 

3.2.3- 0 
 

3.2.1- 4 

3.2.2- 5 

3.2.3- 3 
 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

 

COMPONENTS RESOURCES (Euros' 000) 

Component 1: Development and promotion of agricultural entrepreneurship 

1.1 - Professionalization of stakeholders and development of commercial partnerships 
1.2 - Development of agricultural skills and entrepreneurship for the youth  

1.3 - Access to finance (agricultural and rural) 

1.4 - Support for the economic empowerment of women  

Component 2: Improvement of agricultural value chain productivity and resilience  

2.1 - Dissemination of innovations and climate-smart technologies  

2.2 - Rehabilitation/Construction of backbone infrastructure 

 Component 3: Institutional development and public-private dialogue 
3.1 - Strengthening of training, research and agricultural advisory support systems  

3.2 - Knowledge development and support for land tenure security 

3.4 - Facilitation of a regulatory environment conducive to agricultural entrepreneurship  

Component 4: Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation 

4.1 - Project management and coordination 

4.2 Monitoring-evaluation and knowledge management  

AfDB:               : 73,200.00 

Government      : 7,320.00 
Beneficiaries     : 4,945.00 

TOTAL          :  85,465.00 

 
Component 1: 37,486.00   

 

Component 2: 31,210.00 
 

Component 3: 8,186.00 

 

 Component 4: 8,584.00 



vi 

 

Project Implementation Schedule 

 

 

Q3Q4 Q1Q2 Q3 Q4Q1 Q2Q3 Q4Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
1 Approval of financing

2- Project pre-launch activities

Signing of loan agreement

Loan effectiveness

Fulfillment of conditions precedent to first disbursement

Establishment of the operational mechanism, preparation and validation of the 1st ABWP 2020 of the project

Recruitment of technical assistance for start-up activities

Organization of project launch workshop

Equipment and materials for national coordination and departmental teams

3- Project coordination and management activities

Steering Committee meetings (End-June and End-December from 2020 to 2015)

Preparation of procedures manuals for project management, monitoring/evaluation and execution

Baseline studies, mid-term review and impact studies

Coordination, monitoring of the MPP, Monitoring/evaluation including monitoring of the ESMF

Validation of the ABWPs by the Steering Committee and the Bank from 2021 to 2025

Financial management and submission of audit reports (by the end-June 2021 to 2025 at the latest and 

closing audit in June 2026)Supervision missions from the Bank

Drafting of the project completion report

Execution of activities

4.1. Professionalization of actors and development of commercial partnerships

Identification and characterization of value chain and produce market players

Structuring and professionalization of the stakehoder from various segments of the value chains

Promotion of corporate entrepreneurship

Organisation and facilitation of multi-stakeholder consultation platforms, B2B forums and meetings

Dissemination of quality standards and norms in support of business partnerships

Facilitation of negotiations and establishment of commercial partnerships between stakeholders

Establishment and management (or revitalization) of an information system on agricultural markets

4.2. Agricultural skills development and entrepreneurship for young people

Identification and promotion of agricultural entrepreneurship opportunities

Support for the establishment/support of youth MSMEAs;

Facilitation of a platform for exchange of information/experiences/networking of entrepreneurs

Establishment of a competitive innovation and entrepreneurship fund/youth agricultural start-ups

4.3. Access to agricultural financing

Establishment, management and evaluation of a refinancing fund

Assistance in the operationalization of the institutionalized system

Development, testing and scale-up of new products including review of the procedures manual

Training of credit officers on revised practices, agricultural credit tools and manuals

Development of a management manual and training on risk management

Development and implementation of a financial education program

Procurement of equipment for the operationalization of GIS

Feasibility study for the institutionalization of the financial support mechanism

Regional experience-sharing trips.

4.4. Dissemination of innovations and climate-intelligent technologies

Facilitation of access to quality inputs (seeds, fertilizers, plant protection products)

Advisory support to farmers

Support activities for producers in the sectors concerned

 Dissemination of climate-smart techniques and technologies and monitoring/supervision of stakeholders

4.5. Development of backbone infrastructure

Technical studies

Rehabilitation of farm-to-market roads in the Plateau Department and in the rugged South Pool and Buenza areas

Routine maintenance of rehabilitated road segments

Infrastructure to support private investments, storage and marketing

Sustainable mechanism for the management and maintenance of community infrastructure

Institutional support for departmental technical departments and municipalities (Departmental Councils)

4.6. Consolidation of women's economic empowerment

Preparation of a diagnostic study and a gender strategy

Support for improved village poultry farming

Support for processing and packaging units for target products managed by women

Capacity building for groups/associations and enterprises managed by women

Nutritional education

4.7. Strengthening of training, research and agricultural advisory support systems

 Targeted support for the agricultural research programme

Establishment and operationalization of a multidisciplinary action research unit for ACSA

Development of a decentralized seed system

Capacity-building for extension services and the training system

Strengthening of pilot agricultural vocational training centres and Songhai centres

Rehabilitation and equipment of the CFAs and the agricultural technical school

4.8. Facilitation of an enabling environment for agricultural entrepreneurship

Support for the establishment of a framework for public and private multi-stakeholder consultation and 

with FIs
Dissemination and promotion of voluntary guidelines for responsible agricultural investment

Support for the implementation and acceleration of the necessary reforms

Facilitation of the structuring of professional agricultural organizations
Strengthening of the Chambers of Agriculture, Commerce and Trades 

Prepare local development plans

Institutional support for departmental councils

Activities
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025



1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF BANK GROUP MANAGEMENT TO THE 

BOARD OF DIRECTORS CONCERNING A PROPOSAL TO AWARD A LOAN TO THE 

REPUBLIC OF CONGO TO FINANCE THE INTEGRATED AGRICULTURAL VALUE 

CHAINS DEVELOPMENT PROJECT IN CONGO (PRODIVAC) 
 

Management hereby submits this report and its recommendation concerning a proposal to award 

a loan of EUR 73,200,000 (seventy-three million two hundred thousand euros) to the 

Government of the Republic of Congo to finance the Integrated Agricultural Value Chains 

Development Project in Congo.  

 

I. STRATEGIC GUIDELINES AND OBJECTIVES 

1.1. Project Relation to Country Strategy and Objectives  

1.1.1  PRODIVAC is consistent with the National Development Plan (NDP 2018-2022) 

prepared by the Government of Congo whose two strategic priorities are: (i) reform of the 

education system as well as skills development and vocational training; and (ii) diversification of 

the economy with priority given to the agricultural, tourism and industrial sectors. The government 

holds the view that agricultural sector diversification would generate supplies for the processing 

industry, capitalize on attendant opportunities and synergies and reduce dependency on the outside 

world for food. This operation is a major contribution to implementation of the National 

Agricultural Development Plan (PNDA) 2018-2022, whose operational budget is estimated to 

exceed CFAF 1000 billion, with a financing gap of over CFAF 959 billion, or nearly 84% of needs. 

The project will contribute to the reduction of food imports estimated at approximately CFAF 600 

billion per year and mainly consisting of meat products, more than 50% of which is meat and eggs.  

1.1.2 PRODIVAC is consistent with the strategic objectives of inclusive and sustainable 

growth outlined in the Bank's Ten-year strategy 2013-2022, as well as the High-5 priorities. It is 

also consistent with the Bank's Country Strategy Paper (CSP) 2018-2022, which seeks to diversify 

and enhance the competitiveness of the Congolese economy, with a view to ensuring inclusive and 

sustainable growth, mainly through two pillars, namely: (i) promotion of agro-industrial value 

chains; and (ii) strengthening of human capital and governance. The Bank's expected contribution 

to the agro-industrial sector during implementation of the CSP is estimated at UA 290 million, or 

about CFAF 232 billion, representing 24% of the financing gap. The project design is consistent 

with the guidelines of the Bank's “Feeding Africa” Strategy, which focuses on the value chain 

approach, productivity improvement and resilience, with the adoption of technologies 

(Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT); Africa Climate-Smart 

Agriculture (ACSA). The project is aligned with Job for Youth strategies, including the ENABLE 

YOUTH initiative. Lastly, the project will contribute to the strengthening of women's economic 

empowerment and the establishment of appropriate financing mechanisms for the agricultural 

sector. Its design is also consistent with the guidelines of the Subregional Forum on Boosting the 

Rural Economy in Central Africa, jointly organized by the Bank and the International Labour 

Office (ILO) in February 2019 in Brazzaville. The forum highlighted the need to develop youth 

skills and entrepreneurship, innovations and investments to improve the productivity and 

attractiveness of the agricultural and rural sectors, diversify income sources and ensure social 

inclusion.  



2 

 

1.2.  Rationale for Bank Intervention 

1.2.1  The Bank's intervention, which is a response to the request of Congolese authorities, is 

justified by the need to support the Congolese economy's diversification strategy by mobilizing 

major investments for the structural transformation of the agricultural sector. Indeed, the agro-

industrial sector presents many opportunities in terms of income generation for small producers, 

job creation, especially for youths and women, and improved food and nutritional security. 

Through the constraints identified, the Bank's various missions made it possible to propose priority 

intervention areas in four value chains namely: cassava, maize, poultry and fish. 

1.2.2 With regard to cassava, the main constraints identified are: (i) low yields of about 8 

tonnes per hectare (t/ha) in rural areas, relative to a potential that exceeds 25 t/ha; (ii) unregulated 

rudimentary and hygienic conditions for processing cassava into flour and chikwangue; (iii) lack 

of transport means, limited access to production areas and harassment on the highways. Regarding 

the poultry sector (chicken and eggs) the constraints are: (i) challenges in the supply of day-old 

chicks, livestock feed (mainly maize as well as vitamin and micro-nutrient supplements); and (ii) 

weak veterinary advisory and support services. With regard to maize, which is the main raw 

material in the production of animal feed, the constraints are: (i) the limited (technical and 

entrepreneurial) capacities of small producers; (ii) difficulties in accessing quality seeds and other 

technologies; and (iii) inadequate production and marketing infrastructure and equipment. Lastly, 

regarding fish, the constraints are: (i) inaccessibility to production basins; (ii) insufficient advisory 

support; (iii) no stakeholder organization within the sector; and (iv) challenges in supplying 

improved feed, good fry and other plant ingredients. 

1.2.3 In rural financing, the main constraints are: (i) the unsuitability of the products offered 

(high interest rate, recovery period not concurrent with production cycles, etc.); (ii) the existence 

of uncontrolled agricultural risks; and (iii) considerable shortage of medium- and long-term 

lendable resources. In addition, the financial inclusion rate of the rural population, estimated at 

6%, remains low. The main reasons for such a low bank penetration rate include high poverty 

which accounts for insufficient incomes and the sheer size of the informal sector within which 

most economic actors operate.  

1.2.4 The project will help to eliminate the above-mentioned constraints by promoting 

inclusive agricultural and rural entrepreneurship. PRODIVAC supports competitive market-driven 

agriculture with strong private sector involvement. In addition, the project will support women's 

economic empowerment, entrepreneurship and youth skills development and the establishment of 

an appropriate agricultural financing mechanism. Lastly, the project will sustainably improve 

agricultural productivity by facilitating access to factors of production (improved and resilient 

inputs, machinery, labour, capital, land), soil fertility management and the improvement of rural 

infrastructure. It will achieve this mainly by opening up access to production  areas. The project 

will focus its operations on a limited number of value chains, namely: (i) cassava (Chikwangue, 

flour and other products); (ii) poultry (broilers and eggs); (iii) maize (for animal feed, direct 

consumption and breweries); and (iv) aquaculture/fish farming (fresh and salted/smoked fish). The 

selection of these value chains is informed by certain economic, environmental, social and 

institutional considerations namely: (i) market demand; (ii) their contribution to the national 

economy (import substitution and export growth); (iii) their potential impact on agricultural 

households, the youth and women; (iv) their production and productivity growth potential; (v) their 

contribution to food security and improved nutrition; and (vi) the opportunity to build on and 

consolidate past project interventions with a view to maximizing the outcomes of the current 

project. 

  



3 

 

1.3.  Aid Coordination 

1.3.1 The Ministry in charge of Planning currently plays a significant role in the coordination 

of operations. However, aid coordination in the agricultural sector will be further improved over 

the next years through the establishment of a thematic working group on agriculture and rural 

development in January 2019. The main donors in Congo’s agricultural sector are the World Bank 

which is financing the Commercial Agricultural Development Project with USD 100 million and 

the International Fund for Agricultural Development which is financing the Congo Inland 

Fisheries and Aquaculture Development Project (PDPAC) with USD 7.7 million. 

1.3.2 PRODIVAC will develop synergies and complementarities with ongoing investment 

projects and will mobilize co-financing and establish partnerships with future initiatives and 

projects. The project will also develop complementarities with an ongoing integrated initiative that 

connects small producers with an industrial processing plant in Loudima, Bouenza. The plant will 

have an annual production capacity of 16,000 tonnes of flour (bio-fortified with micro-nutrients) 

supplied at a social rate (less than 30% of the price of non-fortified flour) to the World Food 

Programme (for school feeding programmes and refugees as a substitute for rice imports) and to 

the national market. This approach will be developed through a public-private partnership with the 

participation of the government and United Nations agencies (WFP, FAO, IFAD). In addition, a 

request for the mobilization of parallel co-financing of UA 20 million from the Green Climate 

Funds is being prepared for approval in 2020. Lastly, expected partnership with the next IFAD 

project currently being designed will maximize the project's expected impact. The following table 

presents a summary of agricultural sector coordination.  

Table 1.3-Aid Coordination 

Sector or sub-sector* 
Share 

GDP Exports Labour  

Agriculture, fisheries and 

livestock  5% 2% 40% 

Stakeholders – Annual Public Expenditure (Average) ** 

Government Donors  

 

USD 241 million or 86% 

AFD                                        8.5 % 

World Bank                            66.1 % 

EU                                          20.4% 

FAO                                          5.1% 

Aid coordination level 

Existence of thematic working groups 

Existence of a global sectoral programme 

ADB’s role in aide coordination*** 

Yes 

Yes 

Member 

 

II.  PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

2.1.  Project Components   

2.1.1  The overall objective is to promote competitive and resilient agriculture through 

integrated development of agri-food value chains in Congo. The project's specific objectives are 

to: (i) improve the performance of AVCs; and (ii) improve the business environment conducive to 

the promotion of profitable small- and medium-sized agricultural enterprises. To achieve these 

objectives, PRODIVAC is structured around four components (see Table 2.1). A detailed 

description of the project's theory of change, its components, activities and implementation 

modalities is provided in Volume II on the technical annexes. 

  



4 

 

Table 2.1. Project Components and Cost (in EUR thousand) 
Components Cost 

estimate  

Description of components 

Development 

of agricultural 

skills and 

entrepreneurs

hip. 

37,486.00 

 

This component concerns: (i) the structuring and professionalization of 400 organizations 

and platforms of the cassava, maize, poultry and fish value chains; the facilitation, 

financing and development of 150 commercial partnerships, the establishment of a market 

information system based on new technologies; (ii) skills development and agricultural 

entrepreneurship for 300 youths; the establishment and initial financing of a competitive 

youth innovation and entrepreneurship fund; support for the creation and development of 

400 MPMEA businesses; support for 4 incubation centres, including the two Songhai 

centres; equipment of vocational training centres; (iii) enhancing the empowerment of 

50,000 women, including a reduction of the challenges they face in food processing, 

marketing and the promotion of essential nutrition actions; and promoting the 

consumption of locally available iron-rich food for women, adolescent girls and young 

children (6 to 23 months); and (iv) establishing an appropriate financial mechanism for 

value chains (refinancing, guarantee). 

Improvement 

of 

productivity 

and resilience. 

31,240.00 

 

This component will include: (i) disseminating climate-friendly agricultural technologies; 

(ii) developing agro-forestry to improve soil fertility over 15,000 ha; (iii) rehabilitating 

and renovating critical points on 300 km of rural roads and supporting the implementation 

of local business and development plans through the financing of 100 social and economic 

sub-projects (drinking water, supplemental irrigation, renewable energy, etc.) carried out 

by local actors. 

Institutional 

development 

and public-

private 

dialogue. 

8,186.00 

 

This component will include the following activities: 

 

(i) building the capacity of research and advisory support public institutions for the 

development of four seed sectors;  

 

(ii) building the project preparation, management and coordination capacity of the 

Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries: carrying out a feasibility study on one 

of the agro-industrial poles, including a quality pole; irrigation, electrification in Bouenza, 

Developing a Farmer registration and farm digitalization Model in 4 departments, creating 

an electronic library for the agricultural sector, raising additional resources up to USD 20 

million from climate funds;  

 

(iii) providing support for the implementation/updating of 4 local development plans of 

the departments, taking into account value chains; (iv) facilitating multi-stakeholder 

policy dialogue for the promotion of an enabling environment for agricultural 

entrepreneurship (necessary reforms, public-private dialogue, imports, regulations, etc.); 

and ; 

 

(v) building the operational capacity of the 10 technical services involved.   

Project 

coordination 

and 

management 

8,584.00 

 

This component will include the following activities: (i) project management and 

governance; (ii) planning, monitoring and evaluation; (iii) knowledge dissemination and 

management; and (iv) environmental and social protection.   

2.2.  Technical Solution Adopted and Alternatives Explored 

2.2.1 Inclusive value chains and targeting of potential production areas. The project will focus 

its operations on a limited number of value chains (cassava, maize, poultry and fish) prioritized by 

direct stakeholders based on market demand, their contribution to the national economy (import 

substitution) and their potential impact on agricultural households, youths and women. The project 

aims at improving the competiveness of agricultural products, optimizing processing and 

marketing operations and facilitating business partnerships between small producers and private 

operators. Its focus will be on improving downstream agricultural production activities 

(processing, enhancing value-added and marketing), which should serve as a lever for improving 

production and adopting resilient technical routes. 



5 

 

2.2.2 Promotion of public-private partnership and facilitation of business partnerships among 

stakeholders. Agricultural sector transformation requires the involvement of the private sector 

which is the engine of growth, while the State plays the key role of defining strategic guidelines 

and facilitating the control and monitoring of development policies and actions through incentives 

and improvement of the business environment. There are opportunities to establish business 

partnerships between producer groups and private operators such as the Congo Sugar Refining 

company (Société agricole de raffinage industriel du sucre (SARIS)), the agro-pastoral company 

(ATORA), the Congolese Food Development and Distribution Authority (CODDIPA), Eco-Oil, 

AgriCongo, supermarkets as well as institutional markets such as the World Food Programme and 

public institutions (schools, public services). There is also the gradual emergence of a new class 

of agricultural entrepreneurs capable of investing in private farms and developing business 

relationships with small producers. PRODIVAC's interventions will help to facilitate negotiations 

between stakeholders or groups of stakeholders in the drafting of contracts. The simple contract 

farming model will be promoted for group marketing, and to facilitate financing within the value 

chains.  

2.2.3 Risk hedging and sharing facility: Target sectors will be financed through a technical 

mechanism linked to financial institutions in order to ensure the promotion of rural financial 

services and the sustainability of supply within the various segments of targeted value chains. The 

financing mechanism will make it possible to develop suitable financial products, including 

"mobile banking". This will involve: (i) the establishment of a direct credit window. PRODIVAC 

will set up a fund to provide partner financial institutions with stable lendable resources to 

adequately meet the financing needs of supported MPMEAs. Partner financial institutions (PFIs) 

will receive loans at an access rate of 3% per year, but will contribute 30% of the amount required 

to finance MPMEAs. The interest rates applicable to end borrowers will not exceed 9% per year. 

Beneficiaries' access to the window will be subject to: (i) a cash contribution of about 10%; (ii) 

the establishment of a mechanism known as a Guarantee Fund to support loans to MPMEAs and 

large companies operating in the sectors of the various PRODIVAC chains. Indeed, this Guarantee 

Fund is a hedging and risk sharing facility (HRSF). The project will consent to the establishment 

of a partial guarantee fund that will cover 50% of the risks in the event of default. Beneficiaries 

will also participate by providing commercial contracts appended to business plans within the 

context of productive partnerships. The conditions for the use of the HRSF will be discussed and 

specified with the PFIs concerned before the partnership agreements are formalized. Interest rates 

will be based on market rates and promoters will contribute 10% of the loan amount requested; 

and (iii) the creation of a capacity-building programme for stakeholders in the various 

sectors. 

 

2.2.4 This mechanism will be managed by a Financial Operator (FO) who will be selected on 

the basis of an analysis conducted with the support of an individual consultant. Consideration will 

be given to the strengths and weaknesses of existing refinancing and guarantee institutions 

(Garantie de l’Association Pointe Noire Industrielle, Support Fund for the Socio-economic 

Reintegration of Disadvantaged Groups, Agriculture Support Fund, etc.). The FO will be 

responsible for reviewing funding requests submitted by MPMEAs through partner financial 

institutions. This activity will make it possible to support the operationalization of the functional 

financing mechanism, prepare management tools, build the capacities of bank loan officers, 

promote the development of new financial products and the financial education of beneficiaries. 

2.2.5.  Skills development and youth entrepreneurship: With regard to technical and vocational 

training, PRODIVAC will finance: (i) the upgrading of the equipment of the Education, Training 

and Apprenticeship Centres (CEFA) in Dolisie, Brazzaville and Pointe Noire, financed through a 

previous Bank project; (ii) the upgrading of the equipment of Lycée Technique Industriel and 

Lycée d'Enseignement Professionnel Agricole in Brazzaville; (iii) the development and/or 



6 

 

adaptation of existing curricula to promising economic niches to facilitate youth access to 

employment; and (iv) the establishment of a platform/mechanism for anticipating skills needs and 

those of related occupations by building the capacity of teachers, business advisors, chambers of 

agriculture and all stakeholders in the education sector. With regard to youth entrepreneurship, 

PRODIVAC will finance the following activities: (i) prospective studies to identify 

entrepreneurship opportunities for the youth, raise awareness on entrepreneurship among the youth 

and provide guidance on existing entrepreneurship opportunities. Such awareness-raising will be 

conducted through workshops, for and media programmes, focusing on the success stories of 

young people who have prospered in the field of agricultural entrepreneurship; (ii) support for the 

establishment and assistance of 300 micro-, small- and medium-sized agricultural businesses 

(MPMEA) for youths through an incubation process of close supervision, coaching and mentoring; 

(iii) support for incubation centres, including the two Songhai centres in Congo and other public 

or private structures specializing in the business incubation process; and (iv) facilitation of a 

platform for young entrepreneurs. This activity will be developed in collaboration with the 

Ministry of Small and Medium Enterprises and with the support of specialized (international and 

national) technical assistance.4 

2.2.6 Competitive fund for innovation and promotion of youth entrepreneurship and 
agricultural start-ups. The project will finance an innovation fund to support entrepreneurs, youths 
and producers’ organisations (POs) who present innovative ideas and initiatives for improving 

value chain quality and performance, including: (i) the development of new products or markets; 

(ii) equipment and process testing; (iii) the use of alternative energy; (iv) new technologies that 

are more environmentally-friendly; (v) expertise in food quality and safety; (vi) the use of new 

information and communication technologies to market and promote products, including fortified 

cassava flour etc.; and (vi) the certification and labelling of processed products. Annual 

competitions will be organized at the national level to identify ideas and initiatives with the 

potential for large-scale impact. This fund will be managed with Association Pointe Noire 

Industrielle (APNI), which is already implementing a small- and medium-sized enterprises 

development programme, in collaboration with the Pointe Noire Chamber of Commerce, Industry, 

Agriculture and Crafts (CCIAM). Individual technical assistance will be mobilized for the 

development of operational procedures based on similar successful experiences (Tony Elumelu 

Entrepreneurship Program, AgriPitch, the Ivorian Competitive Fund for Agricultural Innovation, 

etc.). CCIAM will encourage financial institutions and operators in the telecommunications and 

private sector to co-invest in this fund, including buying shares in youth start-ups. 

2.2.7.   Sustainability of rural infrastructure. Actions to improve access will mainly be 

rehabilitation activities carried out from time to time to maintain critical areas (muddy segments, 

steep-sided low-lying areas, watercourse crossing points, steep slopes, etc.) to enable a given 

stretch of a road to be used all year round. The structures will be built of durable materials and 

designed to ensure proper drainage. Drawing lessons from road maintenance governance, the 

project will support local authorities and value chain actors to initiate local management by 

involving and empowering them at all implementation stages. This principle will strengthen local 

governance and the project's sustainability by enabling local authorities to play their roles in 

territorial development planning and infrastructure management in an inclusive manner. To this 

end, all sub-projects to be carried out under the project will be selected through a participatory 

process that involves the local authorities, economic actors and producer organizations in the 

relevant production areas. 

  

                                                 
4  Example of an incubator model created by the University of N'Gaoundéré with the Agence Universitaire de la 

Francophonie in Cameroon 



7 

 

Table 2.2: Project Alternatives Explored and Reasons for their Rejection 
Alternative Brief Description Reasons for Rejection 

Matching grant 

for MPMEA 

financing.  

Financing of sponsors 

through subventions 

ranging from 10-90%. 

Poor sustainability, ownership and accountability of the stakeholders; 

poor business relations with financial institutions; limits on non-

repayable allocations to generate sustainable capitalization of 

entrepreneurial activity; no diversification in the range of products and 

services. 

Total 

resurfacing of 

the roads. 

Resurfacing of the entire road 

with borrow materials. 

Not appropriate due to abundant rainfall and limited resources for the 

maintenance of dirt roads. 

National multi-

donor sector 

programmes 

Multi-donor, multi-sector 

programme throughout the 

country. 

Complex programme difficult to implement effectively; risk of 

dispersal of investments across multiple value chains and countrywide.   

Construction 

of a quality 

pole. 

Construction of a quality 

pole, like a one-stop shop for 

development research, soil 

fertility control, food, etc.   

A preliminary study is required. Such a study will be carried out under 

the project and will make it possible to better plan this activity. 

2.3.  Project Type 

This operation is designed as an autonomous investment project under the ADB window. It is a 

model that is more adapted to Congo’s current context and is applied by the other development 

partners 

2.4.  Project Cost and Financing Mechanisms 

2.4.1.  The total project cost, including physical and financial contingencies, is estimated at 

EUR 85.46 million or CFAF 56 billion. The project will mainly be financed with an ADB loan of 

EUR 73.2 million or CFAF 48.0 billion; the Congolese5 government will contribute EUR 7.3 

million or CFAF 4.1 billion corresponding to taxes and import duties for goods and equipment 

likely to be purchased under the project. Project beneficiaries will contribute EUR 4.9 million to 

productive activities and the financing of business plans, estimated at CFAF 3.2 billion. A summary 

of project costs is presented in Tables 2.3 to 2.6.   

 
Table 2.3: Estimated Costs by Component 

 

COMPONENT 

(In Euro thousand) (In CFAF million)  

% 

F.E. 

 

% Baseline 

Cost 
Local 

Currency 

Foreign 

Exchange 
Total 

Local 

Currency 

Foreign 

Exchange 
Total 

A. Skills development and 

promotion of agricultural 

entrepreneurship  

31 069 6 417 37 486 20 380 4 209 24 589 17 45 

B. Improvement of AVC 

productivity and resilience 

23 368 5 503 28 871 15 328 3 610 18 938 19 35 

C. Institutional support and 

public-private dialogue 

4 302 3 884 8 186 2 822 2 547 5 369 47 10 

D. Coordination and management 7 273 1 311 8 584 4 770 861 5 631 15 10 

Baseline Cost 66 012 17 115 83 127 43 300 11 227 54 527 21 100 

Physical and financial 

contingencies 

1 169 1 170 2 339 768 767 1 535 50 3 

TOTAL PROJECT COST  67 181 18 285 85 466 44 068 11 994 56 062 21 103 

 

  

                                                 
5 See B3.I. for the counterpart contribution waiver 



8 

 

Table 2.4: Financing Sources 

 

Financing Sources 

(In Euro thousand) (In CFAF million) 
% 

Total 

Local 

Currency  

Foreign 

Exchange 
Total 

Local 

Currency  

Foreign 

Exchange 
Total  

ADB 56 584 16 616 73 200 37 117 10 899 48 016 86 

Government  7 320 
 

7 320 4 801 0 4 801 9 

Beneficiaries  3 277 1 669 4 946 2 150 1 095 3 245 6 

TOTAL  67 181   18 285   85 466  44 068 11 994 56 062 100 

 

Table 2.5: Project Cost by Expenditure Category 

 

Expenditure Category  

(In Euro thousand) (In CFAF million) 
% 

F.E 

Local 

Currency 

Foreign 

Exchange 
Total 

Local 

Currenc

y 

Foreign 

Exchan

ge 

Total  

WORKS  15 070   2 985   18 055  9 885 1 958 11 843  17  

GOODS  4 984   4 249   9 233  3 269 2 787 6 056  46  

SERVICES  30 016   7 762   37 778  19 689 5 092 24 781  21  

MISCELLANEOUS (Financing)  9 255   1 870   11 125  6 071 1 227 7 298  17  

OPERATING COST  3 048   249   3 297  1 999 163 2 162  8  

PERSONNEL  3 639   -     3 639  2 387 0 2 387  -    

Baseline Cost  66 012   17 115  83 127 43 300 11 227 54 527  21  

Physical and financial contingencies 1 169 1 170 2 339 768 767 1 535  50  

TOTAL PROJECT COST  67 181   18 285   85 466  44 068 11 994 56 062 21 

 

Table 2.6: Expenditure Schedule by Component 

 Components 
(In Euro thousand) 

2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 TOTAL 

A. Skills development and promotion 

of agricultural entrepreneurship. 
3,322.30 6,821.80 7,385.60 7,598.60 7,127.30 1,944.60 

36,175.70 

B. Improvement of AVC productivity 

and resilience 
2,001.60 7,312.10 11,733.10 5,496.90 3,689.60 1,401.90 

31,456.00 

C. Institutional support and policy 

dialogue 
2,977.70 2,791.20 1,903.50 1,981.00 1,249.60 212.00 

8,279.60 

D. Coordination and management.  2,456.50 1,153.80 1,238.30 1,202.30 1,260.60 1,203.79 9,554.49 

TOTAL 10,758.10 18,078.90 22,260.50 16,278.90 13,327.10 4,762.29 85,465.79 

2.5.  Project Area and Beneficiaries 

2.5.1 The project will primarily cover the corridors of major marketing and consumption 

centres of Brazzaville and Pointe Noire and the production areas in the Plateaux, Pool, and 

Bouenza Departments. The departments of Cuvette and Niari, in which the Songhai centres are 

located, will also be covered by the project, in particular with regard to the youth entrepreneurship 

component. However, the project will be flexible enough to support private investments outside 

these zones as well as priority sectors depending on market trends. Some project activities (access 

to financing, youth innovation funds, policy dialogue, etc.) will be more relevant from a thematic 

(value chains) and geographic perspective given their cross-cutting nature. The three departments 

selected have enormous potential for the development of agriculture, poultry and fish farming, 

with huge swathes of fertile land that remain unexploited. Furthermore, the project’s intervention 

in these areas, especially in the Pool Province, will contribute to peacebuilding and social cohesion.   

2.5.2.  The population of the three departments in the project area (25% of the country’s 

surface area) is 746,024 inhabitants, representing about 15% of the national population. 



9 

 

Agriculture is largely unmechanised and is practiced on very small farms of about 1 to 2 ha 

which produce 90% of the food yield. In this context, 70% of agricultural workers are women. 

The sector is characterized by slash-and-burn farming as well as low labour and surface area 

productivity. The real agricultural land occupancy rate remains low and output is insufficient for 

all sectors selected. These departments are connected to Brazzaville by national roads RN1 and 

RN2 and the Brazzaville-Pointe-Noire railway, which should create opportunities for produce 

marketing and the supply of inputs. Proximity to major urban centres is certainly an asset in 

terms of marketing and supply, but also a constraint due to the rural exodus of young workers 

drawn by more attractive conditions and opportunities.  

2.5.3.  Beneficiaries: The project will impact 355,000 persons in the different segments of the 

selected agri-food value chains. It will primarily target youths, women and vulnerable groups, 

including indigenous peoples, by increasing employment and income-generating opportunities in 

production and processing activities. It will do so by enhancing the attractiveness and profitability 

of such activities, supporting the development of agricultural entrepreneurship, providing adequate 

advisory support and promoting production-related activities (services, transport, marketing). 

More specifically, the project will seek to: (i) increase their incomes and enhance their economic 

independence; (ii) strengthen their decision-making ability and representation; (iii) promote 

women’s rights and financial autonomy; and (iv) reduce their workload. Women and youths will 

be targeted through the application of quotas and specific actions (Sub-components 1.2 on Youth 

Entrepreneurship Development and 2.3 on Women's Empowerment) to ensure their economic 

empowerment. The indirect beneficiaries of the project will be the populations of the departments 

of Brazzaville, Pointe Noire, Pool, Plateaux, Bouenza, Cuvette and Niari, who will benefit from 

improved market access for targeted agricultural products and job creation for young people. 

2.6.  Participatory Approach to Project Identification, Design and 

 Implementation 

2.6.1 In addition to consultations with government authorities and technical services of the 

ministries6 concerned by the project and with technical and financial partners in the agricultural 

sector, extensive consultations were also held with all stakeholders in the agricultural value chains. 

The various project formulation missions carried out visits to markets and private companies and 

held group discussions with young entrepreneurs as well as civil society and private sector 

organizations in Brazzaville and Pointe Noire. The missions made field visits to the Pool, Plateaux 

and Bouenza Departments and held consultations with the relevant stakeholders (producer groups, 

women's cooperatives, youth groups, local authorities and decentralized technical services). They 

also held consultations with several financial institutions, including the Bank of Central African 

States, commercial banks (UBA, BCI, BGFI-Bank) and microfinance institutions (CAPPED, 

MUCODEC and Crédit du Congo). The mission also met with major private operators in the 

Congolese agri-food sector, including SARIS, ATORA, CODDIPA and the Federation of 

Congolese Entrepreneurs, UNICONGO. 

2.6.2 These consultations made it possible to determine, among other things: (i) the production 

areas and priority sectors; (ii) market trends and trade flows; (iii) business opportunities and 

potential value added in the value chains; (iv) the interventions of previous projects; (v) the 

regulatory business environment, constraints on effective and adequate private sector involvement 

and participation; (vi) innovations and technologies to improve production and processing; (vii) 

the position and aspirations of women and youths in value chains; (viii) experiences and 

                                                 
6  The Mission worked closely and with the wide involvement of the technical services of the following ministries: Agriculture, Livestock and 

Fisheries; Forestry; Planning, Equipment and Major works; Equipment and Road Maintenance; Small and Medium Enterprises, Craft s and 

Informal Sector, Technical and Vocational Education, Skills Training and Employment; Scientific Research and Technological Innovation; 

Women's Development and Gender Integration in Development; Youth and Civic Education; Trade, Supply and Consumer Affairs; etc.  

 



10 

 

constraints in accessing finance, especially for agricultural, agri-business and MSMEA 

development in the medium and long terms; (ix) lessons learned from previous projects; and (x) 

specific issues to be explored in different areas. These consultations revealed that all segments of 

the agricultural value chains were underdeveloped and fragmented, and faced several constraints. 

Processing and marketing, in particular, have remained weak links in the agricultural value chains. 

Consultations with stakeholders will continue during project implementation to ensure the 

effective implementation and sustainability of operations. 

2.7. Bank Group Experience and Lessons Reflected in Project Design 

2.7.1.  Since 1967, the Bank has contributed UA 356 million to financing development 

operations in the Republic of Congo. Apart from the agricultural sector study conducted in 2012, 

the Bank’s agricultural sector investments in Congo date back more than 20 years. Its portfolio 

performance in Congo is considered satisfactory overall. The experience gained from cooperation 

with Congo during implementation of the country strategy and projects highlights the importance 

of: (i) focusing on selectivity and flexibility in project design and implementation; (ii) paying 

special attention to both physical investments and governance; (iii) building partnerships with the 

private sector; (iv) focusing on large, core/transformative, integrated projects; and (v) ensuring 

better quality at entry and applying a more pragmatic and realistic approach when programming 

operations. These lessons are reflected in the new Country Strategy Paper (CSP 2018-2022) 

through which the Bank intends to play the role of catalyst in the agribusiness sector, which is 

crucial to diversification of the Congolese economy.  

2.7.2  The project integrated the lessons learned from the IDEV (currently BDEV) evaluation 

of the Bank's support for AVC7 development, whose recommendations focus on the following key 

principles: (i) analyse the entire value chain; (ii) develop a strategy to ensure inclusiveness; (iii) 

maintain the capacity to adapt to market trends; (iv) think in terms of profitability with added 

value; and (v) develop plans to create a sustainable impact.  

2.8.  Main Performance Indicators  

2.8.1.  PRODIVAC's impact indicators are (i) a reduction in the chronic malnutrition rate from 

21% to 18%; (ii) an increase in agricultural-sector growth from 7 to 11%; and (iii) a significant 

reduction in food imports. Over six years, the project's outputs will directly benefit approximately 

125,000 people (and indirectly benefit about 355,000 people, of whom 40% are women and 40% 

are young people) in various segments of the cassava, maize, poultry and fish value chains. The 

project is expected to produce the following results: (i) an increase of at least 40% in the marketed 

volumes of the targeted value chains; (ii) a significant reduction in post-harvest losses and animal 

mortality (at least 60% on average); (iii) at least 400 small- and medium-sized agricultural 

enterprises promoted through the refinancing and financing risk-hedging mechanism; (iv) an 

improvement in the Rural Women's Empowerment Index (1 = low and 5 = high) from 1 to 3.5; (v) 

an increase in the agricultural loan portfolio of at least 7.5 billion outstanding loans at the end of 

the project; (vi) an average increase of more than 70% in the yield and output of the targeted 

sectors; and (vii) improved food diversity via greater production and consumption of iron-rich 

foods. 

 

                                                 
7  Independent Development Evaluation. IDEV. The African Development Bank’s Support for Agricultural Value Chains 

Development: Lessons for the Feed Africa Strategy, Summary Report, March 2018 



11 

 

III.  PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1.  Economic and Financial Performance 

3.1.1.  Financial performance was assessed for ten (10) typical models of farms and enterprises 

engaged in the production, processing, quality improvement and marketing of cassava, maize, 

poultry and fish, which reflect the range of activities that the project will support.  The financial 

analysis shows that these investments will contribute to boosting the net profits of these 

operations/companies substantially, which is evidence that the activities supported by PRODIVAC 

will be profitable. These results (Table 3.1) show that project support will improve the financial 

performance of MSMAEs engaged in production, processing, conservation and marketing.  

3.1.2. The economic analysis results show that the project benefits are very positive. The 

project's basic economic rate of return is 20.1%. The net present value is estimated at EUR 104.4 

million. However, this amount should increase if project benefits pertaining to the reduction of 

micro-nutrient deficiencies and chronic malnutrition, access to safe drinking water and sanitation, 

and the economic empowerment of women are factored into the equation. Indeed, reduction of 

malnutrition and access to safe drinking water will help to improve the overall health status of 

households, and lead to, inter alia, increased labour productivity for household members and 

reduced spending. Supporting young people through business incubation will strengthen their 

managerial capacity and boost self-employment and employment for other young people. 

Table 3.1: Significant Economic and Financial Figures 
 

ERR (baseline scenario): 20.1%  NPV amount: 104.4 (EUR million) 

 

3.1.3.  The sensitivity analysis based on a 30% increase in costs, a 30% decrease in benefits and 

a three-year delay in generating benefits, a 20% increase in input prices and a 20% decrease in 

product prices confirms the project's robust positive economic effects and impacts with economic 

rates of return of 17.9%, 16.2%, 15.3%, 10.2% and 17.6% respectively.  

3.2.  Environmental and Social Impacts 

Environment 

3.2.1  The project is classified under Category 2 of the Bank's Integrated Safeguards System 

(ISS) and the Bank's Climate Safeguards System (CSS), equivalent to Category B at the national 

level, although many sites and activities have not yet been identified at this stage of project 

preparation. Activities included in Component 2 of the project are likely to generate negative 

environmental impacts, such as: (i) pollution and waste generation during infrastructure 

construction works; (ii) pollution and waste generation during product processing within the 

various value chains; (iii) risks of land and water pollution and of the endangerment of the health 

of users by agrochemical products; (iv) degradation of the flora and fauna during the operation of 

quarries and borrow pits for construction work; (v) risk of accidents on construction sites and at 

processing unit sites and; (vi) the risk of transmission of communicable diseases on the various 

sites.  

3.2.2 However, the expected negative impacts will be limited in time. Given that the location 

and environmental and social characteristics of all investments are not known, an Environmental 

and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared in accordance with the 

requirements of the Bank's Integrated Safeguards System. The ESMF indicates the mitigation and 

management procedures, and measures that will have to be implemented by the project once the 

sites and sub-projects are known. These measures are outlined in the Environmental and Social 

Management Framework (ESMF) Plan and include: sub-project analysis and screening 

procedures; consultation, communication and conflict management procedures; environmental 



12 

 

and social management plans (ESMPs) and environmental and social clauses to be included in 

bidding documents and sub-project implementation contracts; guidelines on forests and wetlands; 

and guidelines on pesticide and pest management. The project’s activities will yield many positive 

impacts for both local communities and the environment. Therefore, the participatory approach 

involving local communities in the rehabilitation of road infrastructure, the promotion of more 

sustainable and climate-smart agricultural practices and the reduction of post-harvest losses will 

boost the livelihood resilience of rural households, restore soil fertility and increase tree cover, 

thereby significantly reducing greenhouse gas emissions.  

3.2.3  Functions pertaining to environmental protection measures will include (i) screening of 

sub-projects and identification of their category using environmental and social selection forms; 

(ii) recruitment of consultancy firms/consultants to prepare ESMPs after validation of the process 

by the Directorate-General for the Environment; (iii) inclusion of environmental clauses into the 

recruitment process for implementing companies; (iv) monitoring/evaluation of the 

implementation of sub-projects; and (vi) coordination of audits. As a whole, the environmental 

and social function needs to be strengthened within the institutions involved in project 

implementation. Moreover, institutional and technical support, training and awareness-raising 

measures will have to be adopted to build institutional and human capacities. Such measures will 

seek to: (i) operationalize PRODIVAC's environmental management strategy; (ii) foster the 

emergence of local expertise and professionals in environmental and social management; (iii) raise 

the professional awareness and level of responsibility of the staff in production companies; and 

(iv) protect the urban and rural environment, health and safety of beneficiary communities. 

3.2.4  The total cost of the project ESMF is CFAF 374 million with provisions of (i) 

CFAF 110 million for studies including ESMPs, the Pest and Pesticide Management Plan (PPMP) 

and the Environmental and Social Management Systems (ESMS) Manual for each value chain; 

(ii) CFAF 105 million for training and awareness-raising; (iii) CFAF 50 million for compensation 

for any asset damage and; (iv) CFAF 79 million for monitoring/evaluation.   

3.2.5  Consultations were conducted under the ESMF at different periods of project 

preparation. Participants’ comments were integrated into the ESMF that has been validated by the 

Bank and the summary was published on 26/08/20198. 

Climate Change 

3.2.6  The impacts of climate change are evident in Congo through, inter alia, rising 

temperatures and increasingly erratic rainfall that affect the national agricultural sector, thus 

increasing the vulnerability of local communities to this phenomenon. PRODIVAC is proposed 

for classification in Category 2 for Climate Change as it will integrate the appropriate adaptation 

measures for all the selected sectors. These measures will be simple, affordable, already validated 

and tested in the country or sub-region and accessible to smallholders. They will include the 

dissemination of short-cycle varieties and the planting of cover crops and leguminous shrubs 

(agroforestry) on farms. Co-financing is being sought under the Adaptation Window of the Green 

Climate Fund. The eligible activities are those that fall under Component 2, which seeks to 

strengthen the resilience of agriculture through : (i) the dissemination of improved seeds, farming 

best practices and climate-smart technologies; and (ii) the construction of backbone infrastructure 

to ensure the sustainable development of agricultural value chains. 

                                                 
8 https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/congo-projet-de-developpement-integre-des-chaines-de-valeurs-agricoles-au-congo-prodivac-resume-du-

cadre-de-gestion-environnemental-et-sociale-cges 

https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/congo-projet-de-developpement-integre-des-chaines-de-valeurs-agricoles-au-congo-prodivac-resume-du-cadre-de-gestion-environnemental-et-sociale-cges
https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/congo-projet-de-developpement-integre-des-chaines-de-valeurs-agricoles-au-congo-prodivac-resume-du-cadre-de-gestion-environnemental-et-sociale-cges


13 

 

Gender  

3.2.7.  The project is classified in Gender Category No. 2, according to the Bank's Gender 

Marker System (GMS)9, as it will help to reduce the gender gap in terms of access to production 

factors and income. Women, who represent about 50% of the population of Congo and 70% of the 

agricultural workforce and contribute 80% to traditional subsistence agriculture, 22% to 

commercial agriculture, and nearly 90% to the processing of agricultural products, are more 

vulnerable to poverty. The project's targeting strategy takes this reality into account and will ensure 

that women have at least 40% representation in project activities. In addition, the project is 

investing approximately EUR 5 million to finance specific activities for the economic 

empowerment of women to (i) process and sell cassava products; (ii) process and sell fish; (iii) 

promote improved village poultry farming; (iv) organize women's groups and cooperatives, and 

capacity building; and (v) promote basic actions in nutrition, hygiene and sanitation.  

3.2.8.  In addition to sex- and age-disaggregated data, gender-specific indicators are included in 

the results-based logical framework to measure the women's empowerment index in agriculture. 

This index measures women's increased capacity to make strategic life choices within their 

households and communities, focusing on five areas of agricultural empowerment, namely: (i) 

production (women's role in family decision-making on agricultural production); (ii) resources 

(women's access to productive capital, access to and decision-making power over loans); (iii) 

control over income use; (iv) women's individual leadership and influence in the community; and 

(v) time allocation for women. This index will be used as a diagnostic tool and a monitoring 

indicator to measure how the project affects women's empowerment.  

3.2.9.  Specific activities for young people have been developed in sub-component 1.2. These 

activities include: (i) the identification and promotion of agricultural entrepreneurship 

opportunities; (ii) the establishment and support of micro, small and medium-sized agricultural 

enterprises run by young people, via, inter alia, innovative business incubators and financing; (iii) 

the establishment of a platform to exchange information, experience and networking among 

entrepreneurs (competitions will be organized to find a tool developer); (iv) the establishment of 

a competitive fund to innovate and promote entrepreneurship and agricultural start-ups owned by 

young people; and (v) the promotion of incubators for young people, especially by boosting 

existing initiatives such as Songhaï Center and CEFAs financed by previous Bank projects.   

Social Aspects 

3.2.10.  PRODIVAC will have major positive impacts on the living conditions of rural 

communities by improving the production structure in various agricultural sub-sectors and 

increasing access to basic infrastructure, such as rural roads, markets, drinking water and sanitation 

facilities. Project activities will focus on skills development and youth employment in rural areas, 

gender inclusion, improvement of the living conditions of beneficiaries, cooperative 

entrepreneurship to improve the distribution of value throughout the various value chains. The 

project will generate cross-cutting benefits for small family farms, women, young people and small 

and medium-sized enterprises in terms of improved incomes, greater productivity, and better living 

conditions for agricultural families. Finally, through the local development participatory approach 

adopted, PRODIVAC will help strengthen the social inclusion of minority groups, particularly 

indigenous peoples, and the reduction of inequalities along the value chains. 

 

                                                 
9 According to the Bank's GMP, a project is classified under the Category 2 if it reduces gender 

inequalities and or, women's economic empowerment is one of the effects of the project, but not 

the main one. 

 



14 

 

Forced Resettlement 

 

3.2.11  PRODIVAC activities will not involve the acquisition of land, the forced resettlement of 

communities and/or restriction of their access to resources or livelihoods. Support for the 

development of specific value chains will essentially entail guiding cooperative groups and private 

companies that own land in their production, processing and marketing activities, using 

technological packages, capacity-building, and better access to finance and partners in the value 

chains. The improvement of seeds, cuttings, fry and chicks will be conducted by existing research 

institutions and private investors who will use their own land. Seed and cutting growers and private 

investors will conduct their activities on their land and in accordance with the applicable national 

land tenure policies and laws.  

3.2.12  With regard to core infrastructure, the project will adopt an active approach that favours 

the participation and empowerment of sector stakeholders and local authorities at all stages of 

implementation (from planning to works completion). Requests for support must come from the 

Departmental Council or the Rural Community. Infrastructure sites such as markets and other 

buildings will be owned by local communities or the Departmental Council, which will be 

responsible for their management and maintenance. Rural access roads will be rehabilitated on an 

as-needed basis, focusing on critical points (muddy segments, steep-sided low-lying areas, 

watercourse crossing points, steep slopes etc.) with as much local support as possible. The Project 

will set up local and departmental complaint management committees that will also be responsible 

for initiating and supervising the payment of any compensation arising from the destruction of an 

asset or restriction of access to a resource as a result of project activities. Financial provision for 

such compensation has been made in the ESMP, in particular for infrastructure construction or 

rehabilitation sub-projects.  

IV.  EXECUTION 

4.1.  Implementation Arrangements 

4.1.1 National Steering Committee (CNP): PRODIVAC will have a National Steering 

Committee chaired by the Minister who serves as AfDB Governor (or his or her representative) 

with the Minister of Agriculture (or his or her representative) acting as deputy chair. The members 

of the National Steering Committee will include: (i) representatives of the ministries concerned by 

the project, in particular the Ministries of Agriculture, Planning, Finance, Forest Economy, 

Technical Education and Employment, SMEs, Industry, Social Affairs, Health, and those handling 

youth and women’s affairs; (ii) a private-sector representative, UNICONGO; (iii) a representative 

of Congolese producer organisations, the National Confederation of Congolese Producer 

Organisations (CNOP) and; (iv) a representative of the local authorities in the project area. This 

arrangement was adopted due to the selection of PACIGOF/PADEC, under the supervision of the 

Ministry of Planning, to host the Coordination Unit and given that the project spans several sectors. 

The mandate of the National Steering Committee, which will meet at least twice a year, is to: (i) 

review and approve the annual work plans and budgets prepared by the project; (ii) review the 

semi-annual progress reports, annual reports, mid-term review reports and project completion 

reports; (iii) ensure that programme/project activities are consistent with the sector programmes 

and strategies of the Ministries concerned by the project; (iv) review progress made towards the 

achievement of project objectives; (v) facilitate the coordination of project activities between the 

various implementing entities; and (vi) analyse implementation risks and obstacles and provide 

the necessary guidance to ensure the attainment of expected results. 



15 

 

4.1.2 Project Coordination Unit (PCU): The PCU will be hosted within the 

PACIGOF/PADEC Coordination Unit,10 which has proven experience in the administrative and 

fiduciary management and coordination of Bank projects and those of other financial partners. In 

addition, it is already involved in improving the business climate and supporting small and 

medium-sized enterprises. Consequently, this arrangement will yield efficiency gains by pooling 

certain resources and functions, including procurement, financial management, communication 

and knowledge management, administration, and human resources management. The PCU is 

expected to: (i) facilitate inter-sector coordination; (ii) monitor implementation of the 

recommendations from the CNP's deliberations and those of audit reports, portfolio reviews, mid-

term reviews; (iii) ensure the fiduciary management of the project; and produce any other 

document that falls within its remit. PACIGOF/PADEC coordination will be strengthened through 

a Deputy Coordinator; assistants responsible for fiduciary management, internal and external 

monitoring and evaluation (monitoring of implementation, outcomes and impact in collaboration 

with the National Statistics Institution), value-chain development and financing; a private-sector 

development and entrepreneurship expert, an environmental and social protection expert and 

support staff. The technical departments of the Ministries involved in implementing the project 

will be responsible for the technical execution of the components under their purview. Each 

directorate will designate a focal point to monitor day-to-day activities.  

4.1.3 Departmental Offices: Three departmental offices of the Project will be established in 

the departments concerned. They will be located in Kinkala, Djambala and Madingou. Agricultural 

sector leaders will be the project's focal points at the district level. The two Songhai centres will 

be directly monitored by the National Coordination Unit. The departmental offices will be 

responsible for the following tasks: (i) project coordination at the departmental level and 

establishment of ties with local authorities; (ii) preparation and monitoring/evaluation of AWPB 

(Annual Work Programme and Budget) at the departmental level and drafting of progress reports; 

(iii) provision of technical support for implementation of the technical components of the Project; 

(v) regular and close monitoring/supervision of the project and service providers; (vi) assessment 

of the agreements and performance contracts of local service providers; (vii) stakeholder 

mobilization for the implementation of operations; and (viii) development of synergies and 

partnerships within their respective project areas. Departmental office staff will comprise: (i) the 

office manager, who is an institutional development and capacity-building expert or a specialist in 

a similar field of expertise; (ii) an agricultural engineering technician; (iii) an agro-pastoral 

production systems technician; (iv) an agro-business advisor (processing and marketing); (v) a 

monitoring/evaluation and knowledge management assistant; (vi) an administrative and financial 

assistant; and (vii) support staff (one assistant, two drivers and two watchmen). 

4.1.4  Technical Assistance and Launch Support: In view of PRODIVAC's specific focus on 

innovative approaches to integrated value-chain development, including the promotion of youth 

entrepreneurship and the development of financing mechanisms, it is suggested that targeted 

technical assistance be mobilized to launch the project quickly and implement it efficiently. It will 

focus on: (i) developing strategic programming and country programme management tools; (ii) 

building the capacity of implementation stakeholders and launching specific institutional support 

activities; (iii) refining targeting and implementation approaches; (iv) reconfiguring the 

monitoring/evaluation system; (v) developing the scale-up strategy; and (vi) launching financial 

services access activities. To that end, the FAO's technical assistance will be mobilized to develop 

the seed sector and promote climate-smart technologies. With regard to skills development through 

technical and vocational training and entrepreneurship, ILO technical assistance will be mobilized 

to support the relevant technical ministry. PRODIVAC will also support the development of 

partnerships between the Compacts of the Bank-funded Multinational Programme Technology for 

                                                 
10 Investment Climate and Forest Governance Support Project (PACIGOF) /Economic Diversification Support 

Project (PADEC) 



16 

 

Africa Agricultural Transformation in (TAAT) and national research programmes on cassava, 

maize, poultry and fish farming.  

4.1.5  Implementation Stakeholders: Implementation stakeholders comprise specialized 

private companies, consultancy firms, specialized public entities and any other specialized 

structures, depending on the most appropriate procurement method. Technical Assistance and 

Local Support: The experience and lessons learned from project implementation in Congo 

highlight three major limitations: (i) delays at project launch (ii) weak implementation teams and 

operators; and (iii) onerous procurement procedures. Accordingly, technical assistance in the form 

of short-term individual consultants will be mobilized to: (i) update the manual and configure the 

PACIGOF management system; (ii) prepare the implementation and monitoring/evaluation 

manuals; (iii) prepare the implementation and bidding documents for 300 km of rural roads, in 

addition to the two TA packages for the financing and innovation fund component. These expenses 

will be covered as soon as the project is approved by the PACIGOF project.  

4.1.6  Procurement Arrangements: All goods and works obtained through international 

competitive bidding and consultancy services financed by the Bank shall be procured in 

accordance with the Procurement Policy for Bank-Group Funded Operations (dated October 2015) 

and using the appropriate standard bidding documents of the Bank. Goods and works obtained 

through national competitive bidding shall be procured in accordance with national public 

procurement laws, using the country's standard bidding documents, and with the provisions set out 

in the financing agreement. A procurement plan for the first 18 months was prepared by the 

Government during the appraisal mission and will be regularly updated during the project 

implementation phase. The procurement arrangements are outlined in the technical annexes. 

Financial Management and Disbursement Arrangements 

4.1.7 The fiduciary risk for PRODIVAC's financial management is assessed as moderate. The 

financial management arrangements within the PADEC/PACIGOF Project Coordination Unit at 

the Ministry of Planning, meet the Bank's minimum requirements as defined in the policy on 

"Financial Management of Projects Financed by the African Development Bank" issued in 

February 2014. This Unit, which has already implemented the PADE (WB) and PACADEC 

(ADB) projects, has relevant experience in implementing projects financed jointly by the Bank 

and the World Bank. Lessons learned from the implementation of completed PADE/PACADEC 

projects were factored into the assessment of the executing agency's capacity and financial 

management risk. These lessons will help to improve PRODIVAC's financial management 

through the risk mitigation measures proposed in the financial management action plan presented 

in the annex. These measures will make it possible to maintain a moderate level of fiduciary risk 

and to provide, with reasonable certainty, reliable financial information that is consistent with the 

Bank's minimum requirements.    

4.1.8 The fiduciary team will carry out its tasks under the supervision of the current 

administrative and financial officer whose capacities were deemed to be acceptable by the 

appraisal mission. The team's capacities will be strengthened via a project-funded on-site training 

programme. PRODIVAC’s financial management will be based on the existing system used by 

the PACIGOF/PADEC Project Coordination Unit (premises, equipment, manual, software, 

support staff, etc.). The current Coordinator, as well as the Deputy Coordinator to be recruited, 

will be responsible, in accordance with their respective terms of reference, for the administration 

of project resources, and shall authorize, together with the project accountant (or administrative 

and financial assistant) the disbursement of funds allocated to the project. Financial monitoring 

reports will be prepared in a format to be determined during the negotiation phase, and submitted 

to the Bank 45 days after the end of each quarter.  



17 

 

4.1.9 The recruitment of the external auditor will be the responsibility of the unit, and may be 

carried out in consultation with the Court of Auditors and Budgetary Discipline as part of the 

recourse to national systems as decided during the mid-term review of the Congo Country Strategy 

Paper. The external auditor's TORs will be adapted to take project specificities into account, and 

validated during the negotiations for the recruitment of an independent firm with experience in 

auditing Bank-financed projects. Audits will be carried out in accordance with the ISA/ISSAI 

international standards. The financial statements audited by the independent firm will be sent (see 

table for frequency) to the Bank no later than six months after the end of the financial year 

concerned. Due to the institutional arrangements of each implementing entity, and the 

arrangements described above, the possibility of recruiting a single auditor for all projects executed 

by the Ministry of Planning has not been considered. However, to the extent that the capacities of 

the Court of Auditors and Budgetary Discipline so permit, the Court may include  the organization 

of audit missions to Bank-financed projects in its annual programmes. A provision from loan 

resources will be allocated to cover the expenses of missions to be conducted under PRODIVAC 

and other Bank projects. 

4.1.10 Disbursement Arrangements : Loan resources will be disbursed in accordance with the 

Bank's Disbursement Manual as soon as the loan agreement enters into force and the conditions 

precedent to the first disbursement have been fulfilled. In general, three methods are used to 

disburse funds, namely: (i) the direct payment method; (ii) the working capital or special account 

method; and (iii) the reimbursement method. A disbursement letter setting out the specific 

disbursement terms of the project will be the subject of negotiations between the Bank and the 

Borrower. Counterpart resources will be disbursed in accordance with national procedures that 

provide for the opening of an account for external financing. Two special accounts will be opened 

in Brazzaville to receive Loan resources intended to cover operating costs and community 

activities. Project sub-accounts will be opened in the antennas with the authorization of the 

Ministry of Finance. 

4.2.  Monitoring  

4.2.1.  Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) will be based on four main pillars, namely: (i) the 

results-based logical framework that defines the results indicators (impacts, outcomes and 

outputs); (ii) the Annual Work Programmes and Budgets (AWPBs) that define the programme 

implementation activities, outputs and priorities; (iii) the monitoring/evaluation manual to be 

developed at project commencement and that will define the approaches, methods and tools for 

collecting, analysing data and disseminating the results achieved in terms of outputs, outcomes 

and impacts; and (iv) an IT platform to develop a consolidated geo-referenced monitoring and 

evaluation system, integrating the key indicators of the NDP in relation to ongoing projects, 

private-sector investments and the monitoring and evaluation systems of the NDP.  PRODIVAC 

monitoring and evaluation will include: (i) (ex ante) quantitative and qualitative impact studies 

that will facilitate the design of impact matrices and change trajectories; (ii) continuous internal 

monitoring of activities using a simple and reliable (digital) data collection system; (iii) 

participatory self-assessments with the active involvement of direct actors and stakeholders; (iv) 

supervision missions and ad hoc external assessments as identified by the supervision missions 

and stakeholders; (v) a mid-term review carried out jointly by the Bank and the Government at the 

end of the third year; and (vi) a final appraisal and impact study at project completion to facilitate 

the preparation of the final project report and inform the completion mission.  

4.3.  Governance  

4.3.1.  In terms of global governance, Congo scores 42.8 out of 100 and is ranked 42nd out of 54 

African countries on the Ibrahim Index of African Governance (IIAG). Under the impetus of the 

IMF, the Government has undertaken to conduct, with international assistance, an in-depth study 

on the governance situation in Congo. The Bank and the World Bank are supporting the country 



18 

 

to improve public finances and the business climate through the PADEC and PACIGOF projects. 

Specifically, governance risks in project implementation will be related to procurement, financial 

management, and land management. In this context, the Bank conducted detailed risk assessments 

at Borrower, sector, and project level during project design and, significant measures complete 

with action plans were prepared. PRODIVAC will also support the digitisation of agricultural land, 

linked to a geographical information system, to provide the country with an adequate land 

management tool. In addition, the participatory approach to local development, participation by 

the private sector, non-governmental organisations and beneficiaries in the steering and 

implementation of activities will promote citizen control as a guarantee of good governance. 

4.4. Sustainability  

4.4.1.  The possibility of sustainability and scale-up of the Project's achievements over the long 

term is high. Economic and financial analysis sensitivity tests show that the project remains 

profitable despite a reduction in profits, an increase in input prices and a decrease in product prices. 

The sustainability of investments and expected benefits is based on participatory and 

entrepreneurial approaches to capacity building, including (i) the structuring and 

professionalization of value chain organisations and actors on the basis of expressed demand, (ii) 

partnership with financial institutions to ease access to finance; (iii) the business and 

entrepreneurial dimension and the development of youth skills; (iv) the choice of proven and 

locally manageable techniques and technologies; and the participation and empowerment of value 

chain and local government actors for management of the infrastructure built; and (v) women’s 

economic empowerment. The Project, in collaboration with local authorities, will support the 

establishment of a sustainable management and maintenance mechanism for each infrastructure 

project, based on the organisation of beneficiaries into user associations, establishment of a 

management committee and maintenance fund.  

4.5.  Risk Management  

4.5.1.  The main risks that the project could face: (i) vulnerability to climate change; (ii) low 

capacity of youth support systems and value chain actors; (iii) low interest of financial institutions 

in developing specific financial products; (iv) reluctance of smallholders to innovate; (v) low 

capacity of service providers and (vi) inadequacies in rural infrastructure sustainability 

mechanisms. To mitigate these risks, the following actions will be taken: (i) the dissemination of 

smart agricultural technologies (community agroforestry, short-cycle and attack-resistant seeds, 

etc.); (ii) strengthening of links between agricultural promoters and chambers of agriculture/trades 

whose capacities will be built; (iii) promotion of internal value chain financing mechanisms and 

financial education for beneficiaries; (iv) technical assistance to financial institutions including the 

training and involvement of credit officers in the agricultural entrepreneurship process; (v) the 

adoption of demonstration farms that promote peer training of farmers; and the involvement of 

beneficiaries and local actors in the monitoring of works, the mobilisation of specialised technical 

assistance and the signing of performance contracts with service providers and project 

implementation unit staff. Residual management risks will be minimised through the competitive 

recruitment of staff and partners; the development of annual performance contracts, renewable 

based on good performance; and capacity-building for project management teams at different 

levels. 

4.6.  Knowledge Management  

4.6.1.  As part of knowledge management, an electronic library will be established to store all 

relevant documents from the agricultural sector, an inventory of best practices and identified local 

knowledge and innovations. The library will be accessible to stakeholders and the public. This 

activity will be developed as part of institutional support to the Directorate of Studies and Planning 

(DEP) of the Ministry of Agriculture. The tools and means of communication will be shared with 



19 

 

other projects in the agricultural sector, in particular PADEC and PDAC. A flexible knowledge 

management system, incorporating data, studies and documentation on the agricultural sector held 

by TFPs will be developed to ensure: (i) continuous information to improve programme 

performance; identification, analysis, documentation and dissemination of best practices; (ii) 

interactive and inclusive communication with project managers and all stakeholders; and (iii) 

visibility for policy dialogue and advocacy. Mechanisms of communication with beneficiaries 

upstream, during and downstream of the interventions will be developed. Project-generated 

knowledge will thus help to improve the interventions of ongoing projects, inform the design of 

new projects and boost participation in policy dialogues on themes that may affect improvement 

of the economic environment of sectors (inclusive sector policies, promotion of local products and 

development of standards, trade and tariff policy, etc.). The development of financing mechanisms 

in partnership with financial institutions will generate experiences, best practices and approaches 

that could be used in other value chains and countries to support the development of financial 

products tailored to youth enterprises and the financing needs of small, medium and large 

enterprises.  

V. LEGAL FRAMEWORK 

5.1  Legal Instrument  

The financing instrument proposed is an ADB loan to the Republic of Congo.  

5.2  Conditions Associated with the Bank’s Involvement  

The ADB loan will be subject to the following conditions: 

5.2.1. Conditions precedent to effectiveness. The effectiveness of the Loan Agreement shall be 

subject to the fulfilment by the Borrower, to the Bank's satisfaction, the conditions set out in Section 

12.01 of the General Conditions Applicable to Loan Agreements and Guarantee Agreements of the 

African Development Bank (Sovereign Entities). 

5.2.2. Conditions precedent to first disbursement of the Loan. In addition to the provisions of 

§5.2.1 above, the first disbursement of the loan resources shall be subject to the fulfilment by the 

Borrower, to the satisfaction of African development Bank, of the following conditions:  

Submission to the Bank, evidence of the: 

(i) decision establishing the  Project Coordination Unit (PCU) within the PADEC/PACIGOF 
Implementation Unit;  

(ii) strengthening of the PCU with a Deputy Coordinator; Assistants for Fiduciary Management, 
Internal and External Monitoring and Evaluation, Value Chain Development and Finance; 

Private Sector Development and Entrepreneurship Expert; Environmental and Safeguards 

Expert; and Support staff; and 

(iii) establishment of a National Steering Committee and designation of its members for the 
Project.  

5.2.3 Other conditions. The Borrower ought to provide: 

(i) no later than three (3) months after the first disbursement, evidence of having updated the 
management procedures manual and a computerised accounting system, allowing for 

adequate monitoring and financial information; and 



20 

 

(ii) no later than six (6) months after the first disbursement, the  recruitment of an external 
audit firm on a competitive basis and in accordance with the Bank's standard Terms of 

Reference (TORs).  

5Undertakings. The Borrower undertakes, to the satisfaction of the Bank, to : (i) implement 

the Project and have it implemented by its contractors in accordance with the 

recommendations, requirements and procedures contained in the Project’s Environmental 

and Social Management Framework (ESMF); (ii) conduct environmental and social impact 

assessments (ESIAs), prepare specific sub-project ESMPs and secure their approval in 

accordance with national legislation and Bank requirements; and (iii) provide half-yearly 

reports on the implementation of the ESMPs, including, where applicable, inadequacies 

and corrective actions undertaken or to be undertaken. 

5.3  Compliance with Bank Policies  

The project complies with all relevant Bank policies. 

VI. RECOMMENDATION 

The Bank's Management recommends that the Board of Directors approve the proposal to grant an 

ADB loan not exceeding seventy-three million two hundred thousand (73,200,000) Euros to the 

Republic of Congo for the purpose and under the conditions set out in this report. 

 

 

 

  























































 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

COTE D’IVOIRE 
 

 

BELIER REGION AGRO-INDUSTRIAL POLE PROJECT  

(2PAI-BELIER). 
 

 

 

 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Project Brief 

Client Information 

DONEE/BORROWER    : Côte d’Ivoire 
 
EXECUTING AGENCY  : Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 

Development (MINADER) 
 
Financing Plan 

Source Amount (UAM) Instrument 

ADF 26.04 Loan  

ADF 03.40 Grant 

ADB 50.56 

 

Loan 

Government and Beneficiaries 17 Own Resources 

TOTAL COST 97 
 

 
Key ADF Financing Information 
 
Loan Amount UA 26.04 million 

Commitment Fee (Loan) 0.50% per year of the 

undisbursed amount 

Service Commission (Loan) 0.75% per year of the 

outstanding amount 

Interest Rate 1% 

Maturity (Loan)  30 years  

Grace Period (Loan) 5 years    
 
Key ADB Financing Information 
 

Loan Amount                          EUR 64,360,000 (UA 50,560,000) 

Type of Loan  Loan with fully floating rate 

Maturity To be determined (up to 25 years, including the grace period) 

Grace Period To be determined (up to 8 years) 

Average Loan Maturity To be determined (according to the amortization structure) 

Reimbursement To be determined (Half-yearly payments after the grace period) 

Interest Rates Base rate +funding cost margin+ loan margin+ premium at maturity, if 

applicable 

Base Rate Floating base rate (LIBOR USD 6-months, reviewed on 1 February and 1 

August). A free-fixing option for determining the base rate is available 

Funding Cost margin The Bank’s funding cost margin determined on 1 January and 1 July and 

applied at the base rate on 1 February and 1 August 

Loan Margin 80 basis points (0.8 %) 

Premium at Maturity To be determined as follows: 

- 0% if average loan maturity is 12.75 years or less 
- 0.10% if average loan maturity is over 12.75 years, but lower or equal 

to 15 years 

- 0.20% if average loan maturity is over 15 years 

Initial Commissions 0.25% of loan amount payable latest on signature of the loan agreement 

Commitment Fees 0.25% of the undisbursed amount. Commitment fees are callable 60 days 

following the signature of the loan agreement and payable on the payment dates 

fixed. 

Option for Base Rate Change* In addition to the free-fixing option for the floating base rate, the Borrower may 

change the fixed rate to a floating rate or incorporate in whole or in part the 



 

iii 

disbursed amount. Fees are levied on such transactions. 

Option to set the Base Rate 

Ceiling or Tunnel* 

The Borrower may set the ceiling or floor to be applied on part or all of the 

amount disbursed. Fees are required for such transactions. 

Option for Loan Currency 

Conversion 

Borrower can convert the loan currency into another Bank loan currency, both 

for undisbursed amounts and those already disbursed either in whole or in part. 

Fees are levied on such transactions. 
* Currency conversion options and the related fees must comply with the Bank guidelines for the exchange, available at the following link: 

http://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/document/guidelines-for-conversion-of-loan-terms-july-2014-87643/ 

 

  

Project Performance  

NPV (12% rate) CFAF 123 billion 

ERR (baseline scenario) 30% 

  

Time Frame – Key Milestones (expected) 
 
 

 
 

Concept Note approval 17 October 2016 

Project approval  25 January 2017 

Effectiveness date 30 April 2017 

Completion date 31 December 2021 

Closure of the grant and the loans 31 December 2022 

http://www.afdb.org/fr/documents/document/guidelines-for-conversion-of-loan-terms-july-2014-87643/


 

iv 

Project Summary  

 

Overview. 2PAI BÉLIER was identified during the dialogue with the Government of Côte 

d’Ivoire to transform the agricultural sector, using an innovative approach. It aims to lay down 

the prerequisite conditions for the emergence of an agro-industrial pole in the country’s 

heartland and as the first agropolis for the transformation and modernization of Ivorian 

agriculture. It concerns the Bélier administrative region and the Autonomous District of 

Yamoussoukro - a once prosperous zone that has experienced economic decline for three 

decades despite its significant potential. The project prioritizes the integrated approach to 

revive promising value chains and tackle a number of impediments to the development of the 

agricultural and agro-industrial sector. This innovative approach is a clean break from the 

sector-based approach, and is reflected in a critical mass of diversified actions capable of 

sustainably transforming economic activity at the grassroots. The project’s sector objective is 

to contribute to food and nutritional security. The specific objective is to contribute to the 

emergence of an agro-industrial pole in Bélier Region by revitalizing promising agricultural 

sub-sectors (rice, maize, cassava, vegetables, pork and fish) and further involving the private 

sector, youth and women.  

 

The UA 97 million project cost will be financed by an EUR 64.36 million ADB loan, a UA 

26.04 million ADF loan, a UA 3.4 million ADF grant (a total of UA 80 million to be borne by 

the Bank) and by the Government and beneficiaries to the tune of UA 17 million. The project 

has three components: (i) Restoration of productive capital; (ii) Development of value chains; 

and (iii) Project management. The first component aims to endow the region with key 

infrastructure for the development of agricultural and agro-industrial activities (irrigation 

schemes, roads, storage and marketing facilities, livestock infrastructure, electric lines, ICT), 

while also ensuring the best living conditions for the population concerned (DWS 

infrastructure, classrooms, school canteens, health structures). The second component aims to 

support all actors for them to operate dynamically around value chains in a more integrative 

and inclusive environment. The concern will be to: strengthen land security; better structure 

farmers’ organizations and build their technical and managerial capacity; support 

mechanization; develop employment and the recruitment of young graduates, by supporting in 

particular INP-ESA; promote agri-business especially by strengthening the Yamoussoukro 

industrial zone and ICT development; ensure better access to agricultural financing and enable 

better contribution to nutrition. The last component will ensure that the project is managed 

according to schedule and through sound implementation and monitoring arrangements. 

  

The project will benefit 461,600 people (64% of project area residents), 112,000 of them 

directly, 800 young graduates and 200 SMEs (including 50 in produce processing). It will 

benefit about 230,000 women, including 4,300 farmers, 400 young girls and 25 processing-

operators and traders. With estimated additional production of 465,000 tonnes per year, 

additional income per beneficiary is estimated at about CFAF 1.2 million for Model 1 

(representing rice farmers), CFAF 7.2 million for Model 2 (representing market garden 

operators), CFAF 2.5 million for Model 3 (representing rain-fed activities), CFAF 4.8 million 

for Model 4 (representing young farmers), and CFAF 20 million for Model 5 (representing 

SMEs), CFAF 2.5 million for Model 6 (representing pig farmers) and CFAF 4.5 million for 

Model 7 (representing fish farmers). The project will benefit about 112,000 persons directly, 

107,000 of whom would be lifted out of poverty. Thanks to the setting up and organization of 

processing units (50% run by women), 120,000 tonnes of cassava tubers will be processed into 

several by-products. The project will help to raise the agricultural produce processing rate from 

119,000 tonnes currently (51% of total production) to about 581,000 tonnes (85%). It will 

create the equivalent of approximately 19,000 permanent jobs.   

 



 

v 

Needs Assessment: The project area has a population of about 702,000 and covers a land area 

of 11,695 km2. Average population density is 60/km2. It is about 200 km to the North of 

Abidjan. Two out of three people in Bélier Region live with less than one dollar a day (the 

poverty rate in the region is 61.8%, compared to 46.3% nationally). The rationale for the 

intervention is the high level of poverty and the need to revive the region around the once 

prosperous administrative capital that is now in the throes of economic decline, due mostly to 

insufficient investments linked to the socio-economic crisis of the 2000 decade (PADER-Lakes 

approved by ADF in 2000 was not implemented). Therefore, this intervention is urgent since 

it will contribute to establishing a development pole to tap the area’s high potential and meet 

the great expectations and pressing needs expressed by the youth and women.  

 

Bank’s Value Added: The establishment of a technical and financial framework to support 

agri-business is consistent with the Bank’s Medium-Term Intervention Strategy in Regional 

Member Countries, Pillars 1, 2, 3 and 5 of the High 5s (Light up Africa, Feed Africa, 

Industrialize Africa and Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa) and the Bank’s 

new “Feed Africa: Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa, 2016-2025”. The Bank 

provided the Government technical assistance to identify and prepare the project, and expertise 

to develop financial inclusion and technical support in line with CSP 2013-2017. Besides, 

through this operation, the Bank will support Côte d’Ivoire’s efforts to rebuild the country and 

transform its economy - a priority objective of Government’s National Development Plan 

(PND 2016-2020). Unlike previous standard agricultural interventions, this Bank intervention 

will in particular fulfil all necessary conditions for setting up an agro-industrial pole to ensure 

the dynamism of promising agricultural sub-sectors in a given territory. Tangible and intangible 

infrastructure will be integrated to create local value added, improve the productivity of 

agricultural sub-sectors, and spur the produce processing dynamic to ultimately establish a true 

agro-industry as a prerequisite for agricultural sector development.  

 

Knowledge Management: The project will widely disseminate experience and good practice 

garnered during the management of units for agricultural produce production/processing. Thus, 

farmers of both sexes, artisans, processing operators, traders, youths and girls, as well as local 

authorities will acquire new techniques and skills enabling them to better manage their affairs 

and improve their living conditions. Thanks to the project, actors will gain experience on 

managing sub-sectors around inter-professions at the local level. INP-ESA’s involvement in 

helping young graduates to settle will help to endow it with new expertise and offer 

beneficiaries new opportunities in operational and managerial fields. The dissemination of 

knowledge via the monitoring/evaluation system will be done with the involvement of value 

chain actors. State officials involved will have the opportunity to be trained and broaden their 

experience in promising and innovative intervention sectors currently inexistent in the region 

(financial inclusion and framework of technical support to private initiatives).  



 

vi 

RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 

(*): Indicator data on the baseline situation will be updated at the end of the baseline study 

PROJECT COUNTRY AND NAME: Côte d’Ivoire: Bélier Agro-Industrial Pole Project 

PROJECT GOAL:  The general objective of 2PAI Bélier is to contribute to increasing food and nutritional security of the population 

RESULTS CHAIN 

PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 
MEANS OF  

VERIFICATION 

RISKS/MITIGATION 

MEASURES Indicators (including CSIs) 
Baseline 

Situation 
Target 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

  2016 

 

2021 and Beyond  

 

 

1. Food and nutritional security is improved. 
1.1 Percentage of households living in food insecurity 1.1     12,6% 1.1      3%  Assessment of PND 

 

 

1.2 Prevalence rate of chronic malnutrition 1.2     32% 1.2      20%     

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

      

The conditions for the emergence of an agro-
industrial pole in Bélier Region are fulfilled 

through the revitalization of promising 

agricultural sub-sectors and greater involvement 
of the private sector, youths and women. 

 

2.1 Increased agricultural sector volumes. 
 

2.2 Increased volumes of processed agricultural 

products. 
 

 

 
2.3 Increased crop yields. 

 

 
 

 

2.4 Increased income for sector actors. 
 

 

 

 

2.5 Revitalized SMEs.  

 
2.6 Accelerated industrialization. 

 

2.7 Improved employment level. 
 

2.1   Volume of agricultural production (tonnes)    Cereals assessment and 
MINADER statistics.  

 Mid-term assessment of 
PNIA 

Periodic project 

monitoring/evaluation 

report 

 Mid-term review report and 
project completion report 

Risks :   
(i) Climate change related risk 
(ii) Risk of land-related conflicts  
(iii) Risk of conflicts linked to 
transhumance 
Mitigation Measures:  

(i) A project conducted alongside 

2PAI BÉLIER fully addresses the 

underlying issue of climate change.  

(ii) Land security of target sites to be 

developed envisaged in Component 

B. 

(iii) Support to communes to 

accompany endogenous conflict 

management mechanisms  

2.1.1 Volume of paddy rice (tonnes) 2.1.1    60,000 2.1.1   91,500 

2.1.2  Volume of vegetables (tonnes) 2.1.2     2000  2.1.2   11,500  

2.1.3  Volume of cassava (tonnes) 2.1.3 120,000 2.1.3 460,000 

2.1.4   Volume of maize (tonnes) 2.1.4   50,000  2.1.4  123,000  

2.2    Volume of processed agricultural production (tonnes)   

2.2.1 Volume of polished rice (tonnes) 2.2.1  36,000 2.2.1   55,000 

2.2.2 Volume of vegetables (tonnes) 2.2.2     1,000  2.2.2     9,200  

2.2.3  Volume of cassava (tonnes) 2.2.3  48,000 2.2.3 384,000 

2.2.4  Volume of maize (tonnes) 2.2.4  10,000  2.2.4   97,600  

2.2.5   Production of pigs for slaughter and pork (carcass equivalent tonnes) 2.2.5       517 2.2.5      1,400 

2.2.6   Fish production (tonnes) 2.2.6         27 2.2.6        900 

2.3   Crop yields (tonnes/ha)   

2.3.1  Paddy rice 2.3.1        5 2.3.1         8 

2.3.2  Vegetables (tomato) 2.3.2       10  2.3.2       18  

2.3.3  Cassava  2.3.3       13 2.3.3       20 

2.3.4  Maize (off-season) 2.3.4         2 2.3.4         5  

2.4     Farmers’ income (CFAF/ha)   
2.4.1  Polished rice  2.4.1  370,000 2.4.1    2.5 million 

2.4.2  Vegetables (tomato) 2.4.2   1.1 

million 
2.4.2    4 million  

2.4.3  Rain-fed crops (maize, cassava) 2.4.3   90,000 2.4.3    250,000 

2.4.4   Income of pig producers (CFAF) 2.4.4  700,000 2.4.4    3 million 

2.4.5    Income  of fish producers (CFAF) 2.4.5  500,000 2.4.5   5 million  

2.4.6   Income of established youths, at least 50% of them women 

Filles (FCFA/an) 

2.4.6   1,200 2.4.6    6 million 

2.5      Number of SMEs/agro-industrial units (many in processing) 2.5          0  2.5       100 (20) 

2.6      Operational industrial zone  2.6          0 2.6           1 

2.7      Number of equivalent job positions created            2.7         0 2.7           19,000 

      

 
 

                       P
R

O
D

U
IT

S
 

I.  RESTORATION OF PRODUCTIVE CAPITAL 

1.1 Irrigation schemes 

 

1.2 Socio-economic infrastructure 

 

1.3. Storage and marketing infrastructure 

1.1.1  Number of dams rehabilitated 1.1.1        0 1.1.1             3  PNIA monitoring report 

 Progress reports of 
technical services tasked 
with implementation 

monitoring 

 Contracts signed with 

 

1.1.2  Rehabilitated land areas for irrigation  (ha) 1.1.2        0 1.1.2         2,170  

1.1.3  Number of beneficiaries (including women) 1.1.3        0 1.1.3      4,400 
(2200) 1.2.1  Linear distance of rehabilitated roads (km) 1.2.1        0 1.2.1        700  

1.2.2 HVA with built borehole equipped with a committee, of which 50% women 1.2.2        0 1.2.2        10 

1.2.3 Extension/rehabilitation of schools 1.2.3         1.2.3       +20 



 

vii 

 
1.4 Other infrastructure 

 

 

II. DEVELOPMENT OF  VALUE CHAINS 

2.1     Land security  

2.2    Organization and structuring of actors 

 
2.3 Support for employment of young graduates  

2.4 Technical and managerial support of actors 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.5 Value chain development fund 
2.6 Promotion of agricultural mechanization 

2.7 Promotion of the agro-food industry 

 
2.8 Promotion of ICTs  

2.9   Support for nutrition  

 
2.10 Support for marketing 

 

 
2.11  Institutional support  

1.3.1 Number of storage facilities constructed (50% allocated to women) 1.3.1        0 1.3.1       10 (5) contractors 

 Control firm’s reports 

 Project progress reports 

 Delegated contacting 
authority’s report 
 

 

 

 PNIA monitoring report 

 Progress reports of 
technical services tasked 

with implementation 

monitoring 

 Contracts signed with 
enterprises 

 Control firm’s reports 

 Project progress reports 

 Delegated contracting 
authority’s report 

1.3.2  Number of rural markets rehabilitated/modernized (gender-sensitive design) 1.3.2        0 1.3.2        17 

1.3.3  Number of consolidation centres built (gender-sensitive) 1.3.3        0 1.3.3          4 

1.4.1  Development of pastoral areas 1.4.1        0 1.4.1          2 

1.4.2  Rehabilitation of slaughter houses and areas 1.4.2        0 1.4.2          8 

1.4.3  Construction of butcher’s shops 1.4.3        0 1.4.3          6 

1.4.5  Linear distance of electric lines (linear km) 1.4.5           1.4.5        +52 

2.1.1  Number of land certificates issued (including for women)    2.1.1      ND 2.1.1    100 (50) 

2.2.3  Number of village territories demarcated  2.2.3      ND 2.2.3        10 

2.2.1  Number of cooperatives organized (50% women) 2.2.1      ND 2.2.           42 

2.2.2  Number of groupings (50% women)  2.2.2      ND 2.2.2         40 

2.3.1  Number of incubators supported in Yamoussoukro     2.3.1       0 2.3.1          5 

2.3.3  Number of young graduates trained and established (50% girls)  2.3.3       0 2.3.3    800 (400) 

2.4.1  Quality seeds programme prepared and implemented 2.4.1       0 2.4.1         1 

2.4.2  Support counselling programme prepared and implemented 2.4.1       0 2.4.1         1 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
  2.4.3  Research-development programme prepared and implemented 2.4.1       0 2.4.1         1 

2.4.5  Support programme for mainstreaming gender in ESA/INP curricular 2.4.1       0 2.4.1         1 

2.4.6  Gender monitoring report in the project area drafted 2.4.1       0 2.4.1         1 

2.4.7  Technical assistance for investment promotion 2.4.1       0 2.4.1         1 

2.5.2  Guarantee fund 2.5.2       0 2.5.2         1 

2.6     Mechanization programme prepared and implemented 2.6         1 2.6            1 

2.7.1  Industrial zone revitalization programme implemented 2.7.1      0 2.7.1         1 

2.7.2  SME support programme (at least 30% managed by women) 2.7.2      0 2.7.2         1 

2.8. 1 Telephony, internet and mobility structure in place  2.8.1      0 2.8.1         1   

2.9.2  Training of health workers, doctors and nurses 2.9.2      0 2.9.2         1 

2.9.3  Health control system and bio-fortification 2.93       0 2.93          1 

2.10.1 Agricultural market information system (SIMA) completed 2.10.1    0 2.10.1       1 

2.11   Institutional support programme is implemented 2.11       0 2.11          1 

III. PROJECT MANAGEMENT 3.1    Number of technicians trained 3.1         0 3.1          100 
PCU report 

PCU report 

PP 
SAP system 

Audit reports 

Progress reports 
Mission aide-mémoire 

Risk: 

 MINADER’s weak institutional 
capacity 

Mitigation Measures: 
The project envisages a programme 

of institutional support to 

MINADER and various structures 
involved in the project’s 

implementation, especially in 

monitoring/evaluation. 

3.2    Number of work plans and budgets (PTBA) produced and implemented 3.2         0 3.2            5 

3.3    Number of quarterly reports/annual audit reports approved 3.3         0 3.3           20/5 

3.4    Number of PPs produced and updated 3.4         0 3.4            5  

3.5    Number of steering committee meetings held 3.5         0 3.5           10 

3.6    Number of Supervisory Authority/Bank supervision missions undertaken 3.6         0 3.6           20 / 10 

3.7    Number of mid-term review/completion reports produced 3.7        0/0  3.7          1/1 

 3.8   Installation of project website 3.8         0 3.8             1  

COMPONENTS INPUTS  

A
C

T
IV

IT
IE

S
  Component 1: Restoration of productive capital:  UA 57.07 million (59%) 

 Component 2: Development of Value Chains:                  UA 32.88 million (34%) 

 Component 3: Project Management:                                  UA 7.05 million (7%)  

 TOTAL:                    UA 97.00 million 

ADF (Loan/Grant):                  UA 29.44 million   

ADB (Loan):                         EUR 64.36 million          

Government/Beneficiaries:       UA 17.00 million  

Total:                                    UA 97.00 million 

 
 



 

viii 

Implementation Schedule 
  

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 

Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 

1 Board Approval 
                        

2 
Publication of General Procurement 

Notice 

                        

3 
Signature of Financing Agreement 

(ADB and ADF) 

                        

4 Loan Effectiveness 
                        

5 1st Disbursement Authorization 
                        

6 Commencement of Project 
                        

7 Bid Invitation 
                        

8 Contract Award 
                        

9 Works Implementation 
                        

10 Procurement of Goods 
                        

11 
Implementation of Capacity-

building Activities 

                        

12 Mid-Term Review 
                        

13 Audits 
                        

14 Government’s Completion Report 
                        

15 Completion of Activities 
                        

16 Closure 
                        

 



 

1 

BÉLIER REGION AGRO-INDUSTRIAL POLE PROJECT (2PAI-BÉLIER) 

 

Management hereby submits this report and recommendations concerning a proposal to extend 

an ADF loan of UA 26.04 million, an ADF grant of UA 3.4 million and an ADB loan of EUR 

64.360 million to the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire to finance the Bélier Region Agro-Industrial 

Pole Project. 

I STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE  

1.1 Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives  

1.1.1 After a period of economic recession caused by the armed conflict of 1999-2011, the 

Ivorian economy gradually picked up thanks to political stability and the support of International 

Technical and Financial Partners. After a negative growth of -4.7% in 2011, GDP growth rose 

to 9.8% in 2012 and 8.3% in 2013, 2014 and 2015. Concurrently, the poverty rate at the national 

level dropped slightly from 48.9% in 2008 to 46.3% in 2015. The National Development Plan 

(PND 2016-2020) that followed the previous PND 2012-2015, is a unique frame of reference 

for public action. It hinges on five strategic thrusts: (1) Strengthen the quality of institutions and 

good governance; (2) Speed up human capital development and promote well-being; (3) Speed 

up structural transformations and industrialization; (4) Develop infrastructure spread 

harmoniously across the country and preserve the environment; and (5) Strengthen regional 

integration and international cooperation. In the area of gender, it intends to promote enrolment 

and literacy among young girls/women and women’s empowerment. Strategic Thrust 3 involves 

developing the agricultural sector as a means for the structural transformation of the country, 

especially by: (i) improving the quality of agricultural produce; (ii) speeding up the 

modernization and enhanced productivity of the agricultural sector; and (iii) speeding up 

product processing. The project is in line with Pillar 2 (Development of support infrastructure 

for economic recovery) of the CSP (2013-2017), confirmed during the March 2016 mid-term 

review.  

1.1.2 The National Agriculture Investment Programme (PNIA-2010-2016) covers priority 

activities in the crop, livestock and fisheries development sectors. It fits into a common global 

ECOWAS Agricultural Policy Framework and Comprehensive African Agriculture 

Development Programme (ECOWAP/PDDAA). On 13 October 2016, Government launched 

the process to prepare the second-generation PNIA (2017-2025) with NEPAD and ECOWAS 

support, to be implemented by PND 2016-2020. The authorities aim to guide and support 

regional and national efforts in the agricultural sector to guarantee that the 6% growth target is 

met and at least 10% of the budget is allocated to the sector (Maputo Commitment). The 

Government plans to increase this allocation rate from 5.4% in 2016 to 7-8% from 2017, and at 

least 10% from 2018. The Government adopted the agropoles development approach in 

designing this new programme and intends to organise a Donors’ Roundtable to ensure its 

financing.  

1.2 Rationale for the Bank’s Intervention 

1.2.1 During the implementation of PNIA, the Government identified a programme jointly 

with the Bank for the transformation of the agricultural sector based on the agropoles approach. 

Given the availability of resources, the country’s absorptive capacity and the security situation, 

dialogue with the authorities led to the planning of this programme, which is divided into three 

agropoles projects whose order of priority was adopted by common agreement during the 

preparation of CSP 2013-2017, and confirmed during the mid-term review. The first project 

titled “Bélier Region Agro-Industrial Pole Project” benefited from a Project Preparation Facility 

(PPF) advance. The second, the Agro-Industrial Support Project in the North of Côte d’Ivoire, 

will be the subject of a PPF advance being studied. The third project concerning the Tonkpi 



 

2 

Region will be studied subsequently. This report is for the first selected project covering the 

Autonomous District of Yamoussoukro (Yamoussoukro and Attiégouakro Départements) and 

the Bélier administrative region (Didiévi, Djékanou, Tiébissou and Toumodi Départements). 

This zone is about 200 km to the North of Abidjan, covers 11,695 km2 and has 702,000 

inhabitants. It has significant agricultural potentials that is yet to be fully tapped, highly 

degraded infrastructure and several private agro-industrial initiatives being developed. This 

zone has been marked by economic recession for three decades, after the decline of the cocoa-

coffee sub-sector (1980s and 90s) and the military-political crisis of 2000 to 2010, then the post-

electoral crisis of 2010-2011 (see Annexes A, B and C).  

1.2.2 Various Bank missions to the project area and the concerted approach highlighted a 

number of major constraints: (i) serious degradation and insufficiency of irrigation and pastoral 

infrastructure (dams, schemes) as well as socio-economic infrastructure (roads, markets, storage 

facilities, schools, drinking water, etc.); (ii) insufficient social cohesion and organization of 

actors, making it impossible for farmers/processing operators/traders to optimize their joint 

activities; (iii) weak land security; (iv) poor mastery of production techniques; (v) inadequate 

access to the factors of production (e.g. quality seeds); (vi) poor mechanization of agricultural 

activities; and (vii) inexistence of a framework of technical and financial support to private 

initiatives, industrialization and value chains integration, particularly those that are promising 

for youths. A few development projects exist in the region and private initiatives are emerging 

(SIPRA, INTERVALLE, Aurore, etc.). These offer opportunities for ultimately developing 

PPP-type operations. Although local development is constrained by farmer/grazier conflicts and 

climate change, the region (whose headquarter is Yamoussoukro, the country’s administrative 

capital) has first-class infrastructure suitable for economic revitalization, particularly with the 

commissioning of the Abidjan-Yamoussoukro motorway in 2014, the existence of an 

international airport and the presence of a world-class university complex. By virtue of its 

integrated approach, the project is consistent with four (4) of the Bank’s High 5s: (1) Feed 

Africa; (2) Light up Africa; (3) Industrialize Africa; and (5) Improve the quality of life for the 

people of Africa. In particular, it is in line with the Bank’s new Feed Africa: Strategy for 

Agricultural Transformation in Africa, 2016-2025, which implements Pillar 1 focused inter alia 

on higher investments in tangible and intangible infrastructure, mobilization of agricultural 

financial flows, agricultural produce processing, youth employment, the development of 

agropoles and agro-food industry. It is also consistent with the Bank’s Gender Strategy (2014-

2018), especially its second pillar aimed at strengthening women’s economic empowerment, 

and the Bank’s Strategy for Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience, 2014-2019. 

1.3 Aid Coordination  

1.3.1 The Agricultural Infrastructure Development Support Project in Indénié-Djuablin 

Region (PAIA-ID) is the Bank’s only active project in the agricultural sector. It was approved 

in March 2012 (UA 21.6 million grant) and, since October 2016, benefited from a 

supplementary NTF loan of UA 4 million to strengthen agri-business activities. The project 

status is satisfactory since the disbursement rate in November 2016 was 57%. Apart from the 

Bank, many development partners have interventions in the agricultural sector in Côte d’Ivoire 

including the FAO, the World Bank, WADB, the EU, AFD, WFP, IsDB, IFAD, BADEA, JICA, 

GIZ, Spanish Cooperation, Chinese Economic Cooperation and the Indian Government. These 

partners belong to the “Agriculture, Rural Development and Environment” Sector Group, which 

seeks to facilitate consultation and dialogue with the Ivorian Government. Another partner 

group, the Nutrition Sector Group, also works closely with the Agriculture Sector Group.  

1.3.2 FAO supported the Government in several post-crisis operations as well as in the 

design of development thrusts and operationalization of PNIA, especially in the area of rural 

land. In particular, the World Bank finances a multi-national Research Programme in West 

Africa (PPAAO/WAAPP, 2013-2016) that promotes agricultural sector productivity. Its 



 

3 

innovative outcomes can be capitalized in 2PAI-Bélier, especially in terms of new food 

processing technologies for vegetables and cassava. Since 2013, AFD has been financing the 

Project for the Acceleration of Agricultural Sub-Sectors in Côte d’Ivoire (PARFACI) and co-

finances with the World Bank the Agricultural Sector Promotion Project in Côte d’Ivoire 

(PSAC). PARFACI supports the market gardening, pork and fish sub-sectors as well as the land 

sector in Bélier, Gontougo, Poro and Tchologo regions. On completion in mid-2017, it will be 

relayed in its foodstuff component in Bélier region by 2PAI-Bélier especially by supporting the 

market gardening, pork and fish sub-sectors. The EU interventions are in the cash crop/food 

crop sub-sectors, rural land security, agricultural training, the fight against infectious animal 

diseases (epizooty), as well as the health safety of export products. JICA intervention in Bélier 

Region via the Local Rice Promotion Project (PRORIL) is in the form of a technical assistance 

operation to strengthen the capacity of actors in the local rice sub-sector. JICA also supported 

Government to prepare an agricultural mechanization strategy and is preparing a project for its 

operationalization. 2PAI-BÉLIER will forge synergies with all ongoing projects, including 

PARFACI, PRORIL and PPAAO/WAAPP. 

1.3.3 FAO and AFD play a leading role in the “Agriculture, Rural Development and 

Environment” Technical and Financial Partners Group (TFPG). This group has an internal land 

security sub-group with the EU as lead agency and the AfDB, AFD, WB and FAO as members. 

As part of the TFPG, regular consultations are organized in Abidjan, with Bank participation. 

 
Table 1.3: Aid Coordination 

 

Sector or Sub-Sector* 
Scale  (in 2015) 

GDP Exports Labour  

Agriculture and Rural Development 26.5% 36.9% 66% 
Stakeholders – Annual Public Expenditure (CFAF)** 

Government (Average 2013-2015) Donors (Averages 2013-2015) 

CFAF 7.6 billion 

(4.83% of total expenditure)* 

IsDB 10,469,647,585 

IDA 2,005,098,519 

IFAD 9,974,171,755 

AfDB 7,779,132,814 

BOAD (WADB) 5,617,649,943 

GIZ 9,467,612,936 

EU 44,618,527,507 

AFD 22,126,947,537 

AMB Spain 2,572,000,000 

EXIMBANK GROUP 3,160,233,060 

WAEMU 1,606,560,235 

OTHERS 30,163,941,069 

Total 149,561,522,960 

Level of Aid Coordination 

 Existence of thematic working groups [Yes, established under PNIA] 

 Existence of a global sector programme [No, PNIA prepared along with detailed investment plan   

 Role of AfDB in aid coordination Member (not lead agency) 

(*) Sources: Detailed Investment Plan for the implementation of PNIA, MINADER, 6 April 2016 

(**) Source : DPPF, MINADER, 2016 

 

  



 

4 

II PROJECT DESCRIPTION  

 

2.1 Project Objectives and Components 

 

2.1.1 The project’s sector objective is to contribute to enhancing food and nutritional 

security. The specific objective is to contribute to the emergence of an agro-industrial pole in 

Bélier Region through the revitalization of promising agricultural sub-sectors and greater 

involvement of the private sector, youths and women.  

 

2.1.2 Project Design Elements. The project aims to put in place the prerequisite conditions 

for the emergence of an agro-industrial pole to transform and modernize agriculture in the 

erstwhile prosperous Bélier Region, which has experienced economic decline for three decades, 

despite its significant potential. To revive agriculture around promising value chains, the project 

prioritizes an integrated approach to resolve the many impediments to the development of the 

agricultural and agro-industrial sector (infrastructure, factors of production, organization of 

actors and sub-sectors, market integration, access to financing, etc.). The paradigm underlying 

the project’s design is to consider the agricultural and rural sector as a system with mutually 

inter-acting constituent elements. The novelty of this approach, which represents a clean break 

from the sector-based approach, lies in the critical mass of diversified actions capable of 

reviving and sustainably transforming economic activity at the local level. The project is 

founded on the value-chains and sector-integration approach to create a conducive environment 

for private sector involvement, development of community initiatives and employment of 

youths and women. It will bring about the region’s industrialization through the creation of a 

technical assistance framework, a financial arrangement, the promotion of private investments 

and the implementation of several ambitious mechanization, technical innovation, youth 

employment and human capital development programmes. The financial arrangement to 

accompany the approach will comprise: (i) financial support to strengthen the financial capacity 

of banks and decentralized financing systems through a refinancing line; (ii) a Guarantee Fund 

to contribute to mitigating the risk; (iii) an interest rate improvement fund; and (iv) technical 

assistance to financing institutions and targeted beneficiaries (the details of this component are 

given in paragraphs C3.47 to C3.52 of Annex C3 of Volume 2). 

 

2.1.3 Summary of Components: Project implementation will span five years. It will have 

three components whose main outputs are described in Annex C3 and summarized in the table 

below:   
 
Component Cost Description 

Component A 

Restoration of 

productive capital 

UA 

57.07 

million 

(59%) 

Irrigation schemes: Rehabilitation of 3 dams, about 1,835 ha of irrigated areas/marshy rice-growing 

land and 335 ha of market gardening areas. Socio-economic infrastructure: Rehabilitation of 700 km 

of tracks; Rehabilitation/extension of classrooms and canteens in 20 schools; Equipment of 30 health 

structures with malnutrition screening equipment; Establishment of 5 therapeutic nutrition units, 20 

mobile therapeutic nutrition units, and 28 nutrition and supplementation units; Repair of 100 manual 

pumps; Installation of 50 new boreholes equipped with hand pumps; Rehabilitation of 10 HVA systems; 

Establishment of 15 new HVA systems; Extension of 2 DWS systems; Construction of 30 latrines. 

Storage and marketing infrastructure: Construction of 4 agricultural produce consolidation 

centres; Rehabilitation of 17 rural markets; Construction of 10 foodstuff storage facilities, 20 rice 

drying areas and 15 premises for warehousing market gardening products. Stock-breeding 

infrastructure: Development of two pilot pastoral zones; Construction of one slaughter-house; 

Rehabilitation of 3 slaughterhouses and laying out of related cattle markets; Construction of 4 

modern butcher’s shops, 4 pig slaughter areas and 2 pork sales points; Distribution of backyard 

rearing kits to 250 women; Development of 2 fingerlings multiplication farms; Operationalization 

of fish markets; Installation of 50 fish-farmers and about two rice-cultivation/fish-farming parcels; 

Provision of feed manufacture equipment. Energy component: Laying of a 33kV underground 

electric line from the current Yamoussoukro-Industrial Zone sub-station to raise capacity in the 

industrial zone and laying of a second 33 kV line (32 km) from the current Yamoussoukro sub-

station to the Didiévi sub-station to secure the power supply of the Département.   

  



 

5 

Component B 

Development of 

value chains 

UA 

32.88 

million 

(34%) 

Land security: (i) Support to mechanisms in place for land clarification and issuance of land 

certificates; (ii) Training of actors of both sexes; Demarcation of some ten village territories. 

Organization and structuring of actors: Strengthening of the capacity of about 42 SCOOPs and 

40 farmers’ groupings including unions at regional level as well as inter-professions (rice, maize, 

cassava) being created. Support for the employment of young graduates: Implementation of a 

programme to employ 800 young boys and girls in line with Enable Youth Côte d’Ivoire: (i) increase 

the teaching facilities and technological infrastructure of 5 vocational training institutions in the 

region (including INP-ESA); and (ii) set up an incubator for young entrepreneurs and project 

developers in the agricultural value chains to foster the emergence of very small enterprises. 

Technical and managerial support of actors: Supply of quality seeds (design and implementation 

of a seed production programme, technical assistance to MINADER’s seed service); Advisory-

support (design and implementation of a programme to disseminate production good practice based 

on an innovative approach). Research-development (in partnership with CNRA and ANADER); 

Technical support for investment promotion (technical assistance to support developers refine their 

feasibility studies and business plans). Value-chain development fund: Put a financing mechanism 

in place comprising: (i) financial support to strengthen the financial capacity of partner decentralized 

financial systems through a medium-term refinancing line called Refinancing Facility as well as a 

Guarantee Fund to contribute to mitigating bank risks in financing agricultural SMEs; and (ii) 

technical assistance aimed at supporting the project’s partner financing institutions for the 

development and marketing of new financial products. Agricultural mechanization: Design and 

implementation of a mechanization support programme, including promoting tried and tested 

technologies; Support for innovation and for procurement of agricultural machines (including 

manufacturers, public utility companies and financial services); and Strengthening of users’ 

technical and organizational capacity. Promotion of the agro-food industry: Support for the 

revitalization of the Yamoussoukro industrial zone and private initiatives (reinforcement in power, 

water and ICTs); Support to community agro-industrial units, including those run by women (rice 

steaming, cassava processing, etc.); Support for contacts/contracting between industrialists and 

producers; Study on the creation of a technopolis around the University of Yamoussoukro and the 

industrial zone. Promotion of information and communication technologies: Establishment of 

core infrastructure in terms of telephony, internet and mobility; Creation of a GIS; Putting in place 

of IT/media resources; Support for the agricultural market information system; Establishment of 

SMS-based communication services; and Building on the major achievements and contributions at 

national level of the e-agriculture programme implemented since 2012 and steered by ANSUT. 

Nutrition support: Training of 60 health workers, medical doctors, nurses and mid-wives; 

Establishment of structures for management and tools for malnutrition screening; Organization of 

malnutrition screening campaigns; Promotion of maternal breast-feeding; Broadcast of local-

language radio programmes on good nutritional practices; Technical support (training, technical 

assistance, logistics) for establishing a food health control system and a bio-fortification programme. 

Marketing support: Modernization of markets (component A); Organization of markets and 

support for their functionality; Support for the procurement of suitable means of transport, 

conservation and warehousing; Support to the agricultural markets information system (ICT sub-

component); Study of the wholesale market in the city of Yamoussoukro. Complementary support 

for gender promotion: Strengthening of actors’ technical capacity to mainstream gender; 

Strengthening of literacy among women; Support for the empowerment of women and young girls; 

and Development of women’s entrepreneurship. Institutional support: Support for the project’s 

partner structures to make them more efficient and enable them ensure in a sustainable manner the 

implementation of activities assigned.  

Component C : 

Project 

management 

UA 7.05 

million 

(7%) 

Coordination of project activities with stakeholders; Equipment and operation of the project; 

Rehabilitation of ECP premises; Procurement of goods, services and works; Administrative, 

accounting and financial management; Project’s internal and external monitoring/evaluation; Audit; 

Information and communication activities. 

 

2.2 Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Explored  

 

2.2.1 The technical solutions adopted for infrastructure are based on standards ensuring the 

sustainability of investments at acceptable costs and targeting good beneficiary ownership. 

Rural roads will be rehabilitated in accordance with the technical standards defined by the Road 

Management Agency (AGEROUTE). Special attention will be given to the treatment of critical 

points as this will allow for an uninterrupted flow of traffic in all seasons to and from most 

localities. For irrigated areas, the project prioritized the rehabilitation of existing gravity-based 

structures upstream the dam, extending somewhere available water so allows. Some degraded 

dams will also be consolidated to avoid the risk of submersion or rupture. As regards the 

development of marshy areas and market gardens, the traditional techniques used will be 

improved and modernized to lighten the work and introduce greater efficiency. For marshy 

areas, the concern will be to better regulate high-water levels and gravity-based distribution of 



 

6 

water through suitable works. For gardens, this will involve ensuring water drainage while 

promoting localized irrigation techniques (drip method, spray irrigation, etc.). New areas will 

be irrigated to encourage private community initiatives and meet different market needs. 

Marketing buildings will be constructed according to standards usually applied in the country 

through various projects. 

 
Table 2.2: Alternative Solutions Explored and Reasons for Rejection 

Alternative Solution Brief Description 

 

Reason for Rejection 

 

Construction of new dams 

with schemes downstream 

Creation of new retention dams by 

developing irrigated areas. 

 Numerous existing dams with under-developed schemes 
downstream whose rehabilitation is priority, considering 

the available financial resources. 

 Costly investments not justified given the potential already 
in place but not fully tapped. 

Laying out of large 

schemes fed via pumping 

Develop new irrigated areas of 

several hectares while ensuring 

water supply through pumping 

 High cost of maintaining schemes than for gravity-based 
networks. 

 Priority given to medium-sized and insufficiently 
developed gravity-based schemes. 

Light re-profiling of roads Light treatment of wearing course 

in place 

 Life cycle generally below one year. 
 Unsuitable solution for roads not having been the subject 

of initial rehabilitation. 

 Accessibility not assured because of many critical points 
and crossings. 

 

2.3 Project Type 

 

2PAI-BÉLIER is an autonomous operation in the form of a Loan/Grant for an investment 

project. The country is far advanced in the PDDAA process with the existence of PNIA and 

preparation of a Medium-Term Expenditure Framework (MTEF). Pending completion of the 

process, most donor interventions in the sector are undertaken through targeted investment 

projects.  

 

2.4 Project Cost and Financing Arrangements  

 

2.4.1 The project’s total cost, net of taxes and customs duty, is estimated at UA 97 million 

(approximately CFAF 80.99 billion), including UA 32.50 million (CFAF 27.14 billion) in 

foreign exchange and UA 64.49 million (CFAF 53.85 billion) in local currency. A rate of 5 to 

10% for physical contingencies on works and equipment, making a total of UA 4.4 million for 

this heading or 4.5% of the total project cost, was also factored in. A provision of 3% for 

composite price escalation was applied to all components. Summary cost estimates by 

component and by expenditure category are presented in the tables below. Detailed tables of 

project costs and the list of goods and services are attached as Annexes D5 and D6 of Volume 

2. 
Table 2.3: Cost Estimates by Component 

Components 

 

(CFAF '000) (UA '000) 

% Local 

Cur. 

For. Exch. Total Local 

Cur. 

For. 

Exch. 

Total 

Restoration of productive capital 22,709,325 18,787,485 41,496,810 27,197 22,500 49,698 51.2 

Development of value chains 21,594,780 2,848,370 24,443,150 25,862 3,411 29,274 30.2 

Project management 3,078,450 2,168,450 5,246,900 3,687 2,597 6,284 6.5 

Total base costs 47,382,555 23,804,305 71,186,860 56,746 28,509 85,255 87.9 

Physical contingencies 2,405,640 1,240,513 3,646,153 2,881 1,486 4,367 4.5 

Price escalation 4,064,157 2,096,562 6,160,719 4,867 2,511 7,378 7.6 

Total  53,852,353 27,141,379 80,993,732 64,494 32,506 97,000 100.0 

 

 

 



 

7 

Table 2.4: Project Cost by Expenditure Category 

Expenditure Categories 
(CFAF '000) (UA '000) 

% Local Cur. For. Exch. Total Local 

Cur. 

For. 

Exch. 

Total 

Works 20,495,560 18,704,500 39,200,060 24,546 22,401 46,947 48.4 

Goods 1,698,400 1,081,000 2,779,400 2,034 1,295 3,329 3.4 

Services 9,886,345 3,607,755 13,494,100 11,840 4,321 16,161 16.7 

Miscellaneous* 11,220,900  11,220,900 13,438  13,438 13.9 

Staff 321,425  321,425 385  385 0.4 

Operating costs 3,073,425 255,950 3,329,375 3,681 306 3,987 4.1 

PPF 686,500 155,100 841,600 822 186 1,008 1.0 

Total base costs 47,382,555 23,804,305 71,186,860 56,746 28,509 85,255 87.9 

Physical contingencies 2,405,640 1,240,513 3,646,153 2,881 1,486 4,367 4.5 

Price escalation 4,064,157 2,096,562 6,160,719 4,867 2,511 7,378 7.6 

Total  53,852,353 27,141,379 80,993,732 64,494 32,506 97,000 100.0 

  (*) Value Chains Development Fund and settlement of customary rights. 

  

2.4.2 Project Financing. The project will be financed by: (i) an ADB loan of EUR 64.36 

million (UA 50.56 million), an ADF Grant of UA 3.4 million and an ADF Loan of UA 26.04 

million, making a total of UA 80 million (82.5% of total cost); and (ii) the counterpart 

contribution by the Government and beneficiaries amounting to UA 17 million (CFAF 14.1 

billion), or 17.5% of the total cost. The grant includes the Bank’s UA 998,000 PPF advance to 

the Ivorian Government in February 2015 as well as the service fee. This advance will be 

reimbursed in accordance with PPF’s operational guidelines. Government’s counterpart 

contribution will finance the cost of irrigation schemes, the routine maintenance of roads 

(RMF), the settlement of customary rights in the industrial zone, the rehabilitation/extension of 

the erstwhile PADER-Lakes buildings to serve as project offices and part of operating costs. 

Beneficiaries’ contribution of UA 267,000 (CFAF 223 million), or 3% of the total project cost, 

will be used for irrigation scheme and human water works. The distribution of project financing 

is indicated in Table 2.5 below while Tables 2.6 and 2.7 show the distribution of the grant and 

loans by expenditure category. 

 
Table 2.5: Sources of Financing 

Sources 

Amount (CFAF '000) Amount (UA '000) 

% 
For Exch. Local Cur. Total 

For. 

Exch. 

Local 

Cur. 
Total 

ADB loan 19,004,459 23,212,706 42,217,165 22,760 27,800 50,560 52.1 

ADF loan 5,389,115 16,354,187 21,743,302 6,454 19,586 26,040 26.8 

ADF grant 262,677 2,576,444 2,839,121 315 3,086 3,400 3.5 

   Including PPF 155,100 686,500 841,600 186 822 1,008 1.0 

Total AfDB Group 24,656,251 42,143,337 66,799,588 29,529 50,472 80,001 82.5 

Government  2,485,128 11,485,663 13,970,791 2,977 13,755 16,732 17.2 

Beneficiaries - 223,353 223,353 - 267 267 0.3 

Total 27,141,379 53,852,353 80,993,732 32,506 64,494 97,000 100.0 

 

 

  



 

8 

Table 2.6: Distribution of ADF Financing by Expenditure Category  

Categories 

ADF Loan (UA Thousand) ADF Grant (UA Thousand) 

Local Cur. For. Exch. Total L.C. 

For. 

Exch. Total 

Works 2,405 1,300 3,705    

Goods 1,148 801 1,949    

Services 7,691 3,912 11,603 2,156 125 2,281 

Operating costs 3,491 201 3,692    

Miscellaneous 3,944  3,944    

PPF   ,, 822 186 1,008 

Not Allocated 906 241 1,147 107 4 111 

Total 19,585 6,455 26,040 3,085 315 3,400 

 

Table 2.7: Distribution of ADB Financing by Expenditure Category  

Categories  
ADB (UA Thousand) ADB Loan (EUR Thousand) 

Local Cur. For. Exch. Total Local Cur. For. Exch. Total 

Works 22,643 20,413 43,056 28,823 25,985 54,808 

Goods 1,042 452 1,494 1,327 575 1,902 

Services 2,554 692 3,246 3,251 880 4,131 

Not allocated 1,561 1,203 2,764 1,987 1,532 3,519 

Total 27,800 22,760 50,560 35,388 28,972 64,360 

 

2.5 Project Target Area and Beneficiaries  

2.5.1 The project area covers the Autonomous District of Yamoussoukro (Yamoussoukro 

and Attiégouakro Départements) and Bélier Administrative Region (Diediévi, Djékanou, 

Tiebessou and Toumodi Départements). It is about 200 km to the North of Abidjan and covers 

11,695 km2. The climate is of the humid tropical or Sudano-Guinean type. Recent studies on 

rainfall in this region over a period of 30 years (1980-2010) show an irregular distribution of 

rain with annual values ranging between 1,000 and 1,200 mm. The effects of climate change 

are increasingly felt, leading to disruptions in the planting/harvest calendar. Nevertheless, the 

project area has high agricultural and water potential, characterized by a fairly flat relief crossed 

by a dense hydrographic network (Bandama, N’Zi and Kan Rivers) This hydrography offers the 

region good opportunities for rice cultivation, fishing and fish-farming, which remain untapped. 

According to the 2014 General Population and Housing Census (RGPH 2014), the project area 

has a population of 702,000 of which 51% male and 49% female. Poverty rose from 41.4% in 

2002 to 61.8% in 2015 in Bélier Region and from 25% to 39.4% in Yamoussoukro District 

(INS-ENV2015). Average annual income per capita is CFAF 373,504 in urban areas and CFAF 

246,122 in rural areas. These values are lower than at the national level where they are CFAF 

467,080 and CFAF 256,538. The prevalence of chronic malnutrition stands at 30.4% (SMART 

2011) and underweight at 17.3% (EDS 2012). These ratios reflect a very preoccupying 

nutritional situation, considering that the acceptable threshold of chronic malnutrition is 20%.  

2.5.2 Due to the major constraints for the region’s development and economic recovery (see 

1.2.2), Bélier Region was prioritized during the identification mission undertaken with Bank 

support (see Annex B of Volume 2). This choice was also guided by the significant potential 

that exists but which remains untapped, the existing anchor infrastructure (motorway, airport), 

the existence of a world-class university complex (INPHB), the need to revitalize the region 

around Yamoussoukro, the country’s administrative capital, which has experienced economic 

decline for several decades. It was also guided by the urgency to help the region’s population 

who expect a far-reaching development intervention (the Lacs Region Rural Development 

Support Project assessed by ADF in 2000 was not implemented because disbursements were 



 

9 

suspended in 2002 at the start of the armed conflict in Côte d’Ivoire). The project’s beneficiaries 

are value chain actors, organized as groups or cooperatives, as well as private operators with 

SME status. The project will directly benefit about 112,000 people in all. Its impact on 

employment is significant due to the creation of the equivalent of about 19,000 permanent jobs 

(approximately 4.8 million workdays). 

2.6 Participatory Approach in Project Identification, Design and Implementation  

The project was the subject of wide consultations at all stages of its study. Contacts made during 

the identification mission in March 2013 were continued during the preparatory (June 2015) 

and appraisal (June 2016) phases in Bélier Region, Yamoussoukro District and Abidjan. 

Meetings were held with the administrative authorities, local communities, technical structures, 

farmers’ organizations, women’s groups, private partners, ongoing projects and TFPs involved. 

Several workshops were organized during PPF implementation to select irrigation sites and road 

sections to be rehabilitated. Moreover, the project’s implementation will require the putting in 

place of mechanisms closely involving and empowering the various value chain actors. Since 

the sustainability of interventions, especially those concerning irrigation infrastructure, would 

require the full ownership of the parties concerned, the option was taken to target in priority the 

most committed communities that also fulfil the selection criteria (explicitly made request, land 

security, organization method, contributions and commitments, etc.). For the different sub-

sectors affected, the project will support the establishment of platforms to facilitate synergy 

among stakeholders and by systematically involving those of the private sector. Periodic 

meetings and information campaigns will be financed by the project to ensure proper 

communication and enable participatory decision-making by the actors. 

2.7 Consideration of Bank Group Experience and Lessons Learned in Project Design 

The Bank finances the Agricultural Infrastructure Development Support Project in the Indénié-

Djuablin Region (see 1.3.1). Lessons drawn from the project’s mid-term review were considered 

in the design of 2PAI-BÉLIER, including: (i) greater consideration of the value chains approach 

and promotion of private investment; (ii) optimization of the performance of delegated 

contracting authorities through a better definition of roles and tasks; (iii) expected improvement 

of the procurement process by enhancing the quality of procurement dossiers with a view to 

recruiting competent contractors and firms; and (iv) establishment of competent human 

resources for an efficient management of activities, including cross-cutting aspects 

(environment and gender). The table in Annex C1 details measures taken to reflect the lessons 

learned. An additional NTF financing in the form of a UA 4 million loan was approved by the 

Bank Board of Directors on 21 October 2016 to support agri-business activities. Value chains 

and the role played by the private sector was reflected in the project design. Overall, the project 

design benefited from the pilot initiatives of the Feed Africa Strategy in terms of the 

development of agropoles, youth employment and agriculture financing with shared risks.  

2.8 Key Performance Indicators  

2.8.1 The key performance indicators presented in the logical framework will be refined 

through the project’s baseline situation. The outcome indicators include: (i) outputs and 

production; (ii) additional production processed and marketed; (iii) higher revenue and income 

generation for farmers and settled youths; (iv) the number of women and youths having 

benefited from project support; (v) the average time of electricity cuts in the industrial zone and 

in the town of Didiévi. The main output indicators are: (i) the irrigated surface area laid out, 

rehabilitated or developed; (ii) the number of infrastructure constructed or rehabilitated 

(consolidation centres, rural markets, storage facilities, etc.); (iii) the number of bore holes and 

pumps for rehabilitated DWS; (iv) the linear distance of roads and electric lines restored; (v) 

the number of agricultural groupings and professional organizations (OPA), youths and women 



 

10 

trained or settled in various fields; (vi) the effectiveness of support systems in place 

(mechanization programme, development fund, ICT, etc.); and (vii) the number of senior staff 

and agents of technical services trained.  

2.8.2 Other gender-specific indicators will be added during finalization of the 

monitoring/evaluation system and establishment of the baseline situation, according to the 

results-based management approach. These include: (i) the proportion of women in each 

beneficiary group; (ii) the involvement of women and youths in farmers’ and infrastructure 

management groupings; (iii) the number of land certificates issued to women and youths; (iv) 

the number of women and young graduates settled; and (v) the number of people benefiting 

from the bio-fortification programme. Special emphasis will be laid on the monitoring of socio-

economic impacts (gender- and youth-disaggregated data, monitoring of FO performance, 

turnover of very small enterprises, etc.).  

III PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1 Economic and Financial Performance 

3.1.1 The project’s financial and economic performance was assessed over a 25-year 

period. The calculation of project benefits was based on an estimation of additional outputs 

under the project combined with the effects of an increase in the sown land surface due to works 

(Component A) and the technology package adopted (Component B). The analysis took into 

account the characteristics of agricultural plantations in a without-project and with-project 

scenarios, and the trend of the technical level illustrated by activity fact sheets. More precisely, 

the project benefits come from: (i) the increase in productivity (rice, maize, cassava, vegetables, 

pork and fish); (ii) the increase in the productivity and surface area of rain-fed cultivation; (iii) 

and the increase in the income of youths and SMEs benefiting from the project’s technical and 

financial support.  

3.1.2 In terms of economic profitability, the project has an economic rate of return (ERR) of 

30% and Net Present Value (NPV) of CFAF 123 billion at an opportunity cost of capital of 

12%. These results are deemed satisfactory in light of project activities. The project is more 

sensitive to a decrease in production than to an increase in investment costs. A 10% decrease in 

expected production induces an ERR of 26.8% and a 10% increase in investment costs gives an 

ERR of 28.7%. A 10% decrease in production at the same time as a 10% increase in investment 

costs gives an ERR of 24.9%, which is still above the opportunity cost of capital (12%). The 

assumptions and detailed calculation of financial and economic analyses are presented in Annex 

E1 of Volume 2.  

Table 3.1: Main Economic and Financial Data 

Outcome Assessment Economic 

NPV (baseline scenario: discount rate: 12%) CFAF 123 billion 

Economic Rate of Return (ERR) 30% 

3.1.3 The analysis of the project’s financial performance shows positive additional income 

for all operating models studied. The project will benefit about 11,900 farmers including about 

1,600 for irrigated areas, 8,500 for rain-fed crops and 800 young graduates, as well as 200 SMEs 

(50 of them in produce processing), 150 pig breeders and 100 fish farmers. The project’s impact 

is significant for all plantation types studied, returns being higher for models representing 

irrigated agriculture. The additional income by model are as follows: CFAF 1.2 million for 

Model M1 representing farmers in rice-growing areas (about CFAF 1.2 billion in all), CFAF 7.2 

million for Model M2 representing market gardening farmers (CFAF 4.9 billion in all), CFAF 



 

11 

2.5 million for Model M3 representing rain-fed activities (CFAF 22 billion in all), CFAF 4.8 

million for Model M4 representing young farmers (CFAF 3.8 billion in all), and CFAF 20 

million for Model M5 representing SMEs (CFAF 2 billion in all), CFAF 2.5 million for Model 

M6 representing pig breeders (CFAF 375 million in all) and CFAF 4.5 million for Model M7 

representing fish farmers (CFAF 450 million in all). The project will directly benefit about 

112,000 people with 107,000 of them are expected to be eased out of poverty. It will create the 

equivalent of about 19,000 permanent jobs in the region (see Annex E1 of Volume 2).  

3.2 Environmental and Social Impact 

3.2.1 Environment. The project was classified in Environmental Category 2 since it has 
negligible impact on the environment and will not require population displacement. The 

Environmental and Social Management Plan was approved by ORQR and published on the Bank’s 

website on 18 November 2016. The project will have both positive and negative environmental and 

social impacts. The rehabilitation of irrigated areas (dykes and networks) will cause little 

destruction to ecosystems. Possible scheme extensions will lead only to the felling of a few 

shrubs and uprooting of secondary bushes made up largely by pennisetum purpureum. The same 

is true for impacts of the construction zone of the Raviart mini-dam where: (i) the water storage 

area has deteriorated greatly due to frequent bush fires and illegal logging of the gallery forest; 

and (ii) the poor exploitation of marshy areas by farmers who are not accustomed to it; the few 

cashew nut trees planted close to the marshy areas cover small areas that can easily be 

compensated by the activities of the Climate Change Based Project undertaken concurrently in 

the 2PAI-BÉLIER zone. Socially, the rehabilitation of structures can lead some land owners, 

most of whom are settlers, to over-price agricultural plantations in marshy zones. The 

rehabilitation of rural roads will not cause significant environmental impacts. The same is true 

of the rehabilitation and extension of socio-economic infrastructure (markets, health centres, 

schools and canteens, energy and ICT, fishing and livestock infrastructure, etc.). This 

infrastructure can only improve and ensure the sustainability of the positive impacts expected 

from the implementation of 2PAI-BÉLIER Project activities. The analysis of negative impacts 

reveals two major observations: (i) project activities will neither cause population displacement 

nor seriously undermine biological diversity; and (ii) negative impacts can be mitigated or 

minimized through the measures defined in the 2PAI-BÉLIER ESMP that was prepared during 

the appraisal mission (Annex E of Volume 2). 

3.2.2 Climate Change: Spatial and temporal variations in rainfall patterns are a real cause 

for concern for the conduct of activities in the project area as well as across the country. 

Activities directly concerned are rain-fed agriculture and activities undertaken in lowlands 

developed as water catchment in case of pronounced water shortages. For lowlands on dams to 

be rehabilitated, technical measures will be taken during works to minimize the effects of high-

water level in case of abundant rains (overflow for excess water and networks of drains). To 

mitigate erosion of the banks of lowlands, the project will ensure that good agricultural practices 

are applied, while encouraging farmers to build anti-erosion strips. Tools for implementing alert 

procedures (i.e. collection and processing of climate data and mechanisms for their 

communication to actors) are inadequate and/or obsolete. The project will contribute to 

improving these procedures in the region by: (i) increasing the number of rain gauges in the 

sub-prefectures and villages hosting project sites; and (ii) providing more equipment, 

strengthening capacity to collect and process data and means of communication. The emphasis 

on the rehabilitation of irrigation schemes is in itself a contribution to build the resilience of 

agricultural production systems. The project will support all activities already undertaken in the 

region by WAAPP/PPAAO and CNRA concerning the dissemination of reputedly drought-

resistant plant varieties. The energy component will help to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 

by resorting less to diesel generators (the alternative source when power supplied by the national 

grid becomes unavailable). Besides, as part of the Global Climate Change Initiative (FIP, 

REDD+) financed by the Climate Strategy Fund (SCF), the Bank will support agroforestry and 



 

12 

the creation of forest plantations in the Centre, including in Bélier Region. This intervention 

will be in the form of a project whose appraisal will take place in the first quarter of 2017. This 

project is to be implemented in synergy with 2PAI BÉLIER. It will help to reduce greenhouse 

gas emissions, increase carbon sequestration and build the resilience of production systems. 

3.2.3 Gender Impacts. Women make up 49.6% of the population in the project area. Most 

of them engage in agriculture, in particular in the food value chains (cassava production and 

processing, market gardening produce production and marketing, rice steaming, etc.). Women 

are often confined to less fertile and less irrigated parcels due to the difficulty they encounter in 

accessing landed property. In general, women farm extensively on small areas (about one ha), 

practicing shifting cultivation with few factors of production. Often, agricultural outreach is 

undertaken at their expense because it targets cash crops and organized sub-sectors that are 

dominated by men. Women use old and precarious processing equipment. Most of them do not 

know their rights, are poorly organized and are victims of all manners of violence (sexual, 

physical, psychological, economic, harmful traditional practices, denial of opportunities). 

3.2.4 Considering these constraints and the concentration of 2PAI Bélier on food sub-

sectors, the project’s gender strategy will promote women’s empowerment and gender equality 

in access to project services and resources, the implementation of each of its components, 

community representation and decision-making. In this regard, the project will facilitate 

women’s access to land by facilitating the access of close to 2,200 women to the restored 

irrigated areas. Furthermore, 50% of land certificates, the issuance of which will be facilitated 

by the project, will be set aside for women. The project will lay special emphasis on promoting 

women’s equitable access to technologies, mechanized equipment, inputs (seeds, fertilizers and 

pest-control products), supervision services and financing on a par with men. It will support 

women to procure modern cassava processing and rice-steaming equipment. Rehabilitated 

markets will take into account the specific needs of women, especially cold rooms, and include 

gender-separate sanitation facilities, day care facilities and literacy centres. The project will 

facilitate the evacuation and sale of agricultural produce by establishing platforms, setting up 

farmer/trader contracting systems and rehabilitating rural roads. The project’s “Youth training 

and settlement programme” component will reach about 400 young girls, or 50% of the 

beneficiaries of the said programme. In addition, at least 40% of enterprises managed by women 

will be integrated in the project’s “SME support” component.  

3.2.5 At the strategic level, specific measures and actions will be taken to develop women’s 

leadership and remedy the significant illiteracy rate. A package of integrated services aimed at 

building suitable technical and social capacity, as well as life skills (family planning, HIV/AIDS 

control and violence against women, etc.) necessary for their empowerment will be provided. 

The project will also work to better structure women’s organizations around selected sites by 

ensuring that woman represent 50% of members of various committees and bureaus of 

cooperatives or professional organizations targeted. The project will also work to endow the 

selected support, supervisory or training structures and agricultural professional organizations 

and management units with real technical capacity in gender mainstreaming/inclusion based on 

a gender organizational audit. The Ecole Supérieure d’Agronomie (Advanced School of 

Agronomy, ESA) will be supported to incorporate gender-based modules in its training 

curriculum to enable the country have agronomy and agricultural specialists who are sensitive 

to gender issues. The project will produce the gender profile of the Bélier Region agricultural 

sector, including Yamoussoukro District, which will serve to define indicators for measuring 

gender equality. A gender specialist within the Project Management Unit will monitor gender 

activities. 

3.2.6 Achieving this project’s gender-mainstreaming objectives depends on the knowledge 

and capacity of different sector actors. Therefore, it is necessary from project commencement, 

to undertake training, sensitization and communication actions for a change of behaviour. 



 

13 

Furthermore, the project must sustain the achievements of women in their sectors of activity. In 

this regard, a strict monitoring must be undertaken so that women are not excluded in their 

production sectors (these sectors are bound to become more attractive for men due to the 

modernization of factors of production and an increase in income accruing therefrom).  

3.2.7 Women will benefit from all project activities for a cost amounting to approximately 

UA 58 million. Moreover, a budget of CFAF 1.4 billion (or UA 1.7 million) will be allocated 

specifically to implement targeted actions to empower women and promote gender in the project 

area’s agricultural sector. 

3.2.8 Youth Employment and Inclusion: The project area had 702,000 inhabitants in 2014 

(RGPH data), a third of whom are youths. Despite their predominance in the labour force, 

youths are less occupied and the most vulnerable on the labour market. The national 

employment situation prepared by AGEPE based on 2014 employment data reveals that youths 

are the least active in terms of occupation (59.2% against 66% for the entire labour force), the 

most unemployed (8.3% against 7% for the whole) and the most inactive (32.7% against 2.7%). 

Young men are relatively more occupied (53.5%) whereas young woman are relatively more 

unemployed (58.6%). The level of education of youths is higher (average duration of studies of 

8.8 years against 6.6 years for the entire population of working age). Furthermore, the level of 

education is higher among unemployed youths than among active employed youths (average 

duration of studies is 9.9 years against 7.9 years). Further, youths aged 14-24 years constitute a 

significant percentage of labour in the informal sector compared to the entire population 

(91.1%), more so for young men (94.1%).  

3.2.9 The project will contribute to improving youth employment indicators. It will also 

enhance production and marketing conditions (irrigation infrastructure, roads, markets, etc.), as 

well as access to innovative technologies and factors of production (inputs, equipment, etc.). 

This material capacity building, coupled with stronger technical and financial capacity, will 

boost the productivity of activities undertaken, increase income and prompt the youths to return 

to farming. Besides, during the establishment and/or rehabilitation of irrigation schemes, youths 

will be called up to provide labour. The young artisans of the region will also see their capacity 

strengthened and will thus ensure better services to the satisfaction of producers. This capacity 

building will be undertaken jointly with the Regional Trades Chamber. The platforms envisaged 

by the project for different sub-sectors will help to increase the number of clients and young 

artisans, and resolve issues of unpaid services due to poor produce sales. The project will 

facilitate the implementation of a specific study on the situation of artisans in Bélier Region, 

including Yamoussoukro District. This will provide exhaustive and relevant data for the 

professionalization of the sector, and a better participation of artisans in the establishment of 

the envisaged agro-industrial pole.  

3.2.10 Under its “Support to entrepreneurship” component, the project will foster youth self-

employment. Ongoing initiatives in different local communities (Yamoussoukro Autonomous 

District, Tiébissou mayor) to establish young entrepreneurs will be supported by the project. To 

that end, grants for the establishment of youths will awarded for the conduct of short-duration 

(at most three months) qualifying training programmes. For that, the project will build on the 

expertise of École Supérieure d’Agronomie (ESA). A consultancy firm will be solicited to 

support young entrepreneurs to prepare their feasibility studies. Young girls will make up at 

least 30% of young entrepreneurs supported. The installation of agro-industrial units will also 

contribute to increasing youth employment, as is the case with the Toumodi cassava industrial 

processing unit. Therefore, the project should support access to financing to develop ongoing 

initiatives and facilitate the establishment of new operators. 

 



 

14 

IV IMPLEMENTATION  

4.1 Implementation Arrangement 

4.1.1 Implementation Arrangements: The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 

(MINADER) will be the project executing agency. The day-to-day management of the project 

will be ensured by the project coordination team, which will be under the supervision of the 

General Directorate of Planning, Statistics and Projects (DGPSP) based in the vacant premises 

of defunct PADER-Lakes that will be enlarged. The project is in line with Presidential Directive 

No. 02/2015 particularly paragraphs 3, 4 and 4.1. Staff for the coordination team are being 

recruited and studies and BDs of flagship components (rehabilitation of irrigation schemes and 

roads) are available, thanks to activities undertaken under the PPF advance (see Annex C). 

4.1.2 The main tasks of the team are the coordination, control and monitoring of all project 

activities, as well as the information and contact of the different actors. The team will comprise 

a Coordinator, a specialist in charge of technical operations, an Administrative and Finance 

Specialist, a Monitoring/Evaluation Specialist, a specialist responsible for the farmers’ 

organizations support service, a Procurement Specialist, a Rural Engineering Specialist, a 

Specialist in Agri-business, a Specialist in the Livestock and Fisheries Sub-sector, a Specialist 

in Agricultural Credit, an Environmentalist Specialist, a Gender Specialist and support staff. 

The members of the coordination team being recruited as part of the PPF advance will sign 

performance contracts with the implementation unit. Renewal of such contracts shall be subject 

to annual review. Only senior staff whose performance is deemed satisfactory will be 

maintained. The Borrower will submit to the Bank evidence of appointment of the project 

coordinator (“Condition Precedent to First Disbursement”) within at most six months after 

effectiveness and evidence of the designation of the rest of the team (“Other Condition”). A 

technical committee will support DGPSP in activities to render the loan effective and implement 

the project (monitor the recruitment of the coordination team, etc.). It will comprise members 

from MINADER, technical directorates of Ministries in charge of youth employment and 

livestock/fishery resources and technical advisers from Ministries in charge of the Budget, 

Economy and Finance. The committee’s mandate shall not exceed six months following the 

signature of Agreements. The travel expenses of members of this committee will be borne by 

the State’s counterpart contribution to PPF.  

4.1.3 Steering: The project will be steered by a national committee bringing together the 

representatives of the following Ministries: (i) Ministry of Planning and Development; (ii); 

Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development; (iii) Ministry in charge of the Economy and 

Finance; (iv) Ministry in charge of the Budget; (v) Ministry of Trade; (vi) Ministry of Economic 

Infrastructure; (vii) Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development; (viii) Ministry 
of the Family, the Woman and the Child; (ix) Ministry of Livestock and Fishery Resources; (x) 

Ministry of Youth Promotion and Employment and Civil Service; (xi) Ministry of Industry and 

Mines; (xii) General Confederation of Enterprises of Côte d’Ivoire; (xiii) the National 

Association of Agricultural Professional Organizations; and (xiv) the Group of Women’s 

Organizations for Gender Equality. The Steering Committee will be chaired by the 

representative of the Minister of Agriculture and Rural Development, and its technical 

secretariat will be managed by the Directorate in charge of Planning in the DGPSP. An inter-

ministerial order will be signed in this regard. This committee will meet at least twice yearly to 

consider the outputs and outcomes obtained, approve progress reports and annual work 

programmes and budgets, clear possible blockages and constraints, and ensure that activities 

implemented are consistent with national strategies and policies. The Borrower will submit to 

the Bank evidence of creating a National Steering Committee latest six months following 

effectiveness of the loans. This constitutes the “Other Condition”. 

 



 

15 

4.1.4 Regional Consultative Framework (CRC): This framework targets the harmonization 

of development interventions, local arbitration and the quest for regional balance. It will be 

chaired by the Préfet of the region. The Regional Director of Agriculture will handle the 

technical secretariat. A ministerial order will be signed to that end (Annex D1.3 of Volume 2). 

4.1.5 Associated Agencies: The project will forge partnership or delegated supervisory 

(MOD) relations, through agreements, with specialized experienced agencies to execute or 

monitor tasks falling within their spheres of competence. These include the National Rural 

Development Support Agency (ANADER) for agricultural supervision and outreach; ONDR 

for monitoring works in rice-growing areas; the Foodstuffs Marketing Assistance Authority 

(OCPV) for marketing related arrangements; the Roads Management Agency (AGEROUTE) 

for the delegated supervision of roads; the Territorial Directorate of Human Water Management 

(DTHH), for the supervision of drinking water works; the Investment Promotion Centre of Côte 

d’Ivoire (CEPICI) to monitor the projects of agricultural enterprises; the National Polytechnic 

Institute – Ecole Supérieure d’Agronomie (INP-ESA) and the Youth Employment Agency for the 

implementation of the youth training/incubation/settlement programme and some technical 

directorates of MINADER, MIRAH, Ministries in charge of the environment, women’s 

advancement and the child and the Ministry of Industry for activities falling within their 

respective spheres of competence.  

4.1.6 Procurement Procedures: The procurement of goods (including services other than 

those of consultants), works and consultancy services financed by the Bank as part of this 

project, will be done in accordance with the Procurement Policy for Bank Group Funded 

Operations, October 2015 edition and pursuant to the terms of the Financing Agreement. 

Specifically, procurements will be done in accordance with: (i) Côte d’Ivoire’s procurement 

system (SPM): Procurement methods and procedures (MPA) as part of the procurement system 

of Côte d’Ivoire comprising its laws and implementing decrees (Decree No. 2009-259 of 6 

August 2009 instituting the Public Procurement Code as amended and supplemented by 

Decrees No. 2014-306 of 27 May 2014 and No. 2015-525 of 15 July 2015 and various 

implementing orders), using standard national bidding documents (DNSAO) or other bidding 

documents approved during project negotiations for various types of activities envisaged; (ii) 

Bank Procurement Methods and Procedures (BPM): standard Bank procurement methods, 

based on relevant standard BDs for consulting service contracts deemed to be most suitable.  

4.1.7 Risk Assessment and Procurement Capacity (RAPC): The risk at country, project 

and sector level, and executing agency’s capacity in project-related procurements were assessed 

and the results are reflected in Table D2.20 of Annex D2. Deemed moderate, the risk guided 

the choice of the procurement system (Borrower, Bank or Third Party) used for given activities 

or all similar activities under the project. The appropriate risk mitigation measures identified 

were included in the PERCA action plan indicated in para. D.2.30. of Annex D2. 

4.1.8 Waiver of Eligibility: Considering that part of this project’s financing is through the 

ADB Window and that some procurements will be done pursuant to the Côte d’Ivoire 

procurement system, a formal request is made to the Board of Directors of the Bank to waive 

the rule of origin for procurements made pursuant to the national procurement system. Since 

the public procurement eligibility rules in Ivorian law are not the same as those of the ADB 

Window, it is necessary to prevent any practical incompatibility. For project procurements using 

the national system, the eligibility rules are national ones in addition to the provisions of 

paragraph 5.c of the Bank Policy on Procurement. Consequently, even using the national 

system, Bank resources cannot serve to finance a contract awarded to a bidder under sanctions 

by the African Development Bank Group. If or in spite of these provisions, a contract is 

concluded with a bidder under sanction by the Bank Group, such contract shall not be financed 

with Bank resources. However, procurements made pursuant to the Bank’s Procurement 

Methods and Procedures will comply with the rule of origin as defined in Article 17 (1) (d) of 

the Agreement Establishing the African Development Bank. 



 

16 

4.1.9 Financial Management and Disbursement: The overall fiduciary risk of the 

project executing agency was assessed and deemed moderate. Côte d’Ivoire issued Decree 

No. 2015-415 in July 2015 to organize the preparation, implementation and closing of projects 

co-financed with Technical and Financial Partners (TFPs). It is in line with the Paris Declaration 

on Development Aid Effectiveness, especially the use of the recipient’s national procedures. 

The decree determines all administration and management structures that must be established 

before the Bank Board of Directors rules on the project, especially the Project Coordination 

Team (ECP) and the recruitment or appointment of its members as well as the National Steering 

Committee (CNP). The project budget will be incorporated fully in the State budget and 

implemented following the simplified expenditure procedure. Project accounts will be kept with 

the SIGFIP (Integrated Public Finance Management System) software, which handles only the 

budgetary module. To have complete accounts bringing together budgetary, cost and general 

accounting modules, a private management software will be procured. Financial reports and 

statements will be published for the public as well as private systems. A procedures manual 

harmonizing public and private procedures will be prepared for the project’s management and 

financed by PPF funds.  

4.1.10 Disbursements. Project resources will be disbursed using the reimbursement, direct 

payment and revolving fund methods, pursuant to the provisions of the Bank’s Disbursement 

Manual. Four accounts will be opened in a bank acceptable to AfDB Group to receive ADF 

resources: a special account to receive revolving funds serving for the operation of the project 

coordination and three accounts to receive resources for the Value Chains Development Fund: 

(i) a dedicated account for the operations and operating expenses of this Fund; (ii) a 

“Refinancing Facility” account meant to refinance banks and project partner SFDs, and to 

guarantee loans granted to beneficiary SMEs; and (iii) an account meant for interest rate 

subsidies. These accounts have only one signatory, the public accountant who is personally 

responsible for funds entrusted to him. He/she must be sworn-in and pay a deposit in the public 

Treasury before assuming duty. Expenses linked to the services of consultants, contractors and 

suppliers will be settled by direct payment. Counterpart funds will be used to pay for expenses 

either by direct payment or by a project account opened for that purpose. 

4.1.11 Audit: An independent auditor will be recruited through competitive bidding for the 

annual audit of project accounts. He/she will be recruited based on terms of reference approved 

by the Bank for a maximum period of three years. The auditor’s continued services will be 

contingent on the approval of his/her first report. Audit reports must reach the Bank latest six 

(6) months after the close of the fiscal year. In parallel, the project is subject to control by the 

General Inspectorate of Finance (IGF) and verification by the Court of Auditors, as indicated in 

Decree No. 2015-475. 

4.2 Monitoring 

4.2.1 Project implementation will span five years from the second quarter of 2017. Once the 

project team is recruited, the Bank will organize the start-up mission to put in place all 

requirement for a rapid and efficient commencement of project activities. 

4.2.2 The project’s internal Monitoring/Evaluation Service (SSEI) will monitor the project 

internally at the physical and financial level, and by expenditure category as well as assess the 

project’s impact on beneficiaries and the environment based on relevant and jointly established 

indicators. It will be aligned on a geographic information system (GIS) included in the project’s 

ICT components. At start-up (PPF budget), SSEI will be supported by a consultant to set up the 

baseline situation and establish a monitoring/evaluation system, including verifiable indicators. 

The baseline situation study will include the gender profile in agriculture, to deepen knowledge 

of beneficiary groups especially with regard to socio-economic aspects (income, capital, 

agricultural activities). This system is expected to be functional latest six months following 



 

17 

project commencement. On that basis, the project will produce quarterly and annual progress 

reports indicating especially the implementation rates and outcomes of the different 

components, linked to the performance indicators of the logical framework. 

4.2.3 External monitoring/evaluation will be undertaken by the Directorate of Projects 

Evaluation (DEP), working closely with the directorates in charge of projects of technical 

ministries involved as well as the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF). Half-yearly 

external monitoring/evaluation reports will seek to measure progress made, identify possible 

constraints and make recommendations to resolve problems encountered. DEP will involve 

technical directorates of ministries in external monitoring missions to consider particular 

technical problems and compliance with sector strategies. Considering the project’s linkages 

with ECOWAP, external monitoring/evaluation will ensure harmonization with indictors 

selected for PNIA. The project will place at the disposal of DEP, DPPF of MINADER, the 

Directorate of Public Debt and the directorates of technical ministries involved, the necessary 

means to enable them accomplish this mission. A mid-term review is planned to establish the 

interim implementation situation, ensure the overall good progress of the project and, if 

necessary, propose adjustments. A final joint evaluation is also programmed towards project 

completion to draw lessons and build on project achievements. 

4.2.4 The project implementation schedule is presented in Table 4.7 below. 

Table 4.7: Implementation and Supervision Schedule 

N° ACTIVITIES RESPONSIBILITY TIME FRAME 

1 Approval of loans and the grant ADB/ADF January 2017 

2 Signing of agreements (loans and grant)  ADB/ADF/Government 1st quarter 2017 

3 Effectiveness of loan agreements ADB/ADF/Government 2nd quarter 2017 

3 Fulfilment conditions 1st disbursement ADB/ADF/Government 2nd quarter 2017 

4 Start-up mission ADB/ADF/Government 2nd quarter 2017 

5 Publication BD/DCR  ADB/ADF/Government 2nd quarter 2017 

6 Start-up of works and services Government 2nd half of 2017 

7 Mid-term review ADB/ADF/Government 1st half of 2020 

8 Completion report ADB/ADF/Government 2nd half of 2019 

9 Completion of activities ADB/ADF/Government 31 December 2021 

10 Closing of project ADB/ADF/Government 31 December 2022 

4.3 Governance 

Under Pillar I of the Bank’s CSP 2013-2017, the Bank supports the connection of the Integrated 

Local Government Management System (SIGESCOD) to the Integrated Public Finance 

Management System and the Integrated Public Procurement Management System within the 

framework of the Economic and Financial Management Support Project (PAGEF 2017-2019). 

The aim is to reduce the risk of financial loss during the management of public finances and 

support the capacity building of actors of sector ministries and local governments. This project 

will also support local governance by better securing land tenure systems, establishing concerted 

systems to limit farmer/grazier conflicts, and strengthening the capacity of local communities 

and organs to manage infrastructure whose competencies are sometimes weak. The other 

measures adopted concern: (i) the conduct of annual financial audits; (ii) efficient coordination 

by the Project Coordination Team (ECP); and (iii) the conduct of at least two supervision 

missions per year. 

4.4 Sustainability 

4.4.1 The project aims to initiate truly sustainable development by placing local 

stakeholders, including farmers, at the heart of decision-making while also strengthening their 

capacity to assume new responsibilities. During PPF preparation and site identification studies, 

an intervention process was adopted governed by a number of eligibility criteria to ensure the 



 

18 

effective commitment of the farmers concerned and the absence of potential conflicts. The 

communities concerned will provide financial or in-kind contribution for all support 

infrastructure, based on good governance mechanisms in force. The project will accompany 

them to engage a process aimed at sustaining infrastructure put in place. They will be supported 

to strengthen their capacity at the technical and organizational level, which will create expertise 

and greater ownership at their level. In particular, committees will be created or revitalized at 

each of the sites to ensure sound management and regular maintenance of community 

infrastructure. Mayors will be involved and accompanied in the management of communal 

infrastructure (markets, slaughter areas, etc.). Private sector involvement in processing and 

marketing actions is also a guarantee of the sustainability of actions undertaken through value 

chain dynamics and actor networking. 

4.4.2 The issue of the sustainability of actions implemented, especially infrastructure 

maintenance and management, is a central concern in the project’s design. For each type of 

infrastructure, specific measures will be taken to ensure management and maintenance under 

good conditions: (i) the maintenance of rehabilitated rural roads is ensured by budgeting related 

works on counterpart funds (FER financing) and piloted programming by AGEROUTE (global 

agreement with 2PAIA-Bélier); (ii) gravity-based operation of rice cultivation works, limiting 

management and maintenance costs; (iii) involvement and training of local structures to manage 

markets with higher receipts due to increased activities and sensitization; (iv) training and 

revitalization of committees for the management of HVA systems and irrigation sites, including 

water rates based on recognized practices and activities; (v) support of settled young farmers 

with tracking of trading accounts etc. Regarding the conservation of the physical environment, 

targeted actions will not have negative effects on the environment, which will foster the 

sustainability of actions undertaken. 

4.5 Risk Management 

4.5.1 The main risks that might limit results and measures for mitigating them are as follows: 

climate change related risk: Bélier Region faces serious climatic impacts, including: (i) 

recurrent flooding; and (ii) drought and its repercussions on the farming calendar and choice of 

varieties. The project will undertake mitigation measures including: (a) structures that can resist 

high intensity swells; (b) promotion of varieties and practices suited to drought cycles; (c) the 

dissemination of knowledge of climate-related risks and data; and (d) sensitization and 

communication at the level of the population of zones concerned. 

4.5.2 Risk of land-related conflicts: To ensure non-discriminatory access to works 

undertaken (gravity-based irrigation works, lowlands, market gardens, stores, etc.), the project 

will support the process of social evaluation on all sites to be developed before any intervention 

is undertaken. On development sites with full water mastery and lowland sites, the project will 

finance the land security of sites to be developed. Capacity-building support will also be 

provided to communes for better dissemination of land transaction tools and issuance of 

exploitation certificates.  

4.5.3 Risk of transhumance-related conflicts: With regard to the prevention of 

transhumance-related conflicts, the project will support devolved structures and communes to 

accompany endogenous transhumance-related conflict management mechanisms by setting up 

consultative frameworks and drafting local agreements for natural resources management. Two 

pilot sites integrating structuring works will also be selected in the region. 

4.6 Knowledge Building 

Particularly through its development of the value chains component, 2PAI-Bélier will contribute 

to train different actors and disseminate new knowledge primarily to farmers, thanks to the 



 

19 

support and training offered by operators and technical services in advisory support, structuring 

and organization. It will come up with technical innovations based on research outcomes and 

also enable youths and women inclusively to develop technical and entrepreneurial capacity and 

settle on land equipped with infrastructure and modern means of operation. As part of training 

and settling of youths, the project will support agricultural training centres and INP-ESA by 

introducing new curricula and training modules to better respond to the requirements of 

agricultural entrepreneurship and promote the emergence of technological innovations. Lastly, 

the project will set up an integrated system for managing and sharing knowledge on project 

activities through the regular dissemination of knowledge and experience acquired on its 

website and that of MINADER. 

V LEGAL FRAMEWORK 

5.1 Legal Instrument  

The legal framework will be a Loan and Grant Agreement between the Republic of Côte 

d’Ivoire and the African Development Fund and a Loan Agreement between the Government 

of Côte d’Ivoire and the African Development Bank. These documents will comprise the terms 

and conditions of the loans and grant. 

5.2 Conditions Associated with Bank Involvement  

5.2.1 Condition Precedent to the Effectiveness of the ADF and ADB Loans and the ADF 

Grant: Effectiveness of the ADF and ADB loans shall be contingent on the fulfilment by the 

Borrower of the conditions stipulated in Section 12.01 of the General Conditions Applicable to 

Bank Loan and Guarantee Agreements (sovereign entities). Effectiveness of the ADF grant shall 

be subject to signature by the Donee and the Bank of the related Agreement. 

5.2.2 Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement: The first disbursement of the ADF and 

ADB loans and the ADF grant shall be subject to the effectiveness of the ADF and ADB Loan 

Agreements and the ADF Grant Agreement in accordance with the above provisions and 

evidence of fulfilment to the satisfaction of the Bank Group in both form and substance of the 

following conditions: 

i. Forward to the Bank evidence of the appointment of the 2PAI-BÉLIER Coordinator 
whose qualification and experience will have been judged satisfactory by the Bank 

Group (par. 4.1.1); 

ii. Forward to the Bank evidence of opening a special account in a bank acceptable by the 
latter to receive revolving funds from ADF resources. 

5.2.3 Other Conditions 

In addition, the Borrower shall: 

i. Show to the Bank latest six months following signature of the Agreements, evidence 
of the appointment of the rest of the Project Coordination Team, comprising a specialist 

in charge of technical matters, a specialist responsible for administrative and financial 

matters, a monitoring/evaluation specialist, a specialist responsible for support to the 

service in charge of farmers’ organizations, a public procurement specialist, a rural 

engineering specialist, a specialist in agribusiness, and specialist in the livestock and 

fisheries sub-sectors, a specialist in agricultural credit, an environmentalist and a 

gender specialist (par. 4.1.1);  

ii. Provide, latest most six months following loan effectiveness, evidence of establishing 
the project National Steering Committee (par. 4.1.2);  



 

20 

iii. Provide evidence of opening a special dedicated account for the operations and 
operating expenses of the Value Chains Development Fund, not more than six months 

following the first disbursement (par. 4.1.10);  

iv. Provide evidence of opening a “Refinancing Facility” account meant to refinance 
project partner banks and SFDs and to guarantee loans granted to beneficiary SEs, not 

more than six months following the first disbursement (par. 4.1.10); and  

v. Provide evidence of opening a dedicated account for interest rate subsidies, not more 
than six months following the first disbursement (par. 4.1.10). 

5.2.4 Commitments  

The Borrower commits to:  

i. Implement the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and have it 
implemented by co-contracting parties pursuant to: (a) Bank rules and procedures; (b) 

national laws; and (c) the recommendations, prescriptions and procedures contained in 

the ESMP; and 

ii. Submit to the Bank annual reports on the ESMP implementation, including where 
applicable, weaknesses and corrective actions taken or to be taken. 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

The project is aligned on Thrusts 1 (Light up Africa), 2 (Feed Africa), 3 (Industrialize 

Africa) and 5 (Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa) of the High 5s, the Strategy 

for Agricultural Transformation in Africa, 2016-2025, as well as the Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy 

(LTS 2013-2022) and the Gender Strategy, 2014-2018. Furthermore, the project is in line with 

Presidential Directive No. 02/2015 relating to the process of consideration of operations. Studies 

of the project’s flagship components are available and staff of the project coordination team are 

being recruited thanks to a PPF advance.  

VI RECOMMENDATION 

Management hereby recommends that the Boards of Directors: (i) exceptionally grant a waiver 

on the application of the rule of origin mentioned in Article 17 (1) (d) of the Agreement 

Establishing the African Development Bank and, to enable procurements to be made using the 

national public procurement system of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire, authorize the application 

of the eligibility rules contained in this system in addition to the provisions of paragraph 5.3 (c) 

of the Procurement Policy for operations funded by the Bank Group, October 2015 edition; and 

(ii) approve the proposal to extend an ADF loan of UA 26.04 million, an ADF grant of UA 3.4 

million and an ADB loan of EUR 64.36 million to the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire to finance the 

Bélier Region Agro Industrial Pole Project. 

 directly 
 to the justice system, it treats the 

underlying issue of inclusion, 















































 

 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO 

 

 

 

PROJECT TO SUPPORT THE DEVELOPMENT OF AGRICULTURAL VALUE 

CHAINS IN SIX PROVINCES IN DRC (PADCA-6P) 

 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


PROJECT INFORMATION SHEET 

Client Information 

BORROWER : Democratic Republic of Congo 

EXECUTING 

AGENCY 
: Ministry of Agriculture 

Financing Plan 

Sources of Financing Amount Instrument 

ADF 

 

UA 20 million  

 

Loan 

 

Government and Beneficiaries UA 1. 434.37 million Counterpart in-kind contribution  

TOTAL COST UA 21.434.37 million      

ADF Key Financing Information 
 

Loan/Grant Currency  Unit of Account 

Interest Type*  2% per annum between the eleventh and twentieth years of 

the lending period and 4% thereafter 

Interest Rate Margin*  Not Applicable 

Commitment Fee*  0.5% on the undisbursed loan amount commencing 120 days 

after the signing of the Loan Agreement 

Service Charge  0.75% per annum on the disbursed loan amount not 

reimbursed 

Tenor  30 years 

Grace Period  10 years 

FRR  (baseline 

scenario) 
 19% 

ERR (baseline 

scenario) 
 26% 

Timeframe – Main Milestones (expected) 
  

Concept Note Approval July 2018 

Project Approval April 2019 

Signature of the Grant Protocol of Agreement July 2019 

First Disbursement September 2019 

Completion/Last Disbursement December 2024 

Closing Date December 2025 

  



 

v 

 

PROJECT EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Background: the African Development Bank-funded Project to Support the Development of 

Agricultural Value Chains in Six Provinces in the Democratic Republic of Congo (PADCA-6P) aims 

to sustainably improve food and nutrition security and increase the incomes of the target population. 

PADCA-6P will be implemented over a five-year period (2019-2024) for a total cost of UA 22.153 

million in the provinces of Kwilu, Kasaï, Haut Iomami, Iomami, Maniema, and Tshopo. It will target 

some 1,768,825 rural households, 60% of which are women, with 8, 394,125 direct beneficiaries, and 

build knowledge for the rural world at large.  

In the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), the agricultural sector employs more than 70% of the 

labour force in rural areas. Arable farmland, which is estimated at about 80 million hectares, is largely 

underutilized. Ten per cent is developed, that is about 3.5 million hectares used for farming and some 

4.5 million hectares for livestock breeding. Only 13,500 hectares, representing 3.2% of available 

areas, are irrigated. DRC’s agricultural sector can create more than 60% of jobs in the country, if 

managed sustainably. The diagnosis of the agricultural sector and the operations being implemented 

therein have helped to focus the project’s activities on four growth crop sub-sectors, namely cassava, 

beans, maize and rice.  

The DRC’s food deficit is estimated at between 20% and 30% of total food needs (according to 

region). In addition, the incidence of poverty at the national level, which stands at 63.4%, is very 

high, and 43% of under-five children suffer from chronic malnutrition, that is about 1 in 2 children. 

Furthermore, 38% of the country’s population lives on a poor and limited diet and only 9.3% of 

children aged 6-23 months have a minimum acceptable diet. According to a study on the Cost of 

Hunger in Africa carried out in DRC in 2017, economic losses owing to malnutrition in the country 

are estimated at 3% to 8% of the gross domestic product, that is an annual loss of USD 1.174 billion. 

Against this backdrop, the improvement of agricultural production is an urgent priority for the 

Congolese Government.  

Bank’s Value Added: the proposed project seeks to actively involve agricultural sectors in efforts 

to achieve economic growth so as to create jobs and generate substantial incomes in rural areas. It is 

perfectly in line  with the Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa (2016-2025); the Bank’s 

Ten-year Strategy (2013-2022), particularly two of its High-5s, namely Feed Africa, and Improve the 

quality of life for the people of Africa; the strategy covering the 2014-2019 period titled “Addressing 

Fragility and Building Resilience in Africa”; the Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy which targets the 

agricultural sector and the entrepreneurial training of rural youths; the Multi-Sectoral Nutrition 

Action Plan concerning the pillar that seeks to increase the production and consumption of safe and 

nutritious food; and the Bank’s Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) 

programme whose objective is to deploy agricultural technologies to increase the productivity and 

quality of agricultural production in targeted sectors. The project is technically justified and feasible 

and will generate positive impacts in terms of rebuilding the productive base, reviving economic 

activities and contributing to DRC’s efforts to achieve economic and social development. 

Knowledge Building: PADCA-6P will help to: (a) develop crop sub-sectors through the introduction 

and ownership of new technologies aimed at increasing the productivity of the crops identified; (b) 

provide institutional support, improve governance and build the capacity of existing entities in order 

to enhance their professionalization, particularly through the use of the value chain approach, and to 

improve coordination and dialogue between value chain actors through the platforms established. All 

these activities will serve as the Bank’s pilot schemes in DR Congo and generate invaluable 

knowledge for future developments in the country’s agricultural sub-sectors.  



 

vi 

 

RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 

Country and Project Name: DRC –Project to Support the Development of Agricultural Value Chains in Six Provinces in the Democratic Republic of Congo (PADCA-6P) 

Project Goal: Contribute to sustainably improving food and nutrition security and increasing the incomes of the target population 

RESULTS CHAIN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS / 

MITIGATION MEASURES Indicators (including ISCs) Baseline Situation Target Beyond 2024 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

The food and nutrition security of the 

population is improved 

1. Food insecurity rate 1. Undefined <20% Annual and statistical reports 
of the Ministry of Agriculture 

Demographic and health 

Survey (DHS) – Middle-

income countries (MICs)  

 

2. Severe malnutrition prevalence 
rate 

2. 10% <5% 

3. Chronic malnutrition rate 3. 43% <20% 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

Outcome 1: Agricultural productivity 

and production is increased. 

Level of increase in food crop 

production and productivity.  
  

Annual and statistical reports 

of the Ministry of Agriculture 

 

 

To be defined by baseline 

situation (agricultural 

statistical surveys) 

Climate hazards and pest 

outbreaks 
 
Mitigation measures: 

Integration of the adaptation 

dimension into activities   

 

Integrated approach to 

agriculture and use of disease-

resistant varieties 

 

- Cassava 8 t/ha 15 t/ha 

- Rice 0.720 t/ha 4 t/ha 

- Maize 0.8 t/ha 3 t/ha 

- Beans/Cowpeas 0.8 t/ha 1.5 t/ha 

Outcome 2: New technologies are 

adopted by beneficiaries.  

 

2.1 Number of households that 
have adopted new technologies 

0 >75% 

 

Outcome 3: Jobs and economic 

opportunities are created for youths and 

women. 

3.1 Number of jobs and economic 
opportunities created for 

youths/women. 

0 60,000/80,000  
Reluctance of the population to 

adopt new technologies and 

good farming practices  

Outcome 4: The quantity of fertilizers 

used is increased. 

4.1 Additional quantity of fertilizer 
used. 

0 13 kg/ha  Mitigation measures: Design of 
an appropriate communication 

plan for all stakeholders and 

agricultural extension and 

training activities  

Establishment of platforms 

  



 

vii 

 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

Component 1: Plant Sub-sector 

Development 
  

 

 

0 

 

0 

 

Reports of INERA and project 

reports 

Annual and statistical reports 

of the Ministry of Agriculture 

 

Worsening of the country’s 

political and security crisis and 

its spread to the project impact 

area causing the population to 

flee  

Mitigation measures: in the 

provinces 

- Coordination of security 
information with the United 

Nations system  

- Facilitating social cohesion 

Output 1.1: Women and youths are 

integrated into agricultural value chains 

to develop sub-sectors 

1.1.1 Number of women 
1.1.2 Number of youths 

500 000 

 

300 000 

Component 2: Institutional Support, 

Improvement of  Governance and 

Capacity Building 

   Reports of the Ministry of 
Agriculture and project reports 

 

 

 

 

Reports of INERA and the 

Ministry of Agriculture 

Insufficient synergy of action 

between project partners 

Mitigation measures: 

Commitment of stakeholders/ 

actors 

Synergy and complementarity 

between projects 

Poor road infrastructure for 

product disposal 

 

 

Mitigation measures: synergy 

with existing AfDB projects 

Mesures atténuations : synergie 

avec les projets existants de la 

BAD 

Output 2.1: Farmers’ groups are 

structured  

2.1.1 Number of groups 
structured 

0 90 

Output 2.2: Agricultural research and 

extension system and entities are 

strengthened. 

2.2.1 Number of agricultural 
research and extension 

entities strengthened 

0 6 

Output 2.3: Agri-seed multiplier groups 

and seed producer networks are 

supported. 

2.3.1 Number of seed producer and 
multiplier groups 

0 8 

Output 2.4: National seed policy is 

developed. 
2.4.1 Number of seed laws 

adopted  

0 1 

Output 2.5: The National Seed Board 

(CONASEM) and Provincial Seed 

Boards (COPROSEM) are established 

and strengthened. 

2.5.1 Number of boards 
established 

(a) National 
(b) Provincial 

0 1 

Output 2.6: National platforms (cereal 

and tuber processing units) are 

established 

2.6.1 Number of platforms that 
facilitate technological 

innovations established 

0 6 

  



 

viii 

 

 
KEY ACTIVITIES RESOURCES (UA THOUSAND) 

Component 1: Plant Sub-sector Development 

 Production of Improved Seeds and Seed Conservation Technologies 
 Improvement of Crop Management Techniques 
 Deployment of Technologies for the Production, Processing, Packaging and Storage of Products 
 Supply of Farm Inputs and Tools 

Component 2: Institutional Support, Improvement of Governance and Capacity Building  

 Strengthening the Improved Seed Multiplication and Field Distribution System 
 Establishment of a Platform for Private Seed Enterprises  
 Development of Harvest Products and Nutrition and Market Preference Technology 
 Building the Capacity of Community Relays and Health Workers in Nutrition  
 Baseline Survey on the Nutritional Status of Under-five Children 
 Sensitization on Nutrition, Hygiene and Health/Nutritional Surveillance 
 Socio-economic Survey on the Baseline Situation for the Four Crops Considered 

Component 3: Project Coordination, Management and Monitoring and Evaluation 

 Project and ESMP Implementation Monitoring  
 Project Administrative, Accounting and Financial Management 
 Procurement of Project Goods, Works and Services 

Component 1: UA 10,283.91 

Component 2: UA 6,269.53 

Component 3: UA 4,880.92 

Sources of financing: 

ADF (loan): UA 20 million 

GVT/BEN: UA 1,434.37 

million 

 

  



 

ix 

 

PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE 

  2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 

T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 
T
2 

T3 T4 T1 
T
2 

T3 
T
4 

T1 
T
2 

T3 T4 

1. Board Approval                     

2. Signing of Loan Agreement                     

3. Loan Effectiveness and First Disbursement                     

4 Publication of the General Procurement Notice                     

5. Recruitment of Key Staff                     

6. Project Launching                     

7. Signing of Agreements and Protocols with Partner Institutions                     

8. Signing of Contracts                     

9. Implementation of the Protocols of Research Institutions                     

10. Implementation of Capacity-building Activities                     

11. Mid-term Review                     

12. Auditing                     

13. Completion Report                     

14. Completion of Activities                     

15. Closure in December 2024                     

 

  



 

1 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF BANK GROUP MANAGEMENT TO THE 

BOARD OF DIRECTORS ON A PROPOSAL TO GRANT A UA 20 MILLION TSF  LOAN TO 

THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO TO FINANCE THE PROJECT TO SUPPORT 

THE DEVELOPMENT OF AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS IN SIX PROVINCES IN 

THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO (PADCA-6P) 

Management hereby submits the following report and recommendation concerning a proposal to 

grant a UA 20 million ADF loan to the Democratic Republic of Congo to finance the Project to 

Support the Development of Agricultural Value Chains in Six Provinces in the Democratic Republic of 

Congo (PADCA-6P). 

I. STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE 

1.1 Country Context 

1.1.1  The period of political transition in the Democratic Republic of Congo which began at end-

2016 ended with the holding of presidential, legislative and provincial elections on 30 December 

2018. The country experienced its first peaceful transfer of power on 24 January 2019 between an 

outgoing and an incoming President of the Republic. On the economic front, The Democratic 

Republic of Congo recorded a growth rate of 8.3% on average over the period 2013-2015. However, 

this growth momentum was interrupted in 2016 (2.4%) due to a sharp fall in the prices of the 

country’s main export products (copper and cobalt) and political instability. Growth rose to 3.7% in 

2017 and 4.1% in 2018, driven by an increase in mining production and a rise in the prices of mining 

products especially in 2017. However, the country’s recent economic performance has had a limited 

impact on the population’s well-being due to low inclusiveness of growth which is driven mainly by 

the mining sector. Despite its enormous potential, DRC is one of the world’s poorest countries. More 

than 82% of the population lives below the poverty line (USD 1.25 a day). Developments in the 

present political context marked by the holding of the December 2018 (presidential and legislative) 

elections will help to lay the foundations for the country’s socio-economic development. Poverty, 

discrimination and violence against women are major causes of malnutrition. The poor (invariable 

and undiversified) diet that mothers and their children live on has irreparable consequences on the 

development of children and, hence, leads to economic losses due to a decrease in productivity. 

1.1.2 DRC has considerable agricultural potential and offers tremendous opportunities for 

investment, especially a potential market of more than 100 million inhabitants, given its population 

and that of neighbouring countries. Arable farmland which is estimated at about 80 million hectares 

is highly underdeveloped (10% is developed). Food crop production, excluding groundnuts, 

plantains and cereals, is estimated at about 17 million tonnes on 3,700,000 hectares of land. Food 

shortage is estimated at 20% to 30% of total food needs (according to the regions). 

1.1.3 Agricultural and rural sector development is hampered by numerous constraints including 

(i) advanced environmental degradation and inadequate basic infrastructure; (ii) weak institutional 

and management capacity; (iii) low access to inputs, production equipment and supervisory services, 

and lack of access to markets; and (iv) weak capacity of farmers’ organizations and difficulties in 

accessing financial services and governance. According to the National Agriculture Investment Plan 

(NAIP), the major challenges to be met by the country to significantly alleviate rural poverty by 2020 

are: (i) securing and modernizing the farming system to sustainably improve sub-sector production; 

and (ii) overcoming malnutrition and food insecurity. 



 

2 

1.2 Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives 

1.2.1 The project is consistent with the five main priorities of the National Agricultural 

Investment Programme (PNIA) which are to: (i) improve agricultural governance, promote gender 

mainstreaming and build human and institutional capacity; (ii) sustainably promote agricultural sub-

sectors, particularly food sub-sectors, and develop agri-business in order to increase the incomes of 

farmers and other sector operators; (iii) improve the management of the population’s food and 

nutrition security and build strategic reserves; and (iv) develop and disseminate research products to 

users and improve the level of professional competence of various actors. 

1.2.2 The project is also consistent with the priorities of the Bank’s 2013-2017 Strategy for DRC 

(updated at end-2018 and whose update for the second time to 2020 is under study) which seeks to 

help the country to emerge from fragility by creating conditions conducive to strong and inclusive 

growth driven by renewed vitality in the productive sectors of the economy. It is particularly 

consistent with the second pillar of the Country Strategy Paper (CSP) which aims to build the 

Government’s capacity to increase public revenue and establish a framework of incentives for private 

investment, especially in the second thrust which seeks to create conditions conducive to inclusive 

and diversified growth driven by private investment. Lastly, the project is in line with the CSP’s 

spatial approach which consists in focusing the Bank’s operations in the country’s greater centre 

region. 

1.2.3 PADCA-6P is aligned with the Bank’s Ten-year Strategy (2013-2022) and will contribute 

to achieving two of its five (5) strategic priorities, namely Feed Africa and Improve the quality of 

life for the people of Africa. The project is also perfectly in keeping with the thrusts of Feed Africa: 

Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa 2016-2025, Multi-Sectoral Nutrition Action Plan, 

and Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy. The project is technically justified and feasible and will 

generate positive impacts in terms of rebuilding the productive base, reviving economic activities 

and contributing to DRC’s efforts to achieve economic and social development. 

1.3  Rationale for Bank Involvement  

1.3.1 DRC and its partners are committed to strengthening the population’s resilience through a 

collaborative approach linking food security, social cohesion and access to financial resources in 

order to achieve stability. In this regard, agriculture has been re-positioned at the centre of political 

and strategic concerns to ensure the country’s sustainable recovery. Thus, the objective of Congolese 

authorities is to achieve a sustained annual growth rate of more than 6% in the agricultural sector by 

2020, which is essential to reduce poverty, ensure food and nutrition security for the Congolese 

people, generate sustainable jobs and incomes, especially for the youth. In addition, given the heavy 

concentration of the Congolese economy on the mining sector, the development of the agricultural 

sector contributes to diversifying the productive fabric, thus reducing the vulnerability of the 

economy to external shocks resulting from fluctuations in the prices of mining products. DRC 

imports about USD 1.5 billion worth of food products per year. The project, which will help to 

increase agricultural production (especially food production), is a response to food insecurity. 

1.4  Donor Coordination 

1.4.1 The activities of DRC’s development partners are coordinated through the Aid and 

Investment Management Platform (PGAI) hosted in the Ministry of Planning. This platform records 

the investments made by the various partners, but technical activities are discussed and planned in 



 

3 

thematic groups chaired by the Ministry exercising supervisory authority over the theme. For 

example, the Agriculture and Rural Development Thematic Group is chaired by the Ministry of 

Agriculture. In September 2013, the Ministry of Agriculture, in collaboration with this thematic 

group and in consultation with all stakeholders, designed the National Agricultural Investment 

Programme (PNIA) for the period 2014-2020. 

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

2.1. Project Objectives and Components 

2.1.1  The project’s sector objective is to contribute to sustainably improving food and nutrition 

security. 

2.1.2  The project’s specific objective is to improve agricultural production by: (i) increasing the 

productivity of the growth sub-sectors, namely cassava, maize, bean/cowpeas, and rice; (ii) building 

the capacity of stakeholders to ensure the sustainability of investments in value chains; and (iii) 

promoting youth and women’s entrepreneurship. 

2.1.3  Project Design 

The project design is based on the value chain approach and takes into account the TAAT initiative 

which aims to contribute significantly to: (i) increasing agricultural productivity and production by 

identifying and disseminating appropriate farming technologies; (ii) conducting training and 

extension campaigns for the adoption of good farming practices through the effective provision of 

technologies to farmers; and (iii) promoting a plant sub-sector development policy.  

2.1.4  The project will comprise the following three components: (1) Plant Sub-sector 

Development; (2) Institutional Support, Improvement of Governance and Capacity Building; and (3) 

Project Coordination, Management and Monitoring and Evaluation. Table 2.1 below presents project 

activities by component. 

Table 2.1: Project Components 

No. Component Name Estimated Cost Component Description 

1. Plant Sub-sector 

Development  

UA 11 346.60 

million 
 Promoting and developing food crops using the value chains 

approach for cassava, maize, rice, and cowpeas/beans.  

 Besides developing agricultural value chains, the component will 
also: (i) support the production, supply and distribution of 

improved seeds, certified plant materials and inputs; (ii) promote 

agricultural mechanization/animal draught power; (iii) promote 

storage and processing systems; and (iv) improve market access. 

Sub-component 1.1: Plant Sub-sectors 

Cassava 

 Establishing the baseline situation and registering beneficiaries in 
cassava production basins. 

 Strengthening the seed multiplication and distribution system using 
the Semi-Autotrophic Hydroponic (SAH) rapid multiplication 

technology which makes it possible to rapidly obtain large 

quantities of healthy cuttings.  

 Popularizing appropriate techniques to increase cassava yields by 
at least 30% to 50% and cassava processing technologies. 

 



 

4 

Maize (AATF): the activities will be organized into various modules:  

 Module 1: Establishment of Maize Platforms and Contracts for the 
Operationalization of Development Poles.  

 Module 2: Deployment of Maize Production Technologies in Agro-
ecological Zones in DRC by: (i) producing 120 tonnes of pre-basic 

and basic seeds; (ii) training more than 3 200 maize seed multipliers; 

and (iii) producing and distributing at least 7 000 tonnes of 

commercial maize seeds by the fifth year. 

 Module 3: Establishment of two Farm Input Procurement Centres in 
Ngandajika and Mweka, Grouping the Input Orders of Farmers’ 

Organizations and Building the Capacity of Farmers. 

 Module 4: Building Capacity to Enhance the Ownership and Use of 
Product Processing, Packaging and Storage Improvement 

Technologies.  

 Module 5: Improvement of Market Access and Value Added 
through the Development of Local Markets and Organization of 

Marketing Channels.  

 Module 6: Involvement of Youths and Women through Training in 
Post-harvest, Drying, Packaging, Labelling and Threshing 

Techniques, ICT, etc. 

Beans/Cowpeas (CIAT): supporting the introduction and 

improvement of technologies to  support the promotion of biofortified 

bean cultivation by: 

 disseminating iron- and zinc-rich dwarf varieties which are adapted 
to DRC;  

 ensuring the use of ‘soil docs’ by the platform of producers; 

 promoting the use of hulling machines for the packaging of beans; 

 using Purdue improved crop storage (PICS) bags; 

 promoting the production of high iron bean meal products for child 
and household consumption as nutrient-rich foods – building 

capacity and transferring technology. 

Rice (AfricaRice) 

 Introducing new climate-resilient high yielding seed varieties for 
irrigated lowland and rain-fed plateau ecologies and supporting the 

production of pre-basic and basic seeds by building the capacity of 

the researchers of INERA, PNRI and SENASEM; 

 Supporting the establishment of a seed distribution system by 
organizing producers through innovative contractual 

arrangements; 

 Introducing good farming practices to farmers through trials for 
local adaptation on the following themes: Soil Fertility 

Management, Seed Quality, Crop Density, Weed Management, 

Disease Management, Agroforestry, and Short-term Improved 

Fallows. 

Soil fertility: within the agricultural value chains development 

framework, the Bank included the International Fertilizer 

Development Agency (IFDC) among Compact Leaders. IFDC will 

work closely with SENAFIC to: 

 promote the use of mineral and organic fertilizers with improved 
seed varieties and ensure local adaptation where soils require the 

addition of lime or dolomite to increase productivity; 

 produce soil deficiency and acidity/alkalinity maps for project 
areas;  



 

5 

 work together with private sector actors to determine the feasibility 
of fertilizer blending plants in order to work out specific soil and 

crop formulas. 

Sub-component 1.2: Agricultural Value Chain Support 

Infrastructure: PADCA-6P will utilize the existing infrastructure in 

the project impact area by first identifying all existing infrastructure 

and/or creating and developing synergies with ongoing TFP-funded 

projects. 

II. Institutional 

Support, 

Improvement of 

Governance and 

Capacity Building 

UA 6 227.95 

million 

This component aims to build the capacity of existing entities to 

professionalize them particularly through the value chains approach. It 

will improve coordination and dialogue between value chain actors 

(public and private).  

Sub-component 2.1: Capacity Building  

This sub-component will focus on activities to: (i) build the technical 

and organizational capacity of farmers’ organizations, civil society and 

the private sector involved in the relevant agricultural products value 

chains; (ii) build the capacity of coordination, monitoring-evaluation 

and control entities; (iii) provide vocational training in agricultural 

sector trades and nutritional food technology (fortification and 

biofortification). 

Sub-component .2.2: Institutional Support and Improvement of 

Governance  

 Improving governance by contributing to implementing an 
inclusive national seed policy (including the participation of the 

private sector and other associations) and supporting the 

establishment of the National Seed Board (CONASEM) and 

Provincial Seed Boards (COPROSEM). 

Sub-component 2.3: Support for the Operationalization of Sub-

sectors  

Cassava sub-sector  

 Establishing technological innovation platforms; 

 Promoting good farming practices to improve cassava production; 

 Developing ICT and establishing counselling platforms. 

Maize sub-sector  

 Deploying technologies in production areas and marketing and 
promoting good farming practices and introducing new 

technologies to increase productivity. 

Bean/Cowpea sub-sector 

 Establishing biofortified beans (Fe) platforms and contracts for the 
operationalization of development poles;  

 Developing harvest products, nutrition-related technology and 
market preference. 

Rice sub-sector  

 Producing and disseminating new climate change-resilient  basic 
seed varieties;  

 Deploying technologies in rice growing areas; 

 Involving youths and women in various rice sub-sector chains.  

Support for the Operationalization of Multipurpose Platforms 

(MPPs) 

 Establishing six MPPs in the project impact area within a surface 

area of 100 to 200 square metres;  

 Agricultural counselling: (i) providing counselling services 

through the agricultural extension officers of the Ministry of 



 

6 

Agriculture; and (ii) ensuring the dissemination of information to 

local farmers; 

 Sale of farm inputs: (i) ensuring the supply of farm inputs to local 

farmers; 

 Processing/development of cassava, maize and rice: setting up 

units for the processing and development of these products.  

Support to the Agricultural Market Information System (AMIS)  

 Establishing an agricultural market information system (AMIS) to 

study and identify markets for targeted crops;  

 Monitoring activities and evaluating the results of AMIS 

(monitoring-guidance and monitoring-control). 

Nutritional support 

 Promoting food diversification and good feeding practices among 

children through (i) sensitization campaigns; (ii) grassroots 

nutrition education (Early Childhood and Infant Feeding Support 

Group – ANJE);(iii) the training of community nutrition relays 

(RECO) and health workers in the districts concerned, and 

prevention of malnutrition through the provision of small health-

care facilities to the health districts concerned for nutritional 

surveillance. Since households with at least one malnourished child 

generally figure among the poorest households, they will be the 

primary beneficiaries of nutritional activities. 

III. Project 

Coordination, 

Management and 

Monitoring and 

Evaluation 

UA 3 955.18 

million 

 The PMU in charge of project implementation will ensure effective 

management, integrate key experts, and carry out project financial 

and technical audit.  

 Carrying out environmental compliance monitoring in accordance 

with the ESMP. 

 Developing gender information kits to monitor and guide the 

implementation of activities. 

 Preparation of the annual program and budget of the project 

Préparation du programme et budget annuels du projet 

2.2 Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Explored 

2.2.1 The replacement of the cowpea varieties being disseminated with new iron- and zinc-rich 

varieties (high iron bean – HIB) which meet market requirements (major market classes) will 

significantly increase production and profitability for all actors involved in the value chain. The 

importance and adoption of high iron beans have been well documented in Rwanda and published in 

international science journals (Hass et al. 2016; Oparinde et al. 2015, 2016).  

2.2.2 The continued promotion of new varieties by extension officers and all project partners will 

help to accelerate the adoption and use of new technologies. To fast-track the adoption of input 

technologies, it is necessary to use the integrated soil fertility management (ISFM) approach.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

7 

Table 2.2: Selected technical solutions and alternatives studied Solutions techniques retenues et 
solutions de rechange étudiées 

Name Brief Description Reasons for Rejection 

Adoption of 

techniques for 

the use of 

fertilizers 

The integrated soil fertility management 

(ISFM) approach should be used to 

better rationalize the use of fertilizers. 

Former soil fertility management paradigms which 

focused on fertilizer or “low input” approaches, and 

rarely on both, ignored the vital scientific fact that 

fertilizers are more effective and efficient on well-

conserved soils which contain organic matter. 

Use of bean 

varieties being 

disseminated 

(traditional) 

The replacement of the bean varieties 

being disseminated with new iron- and 

zinc-rich varieties (high iron bean – 

HIB) which meet market requirements 

(major market classes) will help to 

significantly increase production and 

profitability for all the actors involved 

in the value chain. 

The replacement of the bean varieties being 

disseminated with new iron- and zinc-rich varieties 

(high iron bean – HIB) which meet market 

requirements will help to significantly increase 

production and profitability for all the actors involved 

in the value chain. 

Semi-

Autotrophic 

Hydroponics 

(SAH) system 

Strengthening the seed multiplication 

and distribution system using the SAH 

system. 

The SAH technology, which is a rapid seed 

multiplication technology, makes it possible to rapidly 

obtain large quantities of healthy cuttings. 

2.3. Project Type 

This is an investment project. It falls within the framework of the assistance provided to regional 

member countries by the Bank through the Feed Africa initiative and the value chain approach, and 

is in keeping with the Feed Africa strategy. 

2.4 Project Cost and Financing Arrangements 

2.4.1 The indicative project cost is estimated at about UA 21.434 million (USD 30.008 million), 

excluding tax and duty of which 64% in foreign exchange and 36% in local currency. The project 

will be financed as follows: UA 20 million ADF loan, and the remaining UA 1.434 million the 

counterpart contribution of the Government (less than 10% of the total project cost – see supporting 

documents in Annex C.4) and beneficiaries. Project activities will be implemented over a five-year 

period. The summary project cost, financing breakdown and expenditure schedule are presented in 

Tables 2.4 to 2.6. 

2.4.2 The Bank loan will be used to finance all works exclusive of taxes, except community 

infrastructure for which municipal councils will be required to pay a 10% contribution (FEICOM 

will assist beneficiary local authorities in mobilizing this counterpart contribution). Goods and 

services will be fully financed in accordance with the appended financing plan. Civil servants’ salary 

and part of office rental (1/3) costs will be borne by the Government. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

8 

Table 2.3: Estimated Project Cost by Component 

COMPONENTS 
(USD Thousand) (UA Thousand) % 

F.E. 

% Base 

Cost L.C. F.E. Total L.C. F.E. Total 

1. PLANT SUB-SECTOR DEVELOPMENT 2,210.13 11,586.64 13,796.77 1,590.02 8,335.71 9,925.73 84 48 

1.1 Plant /Agricultural Sub-sectors 2,040.13 10,546.64 12,586.77 1,467.72 7,587.51 9,055.23 84 43 

1.2 Agricultural Value Chain Support Activities 170.00 1,040.00 1,210.00 122.30 748.20 870.50 86 4 

2. INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT, 
IMPROVEMENT OF GOVERNANCE AND 

CAPACITY BUILDING 1,901.16 6,605.06 8,506.22 1,367.74 4,751.84 6,119.58 78 29 

2.1 Capacity Building 631.46 2,461.26 3,092.72 454.29 1,770.69 2,224.98 80 11 

2.2 Institutional Support and Improvement of 
Governance 449.70 1,823.80 2,273.50 323.53 1,312.09 1,635.61 80 8 

2.3 Support for the Operationalization of Sub-
sectors 820.00 2,320.00 3,140.00 589.93 1,669.06 2,258.99 74 11 

3. PROJECT COORDINATION, 
MANAGEMENT AND MONITORING AND 

EVALUATION 6,353.95 317.75 6,671.70 4,571.19 228.60 4,799.78 5 23 

Base Cost 10,465.24 18,509.45 28,974.69 7,528.95 13,316.15 20,845.10 64 100 

Physical Contingencies 49.34 444.02 493.35 35.49 319.44 354.93 90 2 

Price Escalation 198.98 341.08 540.06 88.10 146.23 234.33 62 1 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 10,713.56 19,294.55 30,008.11 7,652.54 13,781.82 21,434.36 64 103 

Table 2.4: Project Cost by Expenditure Category 

Table 2.5: Expenditure Schedule by Component (amounts in UA thousand) 
Components 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 TOTAL 

PLANT SUB-SECTOR DEVELOPMENT 2,032.58 2,911.38 2,920.35 1,784.66 634.94 10,283.91 

INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT, IMPROVEMENT OF 
GOVERNANCE AND CAPACITY BUILDING 1,526.99 2,051.12 1,197.88 900.42 593.11 6,269.53 

PROJECT COORDINATION, MANAGEMENT AND 

MONITORING AND EVALUATION 1,104.83 930.31 940.71 948.57 956.50 4,880.92 

TOTAL 4,664.40 5,892.81 5,058.95 3,633.66 2,184.55 21,434.36 

Table 2.6: Sources of Financing 

Sources of Financing 
(UA Thousand) (USD Thousand) % 

Total L.C F.E. Total L.C F.E. Total 

ADF 6,218.17 13,781.83 20,000.00 8,705.44 19,294.56 28,000.00 93.30 

Government 1,434.37 - 1,434.37 2,008.12 - 2,008.12 6.70 

TOTAL 7,652.54 13,781.83 21,434.37 10,713.56 19,294.56 30,008.12 100.00 

 

2.4.3. The Government's contribution (6.7%) not reaching 10% of the overall project budget as 

required by the Bank, a note on the waiver for the national counterpart, developed by the Country 
Economist of the Bank, has been introduced (Annex C4). This note is based on a set of criteria 

including (i) the country's commitment to implement its development programme, (ii) the priority 

given by the country to the sector targeted by the Bank's assistance, (iii) the country's fiscal situation 

and debt level. 

 

EXPENDITURE CATEGORIES 
(USD Thousand) (UA Thousand) 

% F.E. 
% Base 

Cost L.C. F.E. Total L.C. F.E. Total 

Investment         

Works  309.40 2,784.60 3,094.00 222.59 2,003.31 2,225.90 90.00 11.00 

Goods 3,117.78 11,871.14 14,988.92 2,243.01 8,540.39 10,783.40 79.00 52.00 

Services  390.86 3,517.71 3,908.57 281.19 2,530.73 2,811.92 90.00 13.00 

Operating Costs 6,647.20 336.00 6,983.20 4,782.16 241.73 5,023.88 5.00 24.00 

Base Cost 10,465.24 18,509.45 28,974.69 7,528.95 13,316.15 20,845.10 64.00 100.00 

Physical Contingencies 49.34 444.02 493.35 35.49 319.44 354.93 90.00 2.00 

Price Escalation 198.98 341.08 540.06 88.10 146.23 234.33 62.00 1.00 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 10,713.56 19,294.55 30,008.11 7,652.54 13,781.82 21,434.36 64.00 103.00 



 

9 

2.5. Project Target Area and Beneficiaries 

2.5.1. The project impact area is defined by crop and by province as follows: (1) Kwilu: cassava 

and maize (Idiofa, Bulungu and Bagata Territories); (2) Lomami: maize (Ngandajika Territory and 

Muene-Ditu Centre); (3) Kasaï: maize (Mweka Territory); (4) Haut Lomami: beans (Kanyama 

Territory); (5) Maniema: rice (Kibombo, Kassongo, Kabambare sites); and (6) Tshopo: rice (Opala, 

Isangi, Imela, and Banalia Territories). These areas were proposed based on the following criteria: 

(i) accessibility; (ii) existence of infrastructure (warehouses and packaging lines); (iii) mastery of the 

relevant crop by experienced farmers with a high level of organization; (iv) easy access to inputs and 

a high level of production; and (v) existence of plant materials for reproduction and propagation. The 

targeted provinces have a substantial and diverse agricultural potential which, if harnessed, will help 

to partly reduce the country’s food shortage. 

2.5.2 This is one of the priority development areas defined in the Government’s Five-Year 

Programme 2012-2016.This choice is also based on a spatial approach as recommended in the 2013-

2017 CSP, which has been extended to 2020 and focuses particularly on the central and neighbouring 

provinces, and on criteria for the use of the integrated approach to sector-based operations, and the 

consolidation and enhancement of the achievements of Bank-funded and supported operations. The 

provinces of Maniema and Tshopo (rice-growing provinces) have been added to those of the Centre 

Zone to take into account the Government’s desire to implement many operations in the country’s 

rice production sub-sector and to complement the operations of other technical and financial partners 

(IFAD). 

2.5.3. Project Beneficiaries 

Some 1,768,825 rural households, including 60% of women, will benefit directly from the project. 

Given that the average size of a household is about six (6) people, 10.612.950 people will therefore 

benefit directly from the project. The benefits will take several forms, including capacity building in 

the use of modern farming techniques, innovations and good farming practices. Other benefits 

include increased productivity and production, better crop management, improved food and nutrition 

security and increased household incomes, as well as improved general well-being of households. 

Besides the rural households that will benefit directly from the project, about 3,353,650 households 

would benefit indirectly from the project through the dissemination of farming technologies, 

innovations and good practices among the direct project beneficiaries. 

2.6 Participatory Approach for Project Identification, Design and Implementation  

2.6.1. The project design is based on the value chain approach adopted for the TAAT programme 

and takes into account several factors including, in particular, proven high-performance technologies, 

agricultural sub-sector support infrastructure, ability of producers and available manpower, conditions 

for market access, market demand and consumer preference.  

2.6.2 A broad-based participatory approach was used during the preparation of PADCA-6P. During 

the preparation mission, discussions and exchanges were held with all stakeholders involved in project 

implementation. Meetings were held with the representatives of the Ministry of Finance and the 

Ministry of Agriculture, particularly the Project and Programme Monitoring Unit of the Ministry of 

Finance. Discussions were held with key agricultural sector stakeholders such as the National Institute 

of Economics and Agricultural Research (INERA), the National Seed Service (SENASEM), the 

National Extension Service (SNV), Provincial Inspectorates of Agriculture, and other seed sub-sector 



 

10 

and private sector stakeholders represented by the Fédération des Entreprises du Congo (Federation of 

Congolese Businesses) and the General Directorate of the Bukanga Lonzo Agro-industrial Park. 

Consultations and due diligence meetings were held with the key TFPs operating in the agricultural and 

nutrition sector in DRC, notably the Inter-Donor Group for Agriculture and Rural Development 

(GIBADER), the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), the World Food Programme (WFP), the 

European Union (EU), the Belgian Development Agency (ENABEL – formerly Belgian Technical 

Cooperation) and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), to familiarize 

them with ongoing operations and envisage improved aid and operation coordination. 

2.6.3 This participatory, inclusive and holistic approach which is based on lessons learned from 

similar projects aims to contribute significantly to:(i) increasing agricultural productivity and production 

by identifying and disseminating appropriate technologies;(ii) providing training and organizing 

agricultural extension campaigns on the adoption of good farming practices through the effective 

provision of technologies to farmers;(iii) promoting a plant sub-sector development policy; and (iv) 

offering vulnerable groups, particularly women and youths, the opportunity to participate fully in the 

main stages of agricultural sub-sector development. Discussions with the authorities and officials of the 

Ministry of Agriculture, other technical and financial partners (GIBADER and FAO), as well as 

farmers’ groups and associations, and NGOs led to a better definition of the priority actions to be 

implemented in this regard. 

2.6.4 Field visits and discussions held with actors on agricultural value chains helped to identify 

major weaknesses in (i) the production chain (input supply, support/counselling and poor organization, 

inappropriate farming practices, and lack of equipment); (ii) processing (poor organization, lack of 

equipment and inadequate marketing); and (iii) marketing. 

2.7. Bank Group Experience and Lessons Reflected in Project Design 

2.7.1 As at 31 December 2018, the Bank Group’s active portfolio in DRC comprised a total of 31 

public sector operations for a cumulative amount of UA 1 020.67 million. This includes 25 national 

operations for a cumulative amount of UA 895.77 million, of which 21 investment projects (UA 891.15 

million), 3 studies (UA 3.90 million) and 1 emergency humanitarian operation (UA 0.72 million).These 

operations are financed mainly by the ADF for a total of UA 873.21 million (of which UA 163.49 

million under the Transition Support Facility (TSF), that is 18.25%),the Rural Water Supply and 

Sanitation Initiative(RWSSI): UA 4.87 million, the African Water Facility (AWF): UA 1.53 million, 

and the Forest Investment Programme (FIP): UA 15.43 million. The portfolio also includes 6 regional 

projects for a total amount of UA 124.90 million, financed by the ADF, of which UA 65.90 million 

under the TSF. At the national level, the breakdown of the portfolio by sector, which is perfectly 

consistent with the orientations of the CSP and the Bank’s five operational priorities and Ten-year 

Strategy, is as follows: infrastructure sector: (79% transport: 41%, energy: 26%, water and sanitation: 

12%); agricultural sector: 12%; governance sector: 7%, and social sector: 2%.Concerning the 

agricultural sector, 6 national operations are being implemented for cumulative net commitments of UA 

107.65 million (see Annex 3). 

2.7.2 On the whole, from the CSP analysis, portfolio performance as at 31 December 2018 was 
considered satisfactory with a score of 3 on a scale of 4. Performance has remained stable compared 

with the CSP mid-term review carried out in 2015 and the one carried out during the extension of 

the CSP in 2017 to 2020. However, the Portfolio Flashlight Report noted that portfolio performance 

is moderately satisfactory. According to the December 2018 Flashlight Report, only 66% of the 

portfolio achieved a performance considered satisfactory (that is 47% of the portfolio with a 



 

11 

performance considered satisfactory and 19% with a performance considered moderately 

satisfactory), while 33% of the portfolio has an unsatisfactory performance.  

2.7.3 Despite the improvements noted, the implementation of operations continues to face 
recurrent problems which affect performance. These constraints include: (i) delays in fulfilling the 

conditionalities of agreements, particularly the ratification of loan agreements and the fulfilment of 

first disbursement conditions; (ii) the insufficient involvement of line ministries in project 

monitoring; (iii) the poor financial management of some projects, including the conduct of audits; 

and (iv) long delays in the processing of some files by the Bank. 

2.7.4 In light of these findings and in a bid to ensure rapid and consistent project implementation, 
the project design aims to: (i) ease conditions precedent to first disbursement under the project; 

(ii)better involve the line ministry (Ministry of Agriculture) in project monitoring through the 

Secretary-General and the support ministry (Ministry of Rural Development); (iii) promote closer 

and greater collaboration between sector (AHAI) and regional (RDGC)directorates and strengthen 

the country office to ensure the swift processing of files submitted to the Bank for approval. 

2.8 Key Performance Indicators 

2.8.1 The main performance indicators contained in the project logical framework are:(i) food 

insecurity rate; (ii) severe malnutrition prevalence rate; (iii) level of increase in food crop 

productivity (cassava, rice, maize, beans/cowpeas);(iv) number of women and youths integrated into 

agricultural value chains; number of job and economic opportunities created for youths and women; 

(v) number of households that have adopted new technologies; (vi) increase in crop productivity 

through proper fertilization;(vii) number of groups structured; (viii) number of seed producer and 

multiplier groups supported; (ix) number of seed laws adopted; and (x) number of platforms 

facilitating technological innovations established. Concerning the food and nutrition security of 

people in DRC, the food insecurity rate will be reduced to less than 20%, the severe malnutrition rate 

from 10% to a level below 5%, and the chronic malnutrition rate from 43% to below 20%.The 

productivity and production of beans will be increased to 0.86 t/ha, cassava from 8 t/ha to 10 t/ha, 

rice from 0.720 kg/ha to 4-7 t/ha and maize from 0.8 t/ha to 1.5 t/ha.  

2.8.2 The number of households adopting new technologies is estimated at more than 75%. The 

number of women and youths involved in agricultural value chains is expected to be 80 000 (women) 

and 60 000 (youths). In the second year, the project will establish the baseline situation and register 

beneficiaries in the production basins of each crop. All these indicators relate to the African 

Development Bank’s Feed Africa programme. 

III. PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1. Economic and Financial Performance 

3.1.1. Project financial analysis was conducted using three models of activity based on market 

prices. The main assumptions underlying the analyses include: (i) 80 000 farmers are actively 

engaged in agriculture under the project at full capacity; (ii) the project will lead to a 25% increase 

in incomes; (iii) farmers will adopt improved varieties of maize, bean and rice seeds; (iii) a 20-year 

period was used to measure the incremental benefits of the project; (iv) the opportunity cost of the 

capital used to update future benefits was estimated at 12%.  



 

12 

3.1.2 For economic analysis: (v) the value of wage labour was adjusted using a conversion factor 

of 0.75; and (vi) the rehabilitation of the seed system will ensure national supply of quality seeds. 

These analyses were carried out based on financial and economic costs generated using Costab 32. 

The financial and economic analysis is summarized in Annex VII and developed in Annex B6 of 

Volume II of the Appraisal Report. 

3.1.3 The project is expected to generate the following benefits: (i) increased food production; 

(ii) increased private sector investments; (iii) improved seed production and storage; (iv) increased 

average household income; (v) job creation for 140 000 farmers and entrepreneurs; and (vi) improved 

nutrition through use of bio-fortified foods. 

Table 3.1: Key Economic and Financial Figures 

IRR (baseline scenario): 19%   NPV equivalent to:  FC 18 753 235 485.13   

ERR (baseline scenario):  26%   NPV equivalent to:  FC 22 530 519 219.40   

NB: Detailed calculations are presented in Annex B7 

3.1.4 Financial Analysis: based on the above assumptions, the financial analysis generated a net 

present value of FC 18 753 235 485.13 and a 19% internal rate of return, as shown in the technical 

annexes (B6). Based on the above analysis, the project is deemed financially viable. The 19% IRR 

is above the opportunity cost of capital (12%). 

3.1.5 Economic Analysis: the economic analysis was carried out using the same approach as for 

the financial analysis, based on the reference prices of tradeable goods and the total project cost. In 

addition, other indirect benefits were also expected such as reduced post-harvest losses, the 

establishment of an agricultural equipment service centre, a reliable soil information system for 

fertilizer mixtures, an efficient system for the distribution of inputs through the farmer database 

system and reduced cost of transporting goods and services. However, it was difficult to assess these 

additional benefits in monetary terms owing to the limited scope of this report. Under such 

conditions, the economic analysis showed an NPV of FC 22 530 519 219.40 and a 26% IRR, as 

shown in the technical annexes. 

3.2 Environmental and Social Impact 

Environment 

3.2.1 The proposed activities do not entail any physical or economic resettlement. The project 
falls under the TAAT initiative which focuses much more on technology transfer. Besides 

introducing and disseminating new technologies in production areas, the project will only rehabilitate 

infrastructure deemed necessary. Production is mostly rain-fed and rice is irrigated in some areas 

under well controlled conditions.  

3.2.2 PADCA-6P has been classified under Environmental Category 2 pursuant to the Bank’s 

environmental and social assessment procedures (ESAPs), considering the nature of its activities. An 

environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA), together with an environmental and social 

management plan (ESMP), was prepared between January 2019 and March 2019, PADCA-6P 

outcomes are not expected to generate major environmental and social impacts. They will mostly 

address the following real social problems: (i) improvement of the food and nutrition security of the 



 

13 

people; (ii) provision of support for the production, supply and distribution of improved seeds, taking 

into account climate, certified plant material and input risks/variations; (iii) promotion of farm 

mechanization; (iv) promotion of processing systems; and (v) building the technical and 

organizational capacity of farmers’ organizations, civil society and the private sector involved in the 

value chains of the agricultural products concerned. These outcomes will radically improve the living 

conditions of the beneficiary populations (employment of youths and women) in the six project 

provinces and at the national level.  

3.2.3 There will be no irreversible or large-scale negative impact. Most of the impacts will be 

temporary and limited in time. The negative environmental and social impacts of PADCA-6P 

activities will be: (i) risks of pollution of the ground water and water rivers as well as soil degradation 

linked to the use of pesticides and fertilizers (even the project will promote the use of the use of 

mineral and organic fertilizers with local adaptation according to soil deficiencies locally adapted 

mineral and organic fertilizers, depending on soil deficiencies); (ii) fertilization and cropping (crop 

association and rotation) and herbicide (biodegradable materials will be recommended to reduce 

negative impacts) system. 

3.2.4 Socially, there could be the recrudescence of water-borne diseases; insecurity and social 

constraints due to the influx of migrant populations into the project area; risks of accidents and 

nuisances resulting from the rehabilitation and construction of various infrastructure such as 

platforms (the project will set up 6 multipurpose platforms (MPPs) in the project area). Each MPP 

will cover a surface area of between 100 and 200 square metres, including access to drinking water 

and sanitation in storage areas (100-square metre storage room). To prevent these risks, measures 

have been proposed in the ESMP and the overall cost of implementing the environmental and social 

safeguard measures will stand at USD 505,000. The Project Management Unit will be responsible 

for implementing the ESMP. 

Adaptation to Climate Change 

3.2.5 The agricultural sector is very vulnerable to climate change in DRC because of the extreme 

variability of climate parameters, especially rainfall. Seasonal droughts cause serious disruption of 

agricultural calendars, while agriculture is rain-fed, which significantly affects production and, 

hence, the food security of communities, especially in rural areas. They also cause poverty because 

farming is the main means of livelihood in these areas. In addition, the climate risks identified under 

PADCA-6P are compounded by a rain-dependent production system, subsistence agriculture, 

environment-unfriendly farming practices, absence of rigorous compliance with crop management 

techniques and lack of a climate risk information and management system. The specific impacts in 

the project impact area include: (i) drop in the yields of the main crops (cassava, maize, rice, beans 

and cowpea), including those targeted by PADCA-6P; (ii) physical and chemical soil degradation 

leading to reduced agricultural productivity and pasture plant resources for animals; and (iii) 

worsening of land conflicts. 

Gender Situation 

3.2.6 Gender equality is a right enshrined in the country’s constitution. The country has also 

ratified international protocols on the promotion of gender equality. However, despite the progress 

made regarding the legal framework, gender equality is still a major challenge in the country.  Gender 

equality-related issues may be mainstreamed in the various value chain development activities.  

Although women play a key role in agriculture, they face many challenges and constraints, 



 

14 

particularly limited access to the various means of production, unequal access to agricultural inputs 

(seeds, fertilizers, etc.) and lack of access to credit.  

3.2.7 For women to also benefit from the project, specific activities will be designed for them to 

enhance their economic and social empowerment. The project will seek to: (i) ensure socio-economic 

empowerment; (ii) increase the participation of men and women in the promotion of agribusiness in 

the project areas; (iii) create conditions for equal access to project resources by men, women and 

youths; and (iv) increase the participation of women in the decision-making process throughout the 

agricultural value chain. The project will encourage a gender transformation approach through: (a) 

capacity building in all aspects of the agricultural value chain, including the establishment of 

cooperatives/business associations headed by women, and the development of their leadership and 

entrepreneurship technical skills; and (b) the construction of gender-sensitive infrastructure. The 

project will also support gender-specific monitoring and evaluation information activities that will 

be indicated in the reports prepared. 

IV. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1 Implementation Arrangements – Monitoring and Evaluation Mechanism  

4.1.1 PADCA-6P will be placed under the oversight of the Ministry in charge of agriculture 

through the Secretariat General for Agriculture (SGA) which, in that capacity, will facilitate 

interactions with the other sector ministries and technical and financial partners. It will also 

coordinate monitoring and evaluation activities. Consultation at the national level will be carried out 

by a National Steering Committee (CNP) which, for reasons of harmonization and consistency, will 

be the same one set up under PEJAB (see Volume II- Technical Annex B5). At the decentralized 

level, consultation will be carried out by Provincial Consultation Committees (CCs). These bodies 

will validate and supervise the implementation of provincial investment planning in order to ensure 

alignment and coherence with provincial and national strategies and other sector operations.  

4.1.2  Regarding the Project Management Unit (PMU), it was agreed that the PEJAB Coordinator 

will be the PDACA-6P Coordinator, assisted by a project officer. The PMU will be responsible for 

project implementation, assisted by a project officer recruited for that purpose. It will ensure effective 

management and recruit the experts required (1 procurement expert, 1financial management expert, 

1 accountant, 1 environmental expert, 1 rural infrastructure expert placed on secondment from the 

Ministry of  Rural Development and 1 value chain monitoring and evaluation officer). The project 

will supply additional equipment (logistics, ICT and management tools). The project will provide 

resources to reinforce the project management and coordination entity.  

4.1.3 The project monitoring and evaluation mechanism will be designed taking into account the 

target indicators adopted for the project components as well as their expected impact, outcome and 

output indicators. Socio-economic surveys will be conducted according to a frequency to be 

determined to inform the performance and impact indicators. At project start-up, a baseline situation 

will be clearly established, with gender-disaggregated data to provide information on the level of the 

initial key indicators that will be monitored. Monitoring and evaluation activities will be carried out 

in collaboration with the National Agricultural Statistics Service. 

4.1.4  Quarterly and annual progress reports will also be prepared and submitted to the Bank, in 

accordance with the agreements signed. The Bank will field at least two monitoring and supervision 

missions annually. The DRC Country Office will maintain permanent dialogue with the Government 



 

15 

and monitor the project. At the end of the project, the Government will prepare a Completion Report 

on the basis of which the Bank will draft its Project Completion Report (PCR). 

4.2 Procurement Arrangements 

4.2.1 Procurements of goods (including non-consultancy services), works and consultancy 

services financed by the Bank under the project will be done in accordance with the “Procurement 

Policy and Methodology for Bank Group-funded Operations” approved in October 2015, as well as 

the provisions set forth in the Financing Agreement. Specifically, procurements will be done in 

accordance with: (i) the Borrower’s national procurement procedures (NPPs)  governed by Law No. 

10/10 of 10 April 2010 on Public Procurement, as well as its implementing decrees; (ii) Bank 

procurement methods and procedures (BPMPs) using relevant standard bidding documents (SBDs) 

for contracts that are (a) above the thresholds shown in Annex  B7, Para. B.7.3.2 or (b) for 

procurements for which the Borrower’s national procurement procedures (NPPs) is considered 

inappropriate; and (iii) third party procurement systems (e.g. co-financing).  

4.2.2 Procurement Risk and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): the country, sector and project 

procurement risks as well as the procurement capacity of the executing agency (EA) were assessed 

and the findings used to guide the selection of the procurement system (Borrower, Bank or third 

party) to be used for specific activities or group of similar activities under the project. Appropriate 

risk mitigation measures have been included in the action plan presented in Para. B.7.9. of Annex 

B7. 

4.2.3 PADCA’s PMU will be responsible for procurement of goods, works and services. The 

PMU will backed by the Public Procurement and Management Unit (CGPMP) of the Secretariat 

General of MINAGRI, in pursuance of the provisions of Section 13 (1) of the Public Procurement 

Code, as supplemented by Article 2 of Decree No. 10/32 2012 on the establishment, organization 

and functioning of the Project and Public Procurement Management Unit. 

4.2.4 The unit’s procurement capacity is deemed insufficient. The Implementation Unit of 

PADCA-6P should therefore recruit a project procurement expert whose commencement of work 

should be approved beforehand by the Bank.  

4.2.5 A procurement plan (PP) was designed during project preparation. The PP will be updated 

by the PMU at project start-up and posted on the Bank’s website. The PP will cover an initial period 

of 18 months and updated each year as appropriate, but always after 18 months during the project 

implementation period. The procurement plan, detailed procurement methods and the goods and 

service procurement table are presented in the technical annexes of the report (Annex B7). 

4.3 Financial Management Arrangements 

Project financial management will be entrusted to a project team to be recruited. The team will 

benefit from the close collaboration of the Coordination Unit of PEJAB through: (i) the supervision 

of financial and accounting tasks; (ii) the updating of management tools (existing software and 

manual); (iii) the reinforcement of the internal control mechanism; (iv) the preparation of interim 

financial reports and annual financial statements; and (v) the monitoring of audit activities and 

transmission of audit reports to the Bank. The PADCA-6P procedures manual will be based on that 

of PAJEB, but revised to take into account the specificities of PADCA-6P. The project financial 

management conditions will be confirmed and presented in detail in Volume II- Technical Annexes 

of the Project Appraisal Report. 

 



 

16 

4.4 Disbursement Arrangements 

4.4.1 Loan resources will be disbursed in accordance with the Bank’s Disbursement Manual once 

the Loan Agreement enters into effect, and the conditions precedent to first disbursement are 

fulfilled. It is envisaged that the first disbursement will be effected within the three months following 

signature of the Loan Agreement. The following disbursement methods will be used for 

disbursement of loan resources by the Bank: (i) the direct payment method and (ii) the revolving 

fund or special account method, and (iii) the reimbursement method. The direct payment method 

will be used for payment of works, goods and services contracts. The special account method will 

be used to finance operating expenses. The Bank will transmit the "Disbursement Letter" specifying 

the special provisions for the withdrawal of project funds and management of special accounts.  

4.4.2 The Bank reserves the right to take protective measures in compliance with the general 

conditions to, among other things, suspend the disbursements of funds where its fiduciary 

requirements are not met.  

4.4.3 The Government will contribute to project financing through accounting valuation of the 

recurrent operating expenditure (salaries, rents, etc.) of the SGA financed by the State budget. There 

will be no other disbursements in terms of financial flows in respect of the national counterpart 

contribution. 

4.4.4 Disbursements will be made according to the list of goods and services and in accordance 

with Bank rules and procedures as laid down in the disbursement manual. Disbursement conditions 

are presented in detail in the technical annexes. 

4.5 Audit Arrangements  

External Audit: on the date of project appraisal, the SGA had not submitted the 2017 audit report 

for the Study on the Development of Agro-industrial Parks due on 30 June 2018, that is a delay of 

close to 8 (eight) months. The 2017 PPF audit reports for PEJAB and LEAFII were deemed 

acceptable by the Bank. Many audit reports are expected on 30 June 2019, and the processes for the 

recruitment of audit firms are ongoing. Annual project audits financed with loan resources will be 

conducted by an independent external audit firm to be recruited on a competitive basis and in 

accordance with the standard terms of reference (ToR) in force at the Bank. The external auditor 

could be recruited in collaboration with the Court of Auditors.  Audit-related expenses will be borne 

by the project. Audits will be conducted in accordance with International Standards on Auditing 

(ISA) and International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions (ISSAI). Financial statements 

audited by the independent audit firm will be transmitted (see table for frequency) to the Bank within 

the six months following the closure of the financial year under consideration.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

17 

4.6 Project Monitoring and Evaluation 

Table 3: Project Implementation Schedule 

Period Phases Responsible Entity 
April 2019 Board Approval  Bank 
June 2019 Signature of Loan Agreement Beneficiary/Bank 
September 2019 First disbursement Beneficiary/Bank 
June 2020 Submission of first audit report Borrower 
December 2021 Mid-term review Bank/Borrower 
June 2023 Completion mission  Bank/Borrower 
December 2023 Project completion Bank/Borrower 
December 2024 Project closure Bank/Borrower 

4.7 Governance 

4.7.1 The Mo Ibrahim Foundation report on 54 African countries (2017 Edition) notes that DRC 

is among a group of countries that made the most remarkable progress in the 2017 Index of African 

Governance. The World Governance Index created by the World Bank also shows significant 

progress regarding transparency and accountability, political stability, government effectiveness, 

regulation, rule of law and control of corruption. The project will contribute to enhancing agricultural 

governance in the provinces of Kwilu, Kasaï, Lomami, Haut-Lomami, Tshopo and Maniema in 

support of the promotion of the agricultural value chain. 

4.7.2. The recent presidential election is expected to strengthen governance quality. PADCA-6P 

implementation will be placed under the oversight of the Ministry in charge of agriculture through 

the Secretariat General for Agriculture which, in that capacity, will facilitate interactions with the 

other sector ministries. It will also coordinate monitoring and evaluation activities. Consultation will 

be carried out by a National Steering Committee (CNP) at the national level and by Provincial 

Consultation Committees (CCs) at the decentralized level. 

4.7.3 The improvements noted notwithstanding, the Bank portfolio review showed that the 

implementation of operations is still facing recurrent problems that affect performance. The 

constraints faced include: (i) bottlenecks in the fulfilment of loan agreement conditionalities, 

particularly the ratification of loan agreements and the fulfilment of conditions precedent to first 

disbursement; (ii) the low involvement of oversight ministries in project monitoring; and (iii) the 

poor financial management of some projects, especially the conduct of audits. To mitigate these risks 

and enhance good governance, the project will reinforce the PADCA management team which will 

comprise a procurement expert. In addition, the project will support local governance through greater 

regional consultation, secured land tenure systems and capacity building for infrastructure 

management cooperatives and bodies.  

4.8 Sustainability 

4.8.1 Project sustainability will be ensured by enhancing the capacity of institutional actors 

(beneficiaries, State services, service-providing NGOs, local elected representatives, etc.) to replicate 

the good initiatives the project would have developed throughout its existence. The potential effect 

and the sustainability of the expected impacts of the implementation of the activities of the various 

sub-sectors mainly depend on the project’s holistic approach, its intervention and support principles 

upstream and downstream of the sub-sectors.  



 

18 

4.8.2 The sustainability of investments and expected benefits is contingent upon: (i) beneficiaries 

who are better trained and equipped for production and processing; (ii) the choice of locally tested 

and easily mastered varieties, techniques and technologies; (iii) support for the restructuring and 

supervision of beneficiaries in the management, maintenance and replacement of productive 

facilities; (iv) social cohesion, especially community work, which will  contribute to ensuring 

sustainability ; (v) institutions and other actors who are trained and empowered to better conduct 

participatory variety selection (PVS) tests and adoption of good farming practices; (vi) the 

development of partnerships and synergies with national institutions and organizations such as the 

National Extension Service, the National Seed Service and the National Institute of Agronomic 

Studies and Research, which will contribute to ensuring sustainability; and (vii) the involvement of 

the private sector in seed multiplication and the marketing of products, which will ensure continuity 

of production, processing and marketing.  

4.8.3 The national and international laws in place in DRC require the conduct of a prior 

environmental and social impact assessment, especially Law No. 11/9 of 9 July 2011 on the 

fundamental principles for protection of environment, Section 2 of which states that: “Every 

development, infrastructure or industrial, commercial, agricultural, forestry, mining, 

telecommunications, etc. project likely to have an environmental impact shall be subject to a prior 

environmental and social impact assessment, together with its duly approved management plan”. 

4.9 Risk Management 

4.9.1 The project will adopt a participatory approach based on response to request. It will 

introduce technological and technical innovations already tested in research/development institutions 

and/or pilot farmers, through the activities of research centres.  As a result, the technical risks related 

to these activities will be few. The other risks that could affect PADCA-6P are:  

(i) The difficulties in finding local service providers capable of providing the institutional 
and technical support that the project seeks to develop;    

(ii) The weak capacity of the population to implement a participatory, decentralized 
approach for expressing priority needs in a context characterized by the absence 

and/or weakness of grassroots community organizations.   

Mitigation  measures: the risk mitigation strategy adopted by PADCA-6P consists in: (i) promoting 

the structuring, organization and capacity building of the population/farmers’ organizations; and (ii) 

developing, in collaboration with financial partners and specialized NGOs in the provinces 

concerned, consultation and conflict prevention mechanisms among traditional rulers and 

decentralized local authorities. The new political climate ushered in by the presidential and 

legislative elections is expected to mitigate this risk. 

4.9.2 The major potential risks that project implementation may face and their mitigation 

measures are presented in the table below: 

  



 

19 

4.10. Knowledge Building 

4.10.1 Cassava sub-sector activities contribute to knowledge building and sharing. They include: 

(i) the dissemination of production and processing technologies which will help to develop expertise 

in the sub-sector and promote mechanization; (ii) training in production and processing and exchange 

visits which are tools for interaction between researchers, advisory support workers and 

beneficiaries; (iii) awareness-raising and information dissemination through various communication 

channels (community radios, media programmes, website, etc.); and (iv) promotion of innovative 

actions for  youth and women employability in the growth areas of the sub-sector.  

4.10.2 The project will use the Semi-Autotrophic Hydroponic (SAH) rapid multiplication 

technology. The introduction of this technology helps to rapidly obtain large quantities of healthy 

cuttings.  

4.10.3 Regarding fertilization, the project will introduce the integrated soil fertility management 

(ISFM) approach which combines organic and inorganic soil fertility inputs. To improve agronomic 

efficiency, the use of mineral and organic fertilizers with improved varieties will be promoted. They 

will also be adapted to the local context in case the soils need additional lime or dolomite for greater 

increase in productivity. 

 

 

No. Potential Risks Level Mitigation Measures 

1 Insufficient synergy of action 

between project partners 

High - Establishment of a project coordination 
unit and proper planning of activities, 

and fielding of joint missions 

- Reinforcement of collaboration and 
coordination between research and 

agricultural counselling institutions. 

2 Insufficient support from the 

population 

Moderate - Establishment of an appropriate 
communication plan for all actors and 

agricultural counselling and training 

activities 

- Establishment of platforms 

3 Worsening of the political and 

security crisis in the country and its 

spread to the project area 

 

High 

- Establishment of coordination branches 
in the provinces 

- Coordination of security information 
with the United Nations system  

- Facilitating social cohesion  

4   Climate hazards and pest 

outbreaks 

High - Mainstreaming of the adaptation 
dimension in activities   

- Integrated farming approach and use of 
resistant and tolerant varieties 

5 Inadequate road infrastructure Moderate - Synergy with existing AFDB projects  



 

20 

V. LEGAL FRAMEWORK 

5.1. Legal Instrument 

A loan agreement will be signed between the Fund and DRC (“the Borrower”). 

5.2. Conditions for Fund Intervention 

5.2.1. Conditions Precedent to Loan Effectiveness 

Entry into force of the Loan shall be subject to fulfilment by the Borrower of the conditions set forth 

in Section 12.01 of Article XII of the General Conditions Applicable to Loan Agreements and to 

African Development Fund Guarantee Agreements (Sovereign Entities). 

5.2.2. Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement of Loan Resources 

The Fund’s obligation to effect the first disbursement of loan resources shall be subject to entry into 

force of the Loan Agreement, and to fulfilment, to the Fund’s satisfaction, in form and in substance, 

of the following conditions: 

(i) Provide the Fund with evidence of appointing the Coordinator of the Youth 
Entrepreneurship in Agriculture and Agri-business Project as Coordinator of the 

project. 

5.2.3. Other Conditions 

In addition, the Borrower shall:  

(i) Provide the Fund, within the six (6) months following the first disbursement of loan 
resources, with evidence of recruiting the Procurement Specialist and the Accountant 

whose qualifications and experience would have been deemed satisfactory by the 

Fund; and 

(ii) Provide the Fund, within one year following the first disbursement of loan resources, 
with evidence of signing partnership agreements under the project with (a) the 

National Institute of Economics and Agricultural Research (INERA), the National 

Seed Service (SENASEM), the National Extension Service (SNV), the Plant Care and 

Maintenance Centre (CEMAV), the National Rice Programme (PNR) and the 

National Fertilizer and Related Inputs Service (SENAFIC) and (b) the Fund’s partner 

research institutions in TAAT implementation. 

5.2.4. Commitments 

The Borrower undertakes to implement the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 

and to submit, in a form deemed acceptable to the Fund, quarterly reports on the plan’s 

implementation status. 

 

 



 

21 

5.3. Compliance with Bank Policies 

The project is consistent with all applicable Bank policies. 

VI. RECOMMENDATION 

Management recommends that the Board of Directors of the Fund approve the proposal to grant a Loan 

not exceeding Unit of Account twenty million ( UA 20,000,000) to the Democratic Republic of Congo 

for the purpose and under the conditions set forth in this report. 

 

 


























































 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND 

 

 
 

 

 

RURAL ECONOMY INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT (PROADER) 

 

COUNTRY : DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO (DRC) 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT  

Date: August 2019 


Project Information Sheet 

 

Client Information 

 

BORROWER:   Democratic Republic of Congo 

EXECUTING AGENCY:  Ministry of Rural Development  

 

Financing Plan 

 

Source 

 

Amount  

 

Instrument 

 

ADF LOAN 

 

UA 39,99 million  

 

ADF 

ADF GRANT UA 2,1 million 
From Loan 

cancellations 

Government   UA 6,84 million   

Beneficiaries  UA 0,56 million   

TOTAL COST UA 49,49 million  

 

Key ADF Financing Information  

 

Loan Currency  

 

Unit of Account  

Interest Type  N/A  

Interest Rate Margin  N/A 

Other Costs N/A 

Commitment Fee  0.5% of the undisbursed amount 

effective 120 days following 

signature of the Loan Agreement  

  

Loan Maturity  40 years  

Grace Period  10 years 

 

FRR (baseline scenario)  

NPV                                                            

ERR (baseline scenario) 

NPV 

18% 

USD 86.4 million 

19% 

USD 95.5 million  
                                             

Duration – Key Milestones (expected) 

  

Project approval  21 November 2019 

Signature of the agreement End-January 2020 

First disbursement  End-April 2020 

Completion End-July 2025 

Last disbursement  End-December 2025 

Last reimbursement  To be specified  



ii 

Project Summary 

1. Project overview: The Rural Economy Integrated Development Support Project 
(PROADER) will be implemented in the rural areas of Kasaï-Central, Kasaï, Kasaï-Oriental, 

Kwilu, Kwango, Kongo Central and Mai-Ndombe Provinces. About 60% of the inhabitants of 

these provinces live below the extreme poverty line of USD 1.9 per day. The targeted corridor is 

an integral part of areas most severely affected by the humanitarian crisis in the Democratic 

Republic of Congo (DRC). The area has a huge agricultural, forestry, pastoral and fisheries 

production potential, and can serve as a vector for the promotion of agribusiness. It is the junction 

area between the West (Kinshasa border with the Republic of Congo), the Southwest (border with 

Angola) and the Southeast (Grand Katanga towards Zambia). The overall objective of the project 

is to promote a dynamic and prosperous rural economy by improving agricultural and rural 

socioeconomic services, and by diversifying and enhancing agricultural production. To achieve 

this objective, PROADER’s activities will be centred on the following components: (a) local 

governance and institutional capacity building; (b) promotion of productive and social 

investments; and (c) project coordination and management. The project cost is estimated at UA 

49,49 million, of which UA 39,99 million will be contributed by ADF Loan, UA 2,1 million by 

ADF grant from Loan cancellation, UA 6,84 million by the Government and UA 0.56 million by 

the project beneficiaries. The project will be implemented over a six-year period. 

2. PROADER will directly affect 380,000 households in the 30 selected agricultural, 
forestry and pastoral basins, representing nearly 10% of households in the seven targeted 

provinces, or about 2 million people, of whom 50% are women and at least 40% are young 

people. The project will indirectly affect nearly 500,000 households or about 2.6 million people. 

The expected project benefits are the increase in rural household income, the reduction in chronic 

malnutrition among children under five, the increased share of the agricultural sector in the 

national Gross Domestic Product (GDP), and the enhanced resilience of rural households. 

3. Needs assessment: The Bank’s intervention is justified partly by the considerable 

investment needs of the DRC agricultural sector, which must be met to allow the actors of this 

sector to fully play their roles in the structural transformation of Congolese agriculture. The 

project area is replete with natural resources that offer value-adding opportunities with the 

potential to generate wealth for the rural economy. However, agricultural/rural development 

continues to face problems that hinder the dynamism of the rural economy and should, therefore, 

be given special attention. These problems include: (i) the low productivity of traditional 

subsistence farming systems characterised by shifting cultivation and slash-and-burn practices, the 

use of degenerated local seeds, rudimentary farming techniques and high vulnerability to climate 

change. According to the E-QUIBB 2016 survey, 1.8% of households use modern farming 

techniques and 0.8% have access to agricultural machinery; (ii) weak local governance leading to 

significant inadequacies in the planning and maintenance of basic infrastructure required for 

economic development; and (iii) lack of development opportunities for small- and medium-sized 

enterprises in occupational areas related to the development of agricultural and rural services. The 

formal request of the DRC Government was made to the Bank in March 2019. 

4. Bank’s value-added: The Bank’s value-added stems from its experience acquired 

through its interventions in the agricultural and rural sector. Bank intervention will consolidate the 

gains of Bank-financed rural development sector projects under which several rural infrastructure 

facilities were rehabilitated. It will also revive the rural sector, which was left in utter shambles by 

the conflicts. This project lays special emphasis on the establishment of a sustainable mechanism 

for the management and maintenance of rural infrastructure, including roads, with the building of 

the institutional and financial capacity of Decentralised Territorial Entities (ETDs) and the 

involvement of economic actors and the communities concerned. 



iii 

 

5. Knowledge building: PROADER will generate knowledge on the development of the 

rural economy in the DRC, including the challenges, methodologies and benefits of local planning, 

integrated water management, digitisation of farms and registration of producers, the public-

private-producer partnership (or 4P)1 and the financing of gender mainstreaming innovations. As 

part of knowledge management, an electronic library will be set up to store all relevant documents 

from the agricultural and rural sector, which will be accessible to stakeholders and the public. To 

this end, an inventory of best practices, identification of local knowledge and innovations will be 

carried out. This activity will be developed as part of institutional support to the Department of 

Studies and Planning (DEP) of the Ministry in charge of Rural Development. The project's 

monitoring and evaluation system and the gender-sensitive social and institutional communication 

strategy that will be developed will facilitate the production of information for dissemination to 

stakeholders, particularly through partner community radio stations. The knowledge generated by 

the project will help to fuel policy dialogues, support and improve the design of new projects.  

 

                                                 
1  A 4P is a cooperation arrangement between a government, entrepreneurs and small producers, who agree to work together to 

reach a common goal or perform a specific task, while jointly assuming the risks and responsibilities and sharing benefits, 

resources and skills. An illustration of a 4P is presented in Annex B.1.4, Volume II, of the Appraisal Report. 



iv 

 

Results-Based Logical Framework  

Country and Project Name: Democratic Republic of Congo – Rural Economy Integrated Development Support Project (PROADER) 

Project Goal                :  Contribute to the promotion of a dynamic and prosperous rural economy through the establishment of effective agricultural and rural 

entrepreneurship 

RESULTS CHAIN 

PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 

 

MEANS OF 

VERIFICATI

ON 

RISKS/MITIGATION 

MEASURES 

Indicator (including CSI) Baseline Situation  Target 

Sources of 

Verification 
 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Contribute to 

poverty reduction 
and the value-

added of 
agricultural 

products 

1-Income of agricultural households 
2. Chronic malnutrition rate among children under 5 

in rural areas 

 

1- Less than USD 

2000 /year (2016) 
 

2- 43 % (2013)  

1- USD 3500 (in 

2025) 
2- 38 % (2025) 

Sources:  

Ministry of 
Statistics and 

Planning  
 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

 

Outcome 1: 

Improved 

agricultural and 

rural services for 

rural households 

 

1.1. Percentage of residents of the targeted basins 

with year-round road access 
1.2.  Mechanisation access rate  

1.3.  Access rate of small producers to agricultural 

technological innovations 

(2018) 

 

1.1. 25% 

1.2. 0.8% 

1.3.  0 

(2025) 

 

1.1. 60%  

1.2.10%, 25% of 

them women  
1.3. 30%, 40% of 

them women 

Sources:  

Reports 
 

Risk: Vulnerability to climate 
change 

Mitigation measure: 

Promotion of community 
agroforestry, integrated water 

resource management and short-

cycle crop varieties, access to 
supplemental irrigation  

 

Risk: Poor sustainability of the 
infrastructure built  

Mitigation measures: 

Establishment of a local 
infrastructure maintenance 

mechanism, including rural 

roads, by empowering 
decentralised territorial entities, 

labour-intensive private 

agricultural enterprises and 
small- and medium-sized 

enterprises, as well as producer 

associations/cooperatives. 
 

 

Outcome 2. 

Improved 

diversification 

and value-added 

of agricultural 

production  

 

2.1. Improved productivity in the selected subsectors: 

(maize, cassava, village palms, etc., in the targeted 

area)  
2.2.  Increase in the additional volume marketed 

2.3.  Post-harvest losses of targeted crops  

2.4.  Percentage of children between 6 and 23 months 
with a minimum acceptable diet  

2.5. Rural women empowerment index (scale of 1 = 

low and 5 = high) 

2.1. Maize: 0.8 t/ha; 

cassava: 8 t/ha; 

rice: 0.8 t/ha; 
peanuts: 700 kg/ha; 

village oil palm: 2.5 

tonnes of palm 
nuts/ha/year 

2.2. 0 

2.3. Cassava: 30 %; 
maize: 25 % 

2.4. 8.4 % 

2.5. 1 
 

2.1. Maize: 2 t/ha; 

cassava: 20 t/ha; 

rice: 2 t/ha; 
peanuts: 1.5 t/ha; 

village oil palm: 20 

tonnes of palm nuts 
/ha/year 

2.2. 40% 

2.3. Cassava: 15%; 
maize: 10 % 

2.4. 20% 

 
 

2.5. 3 

Sources:  

Socioeconomic 

impact 
monitoring and 

evaluation 

reports  
 

Population and 

health survey 

 

Component 1. 

Build 

governance and 

institutional 

capacity  

1- Build the 

institutional 

capacity of 

territorial entities  

 
 

 

1.1- Number of gender-sensitive local development 

plans prepared  
1.2- Number of community radio stations supported 

1.3- Number of buildings for Decentralised 

Territorial Entities (ETD) rehabilitated 

1.4- Number of locally elected officials trained 

(finance and local taxation, participatory and citizen-

oriented budgeting, planning, governance, etc. (M/W) 
1.5- Preparation of the National Rural Development 

Master Plan  
 1.6- Standards and blueprints for gender-sensitive 

rural infrastructure developed and disseminated 

1.7- Electronic library for the management of sector-
based data set up 

1.8- Establishment of a gender-sensitive farm 

digitisation and registration system 
1.9- Number of central and provincial staff trained in 

rural economy, integrated management, local 

planning, monitoring and evaluation, and project 

development 

1.10- Number of integrated water resources 
management (IWRM) action plans for sub-

watersheds 

1.11-. Number of actors made aware of nutrition 
issues  

1.12- Number of teenage girls and women made 

aware of nutrition issues and essential nutrition 
actions 

1.13- Mobilisation of climate funds for the project 

area 

1.1-   0 

1.2-   0 
1.3-   0 

1.4-   0 

1.5-   0 
1.6-   0 

1.7-   0 

1.8-   0 
1.9-   0 

1.10- 0 

1.11- 0 
1.13- 0 

1.13- 02 

1.1- 30 

1.2- 30  
1.3- 30 

1.4- 1000, 30% of 

them women  
1.5- One (1) master 

plan and detailed 

studies on three 
integrative hydro-

agricultural 

development 
projects  

1.6- One (1) guide 
prepared and 

disseminated  

1.7- One (1) 
electronic library 

operational  

1.8- Farm 
digitisation and 

registration system 

operational  
1.9- 200 

1.10- 4 (2 with 

ADF) 
1.11- 800, 60% of 

them women 

1.12- 5,000 
1.13- USD 15 

million  

 

Sources:   

Monitoring and 
evaluation 

reports 

(progress, 
supervision and 

mid-term 

review reports) 
Socioeconomic 

impact reports 

 Risk: Reticence of public 

entities regarding the 
empowerment of ETDs 

 

Mitigation measures:  
Dissemination of the legislation 

on decentralisation; capacity 

building for public entities in 
preparation for the challenges of 

decentralisation 

 



v 

 

 

  

RESULTS CHAIN 

PERFORMANCE  INDICATORS 
MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

Indicator (including CSI) Baseline Situation  Target 
Sources of  

verification 
 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

Component 2. 

Promote productive 

and social 

investments  
 

2.1- Develop trade 

partnerships in the 
agricultural and rural 

sector 

 
2.2-Strengthen the 

productivity and 

resilience of 
agricultural 

production systems  

 
2.3- Strengthen the 

skills of young people 

for jobs in the 
agricultural and rural 

sector  

 
 

2.4- Strengthen rural 
women’s economic 

empowerment  

 
2.5- Improve access to 

socioeconomic 

infrastructure  
 

 

2.1.1- Number of trade partnerships 
created and operational for the agro-

industrial development of maize, cassava 

and village palm plantations 
 

2.2.1- Number of rural farmers with 

access to technological innovations 
(seeds and other improved inputs) 

 

2.3.1- Number of small- and medium-
sized agricultural and rural enterprises 

(PMEARs) established and operational 

cooperatives in production basins 
 

 

2.3.2- Number of technical and 
vocational training centres strengthened  

 

2.4.1- Number of gender-based multi-
service platforms created and 

rehabilitated 

 
2.5.1-. Length rural roads rehabilitated 

 
2.5.2- Number of socioeconomic 

infrastructure facilities built/rehabilitated 

(gender-sensitive drinking water supply 
systems, small irrigation systems, market 

infrastructure, renewable energy) 

 
2.5.3- Number of pilot community 

agricultural estates set up 

2.1.1- 0 
2.2.1- 0 

2.3.1- 0 

2..3.2- 0 
2..4.1 - 0 

2.5.1- 0 

2.5.2- 0 
2.5.3-0 

 

2.1. 4  
2.2.1-50,000, 50% of 

them women 

2.3.1- 500, 35% of them 
benefiting women  

2.3.2- 3 

2.4.1- 4 
2.5.1. 300, at least 50 % 

of them rehabilitated by 

PMEARs  
2.5.2- 100 

2.5.3- 2 

Sources:  
Monitoring and 

evaluation reports 

(progress, 
supervision and 

mid-term review 

reports) 
Socioeconomic 

impact reports  

Risk: Bad governance 
 

Mitigation measure: 

Strengthening of citizen 
control with the 

empowerment of 

beneficiaries and 
economic actors in the 

process of planning, 

building, managing and 
maintaining the 

facilities; raising of 

stakeholder awareness 
of the available 

remedies 

 
 Risk: Poor knowledge 

of gender issues and 

their impact on the 
performance of 

household activities.  

Mitigation measure.  
Gender mainstreaming 

in local planning 
strategies 

Raising the awareness 

of households 
concerning the benefits 

of proper gender 

mainstreaming 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

  

COMPONENTS  RESOURCES (UA MILLION) 

1. Build local governance and institutional capacity 

 Preparation of local development plans and priority investment plans 

 Construction of offices for decentralised territorial entities 

 Training of locally elected officials 

 Institutional support for technical services involved in the development of the rural economy, 
integrated management of water resources and nutrition 

 

2.  Promote productive and social investments 

 Development of trade partnerships 

 Rehabilitation and equipment of technical and vocational training centres 

 Building of transformative rural infrastructure 

 Support for the establishment and operationalisation of gender-based multi-service platforms 

 Establishment of two community agricultural estates 

 Community agroforestry development 
 

4.  Project coordination and management:  

3. Administrative management; financial management; procurement; environmental and social 
management; monitoring/evaluation and knowledge building 

 

 

ADF                        : UA 39.99 million  

Govt.                       :   UA 6.84 million  
Beneficiaries           :   UA 0.56 million  

 

TOTAL RESOURCES: UA 49.49 

million  



vi 

 

Project Implementation Schedule 

 

T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4
IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE OF PROADER ACTIVITIES

2- Project pre-startup activities 

Signing the Loan Agreement

Loan effectiveness

Fulfillment of conditions for the first disbursement of loan

Establishment of the operational mec hanism, preparation and validation of the first 2020 AWPB for the projec t

Signing of agreements with implementing partners

Organization of the project launch workshop

Equipment and materials for national coordination and provincial teams

3-  Coordination activities and project management

Steering Committee meetings (end-June and end-December from 2020 to 2025)

Preparation of procedures manuals on project management, monitoring-eva luation and 

implementation Reference studies, mid-term review and impact assessment

Coordination, monitoring of the procurement plan, monitoring and eva luation, including the 

Validation by the Steering Committee and the Bank of the AWPB from 2021 to 2025

Financial management and submission of audit reports (no later than end-June from 2021 to 

Bank supervision mission

Preparation of the project completion report

4- Implementation of activities

Local  De ve l opm e n t S u pport

Updat e of t he regional planning met hodological guide

P reparat ion of local development  plans and priorit y invest ment  plans for t he rural economy

Recruit ment  of t he individual consult ant  for t he development  of t he social communicat ion st rat egy

Development  of a  social communicat ion st rat egy

St rengt hening of communit y radio st at ions 

Recruit ment  of an archit ect  for t he design of st andard premises for decent ralised t errit orial ent it ies (ET Ds)

Archit ect ural and t echnical st udies of ET D premises

Recruit ment  of companies and rehabilit at ion / const ruct ion and equipment  of t he premises of t arget ed ET Ds

Development  of t he capacit y building plan for local act ors

Capacit y building for local act ors (st udy t ours, t raining, awareness raising)

In sti tu ti on al  su pport for te ch n i cal  se rvi ce s an d stru ctu re s i n vol ve d

P reparat ion and validat ion of T oRs for t he development  of t he rural development  mast er plan (SDDR)

Recruit ment  of t he consult ant  for t he development  of t he SDDR

Development  and validat ion of t he rural development  mast er plan 

Development  and disseminat ion of a guide on rural infrast ruct ure st andards and blueprint s

Est ablishment  of an elect ronic library for sect or dat a management

Est ablishment  of a land digit izat ion syst em

Capacit y building for t he st aff of t echnical services 

Development  of four int egrat ed wat er resource management  (IWRM) act ion plans and support  for t heir implement at ion

Nu tri ti on  su pport

Nut rit ion–relat ed awareness-raising 

De ve l opme n t of ru ral  e n tre pre n e u rsh i p

Recruit ment  of t echnical assist ance for t he development  of business part nerships and ent erprises

Supplement ary feasibilit y st udies and support  for t he development  of t rade part nerships

Signing and implement at ion of public-privat e  producer part nership agreement s

Development  of small amedium-sized agricult ural and rural ent erprises

Support  for t echnical and professional agricult ural t raining

De ve l opme n t of mu l ti -se rvi ce  pl atforms for wome n

Recruit ment  of t he consult ant  for supplement ary st udies

Supplement ary st udies, proposal of t he plat form management  model

Const ruct ion of mult i-service plat forms

Const ruct ion of mult i-service plat forms

Equipment  of plat forms

Capacit y building for women (t raining, st udy t ours, part icipat ion in foras, et c.)

De ve l opme n t of stru ctu ri n g i n frastru ctu re

Recruit ment  of consult ant s

P reparat ion of informat ion sheet s for priorit y socioeconomic sub-project s 

Select ion of priorit y sub-project s

Supplement ary t echnical st udies and preparat ion of compet it ive bidding document s 

Communit y procurement  for t he recruit ment  of companies

Rehabilit at ion of farm-t o-market s roads 

Rout ine maint enance of rehabilit at ed sect ions

P rivat e invest ment  support  and st orage and market ing infrast ruct ure

Sust ainable mechanism for t he management  and maint enance of collect ive infrast ruct ure

Est ablishment  of 2 pilot  communit y agricult ural domains

C ommu n i ty agrofore stry

Signing of agreement s wit h local agencies

Implement at ion of agroforest ry act ivit ies 

IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE OF PROADER ACTIVITIES

Activities
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025



1 

BANK GROUP MANAGEMENT’S REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION TO THE 

BOARD OF DIRECTORS CONCERNING A PROPOSAL TO GRANT A LOAN TO THE 

DEMOCRATIC DEVELOPMENT REPUBLIC OF CONGO TO FINANCE THE RURAL 

ECONOMY INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT (PROADER) 

 

Management hereby submits this report and its recommendation concerning a proposal to grant a 

Loan of UA 39.997.947 and a Grant of UA 2.100.000 from Loan cancellations to the Government 

of the Democratic Republic of Congo to finance the Rural Economy Integrated Development 

Support Project. 

I. STRATEGIC THRUST AND OBJECTIVES 

1.1. Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives 

1.1.1 The project is consistent with the DRC's 2016-2021 Strategic Development Framework 

(SDF), which seeks to achieve economic and social development by diversifying the economy 

through: (i) agriculture and the agro-food chain; (i) forest exploitation, timber processing and 

marketing industries; (iii) mining; (iv) construction and building materials; (v) the tourism and 

hotel business; and (vi) financial services. The project is also aligned with the National 

Agricultural Investment Plan (PNIA) for 2014-2020, whose overall objective is to stimulate 

sustained annual growth of the agricultural sector by more than 6% - an essential prerequisite for 

reducing poverty, ensuring the people’s food security and nutrition, and sustainably generating 

jobs and income. PROADER is in line with the country's Decentralisation Policy, which 

empowers the Provinces and ETDs to plan and assume responsibility for the economic 

development of their communities and to become real drivers of development from the grassroots. 

According to the 1-2-3 Survey (2016), 63.4% of the population, or 46 million Congolese, live 

below the poverty line and close to three-quarters of them below the extreme poverty line. In 

terms of the human assets index (HAI) and the human development index (HDI), the DRC ranks 

146th out of 157 countries, with an HAI of 0.37 (2017), and 176th out of 189 countries with an HDI 

of 0.457 (2018). The country offers very few formal job opportunities and overall 

underemployment affects 85.7% of the workforce (82% of men and 89.7% of women).  

1.1.2  PROADER is consistent with the 2013-2017 Country Strategy Paper (CSP), extended 

respectively to the end of 2018 and the end of 2020, the two pillars of which are: (i) development 

of private investment and regional integration support infrastructure; and (ii) building central 

government’s capacity to increase public revenue and create an enabling framework for private 

investment. The project will help to strengthen the structural transformation of the rural and 

agricultural sector, which offers a real opportunity to diversify the country's economy and create 

jobs. The project design is in line with the Bank's "Feed Africa" strategy, which is based on the 

value chain approach and seeks to improve productivity and resilience by adopting technology 

through two flagship programmes: Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) 

and Africa Climate-Smart Agriculture (ACSA). PROADER is also aligned with youth 

employment strategies, including the “ENABLE YOUTH” initiative. Lastly, the project will help 

to strengthen women's economic empowerment, and thus dovetails with Pillar 2 of the Bank's 

Gender Strategy, which is based on women's economic empowerment. 

1.2. Rationale for Bank Intervention  

1.2.1. The development of agriculture and agribusiness is an economic diversification pillar of 

the Strategic Development Framework (SDF), aimed at the economic and social development of 

the DRC. The DRC abounds in natural resources, which offer opportunities for the creation of 

value-added that could lead to the generation of wealth for the rural economy. However, 

agricultural/rural development continues to be handicapped by: (i) the low productivity of 

traditional subsistence farming systems characterised by shifting cultivation and slash-and-burn 



2 

practices, the use of degenerated local seeds, rudimentary farming techniques and high 

vulnerability to climate change; (ii) weak local governance leading to notable inadequacies in the 

planning and maintenance of basic infrastructure required for economic development; and (iii) the 

lack of development opportunities for small- and medium-sized enterprises in occupational areas 

related to the development of agricultural and rural services.. Therefore, the project will help to 

strengthen the structural transformation of the agricultural and rural sector, which offers a real 

opportunity to diversify the country's economy and create jobs, especially for young people. It will 

support the improvement of agricultural productivity and the organisation of small producers to 

guarantee regular and appropriate supply for agro-industries located in the selected production 

basins and operating in the priority value chains of the targeted areas. Moreover, this intervention 

will enhance and consolidate the major gains of previous Bank-financed projects in terms of rural 

development sector infrastructure, and will thus promote the revival of a rural sector that was 

completely in tatters due to lack of investments and as a result of conflicts in the project areas. 

Furthermore, the Bank's intervention will help to strengthen social cohesion and reduce the 

fragility of the intervention area, which is the focus area of the operational activities of the current 

CSP. 

1.2.2. The agricultural and rural sector requires significant investments to enable all actors in 

the sector to fully play their role in the transformation of Congolese agriculture. In this context 

and as a result of its experiences gained through the implementation of its strategies for 

transforming agriculture, overcoming fragility and building resilience in Africa, the Bank enjoys a 

real comparative advantage as far as this intervention is concerned. 

1.3. Aid Coordination 

1.3.1. The activities of the DRC's development partners are coordinated through the Aid and 

Investment Management Platform (PGAI), hosted in the Ministry of Planning. Technical activities 

are discussed and planned in thematic groups, including the Inter-Donor Group for Agriculture 

and Rural Development (GIBADER). PROADER will develop synergies and complementarities 

with ongoing investment projects in the agricultural and rural sector financed by other donors, 

which include: (i) the Government-funded Agricultural Voluntary Programme (PVA); (ii) the 

PAPAKIN project, financed by IFAD; (iii) the Kwilu/Kwango Districts Agricultural Development 

Programme (PRODAKK) and the Kwilu/Kwango Access Improvement Programme (PRODEKK), 

financed by the Kingdom of Belgium and implemented by Enabel (former Belgian Technical 

Cooperation); and (iv) the World Bank-funded Growth Pole Development Project (PDPC) in the 

Western Region. Lastly, the project will scale up successful public-private-producer partnership 

initiatives in village palm oil value chains (with the private concern known as Huilerie, 

Plantations, Élevage du Kwango Kwilu - HPEK) (Kwango Kwilu Oil Mill, Plantations and 

Livestock Company), maize with STRATEGOS, cassava with two private concerns: Entreprise de 

Consultance et de Services Agricoles au Congo (Consultancy and Agricultural Services Enterprise 

in Congo) (ECOSAC) and LAYUKA. The project will support the country in mobilising climate 

funds. Lastly, an expected partnership with the next IFAD project that is being designed for 

Kassaï Oriental and Central will maximise the project impact. The following table provides a 

summary of the coordination of the agricultural sector.   



3 

Table 1.3-Aid Coordination  

1- Sector or subsector  
2- Importance  

GDP Exports  Labour  

Agricultural and Rural Development  22.4% in 2016 15% 70-80% 

3- Stakeholders and contribution to annual public expenditure  

Government (budget implemented from 2007 to 2016: USD 584 million 

Donors (commitment between 2008 and 2016) WB USAID Belgium  IFAD  AfDB EU 

In % 34% 17% 18% 15% 11% 5% 

Amount (in USD million) 425 213 221 183 137 63 

4- Aid coordination level  

Existence of thematic working groups                                     [Yes, GIBADER]; Technical Group No. 9 at 

governmental level, comprising the agricultural and rural development sectors, and community dynamics  

Existence of an overall sector project                                       [Yes,   PNIA 2013-2020] 

Role of the AfDB in aid coordination                                       Member (not the leader) Sources: PNIA; GIBADER. 

II PROJECT DESCRIPTION  

2.1. Project Objective and Components 

2.1.1. The overall project objective is to promote a vibrant and prosperous rural economy. The 

specific objectives are to improve productive and social investments to make the rural 

environment more attractive and productive, and to promote private sector development, 

agricultural and rural entrepreneurship with a view to fostering the diversification and 

enhancement of agricultural production. To achieve the above objectives, PROADER’s activities 

will be centred on three components: (a) local governance and institutional capacity building; (b) 

promotion of productive and social investments; and (c) project coordination and management, as 

presented below.    

Table 2.1. Project Component and Cost (in UA million)  

Component  Description of Activities and Components   Cost (UA million ) 

 

 

 

Build local 

governance and 

institutional capacity  

Sub-component 1: Support local development. Updating of the regional 

planning methodology guide on the rural economy, fragility, resilience and 

gender mainstreaming; Preparation of 30 local development plans (LDPs); 

Development and implementation of a social communication strategy on 

behavioural change; Construction of 30 premises for decentralised territorial 

entities; Building the capacity of 1,000 local actors, 50% of them women, in 

finance and local taxation, participatory and citizen budgeting, governance, 

planning, etc. 

 

Sub-component 2: Institutional support for the technical services and 

structures involved. Development of the rural development master plan; 

Development and dissemination of a guide on standards and model plans of 

rural infrastructure; Setting up of an electronic library for sector data 

management; Setting up of a farmer digitisation system; Capacity building 

for 200 officers from central and provincial technical services in rural 

economy, planning, project development, integrated water resource 

management, climate change and green growth, financial management, 

procurement and monitoring/evaluation, gender mainstreaming; 

Development and support for the implementation of two gender-sensitive 

integrated water resource management (IWRM) action plans; Mobilisation 

of USD 15 million in climate funds; Preparation of a study on deepening 

knowledge on fragility in the Central region of the Country; Institutional 

support for the establishment of a sustainable mechanism for the 

maintenance of rural roads; Rehabilitation of the offices of the Directorate in 

charge of Rural Economy. 

 

6.55 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

7.56 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

1.03 



4 

Component  Description of Activities and Components   Cost (UA million ) 

Sub-component 3: Nutrition support. Nutrition awareness for 800 health 

workers (50% of them women), community relays (50% of them women); 

Awareness-raising concerning nutrition and essential nutrition actions 

targeting 5,000 teenage women and girls. 

Promote productive 

and social 

investments 

Sub-component 1: Development of trading partners. Promotion of 4 

commercial partnerships for the agro-industrial development of maize, 

cassava and village oil palm plantations; Rehabilitation and equipment of 

three technical and vocational training centres; Development of 300 micro-, 

small-, and medium-sized agricultural and rural enterprises (MPMEARs). 

 

Sub-component 2: Skills and innovation development in the agricultural and 

rural sector.  Setting up of an innovation fund to promote innovative ideas 

and approaches in the agricultural and rural sector; Rehabilitation of 

technical and vocational training centres and improvement of the quality of 

the teaching at these centres; Supply of equipment and materials to centres; 

Opening and equipment of two pilot community farms for young people. 

 

Sub-component 3: Empowerment of rural women. Setting up of gender-

based multi-service platforms, including the building of gender-based multi-

service centres; Building of women's leadership capacity in the creation and 

development of cooperatives and/or enterprises in the areas of processing, 

marketing, etc.; Training of women in functional literacy; participation in 

fora; etc. 

 

Sub-component 4: Support for community agroforestry. Support for the 

establishment of 15,000 hectares under community agroforestry, in 

association with food crop farming (manioc and maize).  

 

Sub-component 5: Development of transformative infrastructure. 

Rehabilitation of 300 km of rural roads; Implementation of 100 

socioeconomic sub-projects (drinking water supply systems, small irrigation 

systems, commercial infrastructure, renewable energy; Setting up of two 

pilot community agricultural estates. 

8.78 

 

 

 

 

 

7.69 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.63 

 

 

 

 

 

1.57 

 

 

 

8.92 

 

 

Project Management  Administrative and financial management; Monitoring and evaluation; 

Procurement; Communication; Environmental compliance surveillance in 

accordance with the ESMP. 

6.87 

TOTAL  UA 49.492 million 

2.2. Technical Solution Adopted and Alternatives Explored  

2.2.1 Participatory local development. In accordance with the Constitution of 18 February 

2006, which confers on Decentralised Territorial Entities (ETDs) the responsibility of planning 

and overseeing the economic development of their communities, EDTs are required to manage 

operational activities in their territory. In this context, they play a key role in establishing good 

local governance, facilitating the development of the rural economy and the maintenance of rural 

infrastructure. Under PROADER, preference will be given to the demand-driven approach and the 

strengthening of local project management. In this regard, project investments will not only be 

based on the needs clearly expressed by the actors within the context of the development of value 

chains, but must also support the development of the local economy and be linked to local 

development plans.  

2.2.2 Development of public-private-producer-partnership (4P)3: There are specialised private 

agricultural enterprises in the project intervention area that offer small producers various services, 

including mechanisation, improved input supply and agricultural advisory services. The project 

will adopt the "subcontracting" approach by delegating services related to the improvement of the 

                                                 
2  Including physical and financial contingencies. 
3  A 4P is a cooperation arrangement between a government, entrepreneurs and small producers, who agree to work together to reach a common 

goal or perform a specific task, while jointly assuming the risks and responsibilities, and sharing benefits, resources and skills.  



5 

agricultural productivity to specialise agricultural enterprises located in the production basins and 

operating in the targeted value chains. These enterprises will be responsible for supporting 

producers by: (i) providing agricultural advisory services (application of good farming practices), 

(ii) ensuring access to resilient and good quality agricultural inputs (improved seeds and cultivars, 

fertilisers, pesticides, etc.); (iii) purchasing the surplus marketable production from small 

producers and/or unions, following an aggregation model, at a fair price that takes into account the 

cost of production and the market price. Specialised private agricultural enterprises will also 

process raw products into finished and/or semi-finished products for sale on the local, national and 

international markets, which will create value-added in the basins with spin-offs on the rural 

economy in terms of job creation. Specialised private agricultural enterprises will be remunerated 

based on the work actually carried out after the quality of such work has been assessed by all the 

parties concerned (the project/the Government, the private operator and the union). In this regard, 

PROADER will sign partnership protocols/contracts with the following specialised agricultural 

enterprises: (i) Huilerie, Plantation, Élevage de Kwilu/Kwango (HPEC) (Kwilu/Kwango Oil Mill, 

Plantation, Livestock Company), headquartered in Kikwit (Kwilu Province), to support farmers' 

unions in the production of palm oil from the village oil palm plantation covering an area of 2,000 

hectares; (ii) STRATEGOS, headquartered in Lusanga, Kwilu Province, to support 10,000 

producers in maize production. Its intervention will cover 350 villages within a radius of about 50 

km of Lusanga on the right and left banks of the Kwilu River; (iii) LAYUKA, headquartered in 

Madimba, Kongo Central, to support 200 producer associations, representing about 5,000 

households, in cassava production; (iv) Consultance et des Services Agricoles (ECOSAC Sarl) 

(Consultancy and Agricultural Services), to support small producers in the production of cassava. 

This company is currently operating in Bukango Lonzo, Kwango Province, where it is 

headquartered, but plans to set up operations in Kikwit and Bandundu City (Kwilu Province) to 

support the activities of small-scale cassava producers.   

2.2.3 Youth skills development and innovation.: The project will set up a competitive 

mechanism for innovation and promotion of youth entrepreneurship in rural areas. It will finance 

an innovation fund to support entrepreneurs, young people and producer organisations (POs) with 

innovative ideas and initiatives for improving the quality of life and income in rural areas. These 

innovations could concern: (i) the development of new products or new markets; (ii) equipment 

tests and processes; (iii) the use of alternative energy; (iv) new environment-friendly technologies; 

(v) expertise in food quality and safety; (vi) the use of new information and communication 

technologies in the marketing and promotion of products, including fortified cassava flour; and 

(vi) the certification and labelling of processed products. Annual competitions will be held at the 

national level to identify ideas and initiatives with potential for large-scale impact. The innovation 

selection process will include the following steps: Phase A, preselection of the best ideas in 

agricultural value chains based on project profiles submitted by potential candidates; Phase B 

intended to (a) identify potential applications of the technology, (b) learn to recognise the 

market(s) targeted, (c) guide research and development (R&D) taking into account market needs, 

and (d) conduct a technical and commercial proof of concept, to validate the business model and 

design the business plan. By means of a stringent selection process, candidates with the greatest 
potential to succeed will be selected; and Phase C dealing with the funding and close 

support/coaching/mentoring of candidates whose innovations were selected. Individual technical 

assistance will be mobilised for the development of operational procedures based on similar 

successful experiments (Tony Elumelu Entrepreneurship Program, AgriPitch, the Competitive 

Fund for Agricultural Innovation of Côte d'Ivoire, etc.). Financial institutions, telecommunications 

sector operators and private concerns will be encouraged to co-invest in this fund, including 

through acquisition of stakes in the identified micro-, small- and medium-sized agricultural and 

rural enterprises (MPMEARs). 

 



6 

2.2.4 Promotion of community agroforestry: Various agroforestry models have already been 

tested in many African countries with positive results and trials have also been conducted 

successfully in the DRC. The agroforestry system model that will be promoted by the project is 

based on the association between food production (cassava and maize, plus legumes/beans and 

soya beans), fruit trees and charcoal production with Acacia auriculiformis as flagship species for 

soil fertilisation. The model chosen is based on the success of the Mampu Agroforestry Project 

funded by the European Commission, which covers an area of 8,000 hectares. Agroforestry will 

aim to: (i) increase cassava production and yield from 9 tonnes per hectare to 15 tonnes per 

hectare, for a total area of at least 10,000 ha, while slashing production costs by about 30%; (ii) 

increase maize production and yield from 1.5 t/ha to 3 t/ha, for a total area of at least 5,000 ha, 

while slashing production costs by about 25%; and (iii) increase farmers' income by at least 20%.    

2.2.5 Sustainability of investments. The opening up of production areas will mainly concern 

targeted rehabilitation consisting of treatment of critical points (quagmires, low-lying areas, water 

crossing points, steep-slope areas, etc.) to allow the year-round use of a given road section. The 

structures will be made of durable materials and sized in such a way as to allow the proper flow of 

water. The project will support the establishment and operationalisation of multifunctional service 

platforms (PMS) for the promotion of women's economic empowerment. Each platform will 

include a Gender Multifunctional Centre (CMG) for rural job training, awareness raising, 

managerial and leadership capacity building for women. Each infrastructure promoted and 

implemented by the project will be accompanied by a service package (maintenance system, 

technical training in the use and management of the infrastructure, etc.).   

Table 2.2: Project Alternatives Explored and Reasons for Rejection  

Alternative Brief Description Reasons for Rejection  

Complete 

resurfacing of the 

roads  

Resurface all the road sections 

with borrow material  

Not appropriate due to the heavy rains and limited resources 

available for the maintenance of dirt roads 

Rural financing  Establishment of a financing 

mechanism 

Taken into account under PEJAB 

 

Sector-based 

approach 

Intervention following a top-

down approach 

Incompatible with local planning  

Low incentives for the private sector, low ownership 

National 

programme  

National coverage  Limited resources considering the size of the country 

 

2.3. Project Type  

This operation is formulated as a stand-alone investment project funded with ADF window 

resources. 

2.4. Project Cost and Financing Arrangements  

2.4.1. The total project cost, including physical and financial contingencies, is estimated at USD 

68.22 million, or UA 49.49 million. The project will be financed mainly by an ADF Loan of UA 

40.00 million and an ADF Grant of UA 2.1 million. The Congolese Government will contribute 

USD 9.40 or UA 6.84 million, corresponding to import taxes and duties on goods and equipment 

that may be procured under the project. The summary of the project cost is presented in Tables 2.3 

- 2.6. The beneficiaries and ETDs will contribute USD 0.75 million, or UA 0.56 million in-kind. 

 

 



7 

Table 2.3: Estimated Cost by Component 

  

COMPONENT  

(USD ’000)  (USD ’000) 
% 

F.E. 

% Base 

Cost  

L.C. F.E. Total L.C. F.E. Total 
  

A. Build local governance 

institutional capacity  

10 573,00 7 241,00 17 026,00 7 654,00 4 676,00 12 329,00 38 27 

B. Promote productive 

and social investments 

21 338,00 16 217,00 37 555,00 15 489,00 11 772,00 27 261,00 43 60 

C. Coordination. 

management and 

monitoring/evaluation  

7 019,00 1 510,00 8 529,00 5 090,00 1 096,00 6 186,00 18 14 

Base Cost  38 930,00 24 968,00 63 110,00 28 233,00 17 544,00 45 776,00 38 100 

Physical contingencies  1 396,00 1 195,00 2 591,00 1 013,00 867,00 1 880,00 46,00 4 

Financial contingencies 1 590,00 933,00 2 523,00 1 154,00 678,00 1 831,00 37,00 4 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 41 916,00 27 096,00 68 224,00 30 400,00 19 089,00 49 487,00 39 108 

Table 2.4: Sources of Financing  

Sources of Financing  
(USD ’000) (USD ’000) % Total 

 L.C.  F.E. Total  L.C.  F.E. Total 
 

ADF LOAN 29 986,00 25 155,00 55 141,00 21 766,00 18 259,00 40 025,00 81 

ADF GRANT(Loan 

cancellation) 

2153,000 787,00 2940,00 1538,00 562,00 2100,00 4 

Government 9 396,00 787,00 9 396,00 6 820,00 - 6 820,00 14 

Beneficiaries, ETDs 381,00 367,00 747,00 276,00 268,00 544,00 1 

Total 41 916,00 27 096,00 68 224,00 30 400,00 19 089,00 49 489,00 100  

Table 2.5: Project Cost by Expenditure Category  

Expenditure Category 
(USD ’000) (USD ’000) % F.E. 

L.C. F.E. Total L.C. F.E. Total 
 

Works 5 844,00 10 251,00 16 386,00 4 386,00 7 501,00 11 887,00 63 

Goods 2 308,00 4 201,00 6 507,00 1 649,00 3 073,00 4 722,00 65 

Services 19 629,00 8 781,00 29 288,00 14 680,00 6 559,00 21 239,00 31 

Miscellaneous        

Innovation Fund  1 000,00 - 1 000,00 726 - 726 - 

Study Fund  3 500,00 - 3 500,00 2 540,00 - 2 540,00  

OPERATION 5 643,00 566,00 6 430,00 4 252,00 411,00 4 663,00 9 

Base Cost  38 930,00 24 968,00 63 110,00 28 233,00 17 544,00 45 776,00 39 

Physical contingencies  1 396,00 1 195,00 2 591,00 1 013,00 867 1 880,00 46 

Financial contingencies  1 590,00 933 2 523,00 1 154,00 678 1 831,00 37 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 41 916,00 27 096,00 68 224,00 30 400,00 19 089,00 49 487,00 39 

Table 2.6: Expenditure Schedule by Component  

Components  
(UA ’000) 

2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 TOTAL 

A. Build local governance and institutional 

capacity  

1832 4 291,00 2 341,00 2 002,00 880 985 12 331,00 

B. Promote productive and social investments 
60 10 306,00 6 812,00 4 655,00 3 004,00 2 423,00 27 260,00 

C. Coordination, management and 

monitoring/evaluation  

1254 1 302,00 1 019,00 997 874 739 9 896,00 

TOTAL 3146 15899 10 172,00 7 654,00 4 758,00 4 147,00 49 487,00 



8 

2.5. Project Area and Beneficiaries  

2.5.1 PROADER will carry out its operations in seven provinces, namely Kongo Central. 

Kwango, Kwilu, Maindombe, Kasaï, Kasaï Occidental and Kasaï Oriental. This area has 

enormous potential for agro-pastoral and fisheries production. It is the main supplier of staple 

foodstuffs to the country's major cities (Kinshasa, Lubumbashi, Mbuji-Mayi, Kananga, Kikwit and 

Matadi). Moreover, about 70% of the population of this area is rural, having agriculture and 

related activities as their main source of livelihood. With a total population estimated at 

19,558,3054, the project area accounts for nearly 25% of the DRC's total population and covers 

about 22% of the national territory. The project area is part of the Government's priority 

development areas, the more so since the corridor targeted by the project, including the central 

region, is one of the areas most severely affected by the humanitarian crisis in the DRC. 

2.5.2 This area is crossed by the railway and National Road No. 1 (RN 1), which are the part of 

the regional network connecting Kinshasa to Johannesburg in South Africa. Until now, this vast 

territory did not enjoy the benefits of cross-border trade because of its isolation. The operations 

currently being carried out by the Bank on RN1 in coordination with other technical and financial 

partners (TFPs), in particular the European Union, for the extension of this road up to Mbuji-

Mayi, and the World Bank, for the rehabilitation of the Ilebo-Lubumbashi railway, will help to 

open up this major corridor. The project’s intervention area is a continuation of the Bank's 

previous operations in the agricultural and rural development sector in the Central Region and 

Kongo Central.   

2.5.3. Beneficiaries. The Project will target mainly small family farms, producer organisations 

(POs) and their unions, cooperatives and micro-, small- and medium-sized agricultural and rural 

enterprises (MPMEARs) upstream and downstream of the production chain. Of all these actors, 

special attention will be given to women, young people and MPMEARs owned by young people 

and women. The other PROADER beneficiaries are the EDTs, central and devolved State public 

entities, and specialised private agricultural enterprises operating in the targeted production basins 

that not only provide support services, including agricultural extension services and inputs, but 

also add value through the processing of agricultural products. PROADER will directly affect 

380,000 households in the 30 targeted agricultural, forestry and pastoral basins, representing 

nearly 10% of households in seven targeted provinces, or about 2 million people, of whom 50% 

women and 40% young people. Indirectly, the project will affect some 500,000 households or 

about 2.6 million people. PROADER will primarily target young people and women, by 

increasing employment opportunities and income from production and processing activities, 

supporting the development of agricultural entrepreneurship in activities related to production 

(ploughing service, transport, road maintenance, processing, marketing, etc.) and providing 

appropriate advisory support. 

2.6.  Participatory Approach for the Project Identification, Design and Implementation  

2.6.1 The project was designed using a participatory approach based on consultations with the 

various stakeholders throughout the formulation process. In this context, the Secretariat General 

for Rural Development set up a multidisciplinary team of national experts who worked closely 

with Bank experts during the project preparation and appraisal phases. The consultations included 

the Ministries of Rural Development, Agriculture, Decentralisation, Planning, Gender, Child and 

Family, Small- and Medium-sized Enterprises and Technical and Vocational Training, the private 

sector, represented by the Federation of Congolese Enterprises (FEC), non-governmental 

organisations, producer umbrella organisations, producers and processors of agricultural products, 

individually or in association, political and administrative authorities as well as devolved technical 

                                                 
4  The total population of the DRC was estimated in 2018 at about 80 million. E-QUIBB-RDC1-2016 Survey, Page 1. National Institute of 

Statistics (INS), Ministry of Planning.. 



9 

services in the project area, private agricultural operators, ETDs, project managers, specialised 

private agricultural enterprises, microcredit institutions, and several NGO-led initiatives in the 

agricultural and rural development sector.   

2.6.2 These consultations, among other things, helped to identify and more clearly define: (i) 

production basins and priority sectors; (ii) market dynamics and trade flows; (iii) business and 

value-adding opportunities in value chains; (iv) previous project operations; (v) the business 

regulatory environment; constraints to the involvement and effective/proper private sector 

participation; (vi) innovations and technologies for the improvement of production and 

processing; (vii) the involvement and aspirations of women and young people in value chains and; 

(viii) experiences and constraints regarding access to funding, especially on a medium- and long-

term basis, for agricultural and rural development ventures, agribusiness and MPMEARs. 

Stakeholder consultations will continue during project implementation to ensure effective 

implementation and the sustainability of interventions.   

2.7. Consideration of Bank Group Experience and Lessons Learned in the  Project Design 

2.7.1. The portfolio performance as of 31 December 2018 is generally satisfactory, with a rating 

of 3 on a scale of 1 to 4. The average portfolio age increased from 3.8 years in 2017 to 4.4 years as 

of 31 December 2018. The national portfolio does not include any project-at-risk (PAR). 

Regarding the agricultural and rural sector in the DRC, the operations carried out over the past 

five years relate to: (i) the financing of the Rural Infrastructure Development Support Project 

(PADIR), scheduled to close on 31 December 2019. PADIR’s physical implementation rate is 

nearly 98%, with a disbursement rate of 92%. The project has made significant gains in the 

rehabilitation of rural roads (1,300 km) as well as the building of several other rural infrastructure 

facilities leading to the revival of the rural sector that was completely moribund; (ii) new projects 

including the Youth Entrepreneurship in Agriculture and Agri-Business Project, targeting young 

graduates and the Agricultural Value Chain Project in six provinces, which focuses on the 

dissemination of agricultural technologies developed by TAAT programme compacts. Recurrent 

problems have been highlighted by lessons learned from previous projects and the portfolio 

performance, including: (a) difficulty in ensuring the timely fulfilment of conditions precedent to 

loan effectiveness and first disbursement, (b) delays in the procurement process, with a negative 

impact on overall disbursement, and (iii) weak empowerment of beneficiaries of rural 

development projects. 

2.7.2. These weaknesses are addressed in the revised Portfolio Improvement Plan (PAP) 

2018/2019. Hence, the project design takes these lessons into account through: (i) support for local 

participatory development in terms of building the capacity of local actors in project planning and 

management; and (ii) encouragement of sustainable partnerships between public and private actors 

and producers to improve access to agricultural and rural services. Furthermore, the Bank will 

strengthen its presence on the ground to facilitate the close monitoring process. In addition, the 

project will draw lessons from the report of the internal audit conducted by the Bank in 2017 on 

projects financed in Central Africa, especially as concerns delays in the submission of audit 

reports and the low level of implementation of the environmental and social management plans.    

2.7.3 The project has taken into consideration the lessons learned from IDEV's assessment of 

the Bank’s support for the development of agricultural value chains (AVC)5, which recommends 

the following basic principles, among others: (i) analyse the entire value chain; (ii) develop a 

strategy to ensure inclusion; (iii) maintain the ability to adapt to market developments; (iv) think 

in terms of profitability with value-added; and (v) establish plans for creating a sustainable impact. 

Accordingly, the project design capitalised on the guidelines of the sub-regional forum on the 

                                                 
5  Independent Development Evaluation (IDEV). African Development Bank Support for the Development of Agricultural Value Chains: 

Lessons for the "Feed Africa" Strategy.  Summary Report, March 2018 

 



10 

revitalisation of the rural economy in Central Africa, jointly organised by the Bank and the 

International Labour Office (ILO) in February 2019 in Brazzaville. These are: (a) increase 

investment and attractiveness of rural areas, (b) promote an integrated training and skills 

development system to address the challenges of innovative agriculture, (c) diversify the rural 

economy through the development of rural occupations and opportunities in rural areas, and (d) 

develop skills and approaches that take into account the crisis and resilience context. 

2.8. Key Performance Indicators 

2.8.1. PROADER’s impact indicators are: (a) improvement of farm household income from less 

than USD 2,000/year in 2018 to USD 3,500/year in 2025; and (b) reduction of chronic 

malnutrition rate among children under 5 in rural areas from 43% in 2019 to 38% in 2025 The 
project is expected to produce the following outcomes: (i) increase of the percentage of the 

population in targeted basins with access to all-season roads from 25 to 60%; (ii) improvement of 

the rate of access to mechanisation from 0.8 to 10%; (iii) increase of the percentage of the budget 

allocated by ETDs for the maintenance of access roads to production basins from 0 to 10%; (iv) 

improvement of the rate of rural women’s access to technological innovations in agriculture from 

0 to 30%; (v) improvement of the productivity of the following main crops: maize - from 0.8 to 2 

t/ha ; cassava - from 8 to 20 t/ha; palm nuts - from 2.5 to 20 t/ha/year; (vi) 40% increase in 

additional marketed volume; (vii) reduction of post-harvest losses from 30% to 20% for cassava 

and from 25% to 10% for maize; (viii) improvement from 8.4% to 20% the percentage of children 

between 6 and 23 months with a minimum acceptable diet; (ix) improvement of the rural women 

empowerment index from 1 to 3 (scale of 1 = low and 5 = high). The project’s detailed baseline 

situation, including the environmental and social baseline situation, will also be prepared by 

capitalising on the results of the household surveys to be conducted at the completion of PADIR in 

collaboration with the National Institute of Statistics (INS). To assess the progress achieved, 

surveys will be carried out at mid-term and at project completion in the same areas (project and 

buffer areas where the baseline surveys were conducted). 

III –  PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1. Economic and Financial Performance 

3.1.1. Financial performance was assessed for four (4) typical model farms and enterprises that 

produce cassava, maize and palm nuts, and carry out cassava processing operations, reflecting the 

range of activities that the project plans to support. Financial analysis shows that these 

investments will lead to a substantial increase in the net profits of farms and enterprises, which 

means that the PROADER-supported activities will be profitable. As indicated by Table 3.1 below, 

these results show that the project support will improve the financial performance of farms, 

cooperatives, micro, small- and medium-sized agricultural and rural enterprises (MPMEARs) 

engaged in the production, processing and marketing of these food products.   

3.1.2. Financial analysis: Based on the above assumptions, the financial analysis generated a 

net present value of USD 86.4 million and a financial internal return rate (FIRR) of 18%, meaning 

that the project is financially feasible.  

3.1.3.  Economic analysis: The economic analysis was carried out using the same approach as for 

the financial analysis, which consisted in analysing the benefits generated by the farms and 

enterprises concerned, based on the reference prices of the tradable goods and the total project 

cost. The results of the economic analysis show that the benefits of the project are positive.  The 

project's economic return rate (ERR) is 19% and the net present value (NPV) is estimated at USD 

95.5 million. However, these benefits should be higher if account is taken of the unquantifiable 

gains derived from nutritional and financial education, access to clean water, sanitation, women's 

economic empowerment and improved accessibility of production areas. Nutritional education and 



11 

access to clean water will help to improve the health condition of households, which would result 

in improved labour productivity of household assets and a reduction in household medical 

expenses, among other benefits. Access to road infrastructure will not only increase the volume of 

marketed production but would also facilitate access to health and education services for 

beneficiaries. The improvement in the curriculum of technical and vocational training centres will 

enable the latter to offer young people quality training tailored to the needs of the job market.  

Sensitivity analysis confirms the strength of the project’s positive economic effects and impacts.   

Table 3.1: Key Economic and Financial Figures 

FRR (baseline scenario): 18%; NPV: USD 86.4 million  

ERR (baseline scenario): 19%; NPV: USD 95.5 million  

 

 

3.2.  Environmental and Social Impacts 

Environment 

3.2.1 The project is proposed for classification in Category 2 of the Bank's Integrated 

Safeguards System (ISS) and the Bank’s Climate Safeguard System, equivalent to Category B at 

the national level, although at this stage of preparation most of the sites and activities are yet to be 

determined. The activities under project component 2 are likely to have adverse impacts on the 

environment, namely: (i) the production of pollution and waste during infrastructure construction 

works; (ii) the production of pollution and waste during the processing of value chain products; 

(iii) the risks of land and water pollution by agrochemicals, endangering the health of users; (iv) 

the risk of plant and wildlife degradation during the operation of quarries and borrow pits for 

construction works; (v) the risk of accidents at construction sites and on the sites of processing 

units, and (vi) the risk of spread of communicable diseases on the sites.   

3.2.2 However, the expected negative impacts will be limited in scope and time. The "capacity 

building" component will contribute significantly to strengthen local governance and the ongoing 

decentralisation process, and to reduce conflicts over the use of natural resources (IWRM 

approach/support for the promotion of the green economy and the blue economy). The IWRM-

associated blue economy promotes the conservation of aquatic ecosystems, as well as the use and 

sustainable management of their resources. Given their nature, the planned activities are certainly 

not likely to generate any negative impacts or major risks, or lead to any significant asset losses or 

displacement. However, the building of certain production and processing support infrastructure 

facilities, depending on their size and the situation of the host environment, is likely to affect the 

environment, and possibly cause negative impacts on the biophysical and human ecosystems if 

preventive or mitigation measures are not considered at this project design stage and during 

implementation.   

3.2.3 Given that the siting and environmental and social characteristics of all investments are 

not known, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared in 

accordance with the requirements of the Bank's Integrated Safeguards System. The ESMF 

indicates the mitigation and management procedures and measures that will need to be 

implemented by the project once the sites and sub-projects are known. These measures are 

described in the Environmental and Social Management Framework Plan (ESMFP) and comprise, 

among others, sub-project analysis and screening procedures, consultation, communication and 

conflict management procedures; environmental and social management plans (ESMPs) and 

environmental and social clauses that should be included in competitive bidding documents and 

sub-project implementation contracts, forest and wetland management guidelines, and pesticide 

and pest management guidelines. The project activities will have many positive impacts on both 

the local communities and the environment. Thus, the participatory approach involving local 

communities in the rehabilitation of access facilitation infrastructure, the dissemination of more 



12 

sustainable and climate-smart agricultural practices, including community agroforestry, and the 

reduction of post-harvest losses, will enhance the resilience of the livelihoods of rural households, 

restore soil fertility and increase tree cover, thereby significantly reducing greenhouse gas 

emissions.   

3.2.4 Functions relating to environmental safeguard measures will include: (i) the screening of 

sub-projects and identification of their category based on the environmental and social selection 

sheets; (ii) the recruitment of firms/consultants for the ESMP preparation after validation of the 

process by the Directorate General of the Environment; (iii) the inclusion of environmental clauses 

in the process of recruiting works implementation contractors; (iv) monitoring and evaluation of 

the implementation of sub-projects; and (vi) audit coordination. The entire environmental and 

social function needs to be strengthened within the institutions involved in project 

implementation. Furthermore, measures should be adopted to support institutional and technical 

measures, training and awareness-raising in order to build the capacity of structures and human 

resources that will be set up. Such measures will aim to: (a) operationalise the PROADER Project 

environmental management strategy, (b) foster the emergence of local expertise and professionals 

in environmental and social management, (c) raise the level of professional consciousness and 

accountability among employees in production enterprises, and (d) protect the urban and rural 

environment and the health and safety of beneficiary communities. 

3.2.5. Consultations were held in the context of the ESMF at various phases of the project 

preparation and participants' observations were incorporated into the Environmental and Social 

Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF was validated by the Bank's Safeguards Department 

and published on 2 October 20196.  

Climate Change  

3.2.6 The impacts of climate change can be seen in the DRC through the persistence of high 

temperatures, heavy rains, land degradation (particularly gully erosion), the prolonged dry season, 

increased sequences of dry spells during the rainy season, and floods, among others. Given that 

agriculture remains rain-fed, these phenomena exacerbate the vulnerability of the rural population. 

More frequent and longer seasonal droughts lead to disruptions in agricultural calendars. In terms 

of agricultural production, these climatic disturbances should have a direct impact on food 

security, which is already precarious for a large majority of the Congolese population. The project 

will contribute to the resilience of communities and ecosystems by improving the living 

conditions and food and nutrition security of rural communities. This is in line with the country's 

nationally determined contribution (NDC) in respect of climate change, which targets a 17% 

reduction in greenhouse gas emissions over the period 2021 to 2030. The project is classified 

under Category 2 of the Bank's Climate Safeguards System. Activities financed under PROADER 

will strengthen the resilience of ecosystems and communities to climate change by improving 

production systems, limiting the practice of extensive farming, restoring ecosystems through the 

application of good agricultural practices, institution building on climate change and green 

growth, and capacity building on climate change. The project plugs into the Bank's Climate 

Change Action Plan and contributes to domestic climate financing through the activities under 

Component 2. 

Gender 

3.2.7. The project is classified under Gender Category 27 of the Bank's Gender Marker System 

(GMS), since it will help to narrow the gender gap in terms of access to factors of production, 

                                                 
6  https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/rdc-projet-dappui-au-developpement-integre-de-leconomie-rurale-proader-resume-cges  

 
7  A project is classified in Gender Category 2, when gender equality (GE) and/or economic empowerment (EE) is one of the project outputs, but 

not the main one. PROADER is in this situation. 

https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/rdc-projet-dappui-au-developpement-integre-de-leconomie-rurale-proader-resume-cges


13 

knowledge, innovation and income improvement. Women, who make up about 50% of Congo's 

population and 70% of the agricultural workforce, account for 80% of food crop production, 22% 

of commercial agriculture, and nearly 90% of agricultural processing, are more severely affected 

by poverty. Therefore, the project's targeting strategy takes this into account and will ensure that at 

least 50% of women benefit from project activities. The project will mobilise nearly USD 5 

million to finance (i) the construction and equipment of gender-specific multi-service platforms 

for rural women. These platforms will act as multipurpose incubators for technical and 

entrepreneurial capacity building, learning, advocacy and female leadership; (ii) the organisation 

of foras and exchange trips; and (iii) the promotion of essential activities in the areas of nutrition, 

hygiene and sanitation. Hence, the project will help to enhance the economic empowerment of 

women in the project area through a series of integrated actions, including building their capacity 

in that area of activity, establishing sustainable agricultural production systems, providing access 

to inputs in production basins and markets, easing their work and setting up a framework tailored 

to the conditions of women farmers. As much as possible monitoring indicators will be gender 

disaggregated to take gender aspects into account.   

3.2.8. In addition to the gender and age disaggregation of indicators, gender-specific indicators 

are included in the results-based logical framework for measuring women's empowerment index in 

agriculture. This index measures the increase in women's capacity to make strategic life choices in 

their households and communities, focusing on five areas of agricultural empowerment: (i) 

production (women's role in decision-making in the household context regarding agricultural 

production); (ii) resources (women's access to productive capital, access to and decision-making 

on credit); (iii) control over the use of income; (iv) leadership and individual influence of women 

in the community; and (v) time allocation for women. This index will be used as a diagnostic tool 

and as a monitoring indicator to measure the project’s impact on women's empowerment.   

Social 

3.2.9. The project will strengthen food and nutrition security, especially for children under five, 

and promote the creation of local employment opportunities. It will help to reduce poverty and the 

vulnerability of communities, while decreasing unemployment and the exodus of young people 

particularly through the development of 300 micro-, small- and medium-sized agricultural and 

rural enterprises in agricultural and rural occupations (product processing, manufacture of 

equipment and material, maintenance of agricultural equipment and machinery, supply of 

production factors, including inputs, etc.). PROADER will contribute to the enhancement of local 

governance through institution and capacity building for ETDs, as well as to the economic 

empowerment of women who, with their rising literacy rates, should be able to improve their 

participation in household decision-making concerning production, in addition to increasing their 

power over the distribution of household income. The project will improve access to socio-

economic services through the construction of about 100 social infrastructure facilities that will be 

identified in a participatory manner. As far as young people are concerned, they will be offered 
specific benefits through (i) the establishment and support of youth-oriented micro-, small- and 

medium-sized agricultural enterprises and the setting up of a competitive fund for innovation and 

promotion of youth entrepreneurship and agricultural start-ups; and (ii) the improvement of the 

skills and employability of young people.   

Forced Resettlement  

3.2.10. PROADER activities will not entail land acquisition or the forced resettlement of people 

and/or restriction of their access to resources or livelihoods. In terms of transformative 

infrastructure, the project will adopt an intervention approach that emphasises the participation 

and empowerment of sector and local community actors at all stages of implementation (from the 

planning of activities to the completion of works). Requests for support should come from ETDs 

or producer unions/cooperatives. The sites for infrastructure, such as markets and other buildings, 



14 

will be owned by ETDs or communes that will be responsible for their management and 

maintenance. The rehabilitation of agricultural feeder roads will be on an ad hoc basis and will 

focus on critical points (quagmires, low-lying areas, watercourse crossing points, steep-slope 

areas, etc.) with maximum reliance on local participation. The project will establish local and 

provincial complaint management committees that will also initiate and supervise the payment of 

any compensation that may be payable for the degradation of an asset or restricted access to a 

resource because of project activities. Financial allocation for these compensations will be 

provided for in the ESMP, particularly for infrastructure construction or rehabilitation sub-

projects.   

IV. IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1. Implementation Arrangements 

4.1.1 The project will be under the supervisory authority of the Ministry of Rural Development 

(MDR). PROADER will be managed by the existing Steering Committee (COPIL) responsible for 

agricultural and rural sector projects and programmes. COPIL will be expanded to include 

Secretaries-General of the Ministries in charge of Decentralisation, Planning and Land Affairs. 

COPIL shall meet at least twice a year and shall be mandated to: (i) review and approve the annual 

work plans and budgets (AWPBs) prepared by the project; (ii) review half-yearly, annual and mid-

term review and project completion reports; (iii) ensure that the activities of sector-based 

programmes/projects are in line with project objectives; (iv) review progress towards achieving 

project objectives; (v) facilitate the coordination of project activities carried out by the various 

entities involved in the implementation; and (vi) analyse the risks and obstacles related to the 

project implementation and formulate the necessary guidelines for achieving the expected 

outcomes.   

4.1.2 The Project Management Unit (PMU). On the operational front, PROADER will be 

anchored to the Directorate of Rural Economy, whose capacity will be strengthened by the project. 

This Directorate will be strengthened by the establishment of a Project Management Unit that will 

comprise a national coordination unit and three branches covering the three targeted economic 

hubs. To that effect, the Ministry of Rural Development will nominate the following staff: (i) 

Director of Rural Economic, Project Coordinator; (ii) Administrative and Financial Director 

(DAF) of the Ministry of Rural Development; (iii) Accountant; (iv) Monitoring and Evaluation 

Expert; (v) National Expert in Procurement; (vi) Administrative and Financial Assistant; (vii) 

Bookkeeper; and (viii) two drivers.  The qualifications and experience of the nominated staff 

should be prior acceptable by the Bank. The management tools (financial management software, 

database, etc.) that were developed in the context of the PADIR project and are already in use, as 

well as the monitoring and evaluation, financial management and accounting team will be 

capitalised on. The PMU will: (i) ensure inter-sector coordination; (ii) monitor the implementation 

of the recommendations of COPIL deliberations, the recommendations of audit, portfolio review 

and mid-term review reports; and (iii) oversee the fiduciary management of the project and 

undertake all other matters deemed of its competence.   

4.1.3 The PMU team will be strengthened by a project manager with sound knowledge of 

agricultural development and private sector issues, working under the authority of the Director of 

Rural Economy; an accountant and an assistant accountant working under the supervision of the 

Administrative and Financial Directorate (DAF) of the Ministry of Rural Development, a 

procurement expert who will be under the supervision of the Procurement Unit of the Ministry of 

Rural Development, a monitoring and evaluation expert (RPSE) and an IT specialist/database 

manager, a communication expert (RCOM), a skills development and entrepreneurship expert, 

who will also cover the woman’s empowerment component, a rural engineer, an environmental 

and climate change expert, and the necessary support staff (cashier, secretary, drivers, guards, 

etc.). The PMU will work directly with the Technical Directorates of the Ministries involved in 



15 

the project implementation. Each technical directorate will designate a focal point for the 

operational monitoring of the technical implementation of the component falling within its 

jurisdiction.   

4.1.4 Departmental branch offices. Three project branch offices will be established to cover 

the targeted provinces. They will be located in Matadi, Kikwit and Mbuji Mayi. Provincial Rural 

Development Inspectors will be the project focal points in each province. The provincial branches 

will be responsible for: (i) coordinating the project at the provincial level and establishing links 

with local authorities; (ii) developing the annual work plan and budget (AWPB), ensuring the 

monitoring and evaluation of AWPB-related activities at the provincial level and drafting progress 

reports; (iii) providing technical support for the implementation of the project’s technical 

components; (iv) monitoring and ensuring close supervision of the implementation of project 

activities and service providers; (v) participating in the tripartite (Government/private 

sector/producers) evaluation of agreements and service providers’ performance contracts; (vi) 

mobilising actors involved in the implementation of operations; and (vii) developing synergies and 

partnerships across their area of intervention. Each branch office will be headed by a Branch 

Manager and will comprise an expert specialised in one of the three sectors (animal, plant and 

fisheries), a capacity strengthening and gender expert, a decentralisation and local governance 

expert, an accounting assistant, a monitoring officer, a procurement assistant with expertise in 

civil or rural engineering, and support staff.   

 

4.1.5 The Project Manager and technical staff will be recruited based on an open invitation to 

bid, and following the Bank’s opinion concerning the recruitment report. The Secretary-General 

for Rural Development will set up an inter-ministerial recruitment commission for the assessment 

of applications. PMU staff will sign annual contracts, renewable if their performance is deemed 

satisfactory, following the annual evaluation. The evaluation of staff performance will be based on 

the following criteria: (i) disbursement rate; (ii) quality of the implementation of the components; 

(iii) compliance with good governance and transparency requirements; and (iv) the AWPB 

implementation rate. The Project Manager will be evaluated by the Director of Rural Economy, 

while the rest of the staff will be evaluated by the Project Manager.   

4.1.6 Technical assistance and start-up support: The experience and lessons learned from 

project implementation in the DRC highlight three major constraints: (i) delays in project start-up; 

(ii) weakness of implementation teams and operators; and (iii) bureaucracy surrounding the 

procurement process. To accelerate the implementation of PROADER, technical assistance from 

the Department of Rural Economy of the International Labour Office (ILO) in Turin will be 

mobilised. The ILO's technical assistance will focus on the preparation of planning and 

management tools for the rural economy of EDTs targeted in the context of DRC’s 

decentralisation. Therefore, pre-start-up activities should now be initiated. These activities 

include: (i) launching the technical staff recruitment competitive process; (ii) updating the 

administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual and the project implementation, 

monitoring and evaluation manual; (iii) preparing competitive bidding documents for the 

procurement of equipment and materials; (iv) raising awareness among stakeholders and preparing 

the AWPB and the Procurement Plan for the first 18 months of project implementation; (v) 

preparing partnership contracts with private specialised agricultural enterprises and agreements 

with various technical departments and services involved. The implementation of these activities 

can be supported by technical assistance. Expenditures relating to these activities will be 

coordinated by the Secretary-General for Rural Development and covered by PADIR resources. 

Moreover, the Bank, acting through the PADIR and PRISE projects, had recruited technical 

assistance services for procurement and financial management, one of whose missions was to 

build the capacity of national counterparts. Hence, the MDR has competent services and qualified 

financial management and procurement officers. In accordance with the Paris Declaration, these 



16 

structures will support the project in their areas of expertise, to ensure ownership of the project by 

these public entities.    

Arrangements for the Procurement of Goods, Works and Services  

4.1.7 Procurement of all goods and services through international bid invitations, as well as the 

use of consultants financed from Bank resources will be conducted in accordance with the Bank's 

Procurement Policy for Bank Group-Funded Operations, dated October 2015, using appropriate 

standard Bank bidding documents and in accordance with the project financing agreement clauses. 

In accordance with the Bank policy and in the light of several evaluations conducted, it was 

convened that: (a) works for agriculture, rural, social infrastructure and for the rehabilitation of 

administrative building as well as diverse goods, vehicles, and material for project management 

unit, provincial offices and local government offices, will be procured using national procurement 

system as stipulated in law 10/010 of April 2010 for public procurement; (b) all other works and 

goods different from the above will be procured in accordance with Bank’s procurement policy. 

Procurement of goods and works through national bid invitations will be carried out in accordance 

with national procurement legislation, using the country's standard bidding documents and the 

provisions set out in the financing agreement. A procurement plan for the first 18 months was 

prepared by the Government during the appraisal mission and will be regularly updated 

throughout the project implementation period. The procurement arrangements are detailed in the 

technical annex. 

4.1.8 Evaluation of Risks and Capacities in Procurement (ERCA).  In order to take into 

account project specificities, the bank evaluated: (i) the risks at national, sectoral and project 

levels; and (ii) the capacity of the implementing entity.  The results of these evaluations concluded 

that the risk level is substantial for the procurement under the project. Nevertheless, appropriate 

risks mitigation measures have been proposed in the technical appendix to ensure a satisfactory 

project execution.    

4.1.9.   Particular Modalities related to the Utilisation of National System. The use of national 

procurement system requires the setup of particular measures to allow the bank to continue 

ensuring its fiduciary responsibility even in this case.  These measures are described in paragraphs 

B.5.7 of technical appendix B5 and consist of the following aspects: (i) eligibility; (ii) audit of 

public procurement; (iii) complains management; (iv) publication of bid results; (v) control of 

reasonable price; and (vi) reports.    

Financial Management and Disbursement Arrangements  

4.1.10 The Bank's decision on whether to use the national public finance management (PFM) 

system or otherwise was reviewed based on: (i) the assessment of the country's PFM performance; 

(ii) the Bank’s guidelines, practices and risk tolerance; and (iii) other factors such as perception of 

the governance and corruption levels. This review indicates that the level of risk, as assessed under 

CSP 2013-2020, does not allow the Bank to adopt an approach based exclusively on national 

public financial management procedures and systems. However, the reforms initiated by the 

Government have provided the Secretariat General for Rural Development (SGDR) with an 

operational administrative and financial directorate, as per Decree No. 15/043, which 

decentralised public expenditure authorisation centres through the establishment of the 

Administrative and Financial Directorate (DAF). The assessment of the capacity of the Ministry of 

Rural Development was carried out in accordance with the Bank's policy, based on lessons from 

implementing the PADIR and PRISE projects. The fiduciary risk of PROADER’s financial 

management is deemed substantial. The financial management arrangements proposed to support 

the Project Management Unit (PMU) meet the Bank's minimum requirements, as defined by the 

policy on “financial management of projects financed by the African Development Bank”, issued 

in February 2014. The arrangements will help to improve the financial management of the project 



17 

through the risk mitigation measures agreed in the financial management action plan detailed in 

annex. These measures will maintain the fiduciary risk at a moderate level and provide, with 

reasonable assurance, reliable financial information consistent with the Bank's minimum 

requirements. 

4.1.11 The financial management system will rely on the DAF, which will be strengthened with 

the management tools acquired from previous projects, especially from the PADIR project 

currently drawing to a close. At the time of the mission, only the PRISE project regularly 

submitted audit reports deemed acceptable by the Bank. The DAF will be strengthened by 

bringing on board financial staff (accountant, assistant accountant, treasurer) dedicated entirely to 

PROADER. This directorate will oversee financial and accounting operations related to the 

financial and accounting management of the project and will co-sign payment requests and 

documents. This approach allows the Ministry of Rural Development, through the conduct of 

PROADER activities, to mobilise the counterpart resources to be used for local economic 

development, as well as ensure the effective management of external resources. The project will 

contribute to the training of DAF executives in the area of planning/programming and budgeting, 

financial management of development operations, monitoring of audits and financial supervision.   

4.1.12 Annual audits of project loan resources will be performed by the Court of Auditors, 

which will include PROADER's audit missions in its annual work programme. The Court of 

Auditors may be assisted by an external auditor whose recruitment will devolve on the PMU, in 

accordance with the terms of reference in force at the Bank. Audited financial statements will be 

forwarded (see table for frequency) to the Bank latest six months after the close of the fiscal year 

concerned. The capacity of the Court of Auditors will be strengthened to enable it to include audit 

missions of Bank-funded projects in its annual programmes while undertaking to forward reports 

of financial years to the Bank on schedule. A portion of the loan resources will be allocated to 

expenses related to missions that would be carried out for PROADER and other Bank-financed 

projects. The terms of reference of audit missions should be those in force at the Bank, which may 

be used subject to obtaining the Bank’s prior opinion.   

4.1.13 The planned disbursements from the loan resources will be made in accordance with the 

Bank's Disbursement Handbook upon effectiveness of the Loan Agreement and fulfilment of 

conditions precedent to first disbursement. Generally, three methods are used for the disbursement 

of funds at the Bank: (i) the direct payment method; (ii) the working capital or special account 

method; and (iii) the reimbursement method. A disbursement letter specifying project-specific 

disbursement arrangements will be negotiated between the Bank and the Borrower. Two special 

accounts will be opened in Kinshasa, of which one is to receive the loan resources intended for the 

financing of working capital needs and a second one to receive the loan resources intended for the 

financing of community activities. In addition, the Ministry of Finance will authorize the project 

to open sub-account for each PROADER provincial branch.    

4.2.  Monitoring  

4.2.1. The PMU will assume primary responsibility for the internal monitoring of activity 

implementation and the ensuing impacts. It will prepare quarterly and annual progress reports 

focused on the analysis of the technical (outputs, outcomes and impact) and financial outcomes 

relative to the AWPB forecasts and the progress towards achieving the final result. Information 

will be tapped from monitoring and evaluation tools (manual, database of household surveys 

conducted in the context of PADIR with the support of the National Institute of Statistics). 

Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) will include internal monitoring (implementation monitoring), 

external monitoring (outcomes and impact monitoring, and participatory evaluation and planning) 

and should enable the identification of problems, risks and measures taken to mitigate them, and 

the evaluation of the performance of project actors. The implementation manuals and the PADIR 

monitoring and evaluation system (including the manual, the database and the geographic 



18 

information system) will be updated and/or developed to take the specific features of PROADER 

into account.   

4.2.2. Half-yearly external monitoring missions under the leadership of the MDR Secretariat 

General, comprising three to four COPIL members and to whom may be added other experts as 

necessary, will be fielded prior to the holding of COPIL meetings. At the provincial level, under 

the coordination of Provincial Rural Development Inspectorates, quarterly monitoring missions 

will be carried out with the participation of other relevant provincial technical services. These 

missions are intended to review the progress of the project, evaluate its performance and the 

quality of its management and achievements and, if necessary, propose adjustments in 

consultation with the Bank.  All monitoring mission reports should be attached to the project 

progress report. A focal point of the Ministry of Environment in Kinshasa will be involved in the 

coordination of environmental and social safeguard activities. In addition to the close monitoring 

that will be carried out by the Bank's Country Office in the DRC (COCD), the Bank will also keep 

an eye on the project through half-yearly supervision missions leading to the preparation of aide-

memoires, reports on implementation progress and results (IPR), using the Bank’s template. These 

aide-memoires and IPR reports will be used to rate the overall project performance and conduct 

the project’s annual external technical and financial audits. 

4.3. Governance  

4.3.1. According to the 2017 Mo Ibrahim Index of African Governance (IIAG), the DRC 

ranked 47th out of 54 countries, with a score of 32.1 out of 100. Scoring 20 on a scale ranging 

from 0 (very corrupt) to 100 (very clean), the DRC ranked 161st out of 180 countries in 

Transparency International’s 2018 global Corruption Perception Index, representing a loss of 2 

spots compared with the 2015 raking. In addition, according to the Bank's Country Policy and 

Institutional Assessment (CPIA), the country's overall governance rating stagnated at 3.2 between 

2013 and 2015, before declining to 3.1 in 2016 and 3.07 in 2018. The public finance management 

reform process initiated since 2008 has led to: (i) the adoption of a Public Finance Reform 

Strategic Plan and a Public Finance Organic Law (LOFIP) introducing the results-based budget 

system; and (ii) the setting up of a Steering Committee for Public Finance Reform (COREF).   

4.3.2. The risks of poor governance related to this project mainly concern the procurement and 

implementation process. This risk will be mitigated by: (i) the presence of a senior procurement 

expert in the Project Management Unit (PMU) and three procurement assistants at the provincial 

branch offices; (ii) the holding of information, training and technical assistance sessions with the 

PMU, decentralised territorial entities and procurement committees, to allow better ownership of 

the Bank's procurement procedures; (iii) the existence of an administrative, financial and 

accounting procedures manual and a community procurement manual; (iv) ex-ante or ex-post 

control of the different stages of the procurement process; and (v) supervision and financial audits 

of the project. Furthermore, the DRC Country Office (COCD) will provide continuous support in 

procurement, contract and financial management. In addition, the participatory approach to local 

development with the involvement of ETDs, the private sector, non-governmental organisations 

and beneficiaries in the steering and implementation of activities will promote citizen control, 

thereby guaranteeing good governance.   

4.4. Sustainability  

4.4.1. The probability of sustaining and even scaling up the project’s gains in the long term is 

high. The sensitivity tests of the economic and financial analysis show that the project remains 

profitable despite the fall in profits, the escalation of input prices and the drop in commodity 

prices. The sustainability of investments and expected benefits is based on the existence of an 

institutional framework for rural infrastructure piloting and management, as well as participatory 

and entrepreneurial capacity-building approaches. Regarding rural infrastructure, especially rural 



19 

roads, there is a maintenance mechanism that depends on financing from the road maintenance 

fund and on local road maintenance committees (CLERs) for manual repair works, while 

monitoring is ensured by the Directorate of Agricultural Road Roads and the empowerment of 

decentralised territorial entities. Thus, PROADER will support this institutional arrangement by 

providing CLERs with road maintenance equipment and by assisting them in establishing small- 

and medium-sized labour-intensive enterprises. These road maintenance arrangements remain 

valid for all infrastructure built under this project. In collaboration with the ETDs, the project will 

support the establishment of a sustainable management and maintenance mechanism for each 

infrastructure provided, based on the promotion of micro-, small- and medium-sized maintenance 

enterprises. This principle will strengthen local governance and the sustainability of project 

achievements, thus enabling ETDs to play their roles in land-use planning and the inclusive 

management of the structures. ETDs will be strengthened to improve resource mobilisation. In this 

regard, all sub-projects carried out under the project will be selected through a participatory 

process, involving ETDs, economic actors and producer organisations of the relevant production 

basins at the local level. In addition, the development of public-private-producer partnerships with 

the participation of specialised private agricultural enterprises located and operating in the targeted 

production basins, the structuring and professionalisation of organisations and players in value 

chains based on an expressed request will help ensure the ownership and use of the infrastructure.   

4.5. Risk Management  

4.5.1. The main risks that the project could face are: (i) vulnerability to climate change; (ii) low 

sustainability of the infrastructure set up; (iii) reluctance on the part of public entities regarding the 

empowerment of ETDs; (iv) bad governance; and (v) poor knowledge of gender issues by actors 

and their impact on the performance of household activities. To mitigate these risks, the following 

measures will be taken: (a) dissemination of smart farming technologies (community agroforestry, 

short-cycle and attack-resistant seeds, etc.); (b) establishment of a local infrastructure maintenance 

mechanism with the empowerment of ETDs, private agricultural enterprises, small- and medium-

sized enterprises, cooperatives and producer associations; (c) dissemination of legislation on 

decentralisation and capacity building for public entities; (d) strengthening of citizen control with 

the empowerment of beneficiaries and economic actors in the planning, implementation and 

project output management process, and raising of stakeholder awareness of the available 

remedies; and (e) gender mainstreaming in local planning strategies and raising of household 

awareness on the benefits of gender mainstreaming. Residual management risks will be minimised 

through competitive recruitment of staff and partners and preparation of annual performance 

contracts, renewable based on good performance, as well as capacity building of project 

management teams at the different levels.  

4.6. Knowledge Building 

4.6.1. As part of knowledge management effort, an electronic library will be set up for the 

storage of all relevant documents on the agricultural sector, best practices, local knowledge and 

innovations. The library will be accessible to stakeholders and the public. This activity will be 

developed as part of the institutional support for the Studies and Planning Directorate (DEP) of the 

Ministry of Agriculture. The communication tools and resources will be shared with other projects 

in the agricultural sector, including the Youth Entrepreneurship in Agriculture and Agri-Business 

Project (PEJAB) and the Agricultural Value Chains Development Support Project in Six DRC 

Provinces (PADCA-6P). Mechanisms will be developed for communication between the players 

involved upstream and downstream of the targeted value chains. The knowledge generated by the 

project will help to inform policy dialogue on topics that may affect the improvement of the local 

economic environment, support and improve the design of new projects. 



20 

V. LEGAL FRAMEWORK  

5.1 Legal Instrument 

The project will be financed in part through an ADF loan granted to the Democratic Republic of 

Congo. 

5.2 Conditions Associated with the Fund’s Intervention  

Conditions precedent to effectiveness. The effectiveness of the Loan Agreement shall be subject to 

the Borrower’s fulfilment of the conditions set forth in Section 12.01 of the General Conditions 

Applicable to Loan and Guarantee Agreements of the Fund (Sovereign entities), to the Fund’s 

satisfaction. 

Conditions precedent to first disbursement of the loan. In addition to the effectiveness of the Loan 

Agreement, the first disbursement of loan resources shall be subject to the Borrower’s fulfilment of 

the following conditions, to the Fund’s satisfaction: 

(i) forward to the Bank evidence of establishing the Project Management Unit (PMU) within the 

Directorate of Rural Economy of the Ministry of Rural Development; and (ii) provide evidence of 

appointing key PMU personnel8, whose qualifications and experience will have been deemed 

acceptable by the Bank. 

Other conditions: The Borrower shall also satisfy the following other conditions: 

(i) recruit additional staff on a competitive basis latest six (6) months after the first disbursement 

of the loan. The qualifications and experience of key personnel must have first been deemed 

acceptable by the Bank; update the administrative, financial and accounting management 

procedures manual and the computerised accounting system, enabling proper monitoring and 

financial information, latest three (3) months after the first disbursement; and (ii) initiate the 

process for the competitive recruitment of an external audit firm in accordance with the Bank's 

terms of reference (TORs), latest six (6) months after the first disbursement of the loan. 

Undertaking. The Borrower undertakes, to the Bank's satisfaction, to: (i) implement the project 

and ensure its implementation by its contractors, in accordance with the recommendations, 

requirements and procedures contained in the project’s Environmental and Social Management 

Framework (ESMF); (ii) conduct environmental and social impact assessments (ESIA), develop 

specific ESMPs for sub-projects and ensure their approval in accordance with national legislation 

and Bank requirements; (iii) provide half-yearly reports on the ESMP implementation, including, 

where appropriate, failures and corrective measures initiated or to be initiated. 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies  

The project complies with applicable Bank policies. No waiver is requested. 

VI. RECOMMENDATION 

Management hereby recommends the Board of Directors to approve the proposal to grant a Loan 

of UA 39.997.947 and a Grant of UA 2.100.000 from Loan cancellations to the Government of the 

Democratic Republic of Congo to finance the Rural Economy Integrated Development Support 

Project. 














































 

 

 

 

TANZANIA 

 

 

 

 

MARKETING INFRASTRUCTURE, VALUE ADDITION AND RURAL FINANCE 

SUPPORT (MIVARF) PROGRAMME 

 

 

 

PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT 

(PCR) 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

RDGE/COTZ 
 

July 2019 

  

 

 

 
 

 

 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

I  BASIC DATA 
  

A  Report data 
 

Report date Date of report: 27 December 2018 

Mission date (if field 
mission) 

From:  09 November 2018 To:  06 December 2018 

 

B  Responsible Bank Staff 
 

Positions At approval At completion 

Director General Gabriel Negatu Gabriel Negatu 

Country Manager Tonia Kandiero Alex Mubiru 

Sector Director Adbirahman Beileh (Acting)  

Sector/Regional Manager Alex Mend (OIC) Joseph Coompson 

Task Manager Edson Mpyisi Salum Ramadhani 

Alternate Task Manager Salum Ramadhani - 

PCR Team Leader  Salum Ramadhani 

PCR Team Members 
 Salum Ramadhani, Emmanuel Maliti 

(Consultant) 

 

C  Project Data 
 

Project name: Marketing Infrastructure, Value Addition and Rural Finance Support (MIVARF) Programme 

Project code: P-TZ-AA0-019 Instrument number(s): 2100150024993 

Project type: Investment  Sector: Agriculture & Agro-Industry 

Country: TANZANIA Environmental categorization (1-3): 2 

Processing milestones – Bank 

approved financing only 
(add/delete rows depending on the 

number of financing sources) 

Key Events (Bank approved 

financing only) 

Disbursement and closing dates 

(Bank approved financing only) 

Financing source/ instrument1: 

ADF Loan 

Financing source/ instrument1:  Financing source/ instrument1:  

Date approved: 29/06/2011 Cancelled amounts: NA  Original disbursement deadline: 

30/03/2017 

Date signed: 12/09/2011 Supplementary financing: NA Original closing date: 31/03/2016 

Date of entry into force: 

23/01/2012 

Restructuring (specify date & 

amount involved):  NA 

Revised (if applicable) disbursement 

deadline: 31/12/2018 

Date effective for 1st 

disbursement: 23/03/2012 
Extensions (specify dates): 

<31/12/2016 and 31/12/2017> 

Revised (if applicable) closing date: 

30/09/2018 

Date of actual 1st disbursement: 

21/05/2012 

  

TANZANIA: MARKETING INFRASTRUCTURE, VALUE ADDITION AND 
RURAL FINANCE SERVICES – PROJECT COMPLETION REPORT (PCR) 

 

AFRICAN  
DEVELOPMENT  

BANK GROUP 



 

2 

Financing source/ instrument 4: 

IFAD Loan 

Financing source/ instrument2: Financing source/ instrument2: 

Date approved: 31/12/2010 Cancelled amounts:  NA Original disbursement deadline: 

30/03/2017 

Date signed: 25/02/2011 Supplementary financing: NA Original closing date: 31/03/2016 

Date of entry into force: 

23/01/2012 

Restructuring (specify date & 

amount involved): NA 

Revised (if applicable) disbursement 

deadline: 31/03/2020 

Date effective for 1st 

disbursement: 23/03/2012 

Extensions (specify dates): 

31/03/2020 

Revised (if applicable) closing date: 

30/09/2020 

Date of actual 1st disbursement: 

21/05/2012 



Financing source/instrument 
(add/delete rows depending on the 

number of financing sources): 

Disbursed 

amount 

(amount, UA): 

Percentage 

disbursed (%): 

Undisbursed 

amount (UA): 

Percentage 

undisbursed (%): 

Financing source/ instrument 1: 
ADF Loan <UA 40 million> 

37,189,760.47 92.97 2,810,239.53 7.03 

Financing source/ instrument 2: 

Government/Districts <2.08 

million> 

                                    

675,105.73 

32.00                         

1,404,894.27 

64.00 

Financing source/ instrument 3: 
Recipient communities <UA 0.11 

million> 

110,000 100.00 0.00 0.00 

Financing source/ instrument 4: 

IFAD: <UA 63.30 million> 

                               

89,580,140.23  

85.00                           

15,909,859.77  

15.00 

TOTAL: UA 105.49 million  127,555,006.43 86.37 20,124,993.57 13.63 

Financing source/instrument 
(add/delete rows depending on the 

number of financing sources): 

Committed 

amount (UA): 

Percentage 

committed 

(%): 

Uncommitted 

amount (UA): 

Percentage 

uncommitted 

(%): 

Financing source/ instrument 1: 

ADF Loan <UA 40 million> 

722,238.33 1.81 2,088,001.20 5.22 

Financing source/ instrument 2: 

Government/Districts <2.08 

million> 

0 0.00 0 0.00 

Financing source/ instrument 3: 
Recipient communities <UA 0.11 

million> 

0 0.00 0 0.00 

Financing source/ instrument 4: 

IFAD: <UA 63.30 million> 

                                  

10,369,507.00  

94.00                                  

661,414.50  

6.00 

TOTAL: UA 105.49 million 11,091,745.33 80.14 2,749,415.7 19.86 

 
 

D  Management Review and Comments 
 

Report reviewed by Name Date 
reviewed 

Comments 

Country Manager Alex Mubiru   

Regional Manager Joseph Coompson   

Director General (as chair of Country 
Team) 

Gabriel Negatu   

Sector Director    

 



 

3 

 II  Project performance assessment 

 
A: Relevance 

 

1. Relevance of program development objective  
 

Rating*  Narrative assessment (max 250 words)  
 

4 The program’s development objective was to contribute to poverty reduction and economic growth 
through enhancing rural incomes and food security. The objective was well aligned to the needs of the 
beneficiaries – where despite a declining trend, 28% of Mainland Tanzanians remain income poor, more 
so in rural areas (33%) than in urban areas (22%).1.  The program’s objective was the mirror image of 
the of the national strategies including the National Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty II 
(NSGRP), and both the 2013 agricultural policy and the Agricultural Sector Development Program II 
(ASDP). 
 
At the regional level, the program’s development objective aligned to several regional development 
strategies to which Tanzania engaged. The program activities of financing rural markets and storage 
facilities were for instance, the mirror image of the EAC’s food security action plan which specifically 
advocates for the construction of agriculture market facilities, feeder roads and storage facilities as well 
as promotion of low-cost technologies on food processing. 
 
The program underwent two Country Strategic Papers (CSP) 2011-2015 and 2016-2020. It was 
embedded in the CSPs’ infrastructure development pillar which considered rural feeder roads as among 
the key supports to local economic development. The program supported the Bank Group’s Agricultural 
Sector Strategy 2010-2014, and the Bank’s framework paper on Post-Harvest (PH) loss reduction. Such 
Bank’s Group policies have prioritised reducing PH loss and investing in market structures, and agro-
processing as among the important enablers for agricultural transformation. See annex 1 for further 
details on the relevance criteria. 
 

* For all ratings in the Program Completion Report (PCR) use the following scale: 4 (Highly satisfactory), 3 
(Satisfactory), 2 (Unsatisfactory), 1 (Highly unsatisfactory) 
 

2. Relevance of program design  

 
Rating*  Narrative assessment (max 250 words)  

 
4 As a multi-sectorial focusing on local areas, the institutional design of the program was appropriately 

opted for the Prime Minister’s Office (PMO) as the executing agency.2 The program formulation was 
participatory3, and identified geographical areas and clustered projects to maximize expected 
outcomes. Several lessons from the previous Agricultural Marketing Systems Development Program 
(AMSDP) informed the program formulation including better provision for the design of rural roads 
(civil, geodetic/geomatics and geotechnical engineering) and the need for putting in place a well-
designed and robust Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system. The program activities were clustered 
such that investments in warehouses, roads and markets complemented each other.    
 
The program design allowed the district authorities4 to compete for resources based on a set of 
eligibility criteria. To ensure full functioning of the market structures, the design financed service 
infrastructures such as cold-storage facilities located within the rehabilitated markets. To enhance 
sustainability of the program’s investments, the design included capacity development sessions to 
Government staff and beneficiary communities to plan for, implement and manage market/storage 
facilities. The support to the rural economy was also a gender sensitive approach to rural development 
as it is estimated that 84% of Tanzanian women are employed in agriculture, against 80% for men. 
 

 

                                                           
1 URT 2011/12 
2 Up to end of 2015, the PMO office was responsible for LGAs in Tanzania 
3 The preparation mission included a three-day workshop and field visits to Arusha and Zanzibar, while the 
identification mission made field visits to Arusha, Moshi, Morogoro, Dodoma, Mbeya and Zanzibar. 
4 Local Government Authorities. 



 

4 

3. Lessons learned related to relevance  
 

Key issues 
(max 5, add 
rows as 
needed)  

Lessons learned  Target 
audience  

1. 
Institutional 
design of the 
program. 

The support from the PMO, regional and district authorities (the latter two authorities 
were under the PMO during much of the program implementation time) helped to 
address challenges that risked delaying the delivery of the program’s expected 
outputs. An example is the Government interventions when contractors abandoned 
sites – interventions that allowed completion of construction activities. Lessons: 1) 
Multi sectorial programs need to be hosted within authorities higher than sectorial 
ministries 2) It is even more important for program that devolve implementation to 
local levels to be hosted within an authority managing district and regional 
administrations.    
 

The Bank, 
other 
Development 
Partners 
(DPs) and 
Government 
of Tanzania 
(GoT) 

2. Continuity For continuity purpose and transfer of good lessons to the new program, the program 
team was composed of experienced personnel from the previous two programs of 
AMSDP and RFSP. They joined the program with experiences in delivering 
infrastructure development in rural areas, capacity building and networking capacities 
with local authorities.  Lessons: Succession of capacities needs to be prioritised for any 
potential successor to MIVARF. 
 

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT 

3. 
Prerequisite
s for the 
matching 
grants 

The program design introduced several prerequisites to be met by potential 
beneficiaries of the matching grants scheme. However, some of the matching grant 
beneficiaries struggled to meet the prerequisites (qualified buildings, electricity 
connection, working capital) and lacked experience on their planned business lines. 
Lessons: Design of agro-processing machinery support needs to include a well-
resourced component on business support to beneficiaries (e.g. skills transfer, 
business advices, certifications etc.) 
 

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT 

4.  
Geographica
l coverage. 

Because of the widely scattered villages the Bank’s resources were thinly spread with 
the program team covering vast distances during supervision. The 32 program’s 
districts spread across 16 regions had a combined population of about 6.1 million (1.2 
million households). Despite the challenge on the coverage, the program functioned 
successfully because of effective communication with program’s liaison officers at the 
district/regional level and good liaising with the political and administrative 
structures at such levels. Lessons: Dispersion of resources across many projects, wide 
geographic areas and/or too many institutions/districts need to be avoided. Future 
Bank’s rural development programs need to concentrate in fewer places for more 
impactful outcome.  
 

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT 

5. Contract 
management 

Limited contract management capacities by some districts resulted into incidences 
under-designing, and contract variations which increased cost to accommodate design 
components not included earlier on. Also, the quality for some of the complicated 
structures could have been improved if districts had requested additional technical 
support. Such challenges were mitigated by the Bank and the Government exercising 
flexibility to accommodate some of the additional costs. In addition, the program team 
backstopped districts lagging behind in implementation. Lessons: 1) to avoid delayed 
no-objection turnaround and contract variations, ensure that all factors affecting 
implementation are considered when establishing contract duration 2) backstopping 
and additional capacity building to weak districts is unavoidable 3) encourage local 
authorities to use own resources in seeking third party opinion on complex designs 
(e.g. bridges design etc); and 4) intensify supervision, and contractors should be made 
liable for faults before the defect liability period lapses. 

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT 

 
 
 
 



 

5 

B: Effectiveness 

 
1. Progress towards the program’s development objective (program purpose) 

 
Comments 
Provide a brief description of the Program (components) and the context in which it was designed and implemented. 
State the program development objective (usually the program purpose as set out in the RLF) and assess progress. 
Unanticipated outcomes should also be accounted for, as well as specific reference of gender equality in the program. 
The consistency of the assumptions that link the different levels of the results chain in the RLF should also be 
considered.  Indicative max length: 400 words. 
The overall development objective was to contribute to poverty reduction and accelerated economic growth 
through enhanced rural incomes and food security. The program planned to contribute to the Government efforts 
in raising rural incomes and food security through improved market access (feeder roads, market centres and 
linkages, and storage facilities), and increased value-added agricultural produce (through training and matching 
grants equipment). The program which was designed to upscale successful activities implemented under the 
former Bank’s and IFAD’s AMSDP and RFSP5 was made up of three components 1) Marketing infrastructure and 
systems development 2) Rural finance; and 3) Program coordination. The implicit assumptions that linked different 
levels of the results chain were consistent and remained valid to date. For instance, the program’s investments in 
rural infrastructures, in particular rural feeder roads, storage facilities and markets were expected to improve 
access to agricultural markets for small holders, reduce PH losses, all of which were expected to contribute to 
poverty reduction through enhanced rural income and food security. 
 
The program’s 2017 outcome study confirmed the advances made towards the development objective of poverty 
reduction through enhancing rural income. About 78% of program’s beneficiaries in the surveyed program’s wards 
acknowledged increased monthly household income from TSh 95,194 in 2012 to TSh 307,696 in 2017. Surveyed 
beneficiaries attributed such positive income changes to the program interventions of market linkages, utilization 
of program’s warehouses that had reduced PH losses, reduction in transport costs, capacity building and equipment 
support. The program’s support to market linkages, for instance, has expanded markets for program’s beneficiaries, 
as confirmed by 40% of the surveyed wards which reported to have experienced improved market linkages to local 
and out of region markets. The PCR mission also met producers who have experienced increased access to export 
markets for processed breadfruit (producers in Pemba), and onions to Kenya and Uganda (producers in Karatu). 
The advances made on the development objectives of the program were gender sensitive as demonstrated by data 
presented in section B.5. The program also had gender perspective. For instance, through PEML, the program’s 
equally empowering men and women in group’s leadership. In addition, the Program’s infrastructures, such as the 
cold rooms’ in the Mombasa market in Zanzibar largely benefited women (About 50% of traders in that market are 
women). 

 

                                                           
5 Rural Finance Support Program. 



 

6 

2. Outcome reporting  
 

Outcome 
indicators (as 
per RLF; add 
more rows as 
needed) 

Baseli
ne 
value 
(Year) 

Most 
recent 
value  
(A) 

End target 
(B)  
(expected 
value at 
program 
completion) 

Progress 
towards 
target  
(% realized) 
(A/B) 

Narrative assessment  
(indicative max length: 50 words per outcome) 

Core 
Sector 
Indicator 
(Yes/No) 

Outcome 1: Improved access to agricultural markets for smallholder producers and traders  
 
Indicator 
1.1: 
Revenue 
from 
markets/ 
warehouses 
 

US$ 
3.0mi

llion 
p.a.  

 

  NA US$ 
6million 

p.a. by 
PY5. 

NA Deposit value of agricultural produce 
stored in 27 rehabilitated warehouses was 
TSh 3.2 billion (as of 30th June 2018).  
Revenue from selling 76.2% of the stored 
produce was TSh 4.5 billion. The gains 
from program’s markets and warehouses 
also included safe and clean trading 
environment, employment, and expanded 
space for auctions.  

 

Indicator 
1.2: 
Transport 
charges 
from farm 
to primary 
market. 
 

US$ 
6.4 
per 
ton. 

Reduced 
by 50% 

Reduced 
by 25% 

200% Transport charges along all rehabilitated 
roads fell between 20 to 50% of the 
previous charges (annex 2). E.G. transport 
charge for one sack of onions along the 
program rehabilitated road to Mang’ola 
market in Karatu went down from TSh 
3,000 to TSh 500. Crop transportation time 
fell by approximately 3 hrs from the 
previous overall mean of 3.5 hrs to 0.56 
hrs.  

 

Outcome 2:  Reduction of PH losses for key food crops 
 
Indicator 
2.1: % of 
PH losses 
for maize 
and rice. 
 

Maiz
e: 
22% 
 
Rice:  
13% 

NA Maize: 
14%  
 
Rice: 9% 

NA Use of program’s warehouses reduced the 
overall PH losses (all crops) from 57% to 
as low as 15%. Beneficiaries such as Meru 
dairy company reduced PH loss by almost 
85%. After the program’s supported cold 
room, the daily processing capacity 
increased from 400 to 2,200 litres (see 
annex 3 for further details).  

 

Outcome 3:  Increased income of producers and traders 
 
Indicator 
3.1: Mean 
per capita 
households 
monthly 
agricultural 
income 
 

TZS 
11,32
4 
(US$
8.0) 

Increase 
by 
223%6 

Increase 
by 25%. 

892% About 78% of the beneficiaries in the 
surveyed program’s wards acknowledged 
to have experienced improved households 
income, from a monthly average of Tsh 
95,194 in 2012 to Tsh 307,696 in 2017 (in 
nominal terms) (see annex 4). The income 
increase is attributed to selling value-
added items, improved market access, 
improved productivity, use of improved 
technology including among others the use 
of System of Rice Intensification (SRI), 
improved seed and fertilizer use. and 
enhanced capacity to negotiate better 
prices (through farmer producer groups). 
In about 61% of the surveyed wards, 
capacity to negotiate better prices was 
rated as highly improved.  
 

 

                                                           
6 We used the reported figures from the outcome study (an increase from Tsh 95,194 in 2012 to Tsh 307,696 per 
month in 2017) rather than the baseline in the result framework. 



 

7 

Rating* (see 
IPR 
methodology) 

Narrative assessment  

 
4 

  
The program’s outcome study attributes most of the advances towards the program’s development 
objectives to the program’s interventions. Program’s warehouses have improved the overall 
marketing of crops through improved quality management of the agricultural produce, which in turn 
has reduced PH losses and extended marketing period. Extended marketing periods, for instance, 
facilitated farmer’s access to better prices and ultimately improved incomes (annex 5). The 
program’s rehabilitated roads have largely improved market access to distanced farmers as well as 
the improved volumes of crops reaching the markets and warehouses. In addition, transport charges 
and time have been on the decline, an outcome of roads improvement. The rehabilitated rural roads 
have also improved the supply of agricultural inputs (annex 6) which in turn has raised farm 
productivity. In some of the improved program roads, the time to reach markets declined from 3hrs 
to just 1hr. Farmers along the rehabilitated Mapogolo-Mbalino road in Mbarali district, for example, 
used to sell a bucket of paddy for Tsh 5,000 before the road was rehabilitated. The same bucket now 
fetches Tsh 10,000 after road improvement – simply because farmers can now easily take their 
produce to the market rather than selling to buyers who used to collect directly from individual 
farmers. New farming fields have also emerged because of the improved access to markets. An 
example is the paddy field in one of the wards along the Mwapogolo-Mbalino road in Mbarali which 
has expanded from 2,300 acres to 3,700 acres.  
 
Trainings in value addition, and the matching grant equipment have enhanced value addition and 
ultimately reduced PH losses. The program’s outcome study reports that the overall mean for the 
value-added produce in the surveyed program’s wards per season was 849 tonnes ranging from a 
minimum of 6.25 tonnes (in Isandula ward) to a maximum of 4,750 tonnes (in Dakawa ward). 
Through PEML, farmer producer and marketing groups have expanded in numbers and membership. 
Working in groups has enhanced farmers negotiations for better prices, market search including 
links to potential traders and off-takers. Working in groups did also improved farmer enabling 
environment by advancing the use of weighing scales and other measuring facilities (confirmed by 
60% of the surveyed farmers groups). Prior to program support farmers used to rely on volumes.  
 
The advances made on the program’s development objectives are attributed to many factors. They 
included: 1) rigorous backstopping to district staff 2) reliability of   Bank’s financial resources 3) 
flexibility of the Bank, the Government, and the program to take into account field realities 4) close 
supervision and reporting the program, the Government and the Bank 5) capacity development 
efforts 6) participatory approaches e.g. when selecting program sites (that considered the 
dimensions of value chains, presence of complementing interventions such as rural markets) 7) 
agriculture potentiality of the program areas 8) reviews of scope, available resources, and timelines 
of program’s activities to reflect actual situation 9) high level of awareness and relatively good sense 
of ownership of the program by local authorities and commmunities 10) close working relationship 
with partners including the private sector 11) competition for resources between districts has 
allowed the program to invest in best proposals thus ensuring value for money. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 

8 

3. Output reporting 
 

Output 
indicators (as 
specified in the 
RLF; add more 
rows as 
needed) 

Most 
recent 
value  
(A) 

End target 
(B)  
(expected 
value at 
completion) 

Progress 
towards 
target  
(% 
realized) 
(A/B) 

Narrative assessment  
(indicative max length: 50 words per output) 

Core 
Sector 
Indicator 
(Yes/No) 

Component 1. Marketing infrastructure and systems development 
 
Subcomponent 1: Marketing infrastructure 
 
Output 1. Rural markets and warehouses storage constructed /rehabilitated 
 
Indicator 1.1 
No. of new 
storage 
facilities 
 
 

29 29 100% Warehouses that have been handed over so far to district 
authorities are currently operational (see annex 7 and 8). 
Igurusi warehouse, for instance, was storing 2,600 bags of 
paddy at the time of PCR mission. District authorities are 
the owners of the infrastructures, with farmers groups 
engaged participatorily during program implementation 
manage the facilities.  

 

Indicator 1.2 
No. of 
renovated 
storage 
facilities. 

6 6 100% Renovation included added facilities (e.g. cold rooms). 
The Mombasa market in Unguja was installed with two 
cold rooms, for storing fish and vegetables. The cold 
rooms at Mombasa market also serve individuals outside 
the market users (meat traders). The program 
infrastructures are also the reason behind the declining 
storage charges as highlighted in annex 9. 

 

Indicator 1.3 
No. of rural 
markets 
constructed 
and 
maintained. 

16 16 100% The program’s livestock market in Longido has an average 
daily sale of between 3,000 and 6,000 animals. A total of 5 
program’s markets (4 in Zanzibar and 1 in the Mainland) 
were equipped with cold storage facilities for to serve 
perishable products. The facilities will support 
sustainable food production, food security, nutrition, and 
competitive producers’ prices.   

 

Indicator 1.4 
No. of local 
market 
infrastructure 

56 56 100% Complementarity of the program’s investment was 
prioritised by rehabilitating, for instance, rural roads that 
serve the program’s markets and warehouses. The 
successful Longido livestock market serves southern 
highlands, central and lake zone regions of Tanzania, and 
has turned into a regional market flooded with traders 
from Kenya. The markets have also significantly raised 
revenue collected by the district.  

 

Output 2: Feeder roads upgraded to all weather condition 
 
Indicator 2.1: 
km of roads 
constructed/ 
rehabilitated. 

1,079 1,000 108% Rehabilitated roads included the ones linking production 
areas to markets and storage facilities, as well as to main 
roads which have improved access to input supplies, 
increased productivity and reduced imports. For example, 
the improved domestic food supplies to Tibirinzi market 
in Pemba (due to the program’s road) has reduced 
dependency on imports from Tanga region.   

 

Output 3:  Governmental staff trained to be able to sustainably manage food marketing 
 
Output 3.1: 
Government 
staff trained 
to be able to 
sustainably 
manage food 
marketing 
infrastructure

720 720 
(40% 

women) 

100% Training themes ranged from planning, procurement to 
contract management of the Rural Markets Infrastructure 
(RMI). Regional and districts program personnel were 
also facilitated with working tools (motorcycles, 
computers and accessories etc.). The PCT also 
backstopped the program’s local officials to accelerate 

 



 

9 

Output 
indicators (as 
specified in the 
RLF; add more 
rows as 
needed) 

Most 
recent 
value  
(A) 

End target 
(B)  
(expected 
value at 
completion) 

Progress 
towards 
target  
(% 
realized) 
(A/B) 

Narrative assessment  
(indicative max length: 50 words per output) 

Core 
Sector 
Indicator 
(Yes/No) 

, of which are 
women (%). 

planning, surveys, engineering designs, procurement and 
supervision of the construction contracts.7 

Indicator 3.2 
No. and type 
of Local 
Market 
Infrastructur
e Committees 
(LMICs) 
trained and in 
operation 

56 
LMICs 

53 LMICs 
 
 

106% 
 

LMIC were formally established after training their 
prospective members. Operation and maintenance, 
branding and packaging, warehouse receipt system were 
I   mportant themes delivered at the trainings. The 
program went further by facilitating officials from 
important institutions such as TBS8 to enhance important 
capacities necessary for producers to apply for standard 
certifications.  
 

 

Subcomponent 2: Value addition 
 
Output 4: Post-harvest centres rehabilitated and equipped 
 
Indicator 4.1 
No of PH 
training 
centres 
rehabilitated 
and 
resourced. 

13 13 100% 10 centres were rehabilitated and equipped, with the 
remaining 3 centres only needed equipment. The centres 
will support transfer of PH management and value 
addition know-how to regions and districts. SIDO’s PH 
training centre in Moshi has already trained 60 Training 
of Trainers (ToT) who came from regional SIDO centres 
and from other organisations.  

 

Output 5: New technology disseminated for PH management 
 
Indicator 5.1 
No. of new 
technologies 
for PH 
management 
disseminated 

50 50 100% The value addition component supported regional PH 
management training centres, and trained processor 
groups on PH technologies. The program established 
close working relationship with private sector to improve 
access to technologies that advanced processing activities 
and reduce PH losses.  

 

Output 6: Business and technological skills for producers and processors 
 
Indicator 6.1 
No. of 
bankable 
value 
addition 
proposals 
 

37 35 106% Competition for program’s resources between districts 
led to investment in best proposals thus ensuring value 
for money. Value addition activities included milling, 
draying, grading, packaging, labelling, sorting, etc. A 
matching grant beneficiary in Pemba composed of 8 
women and 2 men expanded from producing 1 product 
type to 9 types and now exports breadfruit powder to the 
middle east.   

 

Output 7: On the job training for staff, farmers and processors groups 
 
Indicator 7.1 
Regional and 
district 
officials 
training*  

497 350 142% In addition to training, the program personnel were 
facilitated with working tools (motorcycles, computers 
and accessories etc.). The PCT also backstopped the 
program’s local officials to accelerate the planning, 
surveys, delivery of engineering designs, procurement 
and supervision of the construction contracts.9 

 

Indicator 7.2 
Community 
and 

2,394 2,262 106% Infrastructure management committees were established 
and trained - to effectively and efficiently take the 
responsibility of managing the program’s infrastructures. 
Tanzania Rural and Urban Roads Agency (TARURA) has 

 

                                                           
7 According to the Programme design, the District Councils are responsible for the overall management of the 
infrastructure development in the respective focal areas 
8 Tanzania Bureau of Standards.  
9 According to the Programme design, the District Councils are responsible for the overall management of the 
infrastructure development in the respective focal areas 



 

10 

Output 
indicators (as 
specified in the 
RLF; add more 
rows as 
needed) 

Most 
recent 
value  
(A) 

End target 
(B)  
(expected 
value at 
completion) 

Progress 
towards 
target  
(% 
realized) 
(A/B) 

Narrative assessment  
(indicative max length: 50 words per output) 

Core 
Sector 
Indicator 
(Yes/No) 

councillors 
training* 

also delivered trainings to some of the program’s 
communities on collective management of rehabilitated 
rural roads.   

Indicator 8.2 
No. of 
producers 
and 
processor 
groups 
trained10 

350 
ToT 

 
37,500 
Traine

es  

350 ToT 
 

37,500 
Trainees 

100% 
 

100% 

Trainings were delivered on crop storage, drying, grading, 
sorting, moisture control and milling. Producers groups 
went on study tours to familiarise with best practices in 
garlic, paddy and sunflower value chains. The visits 
covered Kenya and Uganda to acquire knowledge on 
market operations and also look for potential avenues to 
export their produce.  

 

Indicator 8.3 
No. of 
producers 
and 
processors 
linked with 
services. 

26,964 5,000 534% End of program target was surpassed 5-fold. Processors 
were linked to technology and input suppliers (e.g. 
processing addictive and preservatives). Farmers 
organizations were facilitated to engage in formal 
contracts with buyers; to attend promotional events 
including Nane Nane, and SIDO’s entrepreneurship 
exhibitions, World Food Day, and the Dar es Salaam 
International Trade Fair (DITF). 

 

Indicator 8.4 
No. of groups 
receiving 
matching 
grants for 
agro-
processing 
equipment.  

35 25 140% Beneficiary groups paid 25% of equipment cost.  As of 
2017, the percentage change in amount of value added 
produced has improved to for instance71% in Itunundu 
ward. Some equipment were advanced that beneficiaries 
successfully utilised to advance quality and output prices. 
An example is the rice milling equipment at Kisongoni in 
Unguja, which is one of its kind in Zanzibar. 

 

Component 3: Program coordination 
 
Program 
Steering 
Committee 
(PSC) 
meetings* 

10 9 90% PSC11 membership included key public sector 
stakeholders from the Mainland and Zanzibar12, and 
private sector The PCT was responsible for coordinating 
program activities and reported to the Permanent 
Secretary, PMO who was actively engaged and regularly 
briefed by the program and the Bank.   

 

 

4. Development Objective (DO) Rating13 
 

DO rating 
(derived from 
updated IPR)* 

Narrative assessment (indicative max length: 250 words) 

4  
 
(IPR is 
attached as 
annex 11) 

The overall physical implementation of the program is highly satisfactory as the program’s outputs were 
136% achieved (36% above targets). With regards to poverty reduction and food security, significant 
achievements were made reported to have increased 8-fold (in nominal terms) from Tsh 95,194 in 2012 
to Tsh 307,696 in 2017 (in nominal terms) (section B.2). Indirect benefits from the program’s markets 
increased farmers increased awareness of prices, and increased productivity that has largely contributed 
to the increased household income. An example is the increased productivity of onions in Karatu from an 
average of 30 sacks to 50 and 70 sacks.  Nevertheless, the markets have made it easier for traders to buy 
onions from the homes of individual farmers. The number of sellers and buyers have significantly increased 
after the commissioning of the new markets. At Kinyasini market (Unguja), the number of sellers increased 
from 150 (pre-program) to 350 (post-program). It is also worth mentioning that the structures of some of 
the program’s markets have been constructed with excess capacity to cater for possible future expansion 
(e.g. additional storeys).   

                                                           
10 Disaggregated by type of beneficiary group and gender 
11 Programme Steering Committee. 
12 PMO-RALG, MAFC, MITM, MW&I, MLDF, MID, MFEA, MOF, MANR and MoRASD-Zanzibar. 
13 For operations using the old supervision report and rating system in SAP, the DO rating for the PCR shall be 
calculated using the IPR methodology. 



 

11 

 
Rehabilitated roads have contributed to the observed progress on the income side (see the discussion in 
section B.1 and B.2). For example, program beneficiaries testified that the roads have largely improved the 
volumes of crops reaching intended markets. Specifically, the volumes of crops reaching the crop markets 
as a result of improved rural roads increased from an overall mean of 230.5 tonnes to 808.6 tonnes per 
season.  

 

5. Beneficiaries (add rows as needed) 
 

Actual (A) Planned 
(B) 

Progress 
towards target  
(% realized) (A/B) 

% of 
women 

Category (e.g. farmers, students) 

350 350 100 20 Government staff  
2,500 2,500 100 35 Farmer producer groups  

26,694 5,000 187 65 Processors linked to SPs  

 
6. Unanticipated or additional outcomes (add rows as needed) 
 

Description Type (e.g. 
gender, 
climate 
change, 
social, other) 

Positive 
or 
negative 

Impact on 
program 
(High, 
Medium, 
Low) 

Private sector has taken advantage of business opportunities created by the 
program’s infrastructures. An example is the livestock market in Longido where 
a private investor is currently constructing an abattoir with a daily capacity of 
processing 2,000 goats. The investment will further raise the volume of animals 
being traded in the market.  
 

Business Positive  High 

Ownership disputes of markets, e.g. the Longido livestock market where the 
ownership has moved from the district council to the Ministry of Livestock.  There 
were also few incidences of ownership disputes of the matching grant equipment 
- between farmers groups who contributed the 25% and LGAs who claimed to 
own the facilities (claiming the 75% came from the Bank’s loan as a public fund).  
 

Governance Negative Low 

Increased property values along the program’s rehabilitated roads. For example, 
a 400 square meters piece of land along the rehabilitated Karansi Tanki la Maji 
road in Siha district now fetches Tsh 4 million from Tsh 1 million pre-
rehabilitation.  In rural Tanzania, land constitutes 70-80% of asset endowment; 
and it is key to household wealth. In addition to rising property prices, 
Government investment in securing property rights will be a step toward further 
reduction in rural poverty. 
 

Business Positive  Medium  

Cooling chambers that were intended for fruit and vegetables have been utilised 
for other produce as well. An example is the use of the chambers to store ‘Mbege’, 
a traditional brew of the Chagga ethnic group in Kilimanjaro region. The brew is 
made up of ripe bananas and sprouted millet. 
 

Business Positive Medium 

Disputes on the user fees between district authorities and traders who have 
rented stalls inside the markets. The program advised the markets management 
committee and the district authorities to meet and reach an amicable solution. 
 

Management Negative Medium 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 



 

12 

7. Lessons learned related to effectiveness (add rows as needed) 
 

Key issues 
(max 5, add rows 
as needed) 

Lessons learned Target 
audience 

1. Matching 
grant scheme 

Matching grant scheme was relatively new to both LGAs and potential beneficiaries. It took 
almost three years of awareness campaigns before credible applications could be received. 
Late implementation was an outcome of potential beneficiaries delayed application waiting 
to see what happens to early adopters. Also, most equipment had to be sourced from 
abroad. Despite being a learning platform, the intervention was a success as some of the 
cooperatives went as far as taking loans to finance their 25% contribution. Lessons: 1) 
Matching grants scheme is a time-consuming initiative requiring resources and time for 
awareness raising, capacity building and attitudinal change 2) Program coordination teams 
need to assist producers to identify appropriate technology and the scale of operation; and 
3) Early adopters motivate others to join in and commit the 25% contribution. 

 
The Bank, 
GoT, other 
DPs 

2. Sequencing 
of the 
interventions 

Few incidences of non-preparedness of communities to assume fully responsibility of the 
constructed infrastructure. One of the reasons behind such difficulties was the delayed 
efforts from the other donors in forming beneficiary groups at the time construction was 
well advanced. The program sustained its efforts to deliver training to the management 
committees – with an expectation that the district authorities will take over such 
responsibilities post program. Lessons: For effective operation of the infrastructure, 
awareness creation and capacity building of stakeholders need to precede construction and 
rehabilitation works.  

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT 

3. 
Procurement 
rules 

One of the reasons for varying procurement capacities across districts was the staff 
turnover. The program engaged the new staff to be conversant with the Bank’s procurement 
rules through repeated trainings. Such interventions were inclusive and ensured that even 
if staff leaves the LGAs those remaining are well familiar with the program’s guidelines. 
Lessons: Training on Bank’s procurement rules to LGA is not a one-off activity. Continued 
effort is highly encouraged to get district staff well informed with guidelines.   

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT. 

4. 
Communication 

Quick proactive verbal and email interactions between the program and the Bank were very 
productive. The interactions were necessary to effect backstopping, guide, get buy-in and 
facilitate the Bank to be aware of the progress and timely resolve emerged hitches. Lessons: 
Informal interactions fast track decision making and minimise chances of Bank objections. 

The Bank, 
other DPs, 
and GoT. 

 
C: Efficiency  

 

1.0 Timeliness 
 

Planned program duration – years (A) (as per 
the Project Appraisal Report (PAR)) 

Actual implementation 
time – years (B) (from 

effectiveness for 1st disb.) 

Ratio of planned and actual 
implementation time (A/B) 

Rating* 

5 6.6 0.76 2 
Narrative assessment (indicative max length: 250 words) 
The loan agreement was signed in September 201114, with the program taking effects in March 2012. The program was 
initially expected to be conclude by December 2016 but was extended to 30 th September 2018. The extension was 
necessary for a number of reasons - as follows. The program was a complex infrastructural based intervention with 
several construction contracts and demanding engineering designs, and procurement. Some of the projects were new at 
the local level (e.g. cold rooms whose design component had to be outsourced). Nevertheless, the identification of 
potential program’s districts was a time-consuming exercise that could have been avoided if the districts were identified 
prior to loan application. Like in many other development programs, contract management at the lower level was a 
challenge which led to variations due to additional works that were left out at the design phase.  
 
Other reasons for the time overruns included: el Niño rains, community indecision on site selections, disputes between 
contractors, communities on areas to extract construction materials, delayed legal opinion on the draft loan agreement, 
the delayed disbursement of 5% counterpart fund, and the prolonged consultations with authorities in Zanzibar on the 
choices of procurement methods for works contracts. To accelerate implementation, the program intensified follow ups; 
terminated grossly underperformed contracts; reviewed workplans to address implementation gaps; and, gave special 
attention on procurements for some infrastructural designs immediately after delays were noted. The PMO was also 
helpful in resolving delays in the release of the counterpart funds from the program’s districts.  

 

                                                           
14 Implementation of IFAD-funded components started in July, 2011, about 13 months earlier. 



 

13 

2.0 Resource use efficiency 
 

Median % physical implementation 
of RLF outputs financed by all 

financiers (A) (see II.B.3) 

Commitment rate (%) (B)  
(See table 1.C – Total commitment 

rate of all financiers) 

Ratio of the median percentage 
physical implementation and 

commitment rate (A/B) 

Rating* 

100% 90% 1.1% 4 
Narrative assessment (indicative max length: 250 words) 
The program was financed by the Bank, IFAD, counterpart funding from beneficiary districts and in-kind contribution 
from communities. The Bank and the counterpart contributions financed the marketing infrastructure development and 
value addition aspects of the program’s Component 1 and part of Component 3; whereas IFAD resources financed the 
producer empowerment and market linkages activities of Component 1, all of Component 2 and part of Component 3 
(see the description of the components in section B.1). By the time of mission visit, the disbursement rates were as 
follows: The Bank (91%); IFAD (72%); and the counterpart LGA funding (77.9%). In absolute numbers, as of 30th 
November 2018, the Bank had disbursed UA 36,635,956.25; counterpart LGA funding USD 1.12million (UA 0.80 million) 
and IFAD USD 65.0 Million (46.43 million). All making a total spending at UA 83.87 million. 
 
Taking into account ground realities and other factors (e.g. rising contraction costs), the program’s targets in the result 
framework were revised at the MTR. For example, the target for rehabilitating rural roads was scaled down from the 
initial 1,550 km to 1,000 km due to escalating costs. Per unit cost of rehabilitation increased from US$ 19,500 estimated 
at the appraisal to about US$ 35,000. The construction target for the agricultural markets was also scaled down from 32 
(at appraisal) to 16 because of 1) increased per unit cost of rehabilitation from US$ 200,000 estimated at appraisal to 
US$ 450,000; and 2) decreased demand from districts. Despite the program delivered less outputs set at the approval, 
at the program end, the targets set for the output indicators at the MTR were achieved by an average of 136%. The 
computation of the resource use efficiency was based on the targets revised at the MTR.  

 

3.0 Cost benefit analysis 
 

Economic Rate of Return (ERR) 
(at appraisal) 

Updated Economic Rate of Return  
(at completion) 

Rating* 

ERR: 22.4% Net Present Value (NPV): Tsh 215.8 billion ERR: 31% NPV: Tsh 2.3 trillion  4 
Narrative assessment (indicative max length: 250 words) 
The cost benefit analysis is rated highly satisfactory as the ERR at the program end is higher than the ERR at the 
appraisal stage (31% versus 22%). This is despite the downward revision of some of the output targets during the 
Mid-Term Review (MTR). The economic analysis has been undertaken over a 20-year span in line with the projected 
economic life of the program. The analysis is on an estimation of program-wide benefits from 1) investments in rural 
roads and market infrastructure 2) incremental incomes resulting from increases in value of commodity sales; and 3) 
equipment support for value addition (see the key assumptions in annex 10). The EIRR computation is provided in 
annex 10.1. Sensitivity analysis shows the program is more sensitive to changes in benefits than costs. For instance, a 
20% increase in costs results into only 3.1%and 8% reduction in NPV and ERR respectively from the base scenario. A 
similar percentage decrease in benefits leads to 23.1% and 9% reduction in NPV and ERR respectively (ann ex 10.2). 
However, none of such changes has a dramatic impact on the NPV and ERR i.e. pushing the NPV towards zero. Given 
the consistent positive net benefits and ERR from the sensitivity analysis, and the difficulties in quantifying socio-
economic benefits (e.g. from the newly constructed/rehabilitated roads), the program has more benefits than what the 
NPV and EIRR figures suggest.  

 

4.0 Implementation Progress (IP)15 
 

IP Rating (derived 
from updated IPR) * 

Narrative comments (commenting specifically on those IP items that were rated unsatisfactory or highly 
unsatisfactory, as per last IPR). (indicative max length: 500 words) 

4 The latest IPR is dated May 2018. The IPR concluded that the overall physical implementation of the 
program was satisfactory bar intervention on bankable proposals for value addition which had 
physical implementation of only 74%. At the time of the IPR (May 2018), a total of 37 bankable 
proposals out of the planned 50 had been prepared, out of which, 19 proposals were funded by the  
program’s matching grant scheme, 7 remained eligible for the matching grant, with 10 proposals 
forwarded to the rural finance component for funding by Microfinance Institutions (MFI). 
 
By the end of the program the number of bankable proposals for value addition surpassed the target 
by 6% (106% achievement rate). As discussed in section A.3, the challenge with the matching grant 
component was the overstretched and limited financial capacity of some beneficiaries, as well as the 
tendency of some of potential beneficiaries to wait and observe what the early adopters would 

                                                           
15 For operations using the old supervision report and rating system in SAP, the IP ratings need to be converted from 
the 0-3 scale used in SAP to the 1-4 scale used in the IPR.     



 

14 

experience. Despite such challenges, the matching grant scheme was a success, not only because it 
surpassed its targets but also because even financially constrained beneficiaries managed to borrow 
from financial institutions and meet the 25% criteria. As discussed in section B.7, the key lessons 
from delivering the matching grant scheme included the need for extensive awareness and capacity 
development of the processor groups in agro-processing technology to stimulate demand for such 
grants. Programs should also assist groups in identifying appropriate technology, as well as scale of 
their operations to enable the groups to afford 25% contribution. 

 
5.0 Lessons learned related to efficiency 
 

Key issues 
(max 5, add rows 
as needed) 

Lessons learned Target 
audience 

1. 
Maintenance 
of equipment 
supplied 
under the 
matching 
grants  

Most of the matching grant beneficiaries experienced positive outcomes (e.g. increased 
productivity) with the support they received from the program. Experiences gained 
from supporting processors to secure equipment included the risks for beneficiaries to 
order equipment that are too advanced to their environment; and the need for rigorous 
after-sale maintenance support from suppliers. Lesson: Programs need to be well 
resourced to support verification and selection of delivered equipment (such capacities 
are lacking at the local level).  

The Bank, 
other DPs, 
and GoT 

2. Beneficiary 
contributions. 

The 5% beneficiary contribution for infrastructure programs (markets and warehouse) 
and 25% beneficiary contribution for the matching grant equipment was a challenging 
experience to some communities and local authorities. Delays in contributions from 
some of the program’s districts was among the main reasons for the delayed 
implementation of planned infrastructures. Rather than waiting for the districts to 
advance the 5% contribution, the program proceeded with procuring works contracts 
with districts allowed to advance partial payments. Lessons: 1) Capacity to meet 
counterpart contribution differed between local authorities because of differences in 
endowments 2) Context and nature of the interventions (or technologies to be acquired) 
should guide the choice of cash or in-kind contribution 3) Continuous follow up on 
districts to ensure that they meet their financial obligations including seeking support 
from higher authorities 4) mandatory contribution (matching grants) risks to deflect 
interventions from the targeted poor to the better-off. 

The Bank, 
other DPs, 
and GoT 

3. Group size The program experience shows that the small sized farmers groups are performing 
relatively better than large groups. Among the areas that separate the two groups, is the 
fact that the large groups are characterised by large sized committees which raises 
group management costs. Differences in members objectives, free riding and 
opportunistic behaviours is more prevalent with large groups. Lessons: Encourage and 
advocate for small sized farmer organisations as operators of program infrastructures.  

The Bank, 
other DPs, 
and GoT. 

4. Technology Some of the program’s storage facilities were installed with advanced technology (e.g. 
cold rooms, processing machineries) that were very new to most local authorities. As 
such, some local authorities struggled not only to be actively involvement in engineering 
designs but also on best practices when it comes to management and operation of such 
facilities. The latter challenge (engineering designs) was addressed by outsourcing 
designs to experienced entities. Lesson: Complementary TA is necessary to support and 
guide district authorities to establish ideal management and operationalisation models 
for the infrastructures. Overall, the infrastructure interventions need to be accompanied 
by intensive business support taking into account all aspects that would, for instance, 
advances the facilities as profitable business ventures.  

The Bank, 
other DPs, 
and GoT 

5. Co-
financing 
arrangements 
and risks. 

The PAR identified IFAD and AGRA as co-financers of the program. However, only the 
Bank and IFAD proceeded with its co-financing commitment. Commonly to most co-
financing arrangements, co-financers have their own procedures and ways of doing 
business which at times affect the pace of implementation, timelines for supervision 
missions and synchronization of components from different financers. A case in point 
was the mismatch in pace between the Bank’s infrastructure component (‘the 
hardware’) and IFAD’s capacity building component (‘the software’) component. 
Consultations between co-financers helped in avoiding serious misalignments. Lessons: 
1) Flexibility by the Government and/or the Bank in stepping in when potential co-
financers do not fulfil their commitment 2) regular consultations to avoid serious 
misalignment between components being targeted by co-financers 3) Government is an 
important mediator when delays from one co-financer affects the delivery of 
components of the other co-financers. 

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT 

 



 

15 

D:  Sustainability 

 

1.0 Financial sustainability 
 

Rating* Narrative assessment (indicative max length: 250 words) 
 

4 To enhance sustainability, one of the key criteria to initiate program activities was the commercial prospects 
of projects to be financed by the program. To complement such efforts, the program linked the agro-processing 
to the marketing dimensions and access to financial services as well as investing in rehabilitating roads that 
linked beneficiary communities to the pre-existing and program’s rehabilitated markets and warehouses. Of 
recent, the Government has established TARURA, an agency that is tasked to oversee O&M of all rural roads 
including the ones rehabilitated by the program. Such institutional reform raises the likelihood that the 
program investments in rural roads will be sustained.  
 
Strong evidences of potential financial sustainability of the program investment are emerging. The revenue 
collected by the Longido district rose by 300% after the the launch of the program’s livestock market. In fact, 
the district was able to meet its 5% counterpart contribution from the revenue collected from the market. One 
of the program’s market in Zanzibar (Kinyasini market) which used to collect Tsh 1.5million pre-program, 
now collects an average of Tsh 7million – after the new market structure was launched. The milk processor in 
Zanzibar which obtained processing equipment from the program matching scheme used to sell a 175ml cup 
of yogurt for Tsh 500. They are currently fetching Tsh 1,000 for the same due to improved quality. 16 The 
business is now able to price compete with larger processors.  
 
Financial sustainability is also highly likely as some of the program’s markets have introduced additional 
revenue opportunities. The onion market in Karatu, for example, is collecting Tsh 5,000 from each truck 
collecting onions from the villages. Between July-November 2018, more than 1,950 trucks have paid the fee. 
The number of buyers and trucks coming to the market are on the rise due to the program’s rehabilitated 
roads going to the mentioned market. Serve the need for continuous support in strengthening business 
practices in managing the program’s markets and warehouses, revenues being generated from these 
infrastructures currently cover the operating costs.   

 
2.0 Institutional sustainability and strengthening of capacities 
 

Rating* Narrative assessment (indicative max length: 250 words) 
 

4 The program’s effort in training management committees that foresaw the developed infrastructures was an 
important step to reinforce sustainability of the program interventions and ensuring continued use of the 
program’s roads, markets and warehouses. Other training beneficiaries included regional and district personnel 
from program’s region and districts (engineers, procurement, to environmental officers). In addition to the 
provision of training to the beneficiaries and staff the program was well integrated into government 
institutional structure to ensure ownership and sustainability (e.g. implemented by the PMO office with the 
infrastructural assets owned by the local authorities). The field interview shows that 66.7% of the surveyed 
wards have committees in place to ensure continued maintenance of the infrastructures. Moreover, about 
70.4%of the wards confirmed that the committees have a role to set penalties for improper use of the program’s 
infrastructures. Other roles given to the committees included security for the facilities, budgeting, records and 
controlling income from the facilities. In some wards, the committees were given the role of training other 
community members on the proper use of the program’s infrastructures.  
 
The good experiences on maintaining and managing program’s infrastructures from the exemplary districts 
(e.g. Siha district from Kilimanjaro region) have been shared to other districts through workshops and 
documentation for future guidance. Through PEML, the number of farmer producer groups and farmer 
marketing groups have expanded including membership with the groups equally empowering men and women 
in group’s leadership. Working in groups has enhanced producers’ empowerment in price negotiations, market 
search and linkages to potential traders and off-takers. The program also released more than six instruction 
manuals on PH handling of perishables.17 

 
 

 

                                                           
16 We cannot ignore the inflation factor as well.  
17 They included 1) horticultural, roots and tubers crop 2) small milling operations for cereals 3) rice grain PH 
management 4) spice and condiments processing 5) sunflower oil processing 6) packaging and labelling. 



 

16 

3.0 Ownership and sustainability of partnerships 
 

Rating* Narrative assessment (indicative max length: 250 words) 
 

4 To raise the sense of ownership, groups the received matching grants for agro-processing equipment 
contributed 25% of the cost of buying equipment. Beneficiary districts also remitted 5% cash contributions 
for the market and warehouse facilities. Sustainability of these facilities is also highly likely as the maintenance 
and repairing of some of the equipment are currently fully financed by the beneficiary groups. The same with 
the roads. For example, the Government has invested in upgrading the program’s constructed Mkanyageni-
Kangagani (4.5km) feeder road in Pemba by adding one more layer of gravel. Beneficiaries districts have 
invested additional facilities after taking over the program’s infrastructures. For example, the district 
authority managing the Tibirinzi market in Pemba has installed 100 additional stalls in addition to 82 
program’s installed stalls.   
 
To optimise benefits from the program financed markets, district authorities, Longido for example, is 
consulting the Ministry of Livestock to connect the market to the ministry’s livestock marketing information 
system. District authorities in collaboration with beneficiary communities have also enacted bylaws to enforce 
sustainable use of the rehabilitated roads. In Siha district, for instance, a fine of Tsh 200,000 is imposed on 
livestock crossing the newly rehabilitated roads. Despite the district authorities owning the infrastructures, it 
is the beneficiaries’ committees which are tasked to operate the markets and storage facilities. The 
sustainability of such partnerships is highly likely given the management training that the program delivered 
to both parties. However, further clarification is necessary with regards to ownership, operational costs and 
revenue for some of the facilities.  

 
4.0 Environmental and social sustainability 
 

Rating* Narrative assessment (indicative max length: 250 words) 
 

4 Environmental sustainability: The program developed the Environmental and Social Management Plans 
(ESMP) describing measures to mitigate impacts during the construction works. In addition, training was 
delivered to all district environmental officers focusing on EMSP planning, monitoring and reporting. In 
collaboration with the National Environmental Management Council (NEMC), an environmental checklist for 
monitoring rural marketing infrastructure programs was developed and shared to all participating districts. 
Other efforts which have positive impacts on environmental sustainability included: 1) sensitized 
communities to undertake responsible farming along the road alignments as a way of minimising damage to 
the constructed roads 2) provision of adequate drainage; mitre drains and cross drainages structures 3)  
enhanced capacities of communities close to constructed roads in enforcing bylaws  
 
Social sustainability: The program ensured that alignments of the new roads limit any involuntary 
resettlement of communities. Safety signs have been erected along the program’s rehabilitated roads (e.g. 
speed limit signs) – with the police force training motor cyclists to observe rules. The program team and 
district personnel were also sensitised on gender mainstreaming. By February 2015, 25% of the 1,094 
community members who attended training on operation and maintenance of rural infrastructure were 
women. Moreover, some of the cooperatives that benefited from the matching grant scheme are largely 
dominated by women. The Muwanda cooperative creameries, for example, is composed of 8 female members 
and 4 male members. These benefits will positively impact the lives of women who account for a significant 
proportion of the rural population engaging in agriculture.  



 

17 
 

5.0 Lessons learned related to sustainability 
 

Key issues 
(max 5, add rows 
as needed) 

Lessons learned Target 
audience 

1. Utilization 
of storage 
structures 
 

Some of the community-operated warehouses were not utilized to the same extent as 
the privately-owned warehouses. The private owned warehouses have incorporated 
broader agricultural value chain activities e.g. paddy and sunflower processing etc. 
Lessons: 1) Need for increased awareness to the beneficiary communities that the 
program support (e.g. warehouse) is just a motivation to trigger their own efforts to 
invest in broader agricultural value chain activities (e.g. agro-processing) 2) capacity 
of stakeholders to implement additional agricultural value chain activities needs to be 
enhanced and synchronised with infrastructure development. 

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT 

2. Access to 
standards and 
quality 
certifications 

Access to standards certification has been a time-consuming exercise for small 
processors – and of a high transaction cost given their small-scale operations. To 
address this challenge, the program established important contacts with the 
authorities to provide advisory services to processors in addition to inspection, and 
testing towards supporting their applications for certificates. Lessons: Support to 
processors to access standards and quality certification needs to be highly prioritised 
and be considered that is resource demanding similar to other program activities.   

The Bank, 
other DPs 
and GoT 

3. Access to 
standards 
certifications 

As part of their contractual obligations, equipment suppliers delivered trainings to the 
matching grant beneficiaries. However, few processors enrolled only a single member 
in such trainings, limiting the spread of knowledge on expertise to maintain the 
equipment in case of breakdown.  Lessons: Encourage beneficiary groups to enrol 
more than one group member in the O&M training sessions.  

The Bank, 
beneficiaries.  

4. Market 
disruptions 

In some of the areas that the program invested new markets, traders and middlemen 
are exploiting farmers by directly collecting agricultural produce from homes. Efforts 
from district authorities are well acknowledged to have restored order to some extent. 
Nevertheless, the markets were new experiences in some of the program areas, and as 
a result some farmers tended to ‘wait and see’ before engaging with the markets. 
Lesson: Government intervention is necessary to ensure that the operations of the 
markets are not interrupted by opportunistic behaviours of traders and middlemen.  

The Bank, 
GoT, 
beneficiaries. 

 
III: Performance of stakeholders 

 

1.0 Bank performance 
 

Rating* Narrative assessment by the Borrower on the Bank’s performance, as well as any other aspects of the 
program (both quantitative and qualitative). See guidance note on issues to cover. (indicative max length: 250 
words) 

 
4 The program was supervised bi-annually making a total of 14 supervision missions between 2012 and 

2018. The Bank’s missions were diversified in expertise by including financial, procurement and 
disbursement personnel as well as agricultural specialists. Keeping in view the infrastructures involved 
in the program, the Bank’s supervision team was also supported by an engineer. The supervision missions 
assisted the program and the executive agency to address managerial and technical aspects that impeded 
implementation. With more decision-making power devolved to field offices, the COTZ18, using both 
formal and informal means, closely monitored implementation and took prompt actions to resolve 
challenges. An example is the Bank’s interventions to restore the program’s coordinator in Zanzibar and 
the Bank’s procurement rules for works contracts.   
 
The Bank’s country office was involved, either through the supervision missions or outside such missions, 
to actively engage with the Government and co-financers in discussing progress and resolve 
implementation challenges. The MTR19 was carried out in June 2015 and helped to identify challenges and 
way forward including revising some of the program end-targets. The Bank also encouraged the program 
to undertake an internal PCR, a document that offered inputs to the Bank’s own PCR. The Bank also 
encouraged and motivated the program team to intensify monitoring, supervision and follow-up to ensure 
that all infrastructures were completed on time and are fully utilised by the intended beneficiaries.  

                                                           
18 Tanzania Field Office. 
19 Mid-Term Review. 



 

18 
 

Comments to be inserted by the Bank on its own performance (both quantitative and qualitative). See guidance note on 
issues to cover. (indicative max length: 250 words) 
The Bank provided close and extensive program review missions throughout the period of the programme. Since 
inception, the Bank supervised the program 14 times including the MTR.  All the Bank’s missions aided the programme to 
address managerial and technical aspects that greatly helped to expedite implementation.  In all the supervision missions, 
field supervisions were conducted followed by an analysis and discussion of observations including debriefing sessions 
held with the GoT officials and selected members of the steering committee, whose details and strategies for improving 
the program were presented in the aide memoirs of the missions. Where necessary, the Bank supported and aided re-
allocations of funds to GoT’s preferred areas of greater interests. The intensified Bank supervision towards the final stages 
of the program accelerated implementation and helping in the improvement of revised work schedules and activities 
which turned around the slow pace of implementation experienced initially. 
Key issues (related to Bank performance, max 5, add rows as needed) Lessons learned 
1. Future Bank’s supervision missions should maintain diversified 
personnel as appropriate with the aim of facilitating effective 
interactions and advices on various aspects related to program 
implementation.  

Maintain a team of diversified Bank experts in 
supervision missions as appropriate. 

2. In-kind contribution from beneficiaries were not monetised. To avoid 
understating counterpart contribution, the Bank can introduce a model 
were supervision and other costs incurred by beneficiary Governments 
are quantified, documented and ultimately included as part of the 
counterpart contributions.  

Introduce a model were counterpart in-kind 
contributions are monetised and 
acknowledged.  
 

3. Programs that support access to productive assets (equipment and 
infrastructures) need to invest heavily on business coaching to 
reinforce business mindsets and acumen on beneficiaries.  

Upgrade support to business coaching in 
programs that support access to productive 
assets.   

 

2.0 Borrower performance 
 

Rating* Narrative assessment on the Borrower performance to be inserted by the Bank (both quantitative and 
qualitative, depending on available information). See guidance note. (indicative max length: 250 words) 

4 Both the central and local authorities worked closely with the program during implementation. Senior 
officials from the relevant Government ministries constituted the PSC providing an enabling environment in 
terms of policy guidelines and staff. The same with the regional secretariat and LGAs (regional engineers, 
district engineers, agriculture and irrigation and cooperative officer etc) who facilitated implementation in 
terms of designing, procurement, supervision and management. The Ministry of Finance (MoF) was very 
active in negotiating the loan and also in meeting the covenants for the effectiveness of the loan. With regards 
to counterpart contributions, the Government provided the required cash contribution in meeting the 
payroll requirements of the staff serving the program. Despite the delays, the Government supported the 
program in ensuring that districts honoured their counterpart funding obligations as well as ensuring that 
periodic roads maintenance are carried out adequately. A vivid example for the latter is the financing of 
additional culverts along the program’s Mwapogolo-Mbarino road. The culverts protected the road from 
being washed away by water streams, while the culverts also allowed farmers to tap the water flow for 
irrigation. District authorities also closely enforced bylaws that aimed at efficient use of the market 
infrastructures. An example is the introduction of permits for trucks collecting onions in Karatu, a move that 
advanced the use of the program’s market, and district’s awareness of the number of traders operating in 
the area.  

Key issues (related to Borrower performance, max 5, add rows as needed) Lessons learned 
The central Government assisted in following up and reminding districts 
to remit counterpart funds. The efforts paid off as of April 2018, the 
program had collected Tsh 1.8 billion (76.1% out of the total planned 
counterpart contributions from the program districts). 

Timely submission of counterpart funds 
necessitates close follow up from local and 
central Government, and the program team. 

The program’s objectives and logical flow from outputs to outcomes and 
impact remain relevant. It is high likely that the program’s benefits will be 
sustained provided that the Government continue to capacitate 
communities and committing resources to maintain the rehabilitated 
roads and other program’s infrastructures.  

Continuous post-program Government 
follow up and support is necessary to 
sustain the program’s investments and 
benefits.  

Overall, the program team was found to prepare good quality progress 
reports and was up to date on the submission of periodic plans and annual 
external audit reports. Most program staff received relevant training in 
their respective fields such as program management; procurement; 
contract management; monitoring and evaluation, and Training of 
Trainers (ToT). 

A strong and well-resourced program team 
is necessary particularly for a complex and 
geographically wide spread program.  



 

19 
 

3.0 Performance of other stakeholders 
 

Rating* Narrative assessment on the performance of other stakeholders, including co-financiers, contractors 
and service providers. See guidance note on issues to cover. (indicative max length: 250 words) 

3 Generally, the performance of contractors was good, serve for some isolated cases of low quality of 
works and engineering designs. To enhance quality delivery of infrastructure assets, the program team 
in collaboration with beneficiary districts and communities intensified supervision, and whenever 
faults were noted, the responsible contractors were made liable before the defect liability period lapses. 
Continued developing the capacity of the district teams, as well as possibility of seeking third party 
opinion for complex design issues e.g. designing of the bridges, is a lesson for future programs. Other 
institutions such as SIDO and the Tanzania Electrical, Mechanical and Electronics Services Agency 
(TAMESA) had good collaborations with the program’s districts, especially when they were requested 
to repair processing equipment that were financed by the program. 
 

Key issues (related to performance of other stakeholders, max 5, add rows as 
needed) 

Lessons learned (max 5) Target audience 
(for lessons learned) 

Service providers were capacitated and rendered services that 
impacted on overall productivity of rural producers. They assisted in 
supplying the required inputs like seeds, fertilizers and pesticides 
intended for use by individual farmers, farmer producer groups, 
processors etc.  

Complementary 
services, e.g. input 
supplies are important 
targets for programs to 
reach their goals. 

GoT, the Bank, 
other DPs. 

Beneficiary communities were actively involved in the entire business 
cycle from the planning to the implementation stages. This reduced 
the risks of resentment by communities and simplified ways to 
address disagreements on the selection of program sites.  

Community 
participation is 
necessary at all stages 
of the program cycle.  

GoT, the Bank, 
other DPs. 

Increasing bargaining power and better prices for farmers as a result 
of the market and storage facilities were well acknowledged by the 
interviewed beneficiaries. However, traders continue to exploit 
farmers through monopolised structures (e.g. onion market in 
Karatu).  

Government 
interventions and 
market promotion to 
break the monopolistic 
structure  

GoT, the Bank, 
other DPs. 

 
 

IV: Summary of key lessons learned and recommendations 

 

1.0 Key lessons learned 
 

Key issues (max 
5, add rows as 
needed) 

Lessons learned Target 
audience 

Management of 
equipment and 
infrastructures 

Rural beneficiaries have limited business acumen to ensure profitable utilisation 
of equipment and infrastructures. As such, the design of the equipment and 
infrastructure support needs to embed a well-resourced component supporting 
business development services to further guarantee sustainable use of the 
equipment. 

The Bank, 
other DPs and 
GoT 

Matching grant 
scheme 

Matching grant scheme is a time-consuming initiative requiring significant 
resources and time for awareness building, attitude change, and support to 
beneficiaries in identifying appropriate technology and the scale of operation. 

The Bank, 
and other DPs 
 

Standard and 
quality 
certification 

Access to standard and quality certification is necessary for expanding market 
penetration but also a time and resource costly activity to most small processors. 
Program component on supporting access to such certifications needs to be 
highly prioritised in program planning.  

The Bank, 
other DPs and 
GoT 

Opportunistic 
behaviours of 
some of the 
traders and 
middlemen.  

The new markets offered improved prices and motivate farmers to bring their 
produce to the markets. However, Government intervention is necessary to 
ensure that operations of the markets are not interrupted by the opportunistic 
behaviours of some of the traders and middlemen.  
 

GoT 

 
 
 
 
 



 

20 
 

2.0 Key recommendations (with particular emphasis on ensuring sustainability of program benefits) 
 

Key issue 
(max 10, add 
rows as 
needed) 

Key recommendation Responsible  

1.  
 

Market and warehouse infrastructures have generated several benefits as discussed in 
preceding sections. However, further interventions by the district, regional and central 
Governments are necessary to optimise benefits accruing to farmers. There is a need to 
break buyers’ monopoly; promote and attract increasing number of buyers to advance 
the competitiveness of the market; and, strengthen the existing efforts to enforce the 
established marketing rules.  
 

Central, 
regional and 
district 
authorities. 

2.  The implementation of the IFAD’s components has been extended to March 2020. It is 
recommended for the extended IFAD component of the program to further strengthen 
the utilisation of the market and storage infrastructures by supporting marketing, 
financial services and business acumen in managing rural infrastructures.  
 

 
IFAD, and 
GoT. 

3.  Beneficiaries need to be closely supported to develop transparent and well elaborated 
business, and O&M plans for the program infrastructures and equipment. They need to 
have a clear understanding that the facilities need to be operated in a manner that 
maintenance and replacement costs are well covered.   
 

 
GoT and 
district 
authorities.  

4.  The preparation phase of infrastructure program needs to consider planning for an 
implementation time of the program from 5 to 7 years. The first two to three years of the 
program are spent on program identification, engineering designs and procurement 
processes. Another possibility is for the Government to have in place engineering and 
feasibility studies well in advance of loan application.  
 

 
The Bank, 
GoT. 

5.  Fully integrate program’s investments in the district annual plans and budget for 
maintenance for prolonged use of the infrastructures. Capacitate and sensitize local 
authorities to enforce by-laws (e.g. axel load limits on roads).  
 

 
GoT and 
district 
authorities 

6.  Ensure clear understanding for all parties when it comes to ownership and operational 
modalities of the infrastructure. Though local authorities own the markets and 
warehouses, they need to be encouraged or provided with complementary TA to 
establish formal agreements with respect to the role of owners and operators of the 
facilities.  

 

 
The Bank, 
GoT and 
district 
authorities 

7.  Ensure that all stakeholders are familiar with the Bank’s rules and program’s plans. 
Reference is made, for instance. Implementation delays are minimised if the Bank’s 
procurement rules are well understood. Procurement rules are among the rules that the 
Bank cannot change.  
 

GoT and 
district 
authorities 

8.  The initial ERR model (at the PAR stage) needs to be well documented at the PAR stage 
with the program’s M&E made responsible to regularly collect data necessary to update 
the ERR at the program closure stage.  
 

The Bank. 

9.  Intensify support to processors in quality and standards certification. Small processors 
cannot afford the high transaction costs and the time-consuming activity of following up 
certifications. The program approach in facilitating the standards organisations in 
assisting producers is one of the means to address the issue.  
 

The Bank  

10.  Government needs to intervene and clarify the few ownership disputes of some of the 
program’s markets and warehouses. Reference is made to the Longido livestock market, 
and the warehouses in Chato and Njombe.   
 

 
GoT 

 

 
 
 



 

21 
 

V: Overall PCR rating 

 
 

Dimensions and criteria Rating 
 

Dimension A: relevance 4 
Relevance of program development objective (II.A.1) 4 
Relevance of program design (II.A.2) 4 

Dimension B: effectiveness 4 
Development Objective (DO) (II.B.4) 4 

Dimension C: efficiency 3.5 
Timeliness (II.C.1) 2 
Resource use efficiency (II.C.2) 4 
Cost-benefit analysis (II.C.3) 4 
Implementation Progress (IP) (II.C.4) 4 

Dimension D: sustainability 4 
Financial sustainability (II.D.1) 4 
Institutional sustainability and strengthening of capacities (II.D.2) 4 
Ownership and sustainability of partnerships (II.D.3) 4 
Environmental and social sustainability (II.D.4) 4 

Overall program completion rating 3.9 
Highly satisfactory 

 
VI: Acronyms and Abbreviations 

 
AMSDP  - Agricultural Marketing Systems Development Programme 
ASDP II - Agricultural Sector Development Program 
CAADP - Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program 
CSPs  - Country Strategic Plan 
DPs  - Development Partners 
DITF - Dar es Salaam International Trade Fair 
EAC - East African Community 
ERR - Economic Rate of Return 
ESMP - Environmental and Social Management Plan 
GoT - Government of Tanzania 
IFAD  - International Fund for Agricultural Development 
LMIC - Local Market Infrastructure Committees 
MTR - Mid-Term Review 
MoF - Ministry of Finance 
MFI - Microfinance Institutions 
MIVARF  - Market Infrastructure, Value Addition and Rural Finance 
M&E  - Monitoring and Evaluation 
NPV  - Net Present Value 
NSGRP II - National Strategy for Growth and Reduction of Poverty 
O&M - Operation and Maintenance  
PMO - Prime Minister’s Office 
PY - Program Year 
PH  - Post-Harvest  
PHTC  - Post-Harvest Training Centre 
PAR - Project Appraisal Report 
PCR  - Program Completion Report 
RFSP - Rural Financial Services Program 
RMI - Rural Markets Infrastructure 



 

22 
 

SADC - Southern African Development Community 
SRI - System of Rice Intensification 
SIDO  - Small Industry Development Organisation 
TNA - Training Needs Assessment 
ToT  - Training of Trainers 
TAMESA - Tanzania Electrical, Mechanical and Electronics Services Agency 
TARURA - Tanzania Rural Roads Agency 

 








































 
 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND 

 

 
 
 

SIERRA LEONE 

 

 

AGRIBUSINESS AND RICE VALUE CHAIN SUPPORT

 


July 2019 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  
  
  

 

Grant Information 

Client’s information 

RECEPIENT :  Republic of Sierra Leone 

EXECUTING AGENCY :              Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry 

Financing plan 

 
Source Amount (UA) Instrument 

ADF  7.99 million Grant 

GoSL 0.53 million Counterpart contribution 

TOTAL COST 8.52 million  

 

ADF’s key financing information  

 

Grant Currency Units of Account  

        

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected) 

 

Concept Note Approval February 2019 

Project Appraisal March 2019 

Board Approval July 2019 

Effectiveness August 2019 

Completion August 2024 

Last Disbursement December 2024 

 

 



 

iv 

 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

1. Project Overview: 
 

1.1 The Sierra Leone Agribusiness and Rice Value Chain Support Project (SLARiS) aims 

to stimulate a viable upstream agribusiness sector in Sierra Leone in order to promote economic 

diversification, food security, sustainable employment opportunities and improved livelihoods. 

These are all key identified priorities of the New Direction Agenda and the Medium Term 

National Development Plan of the Government of Sierra Leone. The development goal of the 

project is to promote domestic agribusiness focusing on priority agricultural value chains which 

will serve as sustainable and inclusive business opportunities targeted at enhancing production 

and productivity to improve the livelihoods of men and women beneficiaries. The project will 

primarily focus on the rice value chain which is the staple food in Sierra Leone. It will also 

support the emergence of maize and livestock as secondary value chains which have the strong 

potential of meeting domestic food demands, import substitution, improving nutrition and 

farmers’ income. The SLARiS project which will be executed in the identified high potential 

agro-ecological zones in the country (specifically Kambia, Kenema and Moyamba) will be 

implemented over a period of five (5) years (2019 – 2024). The project comprises three (3) 

components namely: a) Support to Enhancement of Agricultural Input Production & 

Distribution Systems; b) Support to Agribusiness Development; and c) Institutional capacity 

development and Project Management. The total project cost is UA 8.52 million with an ADF 

Grant of UA 7.99 million (93.8%) and Government of Sierra Leone (GoSL) contribution of 

UA 0.53 million (6.2%). The project benefits from parallel co-financing from the Islamic 

Development Bank (USD 34.12 million) and the International Fund for Agricultural 

Development (USD 11.2 million) 

  

2. Needs Assessment:  
 

2.1. Sierra Leone is food insecure, with over half the population (i.e. more than 3.5 million 
people) lacking access to sufficient amounts of safe and nutritious food. The Global Hunger 

Index 2018 ranked Sierra Leone as the sixth hungriest country in the world, with an estimated 

35.7% of the population undernourished. These households are exposed to acute fragility and 

unable to cope with socio-economic and environmental shocks such as drought, floods and 

fluctuating food prices. Importation of staple foods such as rice and maize are high due to the 

inability to meet market demand through domestic production. According to the Ministry of 

Agriculture and Forestry, the total rice demand was 1,600,000 metric tons in 2018. In contrast, 

local production was only 700,000 metric tons, with the balance imported from international 

markets. The annual cost of rice imports (including seeds and grains) alone stands at about 

USD 250 million. Similarly about 20,000 metric tons (40 % of total demand) of maize is 

imported into Sierra Leone annually, which is closely associated with equally high importation 

of poultry products as the main ingredient in animal feed is maize.  

 

2.2 Despite the huge potentials of the country’s agriculture, the sector has not been able to 

attain national food and nutritional security, and generate of decent employment opportunities 

for the country’s bulging youth population. The seemingly lacklustre performance of the 

agricultural sector in Sierra Leone is the result of a combination of weak public policy and 

institutions, limited infrastructure, and failures in both the input and output markets. These 

greatly impede the sector’s productivity growth, and its capacity to support the country’s 

poverty reduction and youth employment generation efforts. Specifically production and 

productivity are constrained by low use of improved technologies particularly agricultural 

inputs (e.g. improved seed varieties, fertilizers and pesticides), low levels of value chain 

integration mainly due to inefficient systems that undercut competitiveness, limited access to 



 

v 

 

agricultural finance and a weak enabling environment. Sierra Leone’s dependency on food 

imports and food aid exacts dire socio-economic consequences on the economy and is 

unsustainable. Economic diversification to promote domestic agricultural production and 

productivity is therefore imperative. This is critical to ending hunger and enhancing food 

security as per the Sustainable Development Goals, improving economic growth, social 

welfare, livelihoods and job creation as well as building resilience to shocks.  

 

2.3 The rationale for this project is premised on the fact that Sierra Leone is endowed with 
agro-ecological conditions and water resources to support a vibrant agricultural sector. There 

is significant opportunity for growth in the agribusiness sector across the value chain. 

Furthermore, Sierra Leone’s Medium Term National Development Plan (2019-2023), the 

National Strategic Agriculture Development Plan (NSADP) (2010-2030) which is Sierra 

Leone’s in-country version of the Comprehensive African Agriculture Development 

Programme (CAADP) and the recently launched National Agriculture Transformation Strategy 

(NATS) (2019-2023) evidence clear commitment by the Government of Sierra Leone to 

diversify its economy from its dependence on mining through promoting investments to 

strengthen the agriculture sector and thereby increase its contribution to the national economy. 

Expanding the agribusiness sector will also assist the Government of Sierra Leone to tackle the 

major challenge of youth unemployment in the country (estimated at 60%) which remains an 

important source of fragility. The project will seek to create new jobs to ensure socio-economic 

empowerment, particularly amongst the youth and women by supporting them along the value 

chain. 

 

3. Bank’s Value Added: 
 

3.1 The Bank’s comparative advantage and added value in the project are derived from its 

accumulated expertise and experience in funding agriculture and agribusiness projects in 

various Regional Member Countries (RMCs). The SLARiS project will provide opportunities 

to capitalize on the Bank’s experience in supporting public sector enabled and private sector 

led growth of agricultural value chains and on the gains of past projects in the Mano-River 

Union region, other ECOWAS countries and across the continent. Lessons were drawn from 

extensive continent-wide analysis carried out under the Technologies for African Agricultural 

Transformation (TAAT) and its associated TAAT-Savanah, the Continental Investment 

Program on Rice Self Sufficiency in Africa (CiPRISSA) and the African Agricultural Seed 

Index (TASAI) program as well as various investment operations in Gambia, Ghana, Guinea-

Bissau, Senegal and Zambia. 

 

4. Knowledge Management:  
 

4.1 The project will support research and knowledge development in collaboration with the 
Sierra Leone Agricultural Research Institute (SLARI), AfricaRice and Njala University to 

develop: i) an effective agricultural input system; (ii) innovative crop production techniques 

for rice and maize in the presence of soil challenges; (iii) the emergence of a robust maize value 

chain with strong linkages to the livestock industry; and (iv) support the growth of horticulture. 

The knowledge generated from the research will be disseminated amongst farmers for better 

productivity at the farm level, agro-dealers and agribusiness actors. Additionally, this project 

will implement the ENABLE-Njala Youth Empowerment Model which is an innovative 

initiative combining research, integrated farming systems with business incubator and 

accelerator systems. These experiences will be documented and could be useful in the design 

of other youth in agribusiness development projects. Finally, collaborative knowledge 

development will enhance the systemic development of capacity in agriculture university 

faculties in Sierra Leone. 



 

vi 

 

RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
 

Country and Project Name:  Sierra Leone Agribusiness and Rice Value Chain Support Project (SLARiS) 

Project Purpose:  

 

To promote a viable agribusiness sector in Sierra Leone in order to promote economic diversification, food security, sustainable employment 

opportunities and improved livelihoods. 

RESULTS CHAIN 

PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 
MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 
RISKS/MITIGATION MEASURES 

Indicator (including CSI) 
Baseline 
(2019) 

Target   
(2024) 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

 
Improved household incomes and food 
security 

   
Annual reports  
Bureau of 
Statistics/MAF 

 

Average household farm income  
 
National Rice Self-sufficiency improved (%) 
 

270 
 

42.9% 

580 
 

75% 

   

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

 
1. Increased rice production and  
productivity  
 
 
2.Increased maize production and 
productivity 
 
 
3.Increased private sector engagement 
 
 
 
4.Increased Youth Employment 

 
1.1.Total annual average rice production (mt) 
1.2. Average Yield (mt/ha) 
 
 
2.1.Total annual maize production ( metric tons) 
2.2. Average Yield (mt/ha) 
 
 
3.1.Percentage contribution of private seed companies to total seed 
production 
 
 
4.1.Youth unemployment level (%) 

 
700,000 

1.3 
 
 

71,085 
2.17 

 
 

0 
 
 
 

70% 

 
1,600,000 

3.0 
 
 

150,000 
3.0 

 
 

10% 
 
 
 

67% 

MAF National 
survey 

Project reports 
 

Risk: Limited Govt. commitment 

to implementation of private sector 

oriented policy incentives. 

Mitigation: Govt. buy-in on policy 

incentives obtained  

  

Risk : Climate changes effects 

(drought, floods, etc. could 

adversely affected production 

Mitigation: Climate smart and 

resilience practices will be 

disseminated among farmers 

within the project zone. 

 COMPONENT 1: SUPPORT TO ENHANCEMENT OF AGRICULTURAL INPUT PRODUCTION & DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

1. SLARI/SMP seed production 
strengthened 
 
2.Seed multiplication centres 
rehabilitated & operational 
 
 
 
3.SLESCA operational 
 
 
 
4.Agro-dealers network supported 

1.1.Quantity of early generation (breeder and foundation) seeds 
produced (Rice/Maize) (in tons) 
 
2.1. Quantity of 2nd generation foundation seeds produced (Rice/Maize) 
(in tons) 
 
2.2.Quantity of certified seeds produced (Rice/Maize) (in tons) 
 (Outgrowers) 
 
3.1.No. of inspections conducted 
3.2. No. of private seed producers certified 
 
4.1. No. of input agro-dealers trained, certified & operational (at least 

30% women) 
 

(0) 
(0) 

 
(0) 

 
 

(0) 
 
 

(0) 
(1) 

 
 

(0) 

500 (R) 
100 (M) 

 
9,000 (R) 
2,500 (M) 

 
2700 (R) 
1,800 (M) 

 
10 
8 
 
 

375 

Project 
monitoring 
reports/ 
supervision 
missions  

 Risk : External influences on SMP 

& SLeSCA 

 

Mitigation: SLESCA & SMP will 

be run as PPP outfits to ensure 

autonomy, efficiency and 

sustainability 
 

  



 

vii 

 

 

COMPONENT 2: SUPPORT TO YOUTH AGRIBUSINESS SKILLS, ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND EMPLOYMENT 

5.ENABLE-Njala Youth Program 
established 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6.Out-growers schemes supported    

5.1. No. of Young agripreneurs selected and completed incubation  
sessions (50% women) 
5.2. No of graduates trained at Njala for employability or self-
employment 
5.3. No of direct jobs created with at least 50% for women 
5.4. No. of indirect jobs created with at least 50% for women 
5.5. No. of youth-led agribusinesses created with at least 50% of women 
  
 
6.1. No. of Seed Out-grower Clusters supported , where same is 
established already (at least 30% women) 

0 
 

0 
0 
0 
0 
 
 

0 

1000 
 

4000 
50,000 

150,000 
50 
 
 

15 
 

Project 
monitoring 
reports/ 
supervision 
missions 

Risk: Young agripreneurs are 

unable to establish viable 

businesses on their own. 

 

Mitigation: Incubation training, 

business development, competitive 

seed grant and linkage to markets 

are provided to increase probability 

of success 

 

 

COMPONENT 3: PROJECT MANAGEMENT AND CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT 

7.Establishment of National 
Development Partner Programs Office 
 
8.Capacity Building  
 
9. Project Management 

7.1. NDPPO established and operational 
 
 
8.1. No. of technical assistance staff trained  
  
9.1. Project implemented 
     Annual Workplan & Budget developed 
     Annual Audits completed 
     M & E System developed 

0 
 
 

0 
 

0 
0 
0 
0 

1 
 
 

10 
 

1 
4 
4 
1 

Project 

monitoring 

reports/ 

supervision 

missions  
 

Risk:  Weak implementation 

capacity that affects progress of the 

project 

Mitigation:  Harmonized PFMU & 

competitive selection of experts 

with adequate experience 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

 

ACTIVITIES INPUTS 

Component 1:   Support to Enhancement of Agricultural Input Production & Distribution Systems (UA 3.9 million (46.1%)) 
i. Support to Seed Research, Development & Multiplication 
ii. Support to agricultural input testing, inspection and certification  
iii. Support to private sector led input distribution systems 
 
Component 2:   Support to Agribusiness Development (UA 3.0 million (38.1%)) 
i..ENABLE/Njala Youth Program established 
ii. Out-growers schemes supported  
 
Component 3:   Institutional Capacity Development and Project Management (UA 1.3 million (15.8%)) 
i.Capacity Building  
ii. Project M&E activities  
iii. Project planning and coordination 
iv. Project steering committee 
 

ADF Grant: UA 7.99 million  
Government/Beneficiaries ( in kind) : UA 0.53 
million 
AfDB Total Project Cost: UA 8.52 million 
(USD 11.90 million) 
 
Parallel co-financing IsDB: USD 34.12 
million 
IFAD: USD 11.8 million 



 

viii 

 

PROJECT TIMEFRAME 
 

 
 

No. 

 

ACTIVITIES 

PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION YEARS 

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 

1 Negotiations & Board Approval of Grant       

2 Signature of Grant Agreement       

3 Recruitment of Project Staff       

4 Authorization of 1st Disbursement       

5 Project Launching       

6 Project Coordination       

7 Mid-term Review of Project       

8 Completion Reports       

9 Audits       

10 Last Project Disbursement       



 

1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF MANAGEMENT TO THE BOARD OF 

DIRECTORS ON THE PROPOSED ADF GRANT TO THE REPUBLIC OF SIERRA 

LEONE FOR THE SIERRA LEONE AGRIBUSINESS AND RICE VALUE CHAIN 

SUPPORT PROJECT (SLARIS) 

 

Management hereby submits this Report and Recommendation for an ADF grant of UA7.99 million 

from the African Development Fund to the Government of Sierra Leone to finance the Sierra Leone 

Agribusiness and Rice Value Chain Support Project. 

I. STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 

1.1 Project linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives 

1.1.1 Rice is by far the most important crop in the food economy of Sierra Leone. With an average 
annual per capita consumption of about 131 kg which is one of the highest in the world, rice is 

synonymous with food and constitutes a larger portion of total food intake than any other cereal. In 

fact, in rural areas of Sierra Leone, rice provides up to 75% of total calorie intake. Sierra Leone was 

a net rice exporter in the 1970s and the country still retains its agro-ecological competitive advantage 

to satisfy domestic requirements for food and to increase incomes for smallholders. However, 

limitation to domestic production continue to exist principally as a result of unfavourable policies 

and insufficient access to (i) quality agricultural inputs (seed, fertilizer and pesticides) (ii) improved 

production technology and capabilities and (iii) affordable finance. The total area under rice 

cultivated in Sierra Leone is about 530,000 hectares produces an average of 700,000 metric tons/year 

(compared to an estimated annual milled-rice requirement of 1,600,000 metric tons), which 

corresponds to a very low yield of 1.3 tons/ha. Presently, there is a sharp decline in the incomes of 

farmers due to importation of rice which puts heavy stress on the country’s foreign exchanges (annual 

rice import bill averages about USD 250 million). Rapid population growth, coupled with the 

escalating rural-urban migration, and environmental degradation pose serious threats to food security 

in the country.  

 

1.1.2 The proposed project is well aligned with Sierra Leone’s Medium Term National 
Development Plan (MTNDP) (2019 – 2023). The MTNDP articulates agriculture as one of the 

primary drivers of economic diversification and inclusive economic development. At the sector level, 

the project is in accordance the National Strategic Agriculture Development Plan (NSADP) (2010-

2030) which is Sierra Leone’s in-country version of the Comprehensive African Agriculture 

Development Programme (CAADP). It is also consistent with the recently launched National 

Agricultural Transformation Strategy NATS (2018- 2023) which focuses on developing agricultural 

value chains, making available improved inputs (seeds, fertilizers, pesticides and machinery), 

increasing productivity and production, and establishing crops and livestock processing zones across 

the country. The Strategy prioritises four components, namely: rice self-sufficiency, livestock 

development, crop diversification and bio-diversity management. It strengthens three enablers that 

include: improvement of the policy environment, promoting women and youth in agriculture, and 

setting up of private-sector-led mechanisation. Implementation of the NATS is expected to address 

low productivity, improve linkages with industry and access to financial services and markets. The 

approach also targets urban, peri-urban and rural communities particularly women and the youth as 

well as improved institutions and infrastructure aimed at revitalising rural communities.  

 

 

1.1.3 The project is consistent with the Bank’s Country Strategy Paper (CSP) for Sierra Leone 
(2013 – 2017, extended to 2019) through its Pillar 1: Enhancing Economic Governance and 

Transparent Management of Natural Resources Revenue. During the CSP Mid-Term Review in July 

2016 it was decided to place more emphasis on sub-pillar 3 of Pillar 1 which deals with enabling 

business environment and private sector development, in order to enhance pay-off in deepening the 



 

2 

 

inclusive growth agenda of the strategy. Pillar 1 was specifically re-focused to emphasize private 

sector development, agribusiness and agro-processing.  The project is well aligned to sub-pillar 3 of 

pillar I of the strategy. 

1.2 Rationale for Fund’s involvement 

1.2.1 The agriculture sector in Sierra Leone is important for employment (70% of the national 

labour force), income (more than 40% of GDP) and as a source of food and nutrition. The climate 

and ecological conditions are highly favourable for agriculture. Rice is the single most important 

commodity in Sierra Leonean agriculture mainly because it is the staple food of the local diet. Nearly 

85% of Sierra Leonean farmers grow rice and it is also dominant in terms of cultivated area, volume 

produced and contribution to farm income. More than 5.4 million hectares of arable bolilands, 

mangroves, inland valley swamps, and riverine grasslands are suitable for growing rice and other 

crops. Yet only 10% of these fertile, diverse lowlands are under cultivation. Rice farming is 

dominated by smallholder farmers with average land holdings of 0.5-2.0 hectares and a few medium 

to large scale producers. 

1.2.2 Sierra Leone was self-sufficient in rice production in the 1950s and even exported rice within 

the Mano River Union region in the 1970s. However the onset of the civil war in the 1980s dealt a 

heavy blow to all sectors of the economy. In the case of agriculture, production was seriously 

undermined, agricultural extension services were handicapped and distribution of food disrupted by 

insecurity and lack of mobility resulting in severe food shortages. With the exception of the decline 

caused by the outbreak of the Ebola Virus Epidemic in 2014/2015, the Sierra Leonean economy has 

exhibited strong post-civil war recovery. Yet despite these gains in the agriculture sector continue to 

lag in performance. Over the years Sierra Leone unable to meet local demand through domestic 

production has become a net importer of food and major importer of rice, wheat flour, sugar and 

poultry. Importation of these four commodities consumes an average of $ 700 million of the country’s 

foreign exchange annually. Rice imports alone account for 14.3% and has been on the increase over 

the past decade. Current domestic rice output is 700,000 metric tons compared to total domestic 

demand of 1,600,000 metric tons (approximately 42.9% rice self-sufficiency). The national demand 

for rice is expected to increase to an estimated 2,130,000 metric tons by 2025. Locally produced rice 

is not only more nutritious but also attracts a 15% to 20% premium over comparable grades of 

imported rice. Rising population and domestic demand for local rice presents a viable opportunity 

for investment in domestic rice production. 

1.2.3 Three critical constraints to on-farm productivity in Sierra Leone were identified as access to 

inputs including finance, improved technologies and access to markets. The supply of improved seeds 

fertilizer, agrochemicals and animal feeds is below current demand and far below potential demand. 

According to data collected in the 2015 Comprehensive Food Security and Vulnerability Assessment, 

the most commonly constraint cited by farmers to increasing agricultural production was the 

unavailability of improved seeds. The continuous involvement of Government in the production, 

procurement and distribution of seeds, fertilizers and other agro-inputs to the farmers at non-

competitive market prices is a major disincentive to private sector involvement in agricultural 

transformation that ought to be government-enabled and private sector-led. It is estimated that only 

5% of farmers in Sierra Leone have access to improved seeds varieties. Furthermore, agricultural 

input distribution systems are weak with a ratio of 1 agro-dealer for every 17,033 agricultural 

households in Sierra Leone. Addressing these constraints will improve production and productivity, 

and the latter will lead to better incentives for producing improved food availability, employment 

(particularly for the youth and women) and higher household incomes. 

1.2.4 With the recent volatility in iron prices, the need to diversify the economic base of Sierra 

Leone becomes ever more compelling. Sustainable reductions in poverty will depend on key sectors, 

particularly agriculture, which employs the majority of the population, especially in rural areas. The 



 

3 

 

renewed focus will be to transform the largely subsistence low-input, low-output agriculture into a 

more productive and commercialized system capable of creating gainful employment as a basis for 

broad-based poverty reduction. The project will promote agricultural transformation by supporting 

the emergence of competitive agribusinesses in the agricultural input supply sector.  It will incite the 

development of a private sector driven agricultural input (seeds, fertilizer and pesticides) production 

and distribution which is key to ensuring the timely availability of high-quality of improved, 

appropriate products at affordable prices for commercial and smallholder farmers in Sierra Leone. 

Furthermore, the project will provide support to national institutions and policymakers to create and 

maintain enabling environments that will accelerate the development of competitive formal input 

systems to adequately farmers. 

 

1.2.5 Rice has been selected as the initial crop that this project will focus on because there is strong 

domestic demand for it along with consumer preference. While maize will be the secondary crop due 

its market potential and linkage to the livestock and fisheries industries through its use in the 

production of animal feed.  The project will therefore promote inclusive economic development by 

targeting areas where rice and maize farming is already being practiced but has not been taken to its 

full economic and business potentials. To this end, the project will serve as a bridge between the 

existing major players and medium to small scale producers through supporting out-growers scheme 

with technical assistance. The project seeks to ensure socio economic empowerment, increase the 

involvement of both genders in the advancement of the agribusiness sector in Sierra Leone; create 

conditions for equitable access by men and women to project resources and increase decision-making 

for women along the agricultural value chain. Project interventions will thus deliberately target 

women and youth as beneficiaries and provide opportunities to increasing household income levels. 

 

1.2.6 The project activities are closely aligned to the Bank’s Country Strategy Paper as it will 

induce a great level of private sector participation in the sector’s development and overall economy 

at large. Furthermore, the project is consistent with the Bank Group’s policies and strategies including 

the Ten Year Strategy (2013-22) and the High Five Priority Areas particularly Feed Africa, and 

Improve the Quality of Life of Africans. It supports the Bank’s Strategies for African Agricultural 

Transformation (2016-2025) and Jobs for Youth in Africa (2016-2025) as well as the Strategy for 

Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience in Africa (2014-2019). The project is also firmly rooted 

in the Bank’s main agriculture flagship programs focused improving agricultural productivity 

through technology dissemination and scaling (TAAT, TAAT-S and PHAP), enhancing resilience to 

climate change through climate-smart agriculture and promoting youth empowerment (ENABLE 

Youth). Finally, the proposed project is line with the Bank’s Regional Integration Strategy 

Framework 2018-2025 (Pillar 2: Trade and Investment, which also includes the “Agricultural 

Transformation”) and the CCAP of the Bank for promoting climate-resilient agriculture. 

1.3 Donor Coordination 

1.3.1 Sierra Leone continues to be highly dependent on external development assistance. The Bank 

engages in dialogue with Development Partners under the guidance of the aid effectiveness principles 

embodied in the Paris Declaration, Accra Agenda for Action and Sustainable Development Goal No. 

17 - strengthen the means of implementation and revitalize the global partnership for sustainable 

development. The main DPs active in the agriculture sector include the AfDB, the World Bank (WB), 

the IsDB, the IFAD, the FAO and WFP. The Presidential Taskforce on Agriculture chaired by the 

President of the Republic of Sierra Leone and comprised of the Minister of Agriculture and Forestry, 

other relevant Ministers and heads of DPs active in the agricultural sector is the main decision-

making body and coordination mechanism in the sector. In addition, an Agriculture Advisory Group, 

comprising DPs, private sector and others, provides technical support to program implementation. 

The Bank is an active participant in the DP Group and other diverse micro and thematic advisory 

groups including the National Rice Working Group. 

 



 

4 

 

1.3.2 This project is the outcome of extensive consultations with DPs in the agricultural sector. It 

benefits from parallel co-financing from the IsDB (USD 34.12 million) and IFAD (USD 11.8 

million). The SLARiS project will focus on optimizing the agricultural input supply system which 

would feed into the IsDB financed Rice Value Chain Development Project (RVCDP) and the IFAD 

financed Agricultural Value Chain Development Project (AVDP) both of which target upstream 

production and value addition. 

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
 

2.1 Project Components 
2.1.1 The overall goal of the project is to stimulate a viable upstream agribusiness sector in Sierra 

Leone in order to promote economic diversification, food security, sustainable employment 

opportunities and improved livelihoods.  The specific project objective is to transform the agricultural 

input supply sub-sector as a viable and inclusive business opportunity, in order to promote enhanced 

production and productivity required to improve the livelihoods of beneficiaries along priority value 

chains (rice and maize).  
 

2.1.2 This objective would be achieved through: a) support and promotion of reliable access to 

quality input markets (seeds, fertilizers and pesticides) through liberalisation, adequate regulation 

and certification of the sub-sector sector which in turn is expected to facilitate the entry of new actors 

and expansion of business opportunities by the existing players; b) creation of an enabling 

environment for private sector led agribusiness growth upstream in the value chain through support 

to the emergence and growth of private seed producers and agri-input (seeds, fertilizers and 

pesticides) agro-dealers;  c) empowering young men and women to engage in the agriculture sector; 

d) supporting growth in farmer efficiency, productivity and income through providing improved 

technologies, climate-smart farming techniques, innovations and good agricultural practices; and e) 

increasing reliable output market through strengthening outgrower farming models. 
 

2.1.3 The project consists of the following components: (1) Support to Enhancement of 

Agricultural Input Production & Distribution Systems; (2) Support to Agribusiness Development; 

and (3) Project Management and Institutional Capacity Development. 
 

Table 2.1 Description of Project Components  
 

Notes:  i. Unless stated otherwise, for each activity, the Project is targeting at least 50% of the beneficiaries will be women.  

ii.Details of the activities are provided in Project Appraisal Report Volume II Technical Annex 
 

No. Components Cost (UA, 

Million),% 

Allocation 

Sub-Components Description 

1. Support to 

Enhancement 

of Agricultural 

Input 

Production & 

Distribution 

Systems 

 

 

 

UA 3.94 

million 

(46.1%) 

Sub-component 1.1: Support to Research, Development & Seed Multiplication: 

(i) Support to production of improved early generation (breeder and foundation) seeds 

by SLARI in collaboration with AfricaRice. This will include provision of equipment 

(mechanical seedling transplanters, threshers, winnowers, reapers, power tillers); (ii) 

Support to the production and distribution of certified seeds through rehabilitation and 

equipping of two (2) Seed Multiplication Program (SMP) of seed multiplication 

centres in Kobia and Kenema. This will include provision of equipment (mechanical 

seedling transplanters, threshers, winnowers, reapers, power tillers, rice mills); (iii) 

Rehabilitation of two (2) seed varietal maintenance centres; (iv) support to 

SLARI/Njala nutrition promotion program / MAF Women in Agriculture and Nutrition 

to expand development and dissemination of nutritious food recipes (v) Training of 

lead farmers and technicians on improved farming techniques; & technologies; and 

(vi) Trainings of women farmer associations on improved farming and marketing 

techniques.  

Sub-component 1.2: Support to testing, inspection and certification: 

(i)Support to operationalisation of Sierra Leone Seed Certification Agency (SLESCA) 

through provision of IT equipment, field and laboratory equipment and facilities; (ii) 

Development/ rehabilitation of the agricultural input (seed, fertilizer & pesticides) 

testing and certification laboratory; (iii) capacity building of seed inspectors, seed 



 

5 

 

analysts and seed samplers; (iv) registration of seed industry actors; and (v) training 

and capacity development. 

Sub-component 1.3: Support to private sector led input distribution systems: 

(i) Support to the agro-dealer network: register, train, and accredit agro-dealers; (ii) 

Establishment of an e-voucher subsidy system; and (iii) Training of agro-dealers on 

supply management and related skills. 

2. Support to 

Agribusiness 

Development 

UA 3.24 

million 

(38.1%) 

Sub-component 2.1 ENABLE/Njala Youth Empowerment Program: 

This involves (i) Recruitment of an independent Business Development Expert to fine-

tune the ENABLE/Njala Youth Program based on international best practice and 

market demand; (ii) Establishment/construction of Songhai model based integrated 

farm ecosystem production units (comprising of rice, maize, livestock, aquaculture, 

horticulture production units as well as agro-processing centres) within the Njala 

University Campus; (iii) Intensive incubation and internship (skills and training) of 6 

months for youth that are passionate and highly committed to running an agribusiness 

(200 youth per annum-of which 50% women); (iv) Development of business plans, 

grant and loan applications for funding; (v) Provision of start-up capital  to selected 

agripreneurs on a competitive basis; (vi) Development of linkages to markets and off-

taker arrangements for youth run agribusinesses; (vii) Support to establishment of 

Agrifood Research and Innovation Centre by upgrade facilities for agricultural 

research and training; (viii) Establishment of Engineering, Mechanization and 

Machinery Maintenance Facility which will assist rapid system design and 

prototyping, fabrication of machines and systems component and provide farm 

mechanisation support to the NATS program; and (ix) Development of horticulture 

industry assessment and business plan. 

Sub-component 2.2: Support to Farmer Outgrowers Systems: 

(i) Setting up the legal and regulatory framework for outgrower schemes linking farmer 

cooperatives supported by this project to supply  Government programs, the SMP, DP 

funded projects (specifically the IsDB RVCDP and the IFAD AVCDP amongst others) 

and private sector agribusinesses; (ii) Provision of equipment (power tillers, threshers, 

winnowers) to farmers participating in seed and grain outgrower scheme under leasing 

arrangements; (iii) Support to extension services & training on improved 

farming/production techniques; (iv) Development of linkages to markets and off-taker 

arrangements for maize farmers with animal feed companies etc.; (v) Training of 

farmers and farmer associations on contract farming; and (vi) Promotion of ICT for 

Agriculture.  

3. Project 

Management 

and 

Institutional 

Capacity 

Building 

UA 1.34 

million 

(1.3%) 

Sub-component 3.1: Institutional Capacity Building: 

(i) Training/Capacity building of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) other 

key stakeholders particularly the direct beneficiaries; (ii) Support to MAF in setting up 

a National Development Partners Program Coordination Office (NDPPCO) through 

the provision of office, IT equipment and training; (iii) The project will support the 

cost of NDPPCO Coordinator and a Financial Management Adviser to ensure 

coordination, harmonisation and fiduciary management of all agriculture DP funded 

projects; and (iv) Development of an up-to-date result-Based monitoring and 

evaluation framework which will support the generation, collection, analysis and 

utilization of data (outputs and outcomes) of all agriculture sector DP funded projects. 

Sub-component 3.2: Project Management: 

The project management team will include: (i) Project Manager, Internationally 

recognised Seed Expert, Agribusiness Specialist, Environmental/Social/Gender 

Expert, M&E Specialist, Procurement Specialist and an Accountant. The Project 

Manager and the Fiduciary Team would be nationally advertised and recruitment done 

on a competitive basis, while the other experts will be seconded by the Ministry of 

Agriculture and Forestry. The team will report to the Permanent Secretary through the 

Chief Agriculture Officer in the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry and would be 

charged with the management and coordination of the Project’s activities. All team 

members will be subject to annual performance-based contracts; and (ii) The project 

will also fund the necessary IT and office equipment as well as field vehicles to 

facilitate supervision and coordination activities. 

Total UA 8.52 

million 

 

 



 

6 

 

2.2 Technical solutions retained and other alternatives explored  

2.2.1 The technical solutions which were retained comprises of a multipronged approach based on 

government creating an enabling environment to drive domestic private sector production and 

distribution of agricultural input supply for farmers in order to increase production and productivity 

in the targeted value chains. In addition, the youth empowerment scheme under the project 

encapsulates technical training as well as practical skills in agriculture and agribusiness activities. 

Two alternatives to the investment approach were considered and rejected are as follows: 
 

Table 2.2: Project Alternatives Considered and Reasons for Rejection 

 

2.3 Project Type 

2.3.1 This intervention is designed in the form of a stand-alone Investment Project with the main 

aim of up-scaling production and productivity and reducing imports of rice and maize through 

provision of agribusiness development, technical assistance and capacity building. 

2.4 Project cost and financing arrangements  

2.4.1 Project Costs: The total cost of the project is estimated at UA 8.52 million (USD 11.93 

million), net of taxes and customs duties, and based on 2019 prices, comprising  36.29% of the total 

cost in foreign cost, and 63.71 % in local costs. The project cost comprises an ADF grant of UA 7.99 

million (USD 11.19 million) (93.8 %) and GoSL in-kind contribution of UA 0.53 million (USD 0.74 

million) (6.2%). This cost is inclusive of physical and price contingencies estimated at average rates 

of 6% and 7% respectively. The price contingencies were estimated on the basis of actual and 

projected levels of local and foreign inflation rates of about 5.5% and 2.2% per annum, respectively. 

The physical contingencies are estimated from 0 to 15%. The ADF grant contribution to the project 

cost exceeds the threshold of 90% stipulated by the Policy on Expenditures Eligible for Bank Group 
Financing. This is justified by evident commitment to the project exhibited by the GOSL which is a 

transition state confronted with budget constraints in the face of significant development challenges.  

A summary of the project cost estimates by components and expenditure accounts is shown in Tables 

2.3, 2.4, 2.5 and 2.6 below, while details are provided in the Technical Annexes – Volume II of the 

appraisal report. 
  

Alternative name Brief description Reasons for rejection 

Alternative 1 Support the development of 

special agro-industrial 

processing zones in Sierra Leone  

Currently the level of agricultural productivity and 

production of priority crops is too low to sustain a 

viable SAPZ. This could be considered for future 

projects. 

 

Alternative 2 Focus AfDB financing on 

infrastructure development of 

feeder roads in the same area at 

the IsDB project 

Better value for money would be derived from 

available AfDB allocation by financing the 

establishment of a viable private sector led 

agricultural input supply system, agribusiness 

enhancement and youth development compared to 

a purely infrastructure investment in feeder roads. 

 



 

7 

 

Table 2.3: Estimated Summary Project Costs by Component 

 

PROJECT COMPONENTS 
(USD '000) (UA '000) 

% 
F.
E 

% 
B.
C. Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total 

A. SUPPORT TO AGRICULTURAL INPUT 
PRODUCTION & DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS 1,685.10 3,339.30 5,024.40 1,203.64 2,385.21 3,588.86 66 48 

Research, Development and Multiplication 410.15 1,996.45 2,406.60 292.96 1,426.04 1,719.00 83 23 

Seed Testing, Inspection and Certification 406.45 1,239.35 1,645.80 290.32 885.25 1,175.57 75 16 

Agricultural Input Distribution Systems 868.50 103.50 972.00 620.36 73.93 694.29 11 9 

B. SUPPORT TO AGRIBUSINESS 
DEVELOPMENT 1,202.51 2,602.05 3,804.57 858.94 1,858.61 2,717.55 68 36 

ENABLE NJALA Youth Empowerment Program 869.33 2,050.36 2,919.69 620.95 1,464.54 2,085.49 70 28 

Farmer Outgrowers Scheme 333.18 551.70 884.88 237.99 394.07 632.06 62 8 

C. INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY BUILDING AND 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT 837.70 841.90 1,679.60 598.36 601.36 1,199.71 50 16 

Institutional Capacity Building 197.60 211.20 408.80 141.14 150.86 292.00 52 4 

Project Management 640.10 630.70 1,270.80 457.21 450.50 907.71 50 12 

Total BASELINE COSTS 3,725.31 6,783.25 
10,508.5

7 2,660.94 4,845.18 7,506.12 65 
10
0 

Physical Contingencies 171.13 440.36 611.49 122.24 314.54 436.78 72 6 

Price Contingencies 432.04 375.90 807.95 308.60 268.50 577.10 47 8 

Total PROJECT COSTS 4,328.49 7,599.52 
11,928.0

0 3,091.78 5,428.23 8,520.00 64 
11
4 

 

 

Table 2.4: Estimated Summary Project Costs by Categories of Expenditures 

 

CATEGORY OF EXPENDITURE 
(USD '000) (UA '000) 

% 
F.E. 

% 
B.C. Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total 

 I. Investment Costs 3,647.76 6,689.80 10,337.57 2,605.54 4,778.43 7,383.98 65 98 

A. WORKS 706.25 2,118.75 2,825.00 504.46 1,513.39 2,017.86 75 27 

B. GOODS 480.00 1,830.00 2,310.00 342.86 1,307.14 1,650.00 79 22 

1. Vehicles 146.25 828.75 975.00 104.46 591.96 696.43 85 9 

2. Equipment & Materials 333.75 1,001.25 1,335.00 238.39 715.18 953.57 75 13 

Equipment 327.63 982.88 1,310.50 234.02 702.05 936.07 75 12 

Furniture 6.13 18.38 24.50 4.38 13.13 17.50 75 - 

C. SERVICES 2,381.51 2,621.05 5,002.57 1,701.08 1,872.18 3,573.26 52 48 

Training, Sensitization, Workshops, Seminars, etc. 506.25 618.75 1,125.00 361.61 441.96 803.57 55 11 

Technical Assistance & Consultancies 95.25 1,125.75 1,221.00 68.04 804.11 872.14 92 12 

Contractual Services 1,712.51 794.05 2,506.57 1,223.22 567.18 1,790.40 32 24 

Audit 67.50 82.50 150.00 48.21 58.93 107.14 55 1 

D. MISCELLANOUS 80.00 120.00 200.00 57.14 85.71 142.86 60 2 

II. Recurrent Costs 77.55 93.45 171.00 55.39 66.75 122.14 55 2 

B. VEHICLES OPERATION & MAINTENANCE 19.80 46.20 66.00 14.14 33.00 47.14 70 1 

C. GENERAL OPERATING CHARGES 57.75 47.25 105.00 41.25 33.75 75.00 45 1 

Total BASELINE COSTS 3,725.31 6,783.25 10,508.57 2,660.94 4,845.18 7,506.12 65 100 

Physical Contingencies 171.13 440.36 611.49 122.24 314.54 436.78 72 6 

Price Contingencies 432.04 375.90 807.95 308.60 268.50 577.10 47 8 

Total PROJECT COSTS 4,328.49 7,599.52 11,928.00 3,091.78 5,428.23 8,520.00 64 114 

 

  



 

8 

 

Table 2.5: Expenditure Schedule by Year (in ‘000 UA) 

PROJECT COMPONENTS 
Totals Including Contingencies (UA '000) 

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 Total 

A. SUPPORT TO AGRICULTURAL INPUT PRODUCTION 
& DISTRIBUTION SYSTEMS 775.20 1,284.93 729.96 588.86 564.57 3,943.51 

Research, Development and Multiplication 256.57 736.83 481.97 208.89 206.09 1,890.35 

Seed Testing, Inspection and Certification 386.49 414.90 105.56 214.91 212.95 1,334.81 

Agricultural Input Distribution Systems 132.14 133.19 142.43 165.06 145.53 718.35 

B. SUPPORT TO AGRIBUSINESS DEVELOPMENT 167.87 817.24 918.77 686.99 643.02 3,233.90 

ENABLE NJALA Youth Empowerment Program 145.22 583.59 657.70 580.21 549.92 2,516.63 

Farmer Outgrowers Scheme 22.65 233.66 261.08 106.79 93.09 717.27 

C. INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY BUILDING AND PROJECT 
MANAGEMENT 366.37 224.14 239.51 255.83 256.74 1,342.59 

Institutional Capacity Building 109.71 49.41 57.66 53.66 55.86 326.30 

Project Management 256.67 174.73 181.85 202.17 200.88 1,016.29 

Total PROJECT COSTS 1,309.45 2,326.31 1,888.24 1,531.68 1,464.33 8,520.00 

 

2.4.2 Project Financing Arrangement:  
 

Table 2.6: Financing Plan of the project (UA ‘000) 
 

FINANCING SOURCE 

  
(UA '000) 

  % 

Foreign Local Total 

 ADB Grant 5,428.23 2,561.78 7,990.00 93.8 

 Government of Sierra Leone 0.00 530.00 530.00 6.2 

Total 5,428.23 3,091.78 8,520.00 100.0 

 

 

2.5 Project’s target area and population  

2.5.1 Project Areas: The project interventions will be implemented in the high agricultural 

production potential zones of Kobia and Rokupr (Kambia), Kenema (Kenema) and Njala (Moyamba) 

Districts. These areas were selected following initial technical recommendations and also after the 

stakeholder consultations based on the criteria of: (i) potential for successful rice and maize 

production; (ii) market proximity; (iii) population and poverty incidence; and (iv)ability to build 

synergies with parallel co-financed investments of other development partners particularly the IsDB 

and IFAD. 

 

2.5.2 Project Beneficiaries: The estimated number of direct beneficiaries is about 32,000 farmers 

in the high potential targeted regions/zones. In addition, 1000 young agri-preneurs and 4000 young 

graduates (disaggregated by age and gender) will benefit from the incubation program and the new 

agribusiness training curriculum respectively. The project will create approximately 50,000 direct 

jobs and improve the lives of 150,000 indirect beneficiaries. 

2.6 Participatory process for project identification, design and implementation 

2.6.1 The Project was conceived following GoSL request to the AfDB to support a Rice Value 

Chain Development Project in 2018. On the strength of this formal request, the Bank fielded a project 

identification mission between 21 and 26 September 2018, followed subsequently by a preparation 

mission from 21 to 30 January 2019. An appraisal mission was mounted between 18 and 29 March 

2019 to fine-tune the project. The proposed project is the result of wide and detailed consultations 

with the various stakeholders including the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Ministry of Trade 

and Industry, Ministry of Youth, National Youth Commission, Ministry of Social Welfare, Gender 



 

9 

 

and Children’s Affairs, Ministry of Technical and Higher Education, Sierra Leone Agricultural 

Research Institute, Sierra Leone Seed Certification Agency, the Seed Multiplication Program, private 

sector actors including seed companies, animal feed millers, the Sierra Leone Chamber for 

Agribusiness Development, the Environmental Protection Agency, various Commercial Banks, and 

wide range of Development Partners (IFAD, IsDB, FAO, EU, WFP and WB). Apart from bilateral 

and focus-group meetings, a stakeholder consultative workshop which brought together 

representatives of the various stakeholders of the project was also organised during the appraisal 

mission. 

2.6.2 In effect, the project design and its listed activities were the outcome of broad-based 

consultations (meetings, discussions and workshops) with all the stakeholders who expressed their 

views on what the project should aimed at achieving. This participatory and consultative process 

clearly identified lack of quality inputs (particularly seeds), technologies and finance as three key 

challenges to the development of the agriculture sector. The components of the project were therefore 

designed to address the problems identified during consultations. The participatory process will 
continue throughout program implementation to ensure ownership and sustainability. 

2.7 Bank Group experience, lessons reflected in project design  

2.7.1 The Bank’s ongoing portfolio comprised a total of 18 operations, with a total commitment of 

UA 129.49 million (Annex 1). In terms of sector distribution, infrastructure accounts for 89.12% of 

the total portfolio, of which energy, transport, water and sanitation account for 45.14%, 20.48% and 

34.38% respectively. Although the Bank was previously active in the agriculture sector having 

funded 8 operations and studies since inception, there is currently no active agriculture project in the 

portfolio. The 2018 Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) assessed the overall performance 

of the portfolio as satisfactory, with a rating of 2.96 on a scale from 1 to 4. Implementation progress 

(IP) was rated 2.93, while average development objective (DO) was rated 3.0 indicating that the 

ongoing operations have high likelihood of meeting their development objectives. There is no project 

at risk. The overall supervision rating is Non-PP/Non-PPP. The Country Policy and Institutional 

Assessment (CPIA) rating is 3.2 for 2014 (3rd Quintile). There is no Project Completion Report (PCR) 

backlog for closed Projects. Nevertheless, the CPPR highlighted challenges in existing project 

implementation including procurement, contract and financial management and results monitoring 

and evaluation. The CPPR recommended that the Bank should continue improving portfolio quality 

ensuring higher quality at entry of project, providing regular fiduciary clinics to project management 

agencies and increasing the use of country systems where possible.  

 

2.7.2 The Bank has accumulated notable experience in the implementation of agriculture sector 

projects in Sierra Leone. Although the last agriculture project closed in 2013, previous agricultural 

projects funded by the Bank include the Torma Bum Rice Development Project, the Moyamba 

Integrated Rural Development Project, the Northern Integrated Agricultural Development Project, 

the Artisanal Fisheries Development Project, the NERICA Rice Dissemination Project and the 

Agricultural Sector Rehabilitation Project. The Bank has gained useful experiences from its on-going 

and previous operations across various sectors in the country. The lessons garnered from these design 

and implementation experiences as well as the CPPR have been duly incorporated into this project. 
 

  



 

10 

 

Table 2.7: Lessons Learnt and reflected in project design 

 

No Lesson Learnt Actions Incorporated in the Project 

Design  
 

1 Long duration of project to attain 

effectiveness and first disbursement 

conditions 

Normal Bank and easy to meet conditions. 

No extra/special conditions included 

2 Cumbersome procurement procedures The use of country procurement systems 

which is conversant by most Procurement 

Officers 

3 Low capacity of project staff in the Bank’s 

Procedures 

Recruit competent staff and Technical 

Assistance 

2.8 Key performance indicators  

2.8.1. The project’s key performance indicators to be measured throughout the project life are 

presented in the Results Based Logical Framework. The M&E expert of the PMU will carry out 

internal project monitoring and evaluation in collaboration with MAF to monitor performance. 

Regular implementation progress will be measured through Quarterly Progress Reports, bi-annual 

Bank supervision missions (by Headquarters and CoSL), and annual technical and financial audits. 

The main indicators defined for monitoring the program outputs, outcomes and impact include: (i) 

poverty reduction; (ii) improved incomes; (iii) reduction in food imports; (iv) improvement in seed 

quantity and quality; (v) number of young men and women agripreneurs trained; (vi) number of youth 

and women led agribusinesses established; (vii) improvement in market linkages; and (viii) number 

of beneficiaries (males and females) trained. 

 

Various supervision missions and periodic progress reports will systematically render an account on 

the achievement level of the indicators. These will be regularly presented to decision and policy 

makers to guide project mid-term review and to facilitate project management after completion. 

III - PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1 Economic and financial performance  

3.1.1 A financial assessment of the project was undertaken using activity models, and on the basis 

of prevailing market prices. The key assumptions underlying the analyses include: (i) Additional 

quantity of foundation seeds (rice- 9500 metric tons and 2600 metric tons maize) will be produced at 

full capacity of the project; (ii) production of certified improved seed varieties; (iii) a 10-year time 

period was used to measure the incremental benefits from the project. Farm gate prices were used in 

estimating the total revenue from the project; (iv) the opportunity cost of capital (OCC) used for 

discounting future benefits was estimated to be 12%. For the economic analysis; (v) hired labour 

value was adjusted by a conversion factor of 0.75. These analyses were carried-out with financial 

and economic costs generated using Costab 32. Summary of financial and economic analysis is in 

Annex VII and further elaborated in Annex B6 in Volume II of the appraisal report. 

 

3.1.2 On the basis of the above-captured assumptions, the project is expected to generate the 

following benefits: (i) Increase rice production and productivity resulting in total annual rice of 

1,600,000 metric tons; (ii) Increase maize production and productivity resulting in total annual rice; 

of 150,000 metric tons; (iii) improve market linkage and value chain for rice and maize production; 

(iv) improve average household income of beneficiaries to USD 800; and (v) provide employment 

for 20,000 farmers and entrepreneurs. 

 

 
 



 

11 

 

Table C.1: Key economic and financial figures 

 
FIRR, NPV (base case) 19%         USD  12,105,388.14 

EIRR (base case) 20%         USD  16,325,400.25 

NB: detailed calculations are available in Annex B6 

 

 

3.1.3 Financial analysis: Based on the above assumptions, the financial analysis generated Net 

Present Value (NPV) of USD 12,105,388.14 and internal rate of return (IRR) of 19%, as captured in 

the technical annexes (B6). Based on the above analysis, the project is deemed financially feasible. 

The FIRR of 19% is higher than the opportunity cost of capital (12%). 

 

3.1.4 Economic analysis: The economic analysis was conducted using the same approach as the 

financial analysis, on the basis of shadow prices (prices in conditions of the efficient market 

operation) of tradable goods and total cost of project. In addition, other indirect benefits were also 

expected, such as, easy access to markets through market linkages; provision of agro-service centre, 

reliable market information system and business developments from the incubation trainings. 

However, these additional benefits were difficult to value in monetary terms due to the limited scope 

of this report, hence they could not be adequately captured in the analysis. In these conditions, the 

economic analysis yielded an NPV of USD 16,325,400.25 and EIRR of 20% as captured in the 

technical annexes. 

 

3.1.5 Sensitivity Analysis: The results of the sensitivity analysis indicate that with 5%, 10% and 

15% decrease in production the FIRR decreases to 18%, 17% and 16% respectively. The same 

exercise was carried out for successive decrease in prices by 5, 10, and 20% with a combination of 

yield decline. A decrease in output prices by 20% (switching values) would have to occur before the 

project’s economic benefits reduces to break-even point at 12%, the opportunity cost of capital. A 

combined 10% decrease in output price and 15% decrease in output will break-even at 12%, the 

opportunity cost of capital. 

3.2 Environmental and Social Impacts  

3.2.1 Environment: Based on the proposed project scope the environmental and social (E&S) 

classification is Category 2 according to the African Development Bank’s Environmental and Social 

Assessment Procedures (ESAP). There are parallel co-financed investments from the Islamic 

Development Bank, the World Bank and IFAD and these donors had earlier prepared Environmental 

and Social Management Framework, and Pest Management Plan for the project. These documents 

were reviewed and found to have followed the African Development Bank Environmental and Social 

Assessment Procedures (ESAP). Hence these safeguards documents were adopted and their 

Executive Summaries disclosed on the Bank’s website on 22nd May 2019.  

 

3.2.2 The classification and attendant requirement is commensurate with the project classification 

stipulated by the Sierra Leone Environmental Protection Regulations. The principal objectives of 

conducting this environmental and social assessment and planning was to ensure that the project 

integrates mechanisms to reduce environmental impacts along the entire value chain, from 

production, marketing to product value addition/manufacture, usage and disposal.  

 

3.2.3  Environmental and Social Management Framework indicate that although the project will 

have some site specific negative impacts, it is also posed to have numerous positive impacts among 

them, notably: (i) improved production and competitiveness of selected agriculture commodities that 

will contribute to increased income opportunities for value chain actors, and support the local 

economy of the provinces; (ii)  reduced food imports; (iii) improved agronomic practices and 

technologies for rice and maize improved varieties that are adapted to the local conditions; (iv)  

improved agricultural production, productivity and market linkages that will foster job creation along 



 

12 

 

the value chains (improve quality and quantities of seeds; (v) improved incomes for women and men;  

(vi) increased  number of private sector input producers and distributors; (vii) increased training of 

Youth (disaggregated by gender); (ix) established youth-led agribusinesses ; and (x) improved market 

linkages. 

 

 3.2.4 The negative impacts will stem from a number of rehabilitation activities in the infrastructure 

development and value chain components of the project. The potential negative impacts of the project 

include those associated with the rehabilitation and equipping of two Seed Multiplication Centers, 

agriculture production and value chain activities. Rehabilitation activities may result in; (i) noise, 

vibration and emissions from operation of machinery that may impair air quality and induce health 

implications; (ii) generation of wastes (including rehabilitation waste and construction wastes); (iii) 

occupational health and safety of the rehabilitation crew. During operation phase, agriculture 

activities of value chain actors may lead to: (i) increased use of agrochemicals including pesticides 

and fertilizers, which may contribute to soil and water (surface and groundwater) contamination, and 

increase health-risks of people exposed to pesticides; and (ii) waste and effluents from processing 

and marketing facilities. These impacts are site specific and can be readily managed with the 

application of well-defined measures elaborated in the detailed site specific ESMPs. Some of the 

mitigation measures to be implemented include: (i) refilling the exposed or excavated soil soon after 

completion of works and avoiding or minimizing compaction of soils; and (ii) capacity building of 

value chain actors to promote good agriculture practices, improved agriculture technologies such as 

integrated soil fertility management (ISFM), integrated pest management (IPM) and sustainable land 

and water management practices.  

 

3.2.5 Climate Change: Agriculture production in Sierra Leone is vulnerable to the impacts of 

climate variability and change. Drought and floods are increasing in frequency and intensity, while 

average temperatures during the growing season are rising. Crop failures, reduction in productivity 

and outbreaks of pest and diseases are exacerbated by extreme climatic events. Cognizant of the 

national commitment to combat climate change, the project is being prepared taking into 

consideration the various National Strategies, Plans and Institutions relevant to Climate Change 

Overall, the project will facilitate climate resilience along the selected value chains by promoting 

climate smart agriculture and improved agriculture technologies. 

 

3.2.6 Gender: Women make up more than half of Sierra Leone’s agricultural labor force yet they 

are under-represented in land ownership and income. Discussions during the appraisal mission 

identified four major constraints that limit women’s productivity (as compared to men) and their full 

inclusion in the domestic agricultural economy namely: lack of access to assets, lack of access to 

financing, limited training and time constraints. To alleviate these constraints, the project will seek 

to: (i) increase the number of female entrepreneurs in agribusiness by providing training and 

improving access to financing; (ii) increase income by improving productivity and training women 

in core business skills; (iii) increase access to niche markets by marketing products from women-led 

value chains; and (iv) reduce women time constraints by providing them with improved technologies 

and adequate agro processing equipment’s and trainings.  

 

3.2.7 Five actions and interventions will foster these expected results: trainings and sensitization 

campaigns, financing, enhancing market links, strengthening women’s business groups and 

increasing their access to farm inputs. To implement these actions and monitor them efficiently, the 

Project Management Team will include a Youth and Gender expert to work closely with the Gender 

in agriculture and Nutrition Unit of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry as well as the Ministry 

of Social welfare, Gender and Children’s Affairs. Based on the above expected outcome, activities 

and strategy, the project is classified as Category 2, in accordance with the Bank’s Gender Marker 

System. 

 



 

13 

 

3.2.8 Human Capital, Youth Employment and Jobs: The rapidly growing youth population and 

youth unemployment was a major root cause of the outbreak of civil conflict. According to the 

National Youth Commission of Sierra Leone, the problem of youth unemployment is very complex 

as there are three categories of unemployed youth: uneducated, semi-skilled, and educated youth. 

Approximately 60% of youth are underemployed or unemployed and an estimated 800,000 youth 

today are actively searching for employment. Furthermore, illiteracy remains a persistent challenge 

and youth that lack the skills and education find it extremely difficult to compete for the limited jobs 

available. The main reasons for this high level of unemployment are lack of financial or other 

resources to start businesses, family responsibilities and the lack of skill requirements or experience. 

This frequently causes feelings of hopelessness and despair among young people pushing them to 

migrate from rural to urban areas .As young people move to the urban areas in search of better 

opportunities, urban migration is exerting more pressure on the limited infrastructure. The need to 

address youth unemployment and its underlying causes cannot be over-emphasized, given that large 

numbers of unemployed youths are a potential source of insecurity in view of their vulnerability to 

recruitment into criminal and violent activities. Youth unemployment in Sierra Leone has been 

recognized as a potential trigger for social instability, the prolonged state of underdevelopment and 

economic stagnation. 

 

3.2.9 Agricultural transformation is one of the key enablers for employment and job creation 

especially for young people in Sierra Leone and Africa at large. This project will support agribusiness 

training/incubation, entrepreneurship development through establishing an Enable Youth 

Agribusiness Centre of Excellence in partnership with Njala University of Agriculture.  In an 

integrated model the Agribusiness centre will offer multi-purpose training to meet the needs of Njala 

university students, rural youth and farmers including women. It will offer trainees an 

integrated/holistic practical training opportunity to gain experience from the units that will be 

established at the university (sequenced from production, harvesting, agro-processing, packaging, 

sales and marketing). This practical experience is expected to prepare the trainees for both 

employment and agripreneurship. A tracer study will also be carried out to monitor the progress 

achieved by youth supported by the project. It is estimated that 1,000 young promising agripreneurs 

will be supported to establish their own businesses while 4,000 will be equipped with technical skills 

to access employment. The project will create approximately 50,000 direct jobs and further 150,000 

jobs indirectly. 

 

3.2.10 Social Impact: The project will increase farmer incomes, improve livelihoods and 

consequently support better health, education and well-being indicators among project beneficiaries. 

Youth (both male and female) employment has a positive social impact on economic growth and 

productivity that cannot be ignored. When a great amount of skilled youth and university graduates 

(including young women) in Sierra Leone are able to find jobs and put their knowledge and 

capabilities into innovation and contributing to economic growth. Furthermore, having a large share 

of the workforce mainly youth employed will lead to increase productivity and gross domestic 

product (GDP). Increased capacity of youth (including women) through skill development and job 

creation under the Project will strengthen community cohesion and empowerment thus making it less 

likely for youth to engage in violence crime. 

 

3.2.11 Addressing Fragility: Sierra Leone has made significant progress in consolidating peace and 

security country-wide and in rebuilding its economy that was nearly destroyed by the decade long 

conflict. While Sierra Leone has not fully recovered from the twin shocks of the 2014-2016 Ebola 

crisis and slump in global commodity prices that severely affected the economy and created political 

uncertainties, it has been able to maintain security in the aftermath of the drawdown of the UN 

Mission and conducted peaceful political transition between parties. Rapid urbanization fuelled by 

migration of mainly youth from rural localities into the city of Freetown in search of opportunities is 

posing serious development challenge for the Government of Sierra Leone. In post conflict country 



 

14 

 

of such with major infrastructural deficits, the mass movement of people into Freetown increases 

more pressures on the Government and slow development of the city. Urban migration rate is 

currently 4.20% (about 46,000 people per annum) of the existing 1.1 million people living in 

Freetown which is exerting more pressure on the city limited infrastructure as estimated 15% of the 

country population lives in Freetown and environs alone. This has resulted to creating unsafe 

settlements around the city especially protected enclaves.  

 

3.2.12 Sierra Leone continues to experience some challenges stemming from the root causes and 

drivers of fragility which manifested itself over the decade-long conflict. The underlying drivers of 

fragility continue to pose significant downside risks for the country’s development. The root causes 

of fragility persist in all their political, economic, social and environmental dimensions and 

expressions. Intermediate drivers of fragility, such as limited national cohesion, food insecurity, high 

rates of youth unemployment, gender inequality, high levels of perceived and real corruption, weak 

human and institutional capacities and poor economic governance systems, especially public 

financial management (PFM) and limited revenue management systems are prevalent. With the 

above, the country has more pressures compared to capacity to withstand it. Increasing the Sierra 

Leone capacity and at the same time reducing these pressures through meaningful interventions will 

assist build resilience. 

 

3.2.13 Involuntary resettlement: There will be no resettlement as a result of the project. Any 

proposed activity will be located in areas which have no land disputes. No land acquisition is 

envisaged under this Project. 

IV.    IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1 Implementation Arrangements  

4.1.1 Executing and Implementing Agencies: The Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry will be 

executing agency and will execute the project through a project management team to be established. 

The Sierra Leone Agricultural Research Institute (SLARI), Njala University and SLESCA will be 

implementing entities of certain activities of the project. 

 

4.1.2 A National Project Steering Committee (NPSC): The National Project Steering Committee 

will be constituted   of the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (Chair), Ministry of Finance, Ministry 

of Planning and Economic Development, Ministry of Youth/ National Youth Commission, SLARI, 

SLESCA, SLECAD, Farmers Federation, Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development, 

Ministry of Social Welfare, Gender and Children’s Affairs, Environmental Protection Agency, Njala 

University, Civil Society Representative as well as the Chairperson of the each of the District 

Councils . The NPSC will be convened by the Chair on a semi-annual basis. The NPSC will be mainly 

responsible for: (i) policy and strategic guidance on all issues relating to the project; (ii) approval of 

project investments; (iii) approval and monitoring of project annual work plans and budgets; and (iv) 

resolving implementation bottlenecks and providing positive impetus to facilitate achievement of the 

project’s development objectives (results/outcomes). The Project Core Team on behalf of the 

Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, will convene the NPSC meetings and act as its Secretariat. The 

NPSC will provide guidance and general oversight functions, including policy and strategic 

orientation of the program. 

 

4.1.3 Project Management Team (PMT). The project management team will include: (i) Project 

Manager, Internationally recognised Seed Expert, Agribusiness Specialist, Social/Gender Expert, 

Crop/Extension Expert and Youth Coordinator, M&E Specialist, Procurement Specialist and an 

Accountant. The Project Manager, Seed Expert and the Fiduciary Team would be advertised and 

recruitment done on a competitive basis, while the other experts will be designated by the Ministry 

of Agriculture and Forestry. The team will report to the Permanent Secretary through the Chief 



 

15 

 

Agriculture Officer in the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry and would be charged with the 

management and coordination of the Project’s activities. All team members will be subject to annual 

performance-based contracts and (ii) the project will also fund the necessary IT and office equipment 

as well as field vehicles to facilitate supervision and coordination activities. The project management 

team will be based in Moyamba District. 

 

4.2 Procurement and Financial Management Arrangements  

4.2.1 Procurement Arrangements: The Procurement of goods, works and consultancy services 

financed by the Fund will be carried out in accordance with the “Procurement Framework for Bank 

Group Funded Operations” dated October 2015 for high value contracts and the Recipient’s 

Procurement System for low value contracts.  The Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Food 

Security will serve as the executing agency for this project and a Project Management Team (PMT) 

will be established that will be charged with the responsibility of implementing the project.  The 

Project Management Team will comprise a Procurement Specialist who will be recruited on a 

competitive basis to provide support on procurement related activities and also mentor the existing 

Procurement Officers managing the procurement unit of the ministry.  The PMU will carry out the 

procurement of goods, works, and consultancy services including preparation of procurement plan, 

standard bidding documents, open and evaluate bids, contracting and management of contract 

execution.  

 

4.2.2 Procurement Risks and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): The procurement capacity of the 

Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry was assessed and it was noted that the Procurement Officers are 

University graduates and they have acquired some experience on the Recipient’s procurement 

system. However, they have limited knowledge and experience on the Bank’s Procurement 

framework and will require further procurement training and mentoring on the use of donor 

procurement policies in readiness to assume procurement function of the a National Development 

Partners Program Coordination Office (NDPPCO).The procurement plan for the project will be 

prepared for the entire project duration and included in Section B5 of the Technical Annexes to this 

report. 

 

4.2.3 Financial Management: The financial management of the project will be handled an 

experienced qualified Project Accountant (PA) with hands-on experience on use of accounting 

software and practical application of International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS, 

Adopted by the GoSL for financial reporting). The Project Accountant (PA) will be competitively 

recruited. The PA will use the Tompro Accounting package (in harmony with other projects under 

MAF) for accounting and financial reporting. On a quarterly basis the PA will generate interim 

financial reports (IFRs) from Tompro, for the benefit of MAF and transmit copies to the Fund within 

30 days after the end of each calendar quarter. The project financial statement at end of the year shall 

be audited and certified copies together with the related management letter submitted to the Fund 

within 6 months after the end of each financial year. A  Financial Management Manual (FMM) and 

Project Implementation Manual (PIM) will be customised from the existing manuals and adopted to 

codify FM practices and guide project implementation. The internal auditor responsible for MAF 

will provide internal checks and periodically review project operations. The internal auditor will 

report to the NPSC through the Director of Technical Services and the NPSC ensure that all audit 

recommendations implemented and monitored. 

 

4.2.4 Disbursement Arrangement: Four disbursement methods are used by the Fund in disbursing 

funds to projects. The assessment recommends: (i) Direct payments; and (ii) Payments through 

Special Account (SA) under this project. The other 2 methods –reimbursement and reimbursement 

by guarantee shall be available to the project, if desired. Direct payments will be used for the 

payments against larger contracts signed between project management and contractors/suppliers/ 

service providers. The SA method will be used for meeting recurrent/ administrative expenses and 



 

16 

 

smaller contracts under the project. Here, a United States Dollar denominated Special Account will 

be opened at a Commercial Bank acceptable to the Fund, to receive funds from the Fund. A local 

currency account will be opened at same Bank to receive transfers from the SA for making payments 

in local currency. A second local currency account will be opened at the same bank for project 

operations.. All disbursements will follow with the disbursements procedures outlined in the Bank’s 

Disbursement Handbook. 

 

4.2.5  External Audit: The Auditor General (AG) of Sierra Leone will be responsible for the audit 

of the project on an annual basis in line with the Constitution of Sierra Leone, and use of country 

systems. Whilst the project will not pay related audit fees from its resources for audits performed by 

the AG, it shall bear reasonable incidental audit expenses duly submitted by the AG and cleared by 

the Fund. However, in instances of workload, where the AG cannot perform the audit, MAF and the 

Fund will be notified in time for an independent audit firm to be competitively recruited. The auditor 

terms of reference (TOR) will be agreed with the Fund. Certified copies of the audit reports, together 

with the accompanying management letter, must be submitted to the Fund within six (6) months at 

the end of each financial year.  

4.3 Monitoring and Evaluation  

4.3.1 The M&E system will be developed and managed by the M&E Officer, within the framework 

of the project Results Based Logical Framework. The M&E Officer will regularly track, document 

and report the project’s results and progress, facilitate knowledge building, and share knowledge with 

key stakeholders. The monitoring and reporting plans will be developed based on gender 

disaggregated indicators in the log frame. It will be part of the obligation of all project implementers 

to provide reports in prescribed format on outputs and outcomes achieved within the implementation 

agreements. The Project will provide financial resources to facilitate training, proper data gathering, 

processing and reporting. 

 

4.3.2 The project’s reports and key milestones are indicated in the table below. The Fund will 

supervise the implementation of the project through regular Supervision Missions which will be 

undertaken at least twice a year. These missions will verify implementation progress to ensure that 

key verifiable indicators, including gender specific indicators, related to the outputs, outcomes and 

impacts are being monitored. The M&E activities, including implementation progress and 

expenditure will therefore be an integral part of the project implementing agency, as a regular 

management function through the PMU’s M&E Specialist. The PMU will submit to the Fund 

progress reports, annual work plans and budgets, and annual procurement plans using Fund’s format. 

The quarterly progress report will be submitted to the Fund within 45 days after the end of the 

reporting period, whilst the annual progress report will be submitted within three months after the 

end of reporting period. 
Table 4.3 Monitoring Process 

 

Time Frame Milestone Monitoring Process/Feedback loop 

Year 1 Baseline data collection M&E officer, Project Specialists and Data 

collectors/analysts  

Year 1-5 Project Implementation M&E Officer, Project Team, Service Providers and 

beneficiaries 

Year 1-5 Impact of project 

activities 

M&E officer, Project Team, Project Steering Committee, 

Service Providers and beneficiaries. Annual process along 

project implementation with progress report 

Year 3 Mid-term review Beneficiaries, Bank, Government and Project Team  

Year 1-5 Audit Reports Project Team and Auditors, annually 

Year 5 Project Completion 

Report 

Beneficiaries, Bank and Project Team 



 

17 

 

4.4 Governance 

4.4.1 According to the 2018 Mo Ibrahim Index on African Governance (IIAG), Sierra Leone ranked 

26th out of the 54 African countries assessed with a score of 50.9 which is slightly higher than the 

continental average of 49.9. Sierra Leone’s performance across four categories of governance namely 

(a) Safety & Rule of Law (20th out of 54), (b) Participation & Human Rights (15th out of 54), (c) 

Sustainable Economic Opportunity (39th out of 54), and (d) Human Development (44th out of 54). 

With regard to corruption perception, the 2018 Transparency International Report ranks Sierra Leone 

129th out of 180 with a Corruption Perception Index (CPI) of 30, on a scale of 0 (high corruption) to 

100 (very low corruption). 

 

4.4.2 In order to support the ongoing reform momentum in the country and foster good governance, 

the Fund, in close collaboration with the IMF and other partners, has regularly maintained sustained 

policy dialogue with the Sierra Leonean authorities through reform and institutional support 

operations. The government’s recent reform to operationalize the Treasury Single Account is a 

welcome step, as are policies to ensure that spending commitments are in line with the available 

financing envelope. More broadly, these efforts will lead to better governance, helping promote 

macroeconomic stability and inclusive growth. 

 

4.5 Sustainability 

4.5.1 One of the key aspects of the project is commercial orientation. This implies bringing out the 

business opportunities in the agriculture sector. The project activities will lead to the emergence of 

business oriented agripreneurs who are expected to run their businesses as a going-concern with the 

enhanced capacity they will receive from the project. This will lead to economic sustainability of the 

project. Also, the participatory approach adopted during the design stage of project will continue 

even at implementation in order to enhance ownership by beneficiaries thus ensuring sustainability. 

Implementation through government line ministries will ensure that project activities are in line with 

broader government programmes. All the critical enabling infrastructure that the project would invest 

in under the SMP, SLESCA and the ENABLE-Njala Youth Program will have in place, a 

management arrangement that would ensure that they are run on commercial basis by private 

operators under special management agreement with the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry. 

4.6 Risk management 

4.6.1 Risks to the successful implementation of the project and attainment of targeted outcomes 

and impact will stem primarily from the uncertainty in Government’s commitment to liberalize the 

domestic seed sector. The mitigation is that the National Seed Act was promulgated in 2017, which 

clearly depicts a publicly enabled but private sector driven seed sector.  

 

4.6.2 A related risk is the ability of private sector agro-input producers and agro-dealers to 

effectively fill the market void that would be created from Government’s withdrawal from 

procurement and distribution of seeds and other agro-input. The mitigation is that the project will 

support the provision of incentives including training and capacity building to provide a conducive 

enabling environment for private sector growth during the gradual withdrawal of Government from 

the sub-sector. 

 

4.6.3 Another risk relates to the novelty in the implementation of a commercially oriented youth in 

agribusiness empowerment project within an existing national university in Sierra Leone. The 

mitigation here is that they would not offer the service free but the project will pay for the incubation 

of the identified entrepreneurs who will form satellite farms for the anchor investors. The mitigation 

is that Funds will be managed by a carefully selected funds manager and also the risk for default by 

borrowers limited as the cost Potential risks are summarized below. The overall risks are rated 

moderate as they are manageable and mitigation measures will be in place. 
 



 

18 

 

Table 4.6: Potential Risks and Mitigation Measures 

 

No. Potential Risk Rating Mitigation Measures 

1. Government commitment to deregulating 

the agricultural input supply sector. 

Low Project is aligned to the MTNDP & 

NATS’s focus of economic 

diversification and private sector led 

supply systems 

2. Political influences of SMP, ENABLE-

Njala & SLeSCA  

Low SLESCA, SMP & ENABLE-Njala 

will be run as PPP outfits to ensure 

autonomy, efficiency and 

sustainability. 

3. Young agripreneurs are unable to establish 

viable businesses on their own. 

Medium Incubation training, business 

development, competitive seed grant 

and linkage to markets are provided to 

increase probability of success 

4.7 Knowledge building  

4.7.1 The project will support research through providing support to the Sierra Leone Agricultural 

Research Institute (SLARI) which has a long standing cooperation with the Consultative Group for 

International Agricultural Research Agencies. This research will support the development of 

improved breeder and foundation seeds for rice and maize as well as the varietal maintenance of these 

varieties. The project also includes collaborative knowledge development through Njala University, 

the foremost agricultural university in Sierra Leone. The knowledge generated through these research 

avenues will be disseminated to farmers through strengthened extension services to support better 

productivity at the farm level and youth to promote agribusiness development. 

V – LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

5.1 Legal instrument  

5.1.1 The legal instruments for the Project will be a Protocol of Agreement between the Republic 

of Sierra Leone and the Fund. 

5.2 Conditions associated with Fund’s intervention  

5.2.1 Conditions Precedent to Entry into Force of the Grant Agreement: The grant agreement shall 

enter into force on the date of its signature by parties  

 

5.2.2 Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement: The obligations of the Fund to make the first 

disbursement shall be conditional upon the entry into force of the Grant Agreement and the fulfilment 

by the Recipient of the following conditions:  

 

a. Submission of evidence confirming the designation of the following staff from the Ministry of 

Agriculture and Forestry to the Project Management Team: Social/Gender Expert, 

Crop/Extension Expert and Monitoring & Evaluation Specialist.  

b. Submission of evidence confirming the designation of a staff of the Ministry of Agriculture and 

Forestry to head the National Development Partners Program Coordination Office (NDPPCO) 

with qualification and terms of reference acceptable to the Fund. 

5.2.3 Undertakings: 

 

a. The Recipient shall: 

i. make timely provisions in its annual budget for the Recipient’s counterpart in-kind 

contribution to the implementation of the Project, to avoid Project implementation 

delays; 



 

19 

 

ii. not later than three months after the Date of the Protocol of Agreement enter into an 

Memorandum of Understanding with each of the Implementing Agencies (Sierra 

Leone Agricultural Research Institute (SLARI), Njala University and Sierra Leone 

Seed Certification Agency (SLESCA)) on their roles and responsibilities in respect of 

the implementation of the Project; and   

iii. recruit the Project Manager, the Seed Expert and the Fiduciary Team (Procurement 

Officer and Accountant) no later than three months after the Date of the Protocol of  

Agreement. 

5.3 Compliance with Fund Policies 

5.3.1 This project complies with all applicable Fund policies. 

VI.  RECOMMENDATION 

 

Management recommends that the Board of Directors approve an ADF grant of UA 7.99 million to 

the Republic of Sierra Leone for the above mentioned project and in accordance with the conditions 

specified in this report. 



 

























































AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK



 

 

 

GHANA 

 

 
SAVANNAH ZONE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY 

IMPROVEMENT PROJECT (SAPIP) 

 

 

 

 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


December 2017 

 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

 

Project Overview: The Savannah Zone Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project 

(SAZAPIP) aims at transforming agricultural value chains for food and nutrition security, job 

and wealth creation in the Northern Savannah Zone of Ghana. The project will increase farmers’ 

food and nutrition security and incomes through increased agricultural productivity and 

diversification; and enhance the creation and strengthening of agribusinesses to increase 

incomes of actors along selected value chains on a sustainable basis. The project has four 

Components: (i) Crop Productivity Improvement; (ii) Value Chains & Agribusiness 

Development; (ii) Infrastructure Development; and (iii) Project Coordination, Management, 

Monitoring and Evaluation. The project will be implemented over a five-year period (2018 – 

2023) at a total cost of UA 40.38 million. 

 
Needs Assessment: The Savannah Zone holds major agricultural promise that when harnessed 

will transform the lives of the zone's inhabitants quite significantly, yet the zone constitutes the 

poorest part of the country with a poverty rate of over 40% which is about double the national 

average. The zone is characterized with relatively more challenging agro-ecological conditions, 

low socio-economic indicators and historical deficit in public investments in infrastructure and 

services. Development of this zone is perceived as a national imperative for Ghana’s balance 

of payments, macro-economic stability, economic growth, food and nutrition security, job 

creation and poverty reduction. 

 

Value Added for the African Development Bank: The proposed SAZAPIP will contribute 

towards the High 5 goals of the Bank Group. The project fits with the two key pillars of the 

draft Bank Group Country Strategy Paper (CSP) (2017-2021) for Ghana namely: (i) Agriculture 

Enhancing Inclusive Growth and Economic Development; and (ii) Support to Industrialization 

through Private Sector Development. The Bank Group has a comparative advantage in 

supporting the agriculture value chains development activities that will transform the 

impoverished rural areas of the northern part of the country into zones of economic prosperity 

drawing on lessons from experiences gained from previous projects financed by the Bank in 

Ghana. The project will also leverage on the complementary Ghana Incentive Based Risk 

Sharing for Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL) that is being established by the Bank in 

conjunction with the Bank of Ghana. It will also operationalise the activities of the TAAT 

framework and link up with TASI as a vehicle for attracting private sector investment in 

agriculture as well as the ongoing ENABLE Youth Program in the Bank funded Rural 

Enterprises Project (REP).  
 

Knowledge Management: Knowledge will be captured through the establishment of a 

Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system by the project.  The M&E system will coordinate all 

results and measurement activities, ensure the quality control and provide the necessary 

capacity building. In using the performance indicators and targets specified in the results-based 

framework, special note would be taken of changes that reflect advancement towards the 

translation of outputs into development outcomes. Data for analysis will be captured from the 

M&E database, supervision missions, mid-term report, and periodic impact assessment and 

field exchange visits of the stakeholders. Knowledge will be generated by the pilot 

demonstration plots to form the basis for private sector investment in the agribusiness in the 

ecological zone as part of TASI. Knowledge could additionally be spread within the institution 

by showcasing the Project results using the Bank ICT infrastructure (Intranet, short 

documentaries on Bank website, etc.). 

 



 

iv 

Loan information 

Client’s information 

______________________________________________________________________ 

RECIPIENT :  Republic of Ghana 

EXECUTING AGENCY :              Ministry of Food and Agriculture 

Financing plan 

Source 

 

Amount (million) 

 
Instrument 

UA USD 
African Development Fund (ADF) 27.86 39.01 Loan 

Government of Ghana (GoG)   6.50 9.10 Counterpart  

Beneficiaries    6.01 8.42 Beneficiary 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 40.38 56.53 - 

 

ADF’s key financing information (to be determined at loan negotiations) 

 
Loan currency UA 

Interest type*  

Interest rate spread*  

Tenure  

Grace period  

Commitment fee  

Other fees  

       *if applicable 

 

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected) 

 

Identification Mission May, 2017 

Preparation Mission August 2017 

Concept Note Approval September, 2017 

Appraisal Mission September, 2017 

Programme approval 15 December, 2017 

Effectiveness 15 January, 2018 

Completion 31 December 2022 

Last Disbursement 31 March, 2023 

 

  



 

v 

Ghana: Savannah Zone Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project 

Result-Based Logical Framework (RBLF) 

Country and project name: Ghana : Savannah Zone Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project 

Purpose of the project:  To transform agricultural value chains for food and nutrition security, job and wealth creation. 

RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS BASELINE 
TARGET 

(2018-2023) 
MEANS OF VERIFICATION 

RISKS/MITIGATION 

MEASURES 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

1. Jobs and wealth are generated along the value 

chains 

2. Food and nutrition security is enhanced 

1.  No. of jobs created (disaggregated by sex and age) 

2.1   Increased domestic food supply for key commodities (rice, maize, 

soybean and vegetables,)  

2.2. Prevalence and numbers for child stunting   

1. n.a  

2. n.a  

3. 33% 

1. 20,000 (50% women; 20% youth) 

2. 600,000 mt. 

3. 40% reduction in the number of stunted 

children under five 

MoFA reports, Project Reports 

Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) reports, 

Household surveys 

 

 OUTCOMES 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

1. Increased household income 1. Additional household incomes  USD500 p.a. 

 

USD3,000 p.a. Project Reports, MoFA reports, 

Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) reports, 

Household surveys 

  

2. Increased minimum diet diversity  2. % of children 6-23 mths consumed more than 4 food groups 33.3% 50% UNICEF/MOH data Risk 1: Slow economic 

growth and deterioration 

of the country’s 

creditworthiness due to 

fall in cocoa and other 

commodity prices.  

 
Mitigation 1:  The Bank 

will intensify the 

dialogue with the 

government to adopt 

supportive macro-

economic policies to 

rationalize fiscal 

expenditure. 
 

3. Productivity and diversification Improved 

 

3.1 Quantity (mt) of crops produced:                   1. Rice 

                                                                              2. Maize 

                                                                              3. Soybean 

                                                                              4. Vegetables 

283,109 mt 

85,000 mt 

80,000 mt 

30,000  

350,000 mt 

150,000 mt 

140,000 mt 

  60,000 mt 

Projects Reports, MoFA reports, 

Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) reports, 

Household surveys 

3.2 Crop yield (t/ha)                                             1. Rice 

                                                                              2. Soybean 
                                                                              3. Maize 

                                                                              4. Vegetables 

2 

1.65 
2.5 

n.a 

6 

3.0 
6 

tbd 

MoFA reports, 

Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) reports, 
Household surveys 

 

4. Increased private sector investment in 

priority value chains 

4.1 Domestic and foreign investment (USD) in: 1. Rice 

                                                                             2. Maize 

                                                                             3. Soybean 

                                                                             4. Vegetables 

n.a 

n.a 

n.a 

n.a 

USD120 million 

USD40 million 

USD60 million 

tbd 

MoFA reports, Ghana Investment 

Promotion Centre reports 

 OUTPUTS 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

Component 1:  Crop Productivity Improvement 

1. Improved seeds production 1.1 Quantity of breeder seeds produced (mt)      1. Rice  
                                                                             2. Maize  

                                                                             3. Soybean 

                                                                             4. Vegetables 

16 

71 

n.a 

n.a 

250 

1,500  

tbd 

tbd 

MoFA reports, 

Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) reports, 

Enterprise surveys 

Monitoring reports 

 

 

Risk 2:  The proposed 

project area is prone to 

climate change impacts 

 

Mitigation 2:  ESMPs 
will incorporate 

integrated pest 
management plans and 

climate risk mitigation 

and adaptation measures. 
  

1.2 Volume of foundation seeds produced (mt): 1. Rice  
                                                                             2. Maize  

                                                                             3. Soybean 

                                                                             4. Vegetables 

Rice – 96 
Maize – 120 

Soybean - 140  

Vegetables n.a 

Rice – 5,400 
Maize – 4,000 

Soybean - 4,000 

Vegetables 150 

1.3 Volume of certified seeds produced (mt)      1. Rice  

                                                                             2. Maize  

                                                                             3. Soybean 

                                                                             4. Vegetables 

578  

80,000 

213 

n.a 

28,100 

350,000 

4,250 

 tbd 

2. Mechanization along the value chains 
(segments of value chains mechanized) 

2.1 Mechanized land preparation (ha) 120 10,000   

2.2 Mechanized crop husbandry practices  (ha) 200 10,000  

2.3 Mechanized harvesting (ha) 150 10,000  

3. Crop nutrition enhanced 3.1 Area of land with soils tested for fertility; 0 10,000   



 

vi 

 

 

 

3.2 % of farmers using recommended fertilizer blends. 0 70%  

4. Nutrition Promotion activities implemented 4.1 % of households reached on Nutrition activities 0 80%   

5. Introduction and deployment of new yield 
enhancing technologies  

6. Demonstration of climate smart agriculture 
principles 

5.1 Establishment of 3, 20-ha demonstration plots  

5.2 Training of extension agents in new approaches to crop production 

5.3 Training in conservation agriculture, zero tillage  

2.5 mt/ha of maize and 

1 mt/ha of soybean 

 
0 

6 mt/ha of maize; 3 mt/ha soybean 

3, 20-ha demonstration trials established 

200 extension agents trained 
6 

MoFA reports, 

Program reports, 

Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) reports 

 

Component 2:   Commodity Value Chains Development 

7. Rice processing zone development 6. No of processing zones developed - 1 Projects reports, MoFA reports, 
Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) reports, 

Household surveys 

Enterprise surveys 
Monitoring reports 

Supervision records 

 

 

8. Enhanced capacity of commodity value 
chain actors 

9. Private sector investment  

7.1 No. of value chain development platforms created/strengthened. 2 10  

7.2  No of value chain actors trained 0 20,000 

 

7.3 Percentage of outgrower contracts executed effectively 

8.1 No. of private sector investments attracted to the ecological zone  

8.2 Innovation Platforms established 

0 

0 

0 

80% 

3 

1 

 Component 3:   Infrastructure Development 

 

10. Rehabilitate and expand existing seed 
processing and storage facilities. 

9.1 No of seed processing and storage centres rehabilitated 

9.2 No. of seed processing and storage centres constructed for research 

institutions 

0 

 

0 

4 

 

2 

MoFA reports, 

Ghana Statistical Service (GSS) reports, 

Household surveys 

Enterprise surveys 

Monitoring reports 
Program reports 

Supervision records 

  

 11. Rehabilitation of road infrastructure  10.1 Length of feeder roads rehabilitated (km) 0 100 

 

12. Area of agriculture water management 
schemes rehabilitated / constructed 

11. Area of land under irrigation (ha)   

improved field water management systems 

2,000 10,000 

 13. Rehabilitation of warehouses 12. No of warehouses rehabilitated 0 12   

 14. E-agriculture. 13.1 National E-agriculture system strengthened 
13.2 No of farmers registered and placed on platform 

0 

20,000 

1 

500,000 

  

 Component 4:    Program Management/ Monitoring & Evaluation  

 15. Work plan and operations are implemented 14.1 Rate of implementation of the annual work plan 
14.2  Development & implementation of the site-specific ESMPs 

0 

0 

100% 

100% 

Program agreements, funding documents 

Supervision mission Financial 

management reports M&E reports 

 

 16. Program activities monitored and 
information produced regularly 

15.1 No. of technical and progress reports prepared annually 0 20 

 

15.2 No. of audit reports produced annually 

15.3 No. of monitoring visits conducted by MOFA/MOF headoffice 

15.4 No. of NPSC meetings held 

0 

0 

0 

5 

10 

1 

                                                                                                COMPONENTS     SOURCES OF 

FINANCE 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

 

Component 1: Crop Productivity Improvement 

Improved seeds production; Build capacity for rice and maize seed inspection and certification; Develop an efficient system of production, storage and distribution for breeder, foundation and certified seed; mechanization along the 

production chains; Soil fertility management; and nutrition promotion.  Introduction and demonstration of modern technologies to increase maize and soybean production and dissemination to these technologies to commercial, 

smallholder, and youth farmers 

 

Total Project Cost  

(UA million) :   40.38 

ADF Loan     :   27.86 
 

Other sources 

GoG               :    6.50  

Beneficiaries  :    6.01 

Component 1 :  28.64 

Component 2 :    2.97 

Component 3 :    7.33 

Component 4 :    1.43 

Component 2: Value Chains Development 

Maize and rice processing zone development; Support existing aggregation/marketing centres equipped with drying floors, and storage facilities; training entrepreneurship and business management training; development of market 

information system; installation of processing equipment for commodity value addition and marketing; Number of Value Chain Development Platforms created / strengthened; Percentage of contracts executed effectively. 

Component 3: Infrastructure Development 
Rehabilitation of transport infrastructure (feeder roads, farm-tracks and stock routes); Rehabilitation of irrigation canals; Development of Processing & Marketing Infrastructure; Rehabilitation of warehouses; and E-agriculture; 

Rehabilitate and expand existing storage facilities for seed. 

Component 4: Program Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 

Project management activities; day-to-day management, management of studies on key policy issues; development and implementation of site specific ESMPs; development of a results based framework for M&E; and procurement, 

disbursement and audit functions. 



 

vii 

 

Programme Timeframe 

Task Name 

2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 

Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 

Negotiations                      

Board approval                      

Signature of Loan and Grant Agreement                      

Appointing remaining PCMU team members                      

Satisfaction of conditions for effectiveness and first disbursement                      

Programme launch                      

Finalization and validation of procedures manuals                       

Conducting baseline studies                      

Preparing, signing agreement/protocols with implementing partners                      

Prepare, approve Bid docs and contract awards for Goods, Works & Services                      

Contracts execution for Goods, Works and Services                      

Quarterly reports submission                      

Annual reports submission                      

Programme Work plans and Budgets                        

Steering committee meetings                      

Bank’s supervision missions                      

Audit                      

Mid-term review                      

Programme Completion Reporting                       

Impact assessment and technical audit                      

 

 



 

1 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF MANAGEMENT FOR THE PROPOSED 

ADF LOAN OF UA 27.86 MILLION TO THE REPUBLIC OF GHANA FOR THE 

FINANCING OF THE SAVANNAH ZONE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY 

IMPROVEMENT PROJECT  

 

Management submits the following report and recommendation on a proposed loan of UA 27.86 

million to finance the Savannah Zone Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project in Ghana. 

I STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 

1.1.  Programme linkages with country strategy and objectives 

1.1.1 The Savannah Zone Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project (SAZAPIP) is 

designed within the context of the Ghana Shared Growth and Development Agenda II” 

(GSGDA II). The underlying theme of the GSGDA II is socio-economic transformation, which 

involves a change in the structure and composition of the national output in ways that enhance 

broad-based, inclusive and sustainable growth. It stimulates the innovative process of 

production through skills and technological upgrading; enhancing the competitiveness of 

industry and trade; lifting workers from low-productive agriculture to higher productive 

activities; and putting the economy on a growth path that creates jobs, opens up decent work 

opportunities for all, alleviates poverty and reduces income and social inequalities.  

1.1.2 It is guided by country’s Food and Agriculture Sector Development Policy 

(FASDEP) which has the following as its pillars: (i) Food Security and Emergency 

Preparedness; (ii) Increased Growth in Incomes and Reduced Income Variability; (iii) Increased 

Competitiveness and Enhanced Integration into Domestic and International Markets;  (iv) 

Sustainable Management of Land and Environment; (v) Science and Technology Applied in 

Food and Agriculture Development; and (vi) Improved Institutional Coordination. The 

FASDEP anchors on sub-sector policies including the Crop Development Policy; Cocoa 

Strategy; Livestock Development Policy; Fisheries Policy and Policies for Services Delivery 

(Extension. Irrigation, Plant Protection, Agricultural Mechanization). 

1.1.3 The Government has targeted enhancing agricultural productivity and production 

through its Planting for Food and Jobs (PFJ) Campaign. The major interventions under the 

PFJ are organized around the following five pillars: (i) Seed: The program will catalyse market-

led production of adequate quantities of quality seeds by private enterprises; (ii) Fertilizer: 

Private companies engaged in fertilizer production/blending and importation will be facilitated 

in meeting the fertilizer demands of the beneficiary farmers; (iii) Extension Services: In 

partnerships with the local governments and private inputs and service providers, the extension 

services will provide reliable and programmed technical assistance to beneficiaries; (iv) 

Marketing: It is envisaged that the facilitation of increased uptake of inputs will lead to 

increase in production of the targeted crops by the provision of storage warehouses; and (v) E-

Agriculture: The PFJ Campaign will profile the beneficiaries by e-registering them and 

developing a state-of-art information and communication technology (ICT) platform. 

1.1.4 While the PFJ Campaign is a nationwide program, the SAZAPIP will focus on three of 

the six agri-business clusters of the Northern Savannah Ecological Zone (NSEZ). The NSEZ 

constitutes the poorest part of the country with a poverty rate of over 40% which is about double 

the national average. The zone is characterized with relatively more challenging agro-ecological 

conditions, low socio-economic indicators and historical deficit in public investments in 

infrastructure and services. Development of this zone is perceived as a national imperative for 



 

2 

Ghana’s balance of payments, macro-economic stability, economic growth, food and nutrition 

security, job creation and poverty reduction.  

 

1.1.5 The Project is anchored in the PFJ Campaign of the Ministry of Food and Agriculture 

as well as the One District One Factory (1D1F) initiative of the Government of Ghana. The PFJ 

Campaign seeks to enhance agricultural production while the 1D1F looks at agro-industrial 

development aspects of the project. The Project will target four (i, ii, iv and v) of the above 

mentioned pillars and thereby contribute to the High-5 priorities that are crucial for accelerating 

Africa’s economic transformation: Feed Africa; Industrialize Africa; and Improve the quality 

of life for the people of Africa. It will particularly contribute to the Feed Africa priority which 

focuses on transformation, scaling up agriculture as a business through value addition, led by 

the private sector and enabled by the Government. It will concentrate on one of the eight 

identified Priority Intervention Areas (PIA) under TAAT - Transforming African Savannahs into 

breadbaskets and promote four of the 18 identified priority commodity value chains – rice, 

maize, soybean and vegetables. In line with the Feed Africa Strategy’s focus on priority value 

chains, the project will contribute towards the Transformation of the African Savannah 

Initiative (TASI) by serving as a precursor pilot project for proven technologies and knowledge. 

Details of TASI are in Section C6 of the Technical Annexes.  

 

1.1.6 The Bank has a comparative advantage in supporting the agriculture value chains 

development activities that will transform the impoverished rural areas of the northern part of 

the country into zones of economic prosperity with attendant benefits of employment and social 

development. This Project will achieve this by creating strategic, competitive agribusinesses 

around rice, maize, soybean and vegetable value chains that are widely produced in the northern 

parts of the country. The Project will consolidate the gains made through various previous Bank 

interventions such as the Northern Rural Growth Programme (NRGP), Fufulso-Sawla and 

Techiman - Kintampo Roads Project; optimise on the usage of infrastructure that were 

constructed in those interventions; and leverage on private sector investment to the 

establishment of a rice processing zone around Tamale and commercial farming in the Northern 

Savanna – the RMG projects in Yagaba and Babato.  

 

1.1.7 SAZAPIP is aligned to 2012-2017 Ghana Country Strategy Paper (CSP) which has been 

extended to December 2018. The strategy has two pillars namely: (i) Support for infrastructure 

development; and (ii) Support for improved governance and accountability. During the CSP 

extension period, the Bank will focus on developing and supporting priority skills for industry, 

improving access to sanitation and providing diverse opportunities for rural employment and 

income generation for a more equitable growth. Over the CSP extension period, the Bank will 

meet this objective through the implementation of the Development of Skills for Industry 

Project, and the Greater Accra Sustainable Sanitation and Livelihoods Improvement Project. 

Other projects that are envisaged to support this objective include: the Savannah Zone 

Agriculture Productivity Improvement Project and the Establishment of Ghana Incentive-Based 

Risk Sharing for Agriculture Lending.  

1.2.  Rationale for Bank’s involvement 

1.2.1 The project has a great potential in contributing to the twin objectives of the Bank’s 10-

Year Strategy (TYS). It contributes to inclusive growth across geographical locations, age and 

gender in that the major interventions of the project are concentrated in commodity value chain 

intervention in the NSEZ where poverty is highest in the country and youth and women agri-

preneurs are targeted by the project. 



 

3 

1.2.2 The project will enhance agriculture transformation through increased productivity of 

rice, maize, soybean and vegetables; and investment in both hard infrastructure (seed processing 

and storage, irrigation, produce warehouses and feeder roads); as well as soft infrastructure 

(farmer e-registration and e-agriculture). The project will also leverage on the complementary 

innovative agricultural financing mechanisms (the Ghana Incentive Based Risk Sharing for 

Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL) that is being established with the assistance of the Bank in 

conjunction with the Bank of Ghana. It will also operationalise the activities of the TAAT 

framework and link up with TASI as a vehicle for attracting private sector investment in 

agriculture in the savannah zone of Ghana. Furthermore, the project will provide 

entrepreneurship and business management training to value chain actors in order for them to 

be eligible to assess resources in the ongoing ENABLE Youth Program in the Bank funded 

Rural Enterprises Project (REP).  

1.3. Donors’ coordination 

1.3.1 The key development partners that are active in the sector are: L'Agence française de 

développement (AFD); Department for International Development (DFID); Global Affairs 

Canada; European Union; German Dev. Co-op (KfW Development Bank and GiZ); 

Netherlands Embassy; Australian High Commission; JICA; USAID and World Bank; UN 

Agencies (IFAD, FAO and WFP). Others are IFPRI, AGRA and international NGOs such as 

SNV and Catholic Relief Services. Donor activities cuts across ranges mostly targets various 

commodity value chains development, productivity enhancement, agricultural production and 

processing infrastructure development, mechanization, irrigation, sustainable land 

management, climate change adaptation and mitigation, nutrition, food safety, MSE and 

agribusiness development, access to finance, access to land and ICT for agriculture.  

 

1.3.2 Donor coordination mechanisms for the Agriculture Sector in Ghana are effective. 

Coordination under the Agriculture Sector Working Group (ASWG) began in 2002 and 

provides a platform for sharing information on ongoing and planned future activities with the 

aim of harmonizing interventions. The group holds annual joint sector reviews where donors, 

Government, implementation partners, civil society organizations (CSOs), and the private 

sector review the performance of the sector to inform planning and decision making. The 

ASWG is an open group of donors; quasi donors; implementers including NGOs, CSOs, private 

sector, etc.; and Government Ministries.  

 

1.3.3 Key on-going/pipeline interventions by donors include a EUR160 million support for 

productive investment for sustainable agriculture development capacity building of 

decentralized institutions and community development in the part of the SADA Zone. The 

Government of Canada is also supporting the sector with a CAD125 million facility for 

Modernizing Agriculture in Ghana (MAG). IFAD has provided USD71.60 million as loan for 

sustainable rural poverty reduction in rural areas and a grant of USD10.0 million to mitigate 

the effects of climate change. The Bank has successfully co-financed projects in the sector with 

other donors. Notable among these is the just ended Northern Rural Growth Program and the 

on-going Rural Enterprises Program which were/are both co-financed with IFAD. A matrix of 

interventions by donors is presented in Annex A1 of the Technical Annexes. The coordination 

of aid through the ASWG is enhancing aid effectiveness through harmonization and alignment 

of development partner support.  

 

 



 

4 

II PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

2.1 Project Objectives 

2.1.1 Project development goal: The development objective of the project is to transform 

agricultural value chains for food and nutrition security, job and wealth creation.  

 

2.1.2 Specific project objectives: To increase farmers’ food and nutrition security and 

incomes through increased agricultural productivity and diversification; and enhance the 

creation and strengthening of agribusinesses to increase incomes of actors along selected value 

chains on a sustainable basis. 

 

Project Components 

 

2.1.3 The project will have four Components. (i) Crop Productivity Improvement; (ii) Value 

Chains & Agribusiness Development; (ii) Infrastructure Development; and (iii) Project 

Coordination, Management, Monitoring and Evaluation. The summary of activities are 

indicated in Table 2.1 below. 

 

Component 1 – Crop Productivity Improvement: This component will seek to increase the crop 

productivity through the use of improved and more nutritious seed varieties. The project will 

assist rice, maize, soybean and vegetable farmers to adopt productivity– improving 

technologies such as soil fertility interventions, mechanization, and extension services. 

Nutrition promotion activities will be implemented in order to promote dietary diversity, and 

in particular to increase consumption of vegetables in the project area. Infrastructure of the 

decrepit national seed production centers will be renovated, equipped with modern machinery 

and supported to ensure national self-sufficiency in breeder, foundation and certified seeds 

production for strategic commodities. Essential expected outcomes under this component will 

be disseminating technologies selected under the Technologies for African Agricultural 

Transformation (TAAT) for the target commodities. These technologies will be complemented 

by other proven technologies within the TASI framework. Demonstration of high gross margin 

crop production technology and conservation agriculture will also be carried out at four selected 

locations. Private and public sector extension agents, commercial farmers, and young farmers 

will also be trained in the new maize and soybean production technologies. 

 

Component 2: Value Chain and Agribusiness Development: The objective of this component 

is to set up sustainable agribusinesses along the commodity value chains by entrepreneurship 

training to value chain actors. It will further strengthen the local governance structures such as 

the District Value Chain Committees (DVCCs), which is an innovative concept that links 

farmers to value chain’s actors to more ably participate in the ownership and management of 

facilities that will be set up. It will orchestrate linkages to other flagship programmes of the 

Bank particularly the on-going ENABLE Youth Program in the Rural Enterprises Program and 

the up-coming Risk Sharing Facility (RSF) through Ghana Incentive Based Risk Sharing for 

Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL and facilitation of the establishment of an Innovation Platform.  

This component will ultimately contribute to the achievement of the Government flagship 

program of 1D1F as it will promote private sector investments in the Project operational area. 

 

Component 3:  The infrastructure development component will provide for both hard and soft 

infrastructure. The hard infrastructure will include: (i) Development of Transport Infrastructure 

(feeder roads, farm-tracks and stock routes); (ii) Rehabilitation of irrigation canals; (iii) 

Development of Processing & Marketing Infrastructure especially as corporate rural 



 

5 

enterprises; and (iv) Rehabilitation of warehouses. The soft infrastructure will leverage on on-

going e-agriculture activities in the sector to consolidate the various registration of farmers into 

an agriculture sector database for input supply system. 

 

Component 4: The Project Management and Co-ordination will be responsible for the day to 

day management of the project. It will also be responsible for Monitoring and Evaluation 

(M&E), gender equality and women’s empowerment and implementation of the Project 

Environmental and Social Management Plan. 

 

Table 2.1: Summary of Activities in the Components 

 
Component  Total Cost 

(UA million) 

Component Description  

Component 1: Crop 

Productivity 

Improvement 

28.6  (70.9) This component will seek to increase crop productivity through:  

- Development of an efficient system of production, storage and 
distribution for breeder, foundation and certified seed  

- Use of improved and more nutritious rice, maize, soybean and 
vegetable seed varieties. 

- Rehabilitate and expand existing seed processing and storage facilities  
- Building capacity for seed inspection and certification; 
- Assist rice, maize, soybean and vegetable farmers to adopt 

productivity improvement technologies including soil fertility 

interventions, mechanization, and improved extension using DVCC 

as Innovation Platforms.  

- Disseminating technologies selected under the auspices of TAAT, 
some of which will add nutrition value to the crops 

- Introduction and dissemination of complementary high gross margin 
technologies under the TASI Pilot 

- Training of private and public sector extension agents, commercial 
farmers, and youth farmers.  Technical manuals in English and local 

languages describing the new methods will be produced  

- Promotion of community based nutrition promotion activities 
including appropriate Infant and Young Child Feeding Practices, and 

hygiene sensitization through capacity strengthening of the 

Community Health Worker System in the Upper East region 

- Linkage of small holder farmers to the school meal programme,  
nutrition and hygiene education and support in schools through the 

Regional School Health Education Programme and the School Meal 

Programme in the Northern region 

Component 2: 

Value Chain and 

Agribusiness 

Development  

3 (7.4%) The objective of this component is to set up sustainable agribusinesses 

along the rice value chains. This component will: 

- Strengthen the local governance structures (DVCCs) to more ably 
participate in the ownership and management of facilities will be set 

up. 

- register farmers within the project area on the e-registration platform 
and develop database for input supply system 

- Support the establishment of an Innovation Platform, which will work 
to address policy, infrastructure, fiscal and land tenure bottlenecks in 

order to facilitate the flow of private capital into game changing 

agribusiness investments in the region.  

- Provide incentives to crowd in private investments in project area to 
harness the business opportunities enabled through the public 

investments in the area through this and other projects including 

innovative financing (e.g. GIRSAL), infrastructure development 

(roads, power, irrigation etc.), land tenure reforms and others.   



 

6 

Component  Total Cost 

(UA million) 

Component Description  

Component 3:  

Infrastructure 

Development 

Component 

7.3 (18.2%) The infrastructure development component will consider:  

- Rehabilitation of feeder roads and farm-tracks) 
- Rehabilitation of irrigation canals;  
- Improvement of water harvesting and distribution for lowland rice  
- Development of Processing & Marketing Infrastructure especially as 

corporate rural enterprises; and 

- Rehabilitation of warehouses.  

Component 4: 

Project 

Management, 

Monitoring & 

Evaluation  

1.4 (3.5%) The Project Management and Co-ordination will be responsible for:  

- the day to day management of the project.  
- M&E,  
- Gender equality and women’s empowerment,  
- Implementation of the Project ESMP 

2.2 Technical solutions retained and other alternatives explored 

2.2.1 Table 2.2 presents design options considered and reasons for their rejection. 

Table 2.2: Project alternatives considered and reasons for rejection 

2.3 Project type 

This is an investment project financed with an ADF loan. 

2.4  Programme cost and financing arrangements 

2.4.1 The total cost of the project is estimated at UA40.38 million, net of taxes, and based on 

2017 prices, comprising of UA27.56 million (68%) of the total cost in foreign cost, and 

UA12.81 million (30%) in local cost. The total cost is inclusive of physical and price 

contingencies estimated at average rates of 15% and 2.5%, respectively.  

 

2.4.2 The project cost of UA40.21 million will be part financed by an ADF loan of UA27.86 

million (69% of project costs) covering all major activities including rehabilitation and 

construction of infrastructure. The Government of Ghana will contribute UA6.5 million (16.1% 

of project costs) through the provision of office space and allied facilities, payment of salaries 

of Government staff attached to the project, and provision of tractors and subsidies on fertilizers 

and seeds. The farmer beneficiaries’ contribution of UA6.0 million (14.9% of project cost) will 

be towards the payment for inputs delivered in the Government subsidy scheme. The summary 

of estimated costs by component and category of expenditure are presented in Tables 2.3 and 

2.4 below. 

Alternative name Brief description Reasons for rejection 

Instrument: Project 

vs. sector budget 

support 

Under sector budget support, resources are disbursed in 

tranches based on triggers agreed upon 

Assessment of sector 

fiduciary environment 

was not conclusive and 

had high level of 

uncertainty 

Intervening in other 

value chains including 

livestock. 

Livestock is one of the key value chains that was identified 

in five of the six agribusiness zones. The per-capita 

consumption meat has almost doubled in past 15 years. 

The growth in meat production however lags far behind 

the growth in consumption of meat hence large volumes of 

imported meat.. Livestock development integrates well 

with crops development especially with crops such as 

soybean and maize which are used for livestock feed in 

semi-intensive and intensive production systems 

Budgetary allocation for 

the project cannot 

accommodate the livestock 

intervention. Furthermore, 

livestock is yet to be 

considered a priority 

commodity under the 

Planting for Food and Jobs. 



 

7 

 

Table 2.3: Summary of Project Cost by Component (USD/UA) 
 

COMPONENTS 
(USD '000) (UA '000) % 

Foreign 

Cost 

% 

Total 

Costs 

Local 

Cost 

Foreign 

Cost Total Cost 

Local 

Cost 

Foreign 

Cost 

Total 

Cost 

1. Crop Productivity Improvement 10,763.83 28,900.31 39,664.14 7,688.45 20,643.08 28,331.53 73 70 

2. Value Chain & Agribusiness 

Development 2,272.49 1,737.47 4,009.96 1,623.21 1,241.05 2,864.26 43 7 

3. Infrastructure Development 3,218.59 6,013.66 9,232.25 2,298.99 4,295.47 6,594.46 65 16 

4. Project Management, M&E 1,247.76 726.74 1,974.50 891.26 519.10 1,410.36 37 4 

Total Baseline Costs 17,502.67 37,378.18 54,880.85 12,501.91 26,698.70 39,200.61 68 97 

Physical Contingencies 256.09 731.75 987.84 182.92 522.68 705.60 74 2 

Price Contingencies 172.61 485.11 657.72 123.30 346.50 469.80 74 1 

Total Project Costs 17,931.38 38,595.03 56,526.41 12,808.13 27,567.88 40,376.01 68  

 

Table 2.4: Summary Project Cost by Expenditure Categories (USD/UA)  
 

CATEGORY 
(USD '000) (UA '000) 

%Foreign 

Exchange 

% 

Total  

Costs Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total 

  I. Investment Costs         

  A. WORKS         

   Construction & Rehabilitation 2,607.87 7,461.53 10,069.40 1,862.77 5,329.66 7,192.43 74 18 

  B. GOODS         

   1. VEHICLES         

    Vehicles 463.75 768.75 1,232.50 331.25 549.11 880.36 62 2 

   2. EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS         

    Equipment 1,130.85 2,199.45 3,330.30 807.75 1,571.04 2,378.79 66 6 

    Furniture 15.85 22.05 37.90 11.32 15.75 27.07 58 - 

    Materials 8,589.92 24,299.25 32,889.17 6,135.66 17,356.61 23,492.27 74 60 

   Subtotal 9,736.62 26,520.75 36,257.37 6,954.73 18,943.39 25,898.12 73 66 

  Subtotal 10,200.37 27,289.50 37,489.87 7,285.98 19,492.50 26,778.48 73 68 

  C. SERVICES         

   
Training, Sensitization, Workshops, 

Seminars, etc. 97.38 14.00 111.38 69.55 10.00 79.55 13 - 

   Technical Assistance & Consultancies 2,032.15 1,770.85 3,803.00 1,451.54 1,264.89 2,716.43 47 7 

   Contractual Services 1,736.75 454.95 2,191.70 1,240.54 324.96 1,565.50 21 4 

   Audit 91.00 49.00 140.00 65.00 35.00 100.00 35 - 

  Subtotal 3,957.28 2,288.80 6,246.08 2,826.63 1,634.85 4,461.48 37 11 

 Total Investment Costs 16,765.52 37,039.83 53,805.35 11,975.37 26,457.02 38,432.39 69 95 

 II. Recurrent Costs         

  B. OPERATION & MAINTENANCE         

   Vehicles 17.25 40.25 57.50 12.32 28.75 41.07 70 - 

   Infrastructures 162.50 87.50 250.00 116.07 62.50 178.57 35 - 

  Subtotal 179.75 127.75 307.50 128.39 91.25 219.64 42 1 

  C. GENERAL OPERATING CHARGES 557.40 210.60 768.00 398.14 150.43 548.57 27 1 

 Total Recurrent Costs 737.15 338.35 1,075.50 526.53 241.68 768.21 31 2 

Total BASELINE COSTS 17,502.67 37,378.18 54,880.85 12,501.91 26,698.70 39,200.61 68 97 

  Physical Contingencies 256.09 731.75 987.84 182.92 522.68 705.60 74 2 

  Price Contingencies 172.60 485.11 657.72 123.30 346.50 469.80 74 1 

Total PROJECT COSTS 17,931.38 38,595.03 56,526.41 12,808.13 27,567.88 40,376.01 68 103 

 

 

 



 

8 

2.4.3 The summary of project costs schedule component, source of finance by category of 

expenditure and sources of finance are presented in Tables 2.5, 2.6 and 2.7 below. Detailed 

project cost tables are presented in Section B2 of the Technical Annexes to this report. 
 

Table 2.5: Summary Project Cost Schedule by Components (UA ‘000) 
 
 

Components 
Totals including contingencies 

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 Total 

1. Crop Productivity Improvement 25,419.94 2,960.79 87.22 93.20 77.44 28,638.59 

2. Commodity Value Chain & 

Agribusiness Development 400.00 876.27 883.20 414.29 400.00 2,973.76 

3. Infrastructure Development - 2,718.95 3,124.01 1,399.57 91.08 7,333.61 

4. Project Management, M&E 405.79 290.09 250.80 265.08 218.29 1,430.05 

Total PROJECT COSTS 26,225.73 6,846.10 4,345.23 2,172.14 786.81 40,376.01 

 

Table 2.6 Source of Finance by Category of Expenditure (UA ‘000) 

 

Expenditure Category 

ADF 

Loan Government Beneficiaries Total %  

 I. Investment Costs      

  A. WORKS      

   Construction & Rehabilitation 8,086.38 - - 8,086.38 20.0 

  B. GOODS      

   1. VEHICLES      

    Vehicles 438.62 456.98 - 895.60 2.2 

   2. EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS      

    Equipment 2,425.60 - - 2,425.60 6.0 

    Furniture 27.27 - - 27.27 0.1 

    Materials 12,010.60 5,828.93 5,828.93 23,668.46 58.6 

   Subtotal 14,463.47 5,828.93 5,828.93 26,121.33 64.7 

  Subtotal 14,902.10 6,285.90 5,828.93 27,016.93 66.9 

  C. SERVICES      

   

Training, Sensitization, Workshops, 

Seminars, etc. 79.55 - - 79.55 0.2 

   Technical Assistance & Consultancies 2,729.90 - - 2,729.90 6.8 

   Contractual Services 1,583.11 - - 1,583.11 3.9 

   Audit 100.00 - - 100.00 0.2 

  Subtotal 4,492.56 - - 4,492.56 11.1 

 Total Investment Costs 27,481.04 6,285.91 5,828.93 39,595.87 98.1 

 II. Recurrent Costs      

  B. OPERATION & MAINTENANCE      

   Vehicles 41.07 - - 41.07 0.1 

   Infrastructures - - 182.14 182.14 0.5 

  Subtotal 41.07 - 182.14 223.21 0.6 

  C. GENERAL OPERATING CHARGES 342.64 214.29 - 556.93 1.4 

 Total Recurrent Costs 383.71 214.29 182.14 780.14 1.9 

Total PROJECT COSTS 27,864.75 6,500.19 6,011.07 40,376.01 100.0 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

9 

Table 2.7: Project Costs by Financing Sources (UA ‘000) 
 

Sources of finance Foreign Cost Local Cost Total Cost % Total Cost 

 ADF Loan 18,418.01 9,446.74 27,864.75 69.0 

 Government 4,714.42 1,785.77 6,500.19 16.1 

 Beneficiaries 4,435.45 1,575.62 6,011.07 14.9 

Total 27,567.88 12,808.13 40,376.01 100.0 

 

2.4.4 Justification for Local Costs Financing: The ADF loan of UA 27.86 million will 

finance 100% of Works; 55% of Goods and Materials; 100% of Services; and 68% of recurrent 

costs. The loan will finance 67% of foreign costs and 72% of local costs. The Government of 

Ghana does not have the capacity to finance all local costs of the project as a result of the current 

economic hardship and fiscal deficit facing the country. Consequently, local costs have been 

factored into AfDB financing in order not to delay implementation of activities.   

2.5 Programme’s target area and population 

The Project will be implemented in three agribusiness zones (1, 2 & 5) defined by SADA 

covering the following towns: Savelugu-Nanton (Nasia/Nabogu); Builsa South 

(Fumbisi/Gbedembilisi); Tolon (Golinga); Kumbungu (Bontanga); West Gonja (Nabori, 

Busumu); and West Mamprusi (Walewale). Additionally, four seed centres at Winneba, Ho, 

Kumasi and Tamale would be rehabilitated. The direct beneficiaries are about 50,000 

economically active smallholders living in the selected agro-processing zones; and the 

processing firms that serve as a direct market for the farmers. The indirect beneficiaries include 

the entire population (consumers) that will benefit from the availability of food and business 

associations who provide services to the producers and processors. This number is expected to 

increase significantly when other economically active value chain entrepreneurs get involved 

in the Project. Among the target group, women and youth play a major role in crop production, 

processing, small enterprises operation and marketing. About 50% of beneficiaries (women) 

will be specifically targeted in project activities and to reap benefits. 

2.6 Participatory process for programme identification, design and implementation 

The preparation mission had a general consultation and technical working sessions with 

Government personnel and key stakeholder groups in agriculture including development 

partners. The outcome of the discussions was the development of a logical framework for the 

Project and the preparation report that is forming the basis for the appraisal report. Stakeholders 

will also be consulted during the preparation of the ESMF and site specific ESMPs and their 

inputs will be taken into consideration during planning, design and implementation. A 

stakeholder engagement plan will be developed for the implementation phase of the project. 

2.7 Bank Group experience, lessons reflected in the programme design 

2.7.1 As at 30 December 2016, the overall performance of the Bank’s portfolio in Ghana was 

rated satisfactory, with an overall rating of 3.0 on a scale of 1 to 4, with 4 being highly 
satisfactory. The portfolio was rated 2.9 for implementation progress, and 3.4 for development 

outcome. The portfolio has six (6) project at risk, of which three projects (i) Rural Enterprise 

Programme III; (ii) Development of Skills for Industry (DSIP), and (iii) the Electricity 
Distribution Systems Reinforcement are experiencing slow implementation. The Greater Accra 

Sustainable Sanitation and Livelihoods Improvement Project experienced signature delays, 
which have now been surmounted with the signing of the loan in September 2017. The Ghana 



 

10 

Country Office (COGH) improved in most of the key performance indicators during the period 
2013 to 2017. Average time lapse between approval and first disbursement has reduced to an 

all-time low of 5.4 months compared to 18 months in 2015. The pace of implementation of the 
lending program and portfolio was adversely impacted by Government’s imposition of a 

moratorium on new loans, between 2013 and 2015, as part of its debt management strategy. 

This moratorium contributed to the drop in the disbursement ratio from 28% in 2015 to 18% in 
2016. Disbursement is now on the upward path, at 22.4% as at August 2017. Further details are 

provided in Annex B1.2 of the Technical annexes. 

 

2.7.2 The lessons learnt from the Bank’s operations in the country has enhanced project 

design for implementation efficiency and sustainability. For example the CSPE (2002-2015) 

indicated that the sustainability of agriculture sector projects was limited by project design 

flaws, particularly the lack of clear management plans for the maintenance of key assets such 

as pack houses and markets. This flaw has been addressed in this project by the new approaches 

which considers intervening to fill the gaps in the operations of actors along the value chains of 

interest as against the concentration of the activities supported by the program around just the 

farmers. The project designs also builds on lessons learnt form the NRGP in the areas of 

Appropriate exit strategy for project implementing support agencies; Readiness of project for 

implementation at design; and Matching grants. Specifically, based on the experiences of this 

project and others, APIP is designed to support existing government institutions such as the 

CSIR-SARI, SRI to strengthen their delivery of services that are under their mandate such as 

breeder and foundation seed production; and soil nutrient analysis as against using NGOs or 

private sector. It is also designed to leverage on private sector investment on the ground, such 

as existing AMSECs and AVNASH and catalyse their activities (e.g. mechanization and 

primary processing), without creating dependency of the project funds. APIP has already 

identified the major infrastructure for which feasibilities had already been done including 

rehabilitation works on the existing Golinga and Botanga Irrigation Schemes; improvement of 

water management infrastructure for selected flood recession schemes, rehabilitation of 12 

warehouses have all be identified. APIP is not introducing any one fit all matching grant 

program. It will leverage on the government’s own input and mechanization support program 

in which case mechanized service provides are able to acquire machinery / equipment from the 

government with a concessionary repayment arrangement including a grant element.  In the 

cases of non-existing technologies, particularly for mechanization such as using laser levellers, 

mouldboard plough, rice transplanters etc. the project will provide for full grants to the 

mechanization service providers to acquire the technology and promote them 

2.8 Key performance indicators 

The overall impact of the SAZAPIP include improved food and nutrition security, job creation 

and wealth creation for commodity value chain actors. Through improved agricultural 

production, productivity and market linkages, about 20,000 jobs will be created, of which 

women and youths account for about 60%, along the value chains. It is envisaged that there will 

be income increase by 25% along the value chains and employment of women and youth in the 

agriculture sector. The crowding in of private sector investment in terms of investment volume 

as a result of the demonstration of improved technologies and production systems will be a key 

indicator of success.  

 

 



 

11 

III PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1. Financial and economic performance 

3.1.1 A financial assessment of the project was undertaken using activity models, and on the 

basis of prevailing market prices. The key assumptions underlying the analyses include: (i) 

50,000 farmers being actively engaged in farming at full capacity of the project; (ii) additional 

25% increase in income will be earned under the project, (iii) farmers will adopt the improved 

seed varieties (iii) a 20-year time period was used to measure the incremental benefits from the 

project; (iv) the opportunity cost of capital (OCC) used for discounting future benefits was 

estimated to be 12%. For the economic analysis, (v) hired labour value was adjusted by a 

conversion factor of 0.75; (vi) the rehabilitation of the seed system will ensure national quality 

seed supply. These analyses were carried-out with financial and economic costs generated using 

Costab 32. Summary of financial and economic analysis is in Annex VII and further elaborated 

in Annex B6 in Volume II of the appraisal report. The project is expected generate the following 

benefits: (i) increase in food production; (ii) increased private sector investment; (iii) improved 

seed production and storage; (iv) improve average household income; (v) provide employment 

for 50,000 farmers and entrepreneurs; and (vi) enhanced crop nutrition. 

 

 Table 3.1: key economic and financial figures 
 

FIRR : 23%    NPV (base case) is USD   2,333,835.26   

EIRR : 28%    NPV (base case)  is USD  2,683,910.55      

   NB: detailed calculations are available in Annex B7 

 

3.1.2 Financial analysis 

 

Based on the above assumptions, the financial analysis generated Net Present Value (NPV) of 

USD2,333,835.26 and financial internal rate of return (FIRR) of 23%, as captured in the 

technical annexes (B6). Based on the above analysis, the project is deemed financially feasible. 

The FIRR of 23% is higher than the opportunity cost of capital (12%). 

 

3.1.4 Economic analysis 

 

The economic analysis was conducted using the same approach as the financial analysis, on the 

basis of shadow prices of tradable goods, producer (farm gate) prices and total cost of project. 

In addition, other indirect benefits were also expected, such as, reduction in post-harvest losses; 

provision of mechanic service centre for agro equipment, reliable soil information system for 

fertilizer blends, efficient input distribution system through the farmer database system and 

lower cost of transportation of goods and services. However, these additional benefits were 

difficult to adequately value in monetary terms due to the limited scope of this report. In these 

conditions, the economic analysis yielded an NPV of USD2,683,910.55 and the economic 

internal rate of return (EIRR) of 28% as captured in the technical annexes. 

3.2. Environmental and social impacts 

3.2.1 Environment  

 

3.2.1.1 The Ministry of Food and Agriculture, has made efforts to ensure sustainable land and 

environmental management within the sector through implementation of several policies and 

programmes and these include: Food and Agriculture Sector Development Policy (FASDEP II) 



 

12 

and an Agricultural Sustainable Land Management Strategy and Action Plan was developed to 

operationalize the policy objective. MoFA works in collaboration EPA at all levels to ensure 

that environmental sustainability policy and programmes are implemented. The proposed 

Savannah Zone Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project is classified as a Category 2 

because the project activities are expected to have impacts that can be avoided and minimised 

and will mostly be site-specific environmental and social impacts. The Project also falls under 

Schedule 2 of the Environmental Assessment Regulations 1999 LI 1652 of the Ghana 

Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). The project is expected to finance construction and 

rehabilitation of small irrigation schemes, processing, marketing and storage facilities as well 

as support activities for increased production and commercialization. The project’s precise 

location, scope and scale of the project interventions will not be known before project 

implementation; hence, an overarching environmental and social management framework 

(ESMF) needs to be developed to provide the framework for managing the environment and 

social risks/issues of the project. This will guide the preparation of environmental and social 

impact assessment (ESIA) and development of site specific ESMP during project 

implementation.  

 

3.2.1.2 The anticipated negative impacts are those associated with the construction and/or 

rehabilitation works and agricultural production and value-chain development activities and 

include:  (i) loss of vegetation cover and habitat fragmentation due to site clearing (ii) land 

degradation, soil erosion, and pollution (iii) degradation of water resources through siltation 

and pollution (iv) disruption of water flows and hydrologic cycle which may impact activities 

of other water users, (v) noise, vibration and emissions from construction works and operation 

of machinery that may impair air quality and induce health implications, (vi) increased use of 

agrochemicals including pesticides and fertilizers that may have impacts on human health and 

biodiversity (vii) solid and liquid wastes generated from processing and marketing facilities 

(viii) increase in bush fires through the slush and burn traditional agricultural systems; (ix) 

climate risk impacts of GHG emissions and cumulative impacts of flooding if infrastructure is 

not well designed (x) increase in public health concerns (vector borne diseases, HIV/AIDs and 

other STDs) due to creation of vector habitats such as stagnant waters and influx of workers in 

project site areas and increased land conflicts due to commercialization, most lands are 

customary. The project is not expected to have land acquisition because the infrastructure 

development will be done on existing irrigation schemes and feeder roads with existing right of 

way. During operation phase, agriculture activities of value chain actors may lead to (i) 

increased use of agrochemicals including pesticides and fertilizers, which may contribute to 

soil and water (surface and groundwater) contamination, and increase health-risks of people 

exposed to pesticides, (ii) maintenance of irrigation infrastructure can generate dredged 

materials and waste and effluents from processing and marketing facilities can result in soil and 

water contamination when not properly disposed of. These impacts are mostly site specific and 

can be readily managed with the application of well-defined measures elaborated in site-specific 

ESIAs/ESMPs such as (i) restricting clearance of vegetation to construction and farming areas 

and revegetation by planting of trees; (ii) rehabilitation and filling of the exposed or excavated 

soil soon after completion of works and avoiding or minimizing compaction of soils, (ii) 

ensuring environmental flow for rivers/lakes, (iii) establishing sustainable water management 

and flood mitigation systems, and (iv) reduction of GHG emissions by ensuring well serviced 

machinery is used and proper processing facilities waste management; (v) capacity building of 

value chain actors to promote good agriculture and sustainable environment and land 

management practices (vi) use of improved agriculture technologies such as integrated soil 

fertility management (ISFM), integrated pest management (IPM) and Waste-to Energy; (vii) 

using lessons learned from similar projects. In addition, the project will ensure that institutional 



 

13 

and technical capacity that currently exist within MoFA is strengthened by having an 

Environmental Safeguard specialist in the Program Management Unit and training of 

Environmental Desk Officers at the local level to ensure effective site specific ESMP 

development, implementation and monitoring/reporting.  

 

3.2.1.3 Ghana SAZAPIP will generate significant positive impacts including (i) improved 

production, and competitiveness of selected agriculture commodities that will contribute to 

increased income opportunities for value chain actors including vulnerable groups, and support 

the local economy of the northern regions of Ghana; (ii) improved access to irrigation that will 

foster water management and reduce the vulnerability of farmers to precarious weather 

conditions and ensure all year round agriculture activities; (iii) improved agronomic practices 

and technologies for selected crops and improved varieties that are adapted to different climatic 

conditions; and (iv) improved agricultural production, productivity and market linkages that 

will foster job creation along the value chains. 

  

3.2.2  Climate change 

 

3.2.2.1 Ghanaian agriculture and food systems are climate dependent and recognized as one of 

the most vulnerable sectors to climate change. Indications are that the Northern Region of 

Ghana is currently experiencing seasonal variability of climate and rainfall. Consultations with 

MoFA and EPA indicated that the region is susceptible to flooding and drought that are 

unpredictable. The current increase in rain intensity is aggravating flooding events causing 

riverbank erosion, saltwater intrusion, infrastructure damages, crop failure, fisheries 

destruction, and loss of biodiversity. This has significant implications on livelihoods of 

agricultural communities who are mostly dependent of rain fed agriculture. Recommendations 

were made to incorporate climate risk mitigation and management strategies in the project 

design. 

 

3.2.2.2 The project will mainstream climate risk mitigation and adaptation activities in the 

project design and implementation that will focus on reducing the dependency on rainfall for 

agricultural activities as well as protect ecosystems at risk from other natural or anthropogenic 

hazards that accompany floods, drought and other land use changes.  The program will explore 

climate change adaptation technologies for agriculture consistent with priorities established in 

Ghana’s National Adaptation Program for Action (NAPA), Climate Change Policy, and the 

MoFA’s National Climate Smart Agriculture and Food Security Action Plan (2016-2020). This 

will ensure that the project facilitates and promotes greater resilience and adaptation to climate 

change by promoting climate smart agriculture through use of improved agriculture 

technologies and conservation agriculture.  

 

3.2.3 Social Impact and Nutrition 

 

According to the most recent data in the 2014 Ghana Demographic and Health Survey (DHS), 

the prevalence of stunting is significantly higher in the Northern Region, with 33% stunting in 

children under five as compared to the national prevalence of 19%. Also the prevalence of 

anaemia in children under five is very high (82.1%). The Project will contribute to increased 

dietary diversity among households, and especially among women and children, in the Northern 

and Upper East regions. The actions envisaged include: (i) community sensitization on good 

nutrition and hygiene practices, and enhanced management of acute malnutrition, through 

strengthening of the Community Health Workers system; (ii) equipment of health facilities with 

materials for anthropometric measurements where there is an identified need (based on 



 

14 

assessment by Ghana Health Services); (iii) linkage of small holder farmers to the Ghana School 

Feeding Programme and (iv) nutrition and hygiene education in schools, complemented by fruit 

tree planting and school gardens. To link the School Feeding Programme to the smallholder 

farmers benefiting from the project, agriculture extension officers will be involved, who will 

also be engaged in the school gardens and fruit tree planting. In order to accommodate all these 

activities, a total of UA3 million will be earmarked for the support to the Community Health 

Workers system, the provision of equipment to health centres, and the nutrition and hygiene 

education in schools, complemented by fruit tree planting and school gardens. Part of the budget 

will also be used to support the cost of a representative Food Security and Nutrition Survey to 

support the M&E component of the Project and evaluate impact in terms of household dietary 

diversity at district levels.  

 

3.2.4 Gender Aspects 

 

3.2.4.1 In Ghana, women constitute 52% of the national Agricultural labour force, contribute 

46% to the total GDP and also produce 70% of subsistence crops (MOFA, 2002). In the SADA 

zone, where the project will be implemented, women play a major role in farming and food 

processing. Women are engaged in planting, weeding, harvesting, processing and marketing of 

agricultural produce in the region. Women are involved in the agricultural processing and 

contribute at more than 70% of agriculture transformation. The gender analysis of the 

agriculture sector in the area revealed the gender gaps along the value chain, with women in a 

disadvantaged side. Most of the gender gaps are outlined in  access to land and farming 

equipment’s, access to extension services delivery, access to certified seeds supply, fertilizer 

and crop protection materials, access to agricultural technologies, agriculture processing, access 

to credit and financial services. The Project will contribute to implement the Gender and 

agriculture Strategy by empowering women in the agriculture production. 

 

3.2.4.2 To address the identified gender gaps, the project will implement specific activities and 

put in place measures to uplift the conditions of women in the agriculture value chain, as 

follows: i) Engage with the traditional authorities and family heads to ensure land security for 

women in the project; ii) Ensure that equipment is easy to use and woman-friendly; iii) Ensure 

that women have equal access to improved inputs; iv) Train women and men on safe storage 

options for their produce and utilization of fertilizers; (v) ensure that women have equal access 

to marketing networks; and vi) Organize training for women in the areas of improved 

production, business management, financial literacy, packaging, leadership and decision 

making; good nutrition especially to pregnant women and under five-year children; and (vi) 

organise sensitizations on women’s rights and access to land. The total budget allocated to 

gender equality promotion and nutrition is around UA I million.  

 

3.2.5 Involuntary Resettlement 

 

There is no involuntary resettlement or land acquisition or any loss, by the population, of 

property, sources of income and livelihoods envisioned within the implementation of the 

Project activities. The project interventions will be implemented on existing agricultural 

systems but if any loss occurs it will be compensated based on AfDB requirements.  

 

 

 

 

 



 

15 

IV IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1. Implementation arrangements 

4.1.1 The Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MOFA) is the Executing Agency of the 

Savannah Zone Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project (SAZAPIP). A National Project 

Steering Committee (NPSC) will be constituted chaired by the Hon. Minister of MOFA or his 

representative, to provide strategic direction and oversight guidance to the project. To ensure 

effective project coordination and monitoring, the day-to-day project administration will be 

managed by a Project Coordination and Management Unit (PCMU) within MOFA, under the 

direct supervision of the Chief Director. The PCMU will be headed by a Project Coordinator 

who will report to the Chief Director, and also to the Northern Regional Director of Agriculture. 

The Ministry had used a similar arrangement to successfully implement Bank financed projects 

such as the Northern Rural Growth Program (NRGP), Export Marketing and Quality Awareness 

Project (EMQAP), and Afram Plains District Agricultural Development Project (APDADP). 

The Ministry is thus familiar with the Bunk’s financial management rules, procurement 

requirements and disbursements procedures. MOFA is already connected to the government 

integrated financial information management system (GIFMIS), although the system is yet to 

be fully deployed for all projects. Thus, the PCMU of the proposed project will adopt the Sun 

Accounting software of the just completed NRGP for financial accounting and reporting, and 

migrate to the GIFMIS when the system is fully deployed to projects.  
  
4.1.2 The PCMU staff will be competitively recruited by MOFA and located in the office 

premises of the Regional Department of Agriculture at Tamale. The staff requirement will 

include: the Project Coordinator, a Financial Controller, an Accounts Officer, Agronomist, a 

Monitoring and Evaluation Specialists, an Agribusiness specialist, an Agricultural Engineer and 

a Procurement Specialist. The services of other experts such as Irrigation specialist, Gender and 

Nutrition specialist and Environmental specialist will be drawn from regional government 

institutions. For implementation of nutrition related activities, the PCMU will collaborate with 

other Government stakeholders including the Ghana Health Services, the Ghana School 

Feeding Program and the Ghana Education Regional Offices. SADA will play an active role in 

work activity planning, implementation monitoring and also attracting investors to collaborate 

with the Project. Relevant government agencies such as Projects Coordination Unit, Crop 

Services Directorate, Agricultural Engineering Services Directorate (AESD), Ghana Irrigation 

Development Authority (GIDA), Plant Protection and Regulatory Services Directorate 

(PPRSD), Ghana Grains and Legumes Development Board (GLDB), Environmental Protection 

Authority and Ministry of Trade Industry (MoTI) will be supported to conduct macro-

monitoring of the project’s activities.  
 

4.1.3 A National Project Steering Committee (NPSC) will be established to provide 

strategic policy direction and oversight guidance for the project implementation. Its core 

activities shall include implementation of program strategy, oversee planning, review progress 

and impact, review/ approval of annual work plans and budgets as well as ensuring effective 

linkages with related programs. The NPSC membership would include: (i) one representative 

each from the relevant ministries (MOFA, MOTI MOF, MLGRD, MORH); (ii) one 

representative from selected public-sector agencies and institutions (BoG, DFR, EPA, SADA); 

(iii) three representatives from the Farmer Based Organizations; (v) three representatives from 

large-scale private sector traders/processors; and (vi) four representative from private investors 

and management firms of commodity chains facilities. NPSC meetings would be chaired by the 

Hon. Minister of MOFA or his designated representative, with the Project Coordinator as 

secretary. The NPSC would meet at least twice a year. Costs related to the meetings of the 

NPSC will be financed from ADF loan. 



 

16 

 

Procurement arrangements 
 

4.1.4 “Procurement of goods (including non-consultancy services), works and the acquisition 

of consulting services, financed by the Bank for the project, will be carried out in accordance 

with the “Procurement Policy and Methodology for Bank Group Funded Operations” (BPM), 

dated October 2015 and following the provisions stated in the Financing Agreement. 

Specifically, Procurement would be carried out following: 

 

4.1.5 Borrower Procurement System (BPS): Procurement through Open competitive Bidding 

National (OCBN) procedures will be carried out using BPS comprising its Laws and 

Regulations (Ghana Public Procurement Act, 2003 (Act 663), as amended Act, 2016 (Act 914) 

using the national Standard Solicitation Documents (SSDs) agreed during project negotiations” 

for various group of transactions to be entailed under the project, detailed in annex B 5.1 and 

the provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement.  

 

4.1.6 Bank Procurement Policy and Methodology (BPM): Bank standard PMPs, using the 

relevant Bank Standard Solicitation Documents (SDDs), will be used for Open Competitive 

Bidding International (OCBI) contracts for both goods and works and Acquisition of 

Consulting Services as indicated in the Technical Annex B5, Para. B.5.3.2.  

 

4.1.7 Procurement Risks and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): the assessment of procurement 

risks at the Country, Sector, and Project levels and of procurement capacity at the Executing 

Agency (EA), were undertaken for the project and the output have informed the decisions on 

the procurement regimes (BPS and Banks PMP) being used for specific transactions or groups 

of similar transactions under the project. The appropriate risks mitigation measures have been 

included in the procurement PRCA action plan proposed in Annex B5, Para 5.3.2. The project 

activities derived from these components has informed the procurement risk and capacity 

assessment as well as the market analysis based on which the procurement strategy of the 

project has been developed. In addition some of the identified activities will require that MoUs 

are adopted to engage the services of some of the project partners including research institutions 

and the details of these arrangements are clearly defined in the technical annexes, B5. 

 

 Financial management and disbursement arrangements  

 

4.1.8 The Ministry of Food and Agriculture (MOFA) through its Project Coordination and 

Management Unit model will be directly responsible for the financial management 

arrangements of the project. The Project financial management will be headed by the FMS, 

who shall be a seasoned chartered accountant with hands-on experience on AfDB FM rules and 

procedures, assisted by an experienced Accounts Officer and Accounts Assistant/ Clerk. MOFA 

has not identified qualified accountants from within its ranks that can fill the top project FM 

positions, and would thus be expected to competitively fill the FMS and Accounts Officer 

positions. Both persons will be required to be proficient in the use of Sun Accounting Software 

and the practical application of IPSAS Cash Basis of Accounting. The Accounts Assistant 

position shall however be deployed from existing MOFA staff for staff capacity building and 

knowledge transfer purposes. In harmony with Government of Ghana (GoG) accounting 

standards and practices within MOFA, the project shall adopt the IPSAS Cash Basis for 

financial reporting.  

4.1.9 In terms of information flow, the FMS will report to the PC and to the Finance Director 

of MOFA (to ensure project results are correctly included in the overall consolidated accounts 



 

17 

of the Ministry). The FMS will be required to produce quarterly unaudited interim financial 

reports (IFRs) and annual financial reports in accordance with IPSAS Cash Basis, from the Sun 

Accounting software. The IFRs must be submitted to the Bank within 30 days after the end of 

the quarter reported on, while the annual audited financial reports must be submitted not later 

than six (6) months after the end of the applicable financial year. MOFA internal control 

systems, including the internal audit function (which appears adequate and operating 

effectively) shall be extended to the cover project operations too. A Project Implementation 

Manual (PIM) consisting of Technical Implementation, FM procedures and Administrative 

procedures components will be developed and adopted from the NRGP PIM, to guide project 

implementation, streamline FM practices and administrative procedures. Previous audits of 

MOFA managed Bank financed projects were generally satisfactory, however the finance staff 

tended to leave the service of MOFA/the project on completion of the project activities. 

 

4.1.10 Disbursement: Two of the Bank’s four disbursement methods are recommended to be 

used in disbursing funds to the project: (i) Direct payments; and (ii) Payments through Special 

Account (SA). Direct payments method will generally be used for the larger contracts signed 

between project management and contractors/suppliers/ service providers, while the SA method 

will be used for meeting recurrent/ administrative expenses and smaller contracts. A US Dollar 

denominated SA will be opened at the Bank of Ghana (BoG), to receive ADF resources from 

the Bank. A GHS (local currency) account will be opened at BoG to receive transfers from the 

SA for making payments in Ghana Cedis. A second GHS account will be opened at the BoG to 

receive counterpart cash contributions from the Government of Ghana. All project accounts 

will be managed by the PCMU. All disbursements under the project will follow the 

disbursements procedures outlined in the Bank’s Disbursement Handbook.  

 

4.1.11 Audit: The project will be audited by an external audit firm, selected competitively, and 

in accordance with agreed procedures involving the Ghana Audit Service (GAS), which despite 

having the constitutional mandate for all government audits, tends to outsource the audits of 

donor projects to acceptable audit firms. The audit will be conducted on terms of reference 

acceptable to the Bank, and shall be submitted to the Bank no later than six months after the 

end of the year audited.  

 

4.1.12 Overall Conclusion: The overall FM risk is assessed as moderate. To mitigate the risk 

further, MOFA is expected to hire an FMS and Accounts Officer for the project; develop a PIM 

which includes technical, financial management and administrative procedures components; 

and adopt/ upgrade the existing Sun Systems accounting software for use by the project.  

4.2 Monitoring 

4.2.1 The foundation for the overall project monitoring and evaluation systems will be the 

logical framework, a series of key performance indicators and project operational manual 

(POM) which will be prepared by the PCMU shortly after project loan approval. MOFA will 

monitor overall operations for planning and facilitation purposes for the production aspects of 

the project, implementation of the drainage and roads infrastructure for attainment of national 

standards. The PCMU will monitor and evaluate overall impact of the project including 

environmental and social compliance and performance and compile the project’s quarterly and 

annual reports for dissemination to the Bank Group, MOFA, other line ministries, and SADA. 

A mid-term review (MTR) will be undertaken two years after project start to review the 

project’s achievements and constraints. Similarly, upon completion of project investments at 

the end of program year four, the PCMU will prepare a Borrower’s project completion report.  

 



 

18 

4.2.2 The initial assessment of national capacity indicates a satisfactory rating. The Ghana 

Statistical Service leads the efficient production and management of quality official statistics 

based on international standards, and will be used to assess the contribution of the project 

towards the country and regional development goals and objectives as defined in the relevant 

development plans. In using the performance indicators and targets specified in the results-

based framework, project implementers tracking progress towards project results are expected 

to take special note of changes that reflect advancement towards the translation of outputs into 

development outcomes. In developing monitoring and planning indicators, they will be gender 

disaggregated. The key functions of the M&E Officer in the PCMU will be to ensure quality 

and accountability of monitoring; information management; facilitation of knowledge building; 

and knowledge sharing on monitoring and evaluation. 

4.3. Governance 

Based on Bank’s experience in implementing projects in Ghana, the existing governance 

practices and controls have been deemed satisfactory. The implementation of SAZAPIP 

requires good governance at all levels from the national to District levels. This is in relation to 

better responsiveness, transparency, accountability and efficiency in the use of resources. 

Hence, the institutional arrangement has been designed to ensure good governance, and will 

serve as an instrument for achieving Project objectives.  

 

4.4. Sustainability 

 

The ownership of the SAZAPIP is made manifest by the roles that various stakeholders played 

during formulation and preparation of the Project. The Ministry of Food and Agriculture put up 

a technical team of experts to review the various reports produced by the consultants. The 

maintenance of the access roads and sundry infrastructure will be included in the annual 

recurrent budget of the District Assemblies where the project sites reside. The present Project 

will build capacities of the Regional agricultural officers in agri-business management to ensure 

profitability for the value chain actors. 

4.5 Risk management 

The current agricultural policy and sectoral strategies of Ghana have been developed in a 

consultative manner with the full participation of all relevant stake holders. The Bank Group 

will engage in constant policy dialogue to ensure that the policy, institutional and funding 

(particularly public expenditure) environment remain conducive to agricultural growth and 

development. Furthermore, social risks will be reduced through gender-sensitive approaches 

and ensuring that the poor are not excluded from project benefits. SAZAPIP is expected to be 

classified as a Category 2 because the project activities are expected to have environmental and 

social impacts that can be avoided and minimised since they will mostly be site-specific. 

Climate screening is yet to be done. The following are the main risks identified and with 

mitigation measures.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

19 

Risks  Mitigation measures 

Macroeconomic risks - High 

probability: slow economic growth 

and deterioration of the country’s 

creditworthiness due to fall in cocoa 

and other commodity prices.  

Mitigation measure: The Bank will intensify the dialogue with 

the government to adopt supportive macroeconomic policies to 

rationalize fiscal expenditure, introduce exchange rate flexibility, 

strengthen the banking system to prevent systemic crisis, and 

implement structural reforms for economic diversification. 

Environmental, Social and Climate 

Risk – Medium probability: The 

project activities are anticipated to 

have site specific environmental and 

social risks. The proposed project 

area is prone to climate change 

impacts. 

Mitigation measures: An ESMF has been developed for the 

project. During project implementation, site specific ESMPs will 

incorporate integrated pest management plans and climate risk 

mitigation and adaptation measures. ESMP development and 

implementation will be part of the monitoring and reporting of the 

project activities.  

4.6 Knowledge Building 

Knowledge building will be vital to the success of the Project. Considering the new approach 

in agricultural commodity value chains development, the results of the Project will be 

monitored closely. Knowledge will be built on the evolving concept of decentralized 

implementation unit located in the District; the role of value chain actors including farmers and 

farmers’ organization, women, youth, private sector, commercial and public sector. Knowledge 

will be captured using analysis of M&E database, supervision missions, mid-term reports, and 

periodic impact assessments and field exchange visits of the stakeholders within and outside 

the production clusters. In addition, knowledge would be disseminated by showcasing the 

Project results using Bank’s communication systems (Intranet, short documentaries on Bank 

website, etc.). For the purposes of publicity and sharing of project results, the project could 

recruit a local firm as and when the need be. The Farmer Field Schools will serve as sources of 

innovative knowledge and information sharing learning tools empowering farmers and other 

actors of the value chain to train their peers, share knowledge and experiences, thus reducing 

their overdependence on the public extension agents. This will also expand significantly the 

number of value chain actors having access to the disseminated knowledge and information. 

The technical assistance supports will introduce and consolidate knowledge and skills, and 

facilitate technology and skills transfer both at the community and national levels. It is 

envisaged that knowledge generated by the pilot demonstration plots will form the basis for 

private sector investment in the agribusiness in the ecological zone as part of TASI.  

V LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

5.1.  Legal instrument 

The legal instruments to finance this operation is an ADF loan agreement for UA 27.86 million 

between the Republic of Ghana and the Bank.  

5.2.  Conditions associated with Bank Group intervention  

Entry into Force of the Loan Agreement 

The entry into force of the Loan Agreement shall be subject to the fulfilment by the Borrower of 

the provisions of Section 12.01 of the General Conditions of the Bank applicable to Loan 

Agreements and Guarantee Agreements.  

 

 

 



 

20 

A. Conditions precedent to first disbursement 
 

The obligations of the Bank to make the first disbursement of the loan shall be conditional upon 

the entry into force of the Agreement and the fulfillment by the Borrower, in form and substance 

satisfactory to the Bank, of the following condition:  

 

(i) Provide evidence of the appointment of the members of the Project Coordination 
and Management Unit (PCMU), which will comprise the following key officers: 

(a) Project Coordinator; (b) Financial Controller; (c) Accounts Officer; (d) 

Agronomist; (e) Monitoring and Evaluation Specialists; (f) Agribusiness 

Specialist (g) Agricultural Engineer; and (h) Procurement Specialist, whose 

experience and qualifications shall be acceptable to the Bank (refer to paragraphs 

4.1.1 and 4.1.5).  

 

(ii) Provide evidence satisfactory to the Fund that it has opened a foreign currency 
Special Account (SA) and a local currency account (LCA) with a bank acceptable 

to the Fund 

  

Other Conditions:  
 

The Borrower shall, in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank, fulfil the following 

conditions: 

 

(i) Not later than six months from the date of loan effectiveness, submit a project 
operational manual (POM) acceptable to the Bank; 

 

Undertakings 

 

The Borrower shall, in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank: 

 

(ii) Carry out, and cause its contractors to carry out, the Project in accordance with: 
(a) Bank’s rules and procedures; (b) national legislation; and (c) the 

recommendations, requirements and procedures set forth in the Environmental 

and Social Management Plan (ESMP) prepared for the Project; and 

 

(iii) Deliver to the Bank Project quarterly reports in form and substance acceptable 
to the Bank, describing the Borrower’s implementation of the ESMP (including 

any implementation failures and related remedies, if any). 

5.3. Compliance with Bank Policies 

 This Project complies with all applicable Bank policies. 

 Non-standard conditions (if applicable): N/A 
 

VI RECOMMENDATION 

 

Management recommends that the Board of Directors approve an ADF loan of UA 27.86 

million to the Republic of Ghana for the purposes of the activities in the proposed project and 

subject to the conditions stipulated in the present report. 




























































 

 

 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND 

 

 
 

 

 

GHANA 

 

 

INCENTIVE-BASED RISK-SHARING SYSTEM FOR AGRICULTURAL 

LENDING (GIRSAL) PROJECT   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


September 2018 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
  

  
  

  
  

  
 

 

 

Loan information 

 

Client’s information 

______________________________________________________________________ 

RECIPIENT :       REPUBLIC OF GHANA (ROG) 

EXECUTING AGENCY :       GIRSAL LIMITED 

Financing plan 

Source 

 

Amount (million) 

 
Instrument 

UA USD 
African Development Fund (ADF) 10.00 14.16 Loan  to ROG 

RoG/MOF  34.64 49.09 Counterpart Equity 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 44.64 63.25 - 

 

ADF’s key financing information 

 
Loan currency UA 

Interest rate  100 Basis Points 

Tenure 30 Years 

Grace period   5 Years 

Commitment fee  50 Basis Points 

Service Charge                                                                                                      75 Basis Points 

 

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected) 

 

Identification Mission      May, 2017 

Preparation Mission      August 2017 

Concept Note Approval      September, 2017 

Appraisal Mission      February,2018 

Programme approval 19 September, 2018 

Effectiveness 19 November, 2018 

Completion        November, 2023 

Last Disbursement         February, 2024 

 

  



 

iv 

 

Ghana Incentive-Based Risk-Sharing System for Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL) Project 

Result-Based Logical Framework (RBLF) 

 

                                                 
1 Over a 10 year period 

Country and Project name: Ghana Incentive Based Risk Sharing System for Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL) 

Purpose of the Project:  To create a medium-term facility that would provide; financing, technical assistance, risk management and management information systems that enhance objective pricing of agricultural 

credit.  

 

RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS BASELINE 
TARGET 

(2018-2023) 
MEANS OF VERIFICATION RISKS/MITIGATION MEASURES 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Increased economic growth and reduction in 

poverty 

  Expanded commercial bank and financial institutions  

lending in agricultural value chains 

 

3.4% 6.8%1 BoG   statutory report / 

Ghana Bureau of Statistics 

Statutory Bank Lending 

Profiles/Afdb supervision  

Macroeconomic risks - slow economic growth 

Mitigation measure: GIRSAL will intensify the 

dialogue with the government to adopt supportive 

macroeconomic policies 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

OUTCOMES 

Outcome 1: Increased leveraging effect of 
public funding to incentivize private sector 

lending to Agribusiness 

1.1 Multiplier effect of credit guarantees for crowding-
in  commercial lending into Agriculture  

X1 X3 BoG Reports, GIRSAL 
Quarterly Performance Reports 

 
Risk: BoG increasing the base lending rate 

Mitigation: Ensuring Base + minimum % possible 

 

 

Outcome 2: Improved Financing Terms for 

Agribusiness  

2.1 Reduced  effective interest rates for agribusiness 

loans attached to GIRSAL credit guarantee scheme  

35% (as at July 2017) 30% or less Review of samples of signed 

term sheets 

 

2.2 Reduced Loan Processing Time  base lines studies  10% reduction Review of samples of signed 
term sheets 

 

2.3  Improved Loan Tenor Terms  transition from 

seasonal financing 

 towards term financing Review of samples of signed 

term sheets 

 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

OUTPUTS 

Component 1:  Promoting De-risking Instruments for the Agriculture Sector 

Establishment of: 

(i) Credit Guarantee Scheme 

(ii) Technical Assistance 
(iii) Insurance Facility 

(iv) Digital Finance Platform  for design and 

roll out of low cost distribution systems for 

Financial Services 

1.1 No of new Financial Institutions that commit to 

lending Agribusinesses  

3 6 Portfolio Management reports 

 

  

 

Risk: No Stakeholder interest 
Mitigation: FI stakeholder sessions organised to get 

buy in from all major commercial banks, MFIs and 

rural banks. 

 

1.2 No. of FIs with dedicated Agriculture 
Desk/Loan/Credit Officers to serve Agribusiness 

Portfolio 

3 6 



 

v 

 

 

1.3 No. of Agribusinesses with successful loan 

submissions  

(% of which are women and youth owned businesses); 

 

0 10% utilization in first year 

(Min 30% would be women 

and youth owned 

businesses) 

 

Commercial risks - sharp rise in supply of 

agricultural commodities  domestically and  globally 

Mitigation measure: GIRSAL will work closely 

with its Ghana based and global crop market experts 

to gather pricing data 

 

Productivity risks -  failure to achieve forecast crop 
and livestock yield 

Mitigation measure: GIRSAL will proactively 

support the Ministry of Food and Agriculture 

 

Risk: Challenges with Interoperability 

Mitigation: GIRSAL ICT Experts to build integrated 

platform and run numerous tests prior to systems 
launch 

1.4 Increased volume of new Agribusiness Lending by 

select value chains:  

i) Rice; 

ii) Legume- Soybean/Maize; 

iii)  Sorghum 

iv) Horticulture 

0  5% p.a  

1.5 No. of Agribusinesses across the value chains paying 

insurance premiums (by product) 

1 (large processors) 5  Insurance Desk Reports 

1.6 Improved Quality of Agribusiness Portfolios in 

Participating FIs 

i) No. of NPLs reduced; 

9.8% of total NPLs 

(USAID Stats) 

Reduce by 1% p.a BoG/MOF/MOFA/GIRSAL 

Reports 

1.7  Integrated System accessible by: 

i)  Participating  FIs;  

ii) Insurers 

 

0 To register 100% of all 

GIRSAL 

actors/beneficiaries on the 

platform 

IT System Reports 

 

Component 2:    Program Management/ Monitoring & Evaluation  

1. Institutional set-up of GIRSAL 
2. Work plan and operations are 

implemented 

2.1 Rate of implementation of the annual work plan 

2.2 Development, implementation and monitoring of the 

ESMS 

0 

 

100% in all cases at the end 

of the programme 

 

Project Implementation 

Manuals  

GIRSAL Quarterly Progress 

Reports, Sustainability Plan 

delivered at Mid-Term Review 

Risk: Fiduciary risks related to the use of MOF 

systems. 

  

Mitigation: The Project resources would be ‘ring 

fenced’ and channelled through dedicated accounts, 

with designated signatories and subject to periodic 

external audits. 

3. Program activities monitored and 
information produced regularly 

3.1 No. of technical reports prepared 0 4 

3.2  No. of audit reports produced  

3.3 No. of monitoring visits conducted by BoG 

3.4 No. of Technical Committee meetings held 
3.5 No. of Board  meetings held 

0 

0 

0 
0 

5 

10 

16 
8 

                                                                                                COMPONENTS     SOURCES OF FINANCE 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

 Component 1: Promoting De-risking Instruments for the Agriculture Sector 

Establishing credit guarantee scheme and reinsurance hedge; Developing Agribusiness Linkages and agribusinesses’ capacity to access finance; Technical Assistance for financial institutions to 

objectively appraise and manage agribusiness portfolios; Development of agriculture credit policies and guidelines for FIs; Technical Assistance for Facilitating Access to Agricultural 

Insurance; Development of Insurance Products; Risk-Return modelling (pairing and pricing insurance + guarantees); Technical Sessions on Insurance Regulation (Policy makers and Insurance 
regulators);  Development of GIRSAL Secure Web Applications (Guarantee Application Portal; GIRSAL Payment Portal; Knowledge and Innovation Centre Portal; Risk Scoring Engine; Data 

Warehouse)  

Total Project Cost  

(UA million) :            44.64 

ADF Loan     :            10.00 

Republic of  Ghana :  34.64 
 

Components: 

Component 1 :  42.37 

Component 2 :   2.27 
Component 2: Program Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 
Project management activities; day-to-day management, management of studies on key policy issues; development, implementation and monitoring of the ESMS; development of a results 

based framework for M&E; and procurement, disbursement and audit functions. 



 

vi 

 

Programme Timeframe 

Task Name 
2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 

   2024 

Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 
Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 

Negotiations                                       
    

Board approval                                       
    

Signature of Loan Agreement                                       
    

Appointing remaining GIRSAL team members                                       
    

Satisfaction of conditions for effectiveness and 

first disbursement 
                                      

    

Programme launch and market awareness building                                      
    

Finalization and validation of procedures manuals                                        
    

Conducting baseline studies                                       
    

Preparing, signing Master agreements  with PFIs                                       
    

Prepare, approve Bid docs and contract awards for 

Goods, Works & Services 
                                      

    

Contracts execution for Goods, Works and 

Services 
                                      

    

Quarterly reports submission                                       
    

Annual reports submission                                       
    

Programme Work plans and Budgets                                         
    

Board Meetings                                       
    

Bank’s supervision missions                                      
    

Audit                                       
    

Mid-term review                                       
    

Programme Completion Reporting                                        
    

Impact assessment and technical audit                                       
    



 

1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF MANAGEMENT TO THE BOARD OF 

DIRECTORS FOR THE PROPOSED ADF LOAN OF UA10 MILLION TO THE REPUBLIC 

OF GHANA FOR THE FINANCING OF THE GIRSAL PROJECT 

 
Management submits the following report and recommendation on a proposed loan of UA10 million 

to support the guarantee book and working capital finance requirements of the Ghana Incentive-Based 

Risk-Sharing System for Agricultural Lending (GIRSAL). 

I. STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 

 

1.1.  Project linkages with country strategy and objectives 

1.1.1 The Ghana Incentive-Based Risk-Sharing System for Agricultural Lending Project (GIRSAL) 

is designed within the context of Ghana’s ongoing agricultural transformation including the Ghana 

Shared Growth and Development Agenda II” (GSGDA II). The underlying theme of the GSGDA 

II is socio-economic transformation, which involves a change in the structure and composition of the 

national output in ways that enhance broad-based, inclusive and sustainable growth. The role of 

GIRSAL is to help accelerate financing and interconnectedness of the agriculture sector to ensure that 

across its key components, it is functioning at optimal levels.  

1.1.2 GIRSAL is also guided by country’s Food and Agriculture Sector Development Policy 

(FASDEP). Which has the following as its pillars: (i) Food Security and Emergency Preparedness; (ii) 

Increased Growth in Incomes and Reduced Income Variability; (iii) Increased Competitiveness and 

Enhanced Integration into Domestic and International Markets;  (iv) Sustainable Management of Land 

and Environment; (v) Science and Technology Applied in Food and Agriculture Development; and 

(vi) Improved Institutional Coordination. The FASDEP anchors on sub-sector policies including the 

Crop Development Policy; Cocoa Strategy; Livestock Development Policy; Fisheries Policy and 

Policies for Services Delivery (Extension. Irrigation, Plant Protection, Agricultural Mechanization). 

1.1.3 The Government has targeted enhancing agricultural productivity and production through its 

Planting for Food and Jobs (PFJ) Campaign. The major interventions under the PFJ are organized 

around the following five pillars: (i) Seed: The program will catalyse market-led production of 

adequate quantities of quality seeds by private enterprises; (ii) Fertilizer:  Private companies engaged 

in fertilizer production/blending and importation will be facilitated in meeting the fertilizer demands 

of the beneficiary farmers; (iii) Extension Services: In partnerships with the local governments and 

private inputs and service providers, the extension services will provide reliable and programmed 

technical assistance to beneficiaries; (iv) Marketing: It is envisaged that the facilitation of increased 

uptake of inputs will lead to increase in production of the targeted crops by the provision of storage 

warehouses; and (v) E-Agriculture: The PFJ Campaign will profile the beneficiaries by e-registering 

them and developing a state-of-art information and communication technology (ICT) platform. 

 

1.1.4 GIRSAL is structured to support agriculture across the nation. While certain financing 

priorities will be provided to the Northern Savannah Ecological Zone (NSEZ) under the proposed 

Savannah Initiative, GIRSAL intends to balance market demand, government priorities and donor 

activity in its national spread. GIRSAL views its national footprint as critical to providing support for 

Ghana’s balance of payments, macroeconomic stability, economic growth, food and nutrition security, 

job creation and poverty reduction.  

 

1.1.5 The Project is anchored in the Financial Sector Department of the Ministry of Finance, and 

draws support from the Ministry of Food and Agriculture as well as the Bank of Ghana. GIRSAL is 



 

2 

 

organized to focus on six pillars of intervention and thereby contribute to the High-5 priorities that are 

crucial for accelerating Africa’s economic transformation: Feed Africa; Industrialize Africa: and 

Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa. It will particularly contribute to the Feed Africa 

priority that focuses on transformation, scaling up agriculture as a business through financing and 

catalysing of value addition. 

 

1.1.6 The Bank has a competitive advantage in supporting the financing and de-risking of agriculture 

value chains in Ghana. The Bank’s growing expertise in risk sharing and issuance of credit guarantees 

in agriculture is a key capability for the transaction. By supporting GIRSAL, the Bank will help reduce 

poverty, reduce food importation and improve living conditions across Ghana’s farming communities. 

This Project will achieve this by catalysing transactions designed to boost the scale up and 

competitiveness of various value-prioritized chains such as rice, maize, soybean and cocoa. The 

Project will also consolidate on the gains made through various previous Bank and third party 

interventions in agricultural finance2.   

 

1.1.7 GIRSAL’s catalytic role in mobilizing private sector financing for agriculture will be critical 

to the success of emerging Government of Ghana initiatives such as the One District One Factory 

(1D1F) initiative. The initiative promotes agro-industrialization that will provide massive employment 

and wealth through value addition activities. A key precursor for 1D1F is the production of agricultural 

raw materials. GIRSAL’s financing guarantees will be vital to securing the volumes of agricultural 

commodities produced locally, including foodstuff, agricultural commodities for industry and 

agricultural commodities for exports. GIRSAL’s support will also enable 1D1F to champion agro-

processing through promoting the setting up of factories or revamping underperforming factories in 

the communities. 

 

1.1.8 GIRSAL is aligned to 2012-2017 Ghana Country Strategy Paper3 (CSP) extended to end 2018. 

The objective of the CSP is economic transformation leading to inclusive and sustainable growth. The 

strategy has two pillar namely: (i) Agriculture Enhancing Inclusive Growth and Economic 

Development; and (ii) Support to Industrialization through Private Sector Development. Based on the 

challenges to the country’s development trajectory the two strategic areas of focus are investment in 

agriculture and energy. GIRSAL falls under Pillar (i) stated above. This Project is would allow the 

agriculture sector to be more inclusive through the leveraging of more finances for the various actors 

along the value chain.  

 

1.2.  Rationale for Bank’s involvement 

1.2.1 The African Development Bank’s Feed Africa Strategy has identified innovative financing as 

critical to mobilizing resources to enable agricultural transformation. 

 

1.2.2 The Risk Sharing Financing Mechanism has been proposed as one of the flagships for the 

Feed Africa Strategy and is premised on developing de-risking instruments, technical assistance, 

integrated ICT platforms, performance management and incentives that would bridge the gaps between 

the agriculture and financing value chains. The GIRSAL therefore offers a packaged solution to: 

i. Fix agricultural value chains in order to provide a reliable platform for de-risking agricultural 
lending; 

ii. Mobilize financing for Ghanaian agribusiness by using credit guarantees to address the risk of 
default; 

                                                 
2 Technical Annex B1: Lessons learnt  
3 Dialogue on  the new CSP Pillars is ongoing 



 

3 

 

iii. Provide technical assistance through capacity building across the value chains; 
iv. Reduce the cost of borrowing by agricultural producers from commercial banks; 
v. To provide technical advice to agribusinesses 

 

1.2.3  While the concept of risk sharing for agriculture is relatively emerging, the Bank would profit 

from experiences of other donors e.g. USAID, AFD and NIRSAL experience to help in developing   

GIRSAL.  

 

1.2.4 The Project has a great potential in contributing to the twin objectives of the Bank’s 10-Year 

Strategy (TYS). GIRSAL will catalyse a wave of inclusive growth across agro-climatic zones and 

geographical locations, age and gender buckets. This will occur because the underlying agribusiness 

investments will take place across Ghana and involve regions with high levels of poverty e.g. the 

North, as well as youth and women agri-preneurs. Reducing poverty indicators among these three 

social groups will boost Ghana’s performance materially. 

1.2.5 The Project will enhance agriculture financing and sector transformation through increased 

capital inflows into critical value chains. That increased inflow will ensure appropriate supply of 

inputs, extension services, critical infrastructure, skilled labour and related services to raise the 

productivity of crops and livestock. GIRSAL will also leverage on the activities of the Savannah Zone 

Agricultural Productivity Improvement Project (SAPIP)4 and link up with Transformation of the 

African Savannah Initiative (TASI)5 as a vehicle for attracting private sector investment in agriculture. 

Furthermore, the Project will provide technical assistance, entrepreneurship and business management 

training to value chain actors to improve their business operations.  

1.3.  Private Sector Engagement  

1.3.1 The key private sector financing partners are primarily commercial banks (e.g. Ghana 

Commercial Bank, Agriculture Development Bank and Société Générale), microfinance institutions, 

private equity investors and specialized credit providers. Existing lender and investor activities centre 

primarily on provision of loans and lines of credit to value chain participants on a limited tenure basis. 

Projects financed include agricultural inputs, mechanization, production, processing, and logistics.  

 

1.3.2 Private sector alignment mechanisms include various industry groups at the value chain; 

segment and activity level e.g. Ghana Chamber of Commerce, Agriculture Sector. In adjacent markets 

– insurance – the Ghana Agriculture Insurance Pool (GAIP) is a club of underwriters who work 

together to provide insurance cover to the sector.  

 

1.3.3 Key on-going financing activities are extensive and vary by financial institution. Based on 

discussions with various partners, the pipeline of transaction opportunities exceeds tens of millions of 

USD. For example, the oil palm value chain, for one single bank (Access Bank), represents a potential 

lending portfolio of $8 - $10M/annum targeted to growers and processors only.  Limited coordination 

of private sector actors is required as the commercial process for originating and managing the 

agricultural investment pipeline is sufficiently well developed. 

 

 

                                                 
4 The SAPIP Project was approved by the AfDB in December 2017 aims at transforming agricultural value chains for food and nutrition security, job 
and wealth creation in the Northern Savannah Zone of Ghana. The Project main components: (i) Crop Productivity Improvement; (ii) Value Chains & 

Agribusiness Development; (ii) Infrastructure Development and will be implemented over a five-year period (2018 – 2023) at a total cost of UA 40.38 

million. 
  
5  



 

4 

 

 

1.4.  Donors’ coordination 

1.4.1 The key development partners that are active in the sector are: L'Agence française de 

développement (AFD); Department for International Development (DFID); Global Affairs Canada; 

European Union; German Dev. Co-op (KfW Development Bank and  GiZ); Netherlands Embassy; 

Australian High Commission; JICA; USAID and World Bank; UN Agencies (IFAD, FAO and WFP). 

Others are IFPRI, AGRA and international NGOs such as Engineers without Borders, SNV and 

Catholic Relief Services. Donor activities cuts across ranges mostly targets various commodity value 

chains development, productivity enhancement, agricultural production and processing infrastructure 

development, mechanization, irrigation, sustainable land management, climate change adaptation and 

mitigation, nutrition, food safety, MSE and agribusiness development, access to finance, access to land 

and ICT for agriculture.  

 

1.4.2 Donor coordination mechanisms for the Agriculture Sector in Ghana are effective. 

Coordination under the Agriculture Sector Working Group (ASWG) began in 2002 and provides a 

platform for sharing information on ongoing and planned future activities with the aim of harmonizing 

interventions. The group holds annual joint sector reviews where donors, Government, implementation 

partners, civil society organizations (CSOs), and the private sector review the performance of the sector 

to inform planning and decision-making. The ASWG is an open group of donors; quasi donors; 

implementers including NGOs, CSOs, private sector, etc.; and Government Ministries.  

 

1.4.3 Key on-going/pipeline interventions by donors include a EUR160 million (UA133 million) 

support for productive investment for sustainable agriculture development capacity building of 

decentralized institutions and community development in the part of the Northern Development 

Authority Zone. The Government of Canada is also supporting the sector with a CAD125 million (UA 

83 million) facility for Modernizing Agriculture in Ghana (MAG). IFAD has provided USD71.60 

million (UA 51 million) as loan for sustainable rural poverty reduction in rural areas and a grant of 

USD10.0 million (UA7 million) to mitigate the effects of climate change. The Bank has successfully 

co-financed projects in the sector with other donors. Notable among these is the just ended Northern 

Rural Growth Program and the on-going Rural Enterprises Program, which were/are both co-financed 

with IFAD. A matrix of interventions by donors is presented in Annex A2 of the Technical Annexes. 

The coordination of aid through the ASWG is enhancing aid effectiveness through harmonization and 

alignment of development partner support.  

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 
 

2.1.  Project Details 

2.1.1  Project development goal:  

 

i. Reduce risk faced by commercial banks by providing guarantees to finance risk sharing 
arrangements; 

ii. Improve lending risk profiles by providing technical agricultural and business-related 
assistance to commercial banks and farmers; 

iii. Facilitate creation of appropriate insurance and other risk mitigation products; 
iv. Provide financial rewards to banks that are able to increase agricultural lending in a financially 

responsible manner6; 

                                                 
6
 This could be in the form of cash back or interest rebates to the participating commercial banks. On their end, they 

would be encouraged to extend the same to beneficiary firms that repay loans i.e. akin to an insurance policy without 

claim/loss. 



 

5 

 

v. Establish internationally credible and robust Bank-rating system; 
vi. Develop integrated systems for sharing information on credit behaviour of agribusinesses 

 

2.1.2  The integrated development objective of the Project is to transform access to finance and risk 

sharing across agricultural value chains. Doing so will boost food and nutrition security, job and wealth 

creation. The specific Project objective is : To increase formal sector lending to across the agricultural 

value chain especially the upstream, primary stages by sharing the risk of lending with financial 

institutions. Such increased lending backed by GIRSAL’s credit guarantee is expected to mobilize 

credit creation and strengthening of agribusinesses. That will in turn help to increase incomes of actors 

along selected value chains on a sustainable basis. 
 

2.2.  Project components 

2.2.1  The Project will have two Components. (i) Promoting de-risking for the Agriculture Sector; 

(ii) Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation.  
 

        Component 1: Promoting de-risking for the agriculture sector:  
 

        The Project will utilize four instruments to reduce risks associated with lending to agribusinesses:  
 

● Credit Guarantee Scheme (CGS): This would entail the provision of guarantees to participating 
commercial banks and other financial institutions on an individual or portfolio basis. All banks and 

other financial institutions which shall be eligible for guarantees under the CGS, are prohibited 

from financing items under the Bank Group’s Negative List. The Bank Group’s Negative List is 

included in Annex C of the appraisal report.  The CGS will provide differential risk coverage 

ranging from 50% - 80%; with the scheme providing greater risk coverage for upstream activities 

(production and primary processing) and lower coverage for downstream activities (value added 

processing, services, logistics and marketing). Associated risks would be covered on a partial loss 

arrangement with loan tenure depending on: the volume of lending; profitability of the value chain 

activities; the type of financial intermediary, experience and capacity for agricultural lending. 

GIRSAL has developed: A business plan and investment strategy for the Risk Sharing Facility 

(RSF); a Financial Model; term sheets & tailored products (Guarantees, Letter of Credit, debt, 

equipment leasing, warehouse receipt financing etc.); financing and operational guidelines for RSF 

transactions (origination, credit diligence, default and contract management, development of risk 

management framework (risk pricing) and agriculture value chain (AVC) selection and 

prioritization criteria. 
 

● Technical Assistance Facility (TAF): This would involve capacity building for both Financing 
Value Chain actors (supply side actors) and Agriculture Value Chain actors (demand-side actors).  

Capacity building targeting demand side actors (such as input suppliers, producers, aggregators, 

processors, trade & logistics) will include training to improve farm and financial management, 

value addition and marketing. GIRSAL will also provide coaching and advisory services targeting 

Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs). GIRSAL will provide technical training through 

the Banking and Insurance Colleges of Ghana to enhance the capacity of financial intermediaries 

to assess and manage agricultural credit risk. Training modules and technical support will include: 

establishing agriculture desks, product development and distribution, risk management and 

improving credit information systems. It will also support development of knowledge and 

innovation centres. The TAF will focus on MFI’s given that as at end-December 2016, there were 

five hundred and sixty four (564) MFIs provide commercial credit to agribusinesses (71 money 

lending companies, 11 Financial NGOs and 482 microfinance companies). 
 

                                                 
 



 

6 

 

● Agriculture Insurance Facility (AIF): While insurance presents opportunities for managing 
upstream risks, the uptake of agriculture insurance in Ghana remains low. As part of efforts to 

reduce exposure, GIRSAL guidelines have made provisions for borrowers to purchase insurance 

policies (where the local market provides appropriate insurance at competitive prices). The pairing 

of guarantee and insurance products offers a more holistic de-risking solution and could have 

positive impact on risk-adjusted interest rates over the long run. GIRSAL will collaborate with 

Ghana Agriculture Insurance Pool; the insurance regulator to define the regulatory framework for 

agriculture insurance in Ghana. The GIRSAL implementation team has initiated discussions with 

re-insurers such as SwissRe and AfricaRe to share costs development and rollout new products. 

The feasibility studies identified need for area-yield index insurance for annual crops, index 

insurance for tree crops, livestock insurance to cover both commercial and smallholder farmers, 

aquaculture insurance to cover commercial aquaculture). During year 1 and year 2, the Project will 

need to define models for low-cost distribution of these products through the private sector. 
 

● Digital Finance Platform: GIRSAL’s Digital Finance Platform is a cloud-based platform that 
would facilitate GIRSAL reporting, and development of predictive models. The platform consists 

of 3 elements: 

(i) Secure web applications that support: a guarantee application portal; payments portal and a 
knowledge and innovations centre portal (KIC); 
 

(ii) A Risk scoring engine to be used by lenders in making credit guarantee applications decisions, 

and by GIRSAL to make guarantee approval decisions. The engine presents yet another 

innovative opportunity for automating loan risk assessment as well as profiling potential 

borrowers and 
 

(iii)A data warehouse that integrates information from numerous sources to build Know-Your-

Customer (KYC) data on production: transaction, insurance coverage, input purchases, sales 

and purchases. The portal will allow capability for integrating information from Credit 

Reference Bureaus, Academic Institutions, Mobile Money providers, utilities etc. 

Component 2: Project Co-ordination and Management Unit (PMU): 

 

The GIRSAL team will implement the PMU. They will be responsible for the day-to-day management 

of the Project. They will also be responsible for Institutional set-up of GIRSAL, Operations 

(origination, due diligence, structuring and approval) and Monitoring and Evaluation.  The summary 

of activities is in Table 2.1 below: 
 

Table 2.1: Summary of Activities in the Components 
Component  Est. Total Cost (UA million)/ % 

of Base costs 

Component Description  

Component 1: Promoting de-
risking for the Agriculture 

Sector  

42.37 

 

(94.9%) 

This component will prioritize implementation and rollout of key GIRSAL 

elements:  

- Design and implementation of the credit guarantee scheme 

- Design and rollout of technical assistance products, including 

negotiating with technical partners 

- Rollout of an insurance support program designed to raise the  

awareness and use of insurance products in agriculture 

- Design and roll out of the digital finance services platform 

Component 2: Project Co-
ordination and Management 
Unit (PMU): 
 

2.27 

 
(5.1%) 

The PMU will be responsible for:  

- The day-to-day management of the Project.  
- Due diligence 
- Operations  
- M&E 
- Gender empowerment/equity issues,  
- Implementation of the Project ESMP 



 

7 

 

2.3.  Technical solutions retained and other alternatives explored 

2.3.1 Table 2.2 presents design options considered and reasons for their rejection. 

Table 2.2: Project alternatives considered and reasons for rejection 

Alternative name Brief description Reasons for rejection 

Instrument: Direct 

Lending 

Creation of a budget financed fund to 

provide on-lending support to Ghana’s 
agriculture sector lenders; BoG mechanism 

would secure funds at low interest rate and 

disburse at a moderate spread 

Approach replicates past instruments whose key weakness is the adverse 

selection problem, moral hazard, and lack of sufficient prudence;. GIRSAL has 
in place TA support for banks and farmer borrowers to enhance their 

performance & productivity. It require borrowers to subscribe to insurance 

before accessing loans under GIRSAL. GIRSAL would create special modules 
to facilitate low cost credit that can address gender issues and therefore “Direct 

Lending” would only be considered in this case. 

Instrument: Limited 
RSF 

Replication of existing RSFs akin to 
partnership between AGRA and 

commercial banks across Africa to provide 

first loss guarantee on targeted portfolios  

While attractive, approach has limited appeal due to its lack of scale, 
involvement of the entire financial system, and limited capacity to deliver  

technical change 

Instrument: Nigeria-
style Full Risk 

Sharing 

Risk sharing facility based on the Nigeria 
model i.e. NIRSAL 

GIRSAL will have a second evaluation on its Digital Platform (NIRSAL did not 
have it), of all approved bank loans to satisfy itself before a decision on 

guarantee would be taken 

 
2.4.  Project type:  

This is a lending Project financed with an ADF loan. 

2.5.  Project cost and financing arrangements 

2.5.1 The total cost of the Project is estimated at UA 44.64 million of which the ADF contribution 

is UA 10.00 million (net of taxes and based on 2018 prices). The financing structure attributes UA 

11.69 million (26.18%) of the total cost to foreign currency transactions, and UA 32.95 million 

(73.82%) to local costs.  

 

2.5.2 The total Project cost of UA 44.64 million will be financed by:  

 

i. An ADF loan of UA 10.00 million (22.4% of Project costs). The ADF loan would largely be 
channelled towards financing of the credit guarantee because this component provides the highest 

potential for income generation that would not only service the loan, but also allow GIRSAL to 

finance the non-income generating components of the scheme; 

 

ii. The Government of Ghana will contribute the equivalent of UA 34.64 million (77.6% of Project 
costs) to cover: capitalization of the credit guarantee, targeted technical assistance and agricultural 

insurance activities, digital platform, operating and capital expenditures associated with start-up 

and staffing costs; 

iii. As part of efforts to leverage GIRSAL financing and capitalize on existing Agricultural finance 
operations in Ghana, the GIRSAL implementation team has proposed creating a Technical 

Assistance consortium which will include donors active in the agricultural finance space and key 

project managers for government-financed agricultural finance operations. Technical assistance 

activities that contribute directly towards achievement of GIRSAL’s mandate have been identified 

with cost estimates simulated in Tables 2.4 and 2.6 of this report. The contribution of the Technical 

Assistance consortium is estimated to cover 1.3% of the Project costs and should be considered as 

in-kind contribution since resources will not be disbursed through GIRSAL but will remain tied to 

their respective projects. The modalities for the memorandum to govern activities of the Technical 

Assistance consortium will be prepared following effectiveness of this Project. Given the nature of 

the Project, (no works involved) and discussions with Government of Ghana, there will be no 

provisions made for physical and price contingencies.  

 



 

8 

 

2.5.3 Justification for Local Costs Financing: The ADF loan will finance 25.41% of GIRSAL’s 

financing. At least 50% of GIRSAL’s seed capital would be invested in local treasury bills to generate 

interest income for re-investment and to cover recurrent costs. At least 0.06% of the ADF loan 

resources will be dedicated to carrying out Project Management activities that ensure proper fiduciary 

management of the Project. Given the significant human resource capacity in Ghana, it is likely that 

various technical assistance assignments would be locally sourced. The GoG has approached the Bank 

to support the financing gap given the focus the bank has on the Feed Africa Strategy. The summary 

of estimated costs by component, expenditure category, sources of financing as well as an expenditure 

schedule are presented in the tables below:  

 

Table 2.3: Summary of Project Cost by Component (USD/UA) 

COMPONENTS 

(USD '000) (UA '000) % Foreign % Base 

Local 

Cost 

Foreign 

Cost 
Total Cost Local Cost 

Foreign 

Cost 

Total 

Cost 
Cost Costs 

Component 1: Promoting de-

risking for the agriculture sector 
43,560.21 16,467.09 60,027.29 30,744.85 11,622.49 42,367.35 99.4% 94.9% 

Component 2: Project Co-

ordination and Management 
Unit  

3,125.99 92.05 3,218.04 2,206.33 64.97 2,271.29 0.6% 5.1% 

TOTAL BASELINE 

PROJECT COSTS 
46,686.19 16,559.14 63,245.33 32,951.18 11,687.46 44,638.64 100.0% 100.0% 

PRICE CONTIGENCIES - - - - - - - - 

TOTAL PROJECT COSTS 46,686.19 16,559.14 63,245.33 32,951.18 11,687.46 44,638.64 100% 100% 

 

  



 

9 

 

Table 2.4: Summary Project Cost by Expenditure Categories (USD/UA) 

CATEGORY 
(USD '000) (UA '000) %Foreign 

% Total 

Base 

Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total Costs Costs 

I. INVESTMENT COSTS 

  A. WORKS - - - - - - - - 

  B. GOODS 

  1.EQUIPMENT & 

MATERIALS 
                

         Projected CAPEX 1,449.71 - 1,449.71 1,023.21 - 1,023.21 0.00% 2.29% 

         ICT Hardware/ 

         Digital Finance Platform 
213.10 - 213.10 150.41 - 150.41 0.00% 0.34% 

Sub-Total, Goods 1,662.82 - 1,662.82 1,173.62 - 1,173.62 0.00% 2.63% 

C. SERVICES 

1.GUARANTEE 

CAPITALIZATION 
41,349.55 14,082.82 55,432.37 29,184.57 9,939.67 39,124.24 85.05% 87.65% 

 2. AGRIC. INSURANCE         

Climate data + Risk Modelling 12.57 - 12.57 8.87 - 8.87 0.00% 0.02% 

3. CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT         

Product Development  - 1,257.21 1,257.21 - 887.34 887.34 7.59% 1.99% 

 Regulatory Framework 4.45 - 4.45 3.14 - 3.14 0.00% 0.01% 

 Training for Policy Makers, 
Insurers, Bankers 

25.14 - 25.14 17.75 - 17.75 0.00% 0.04% 

4.TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE          

 Agribusiness Linkages, A2F - 827.06 827.06 - 583.74 583.74 4.99% 1.31% 

FIs (lenders + Insurers) 821.23 - 821.23 579.63 - 579.63 0.00% 1.30% 

Access to Insurance 518.85 - 518.85 366.20 - 366.20 0.00% 0.82% 

Digital Finance Platform - 300.00 300.00 - 211.74 211.74 1.81% 0.47% 

5. PMU         

ESMS - 23.01 23.01 - 16.24 16.24 0.14% 0.04% 

Audit - 49.31 49.31 - 34.80 34.80 0.30% 0.08% 

M&E, MTR, PCR - 19.73 19.73 - 13.92 13.92 0.12% 0.03% 

Sub-Total, Services 42,731.80 16,559.14 59,290.94 30,160.16 11,687.46 41,847.63 100.00% 93.75% 

TOTAL INVESTMENT COSTS 44,394.62 16,559.14 60,953.76 31,333.78 11,687.46 43,021.24 100.00% 96.38% 

II. RECURRENT COSTS 

 A. AGRIC INSURANCE          

Re-insurance Premium 615.30 - 615.30 434.28 - 434.28 0.00% 0.97% 

 Projected OPEX  1,676.27 - 1,676.27 1,183.12 - 1,183.12 0.00% 2.65% 

TOTAL RECURRENT COSTS 2,291.57 - 2,291.57 1,617.40 - 1,617.40 0.00% 3.62% 

TOTAL BASELINE COSTS 46,686.19 16,559.14 63,245.33 32,951.18 11,687.46 44,638.64 100.00% 100.00% 

 Price Contingencies - - - - - - 0.00% 0.00% 

TOTAL PROJECT COSTS 46,682.90 16,562.43 63,245.33 32,951.18 11,687.46 44,638.64 100.00% 100.00% 

 

Table 2.5: Summary Project Cost Schedule by Components (UA ‘000) 

COMPONENTS 
Totals in  UA ('000) 

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 Total 

Component 1: Promoting De-Risking For The Agriculture Sector 40,489.00 565.18 488.71 488.71 335.75 42,367.35 

Component 2: Project Co-ordination and Management Unit 1,244.29 225.95 247.30 270.96 282.79 2,271.29 

TOTAL PROJECT COSTS 41,733.29 791.14 736.00 759.67 618.54 44,638.64 

 

  



 

10 

 

Table 2.6 Source of Finance by Category of Expenditure (UA ‘000) 

Expenditure Category ADF Loan GoG Total 

ADF: Total 

Expenditure 

(%) 

I. INVESTMENT COSTS     

     A. WORKS - - - 0.0% 

     B. GOODS     

          1. EQUIPMENT & MATERIALS     

 Projected CAPEX - 1,023.21 1,023.21 0.0% 

IT Hardware - Digital Finance Platform - 150.41 150.41 0.0% 

Sub-Total, Goods - 1,173.62 1,173.62 0.0% 

     C. SERVICES     

1. GUARANTEE CAPITALIZATION 9,939.67 29,184.57 39,124.24 22.3% 

 2. AGRIC. INSURANCE     

Climate data + Risk Modelling - 8.87 8.87 0.0% 

 3. CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT     

Product Development  - 887.34 887.34 0.0% 

 Regulatory Framework - 3.14 3.14 0.0% 

Training for Policy Makers, Insurers, Bankers - 17.75 17.75 0.0% 

 4. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE      

 Agribusiness Linkages, A2F - 583.74 583.74 0.0% 

 FIs (lenders + Insurers) - 579.63 579.63 0.0% 

Access to Insurance - 366.20 366.20 0.0% 

Digital Finance Platform - 211.74 211.74 0.0% 

 ESMS 11.60 4.64 16.24 0.0% 

Audit 34.80 - 34.80 0.1% 

 M&E, MTR, PCR 13.92 - 13.92 0.0% 

Sub-Total, Services 10,000.00 31,847.62 43,021.24 22.4% 

TOTAL INVESTMENT COSTS 

 
10,000.00 31,847.62 43,021.24 22.4% 

II. RECURRENT COSTS     

A. AGRIC INSURANCE      

Re-insurance Premium - 434.28 434.28 0.0% 

 Projected OPEX  - 1,183.12 1,183.12 0.0% 

TOTAL RECURRENT COSTS - 1,617.40 1,617.40 0.0% 

TOTAL BASELINE COSTS 10,000.00 34,638.64 44,638.64 22.4% 

Price Contingencies - - - - 

TOTAL PROJECT COSTS         10,000.00  34,638.64         44,638.64  22.4% 

 

Table 2.7: Project Costs by Financing Sources (UA ‘000) 

SOURCES OF FINANCE Foreign Cost Local Cost Total Cost % of Total Cost % of Foreign Cost 

 ADF Loan 10,000.00 - 10,000.00 22.5% 85.6% 

 GOG 1,687.46 32,951.18 34,638.64 77.5% 14.4% 

Total 11,687.46 32,951.18 44,638.64 100.0% 100.0% 



 

11 

 

 

2.6.  Project’s target area and population 

2.6.1  The Project is designed to be implemented across Ghana as a national intervention targeting 

selected agribusiness ecosystem7. GIRSAL will have two levels of beneficiaries: 

 

Type 1: Direct Beneficiaries 
 

 This consists of financial institutions and intermediaries who sign Master Agreements with 
GIRSAL to retail guarantees to agribusiness market participants. These will initially be commercial 

and universal banks primarily. Overtime, the mix will also come to include specialized lenders, 

microfinance companies, private equity investors and other types of sector focused sources of risk 

capital; 

 Benefits will be delivered in a number of forms inclusive but not limited to the following: 

 Protection for downside risks to their loan and financing portfolio i.e. up to 80% reduction in loss 
risk subject to the terms of individual contracts purchased; 

 Improved quality of data and market insights regarding agribusiness lending and default 
likelihoods. Data sharing provided by GIRSAL (on a blinded basis) would be  able to show at a 

high level key shifts in the agribusiness financing landscape;and 

 Commercial intelligence related to what investment type and region is attractive versus others. 
 

Type 2: Indirect Beneficiaries 

 

 Group includes the majority of Ghana’s non-subsistence farmers i.e. commercial farmers of all 
sizes, input suppliers, logistics service providers, processors and retailers; 

 Benefits will be delivered in a number of forms inclusive but not limited to the following: 
Reduction in implied risk premium demanded by lenders to finance agriculture; use of credit 

guarantees will likely trigger a decline in the need for collateral in agricultural lending; 

 Improve overall commercial, agronomic and financial capabilities across the agribusiness 
ecosystem as the impact of technical assistance investments start to kick-in; 

 Improvement in business environment and confidence on agriculture, setting up potential for a 
virtuous shift in attitudes towards agriculture lending and investments; 

 Given that the mix of direct and indirect beneficiaries will largely map to current economic and 
demographic structures, the Bank anticipates that women and youth will be critical beneficiaries 

of the proposed intervention. Women and youths are important participants at most stages of value 

chains e.g. primary production, storage and processing. Therefore, in the absence of special 

interventions, we expect proportionate representation in GIRSAL’s guarantee and technical 

assistance footprint. 

 

2.7.  Participatory process for programme identification, design and implementation 

2.7.1  The preparation mission had a general consultation and technical working sessions with 

Government personnel and key stakeholder groups in agriculture including development partners. The 

outcome of the discussions was the development of a logical framework for the Project and the 

preparation report that is forming the basis for the appraisal report.  

                                                 
7 Value chain prioritization is based on export potential (cocoa, vegetables, rubber, cashew & pineapples) and import 
substitution (soybean, maize, rice, cassava, fisheries & sorghum). The Value chain actors will vary depending on the 

commodity and would include input suppliers, farmers, aggregators, quality control, private haulers (transporters), 

warehousing, marketers and processors. 
  



 

12 

 

 

2.7.2  A GIRSAL- Financial Institutions workshop was held on the 15th March 2017, with multiple 

attendees (45) drawn from Ghana’s commercial banks and related financial institutions and  Bank of 

Ghana..  

  

2.8.  Bank Group experience, lessons reflected in the Project design 

2.8.1 The lessons learnt from the Bank’s operations in Ghana and in its recent work on credit guarantee 

systems country has enhanced Project design for implementation efficiency and sustainability. For 

example, the CSPE (2002-2015) indicated that project design flaws limited the sustainability of 

agriculture sector projects, particularly the lack of clear management plans for the maintenance of key 

assets such as pack houses and markets. This flaw has been addressed in this Project by the new 

approaches, which considers intervening to fill the gaps in the operations of actors along the value 

chains of interest as against the concentration of the activities supported by the Project around just the 

farmers. Thus, GIRSAL’s design has a more robust approach to technical assistance than previous 

Bank projects have had. In addition, the Bank’s lessons from its engagement with Sovereign and Non-

Sovereign borrowers including Private Equity firms have shaped the design. These lessons include 

considerations related to the importance of governance, optimizing donor network investments, use of 

investment committees and management of potential conflicts of interest.  

 

2.9.  Key performance indicators 

The overall impact of GIRSAL is to increase the proportion of lending to agriculture from the 3.4% 

total lending at the end of 2015 to a minimum of 6.8% at the end of the ten-year period. 

III. PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

 

3.1. Financial and economic performance 

3.1.1 The viability of GIRSAL has been evaluated through the income model, potential scenarios for 

guarantee payouts and operating expenses. This in turn informed determination of the fund size. The 

following perspectives of capital have been identified as being critical to GIRSAL’s stability: 

 The size of capital; 

 Timing of Capitalization; 

 Cost of capital and prevailing market prices; 

 Securing a fall-back guarantee cover for the capital. 
 

3.1.2 GIRSAL’s seed capital will be GHS 250 million to be secured at the beginning of year 1, with 

additional capital investments envisaged over GIRSAL’s 10-year life. The key assumptions underlying 

the analyses include: (i) Active participation of at least 10 financial intermediaries/digital financial 

services providers with universal coverage in Ghana8; (ii) a leveraging effect of at least 3 times as a 

result of use of the GIRSAL credit guarantees to crowd-in  commercial lending into Agriculture; (iii) 

financial institutions would increase their risk appetite as a result of their improved assessment of 

agricultural financing risks; (iv) AVC borrowers would improve their farm management and financial 

                                                 
8 In March 2018, the GIRSAL implementation team held a technical session with Financial Intermediaries in Ghana to 

validate the assumptions for the Master Agreement. This agreement would define the terms of engagement between 

GIRSAL and the Financial Intermediaries. Chief Risk Officers attended the session from 18 Financial Intermediaries; 

two of which account for 66% of commercial lending to agribusinesses in Ghana. Based on continued negotiations, 

GIRSAL’s implementation team envisions active participation of at least 6 FIs by 2023. 

 



 

13 

 

management as a result of TAF consortium and GIRSAL interventions. For the economic analysis, (i) 

incremental benefits from the Project are realized over a 10-year time period; (ii) the applicable 

discount rate is estimated at 20%. The summary of financial and economic analysis is included in 

Technical Annex B6 of the appraisal report. 

 

3.1.3  Financial analysis: Three capitalization scenarios were considered (capitalization of GHS 

600 million/ GHS 400 million/ GHS 250 million). Fund mobilization for GIRSAL is currently secured 

at GHS 263 million (for capitalization, OPEX and CAPEX), which informed the decision to initiate 

GIRSAL using a capitalization baseline of GHS 250 million. The FIRR analysis generated Net Present 

Value (NPV) of GHS 393,503,981 over the first 5 years. This capitalization scenario presents a break 

even IRR. 

 

3.1.4  Economic analysis: The economic analysis was conducted using the same approach as the 

financial analysis. Economic analysis yielded an NPV of GHS 731,137,197 over the 10-year horizon 

and IRR of 6%. While the IRR projections for GIRSAL are modest, they are likely to increase if: (i) 

there is additional capitalization of GIRSAL over the 10-year horizon. Simulations project an IRR of 

10% at an increased capitalization of GHS 400 million and 12% at an increased capitalization of GHS 

600 million. 
 
 Table 3.1: key economic and financial figures 

 

3.2.  Environmental and social impacts 

3.2.1  Environment:  

 

3.2.1.1 Given its magnitude and the expected minimal environmental and social impacts, the Project 

is classified as a Category 4 FI-C for which no ESA studies are required. This is because the Project 

will support FIs through promotion of agriculture sector de-risking credit guarantee schemes, 

promoting incentives and enablers of agricultural financing and project management. Some of the 

financing will go towards, project management. However, GIRSAL will be required to develop an 

ESMS Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) that will allow it to apply the 

requirements of the Bank’s ISS requirements – in a manner appropriate to the scale and nature of 

GIRSAL operations. GIRSAL will be required to apply the Bank’s Negative and Exclusion list; Bank’s 

ISS requirements; and to comply with applicable national environmental and social regulations 

including labour laws. The Project has integrated E & S risk management procedures within the 

GIRSAL Risk Management procedures and will develop an ESMS and finalise by 31st December 

2018. The ESMS will be reviewed and cleared by AfDB and the ESMS will be disclosed in the 

GIRSAL’s website in compliance with AfDB requirements for Category 4 projects. The Project will 

have the following positive impacts: it will fill the gap in agricultural lending and increase financial 

inclusion especially of youth and women involved in agribusinesses; thereby enhancing the incomes 

of farmers and vendors including women and the youth, and increasing employment opportunities.  

 

3.2.1.2 As a commitment to ensuring implementation of the ESMS, the Project Management 

Component has budgeted for:  ESMS development and training of GIRSAL Staff by a consultant 

(USD20, 000); ESMS implementation and monitoring (USD5, 000 – USD10, 000 per year for five 

years); and capacity building and institutional strengthening resources for GIRSAL staff on ESMS 

implementation within the Technical Assistance Component (USD30, 000).  

 

FIRR : 0%    NPV (base case) is GHS 393,503,981  

EIRR : 6%    NPV (base case)  is GHS 731,137,197  



 

14 

 

3.2.2  Assessment of Institutional Capacity:  

 

In line with the Fund’s requirements, GIRSAL will have to have adequate human, technical and 

financial resources for effective implementation of the ESMS. To ensure the commitment and effective 

implementation of the ESMS, GIRSAL higher management levels will be involved in ESMS 

development and implementation. The Chief Risk Officer will be the focal point in GIRSAL for ESMS 

development and implementation and he/she will provide oversight for E&S risk management within 

GIRSAL. The proposed ESMS Implementation Task force will comprise of GIRSAL staff from the 

following departments/sections: risk management; agricultural insurance and technical assistance. The 

Project-staffing plan includes Credit Risk Officers within GIRSAL and all participating Financial 

Institutions would be staffed with credit risk officers and these will trained to assess and manage E&S 

Risks.  Currently GIRSAL does not have the adequate capacity and its will be strengthened through 

technical capacity building to ensure effective implementation of the ESMS and this has been reflected 

in the Project cost. The overall responsibility of environmental and social risk monitoring as well as 

reporting on Project E & S performance will lie with GIRSAL as part of the overall Project monitoring 

and reporting arrangements.   

 

3.2.3  Climate risks:  

 

Ghanaian agriculture and food systems are climate dependent and the sector is recognized as one of 

the most vulnerable sectors to climate change. The proposed programme will have to take into account 

climate risks that may affect the risk sharing for agricultural lending activities. The Project will also 

support use of improved seeds and climate smart agriculture technologies to support resilience to 

climatic shocks. The bundling of financing with derisking instruments would adequately protect 

agribusiness borrowers from losses resulting from climate events and would provide indemnity for 

financial institutions that extend debt to these agribusinesses. GIRSAL will deploy technical assistance 

to support both agribusinesses and financial institutions to mitigate/manage risks. In addition, the 

facility would also leverage the use of ICT based services to enhance climate and market information. 

 

3.2.4  Gender Aspects 

 

3.2.4.1  In Ghana, women constitute 52% of the national Agricultural labour force and contribute 46% 

to the total GDP and produce 70% of subsistence crops (MOFA, 2002). Women play a major role in 

the agriculture value chain, from farming to food processing and marketing.  However, women 

experience more constraints in accessing agricultural productive resources, compared to men. 

According to FAO, such limitations involve several dimensions such as: (i) ownership of land, 

livestock or other agricultural resources; (ii) management of agricultural resources; (iii) use of financial 

services and other inputs for agriculture (FAO, 2011). As the study mentions, access to credit and other 

financial services is a serious constraint to many actors in the agriculture sector especially the 

smallholder farmers, who are mostly women, for whom funding from the banks is simply out of reach.  

3.2.4.2 The obstacles of women to access funding for agribusinesses are mainly:  limited access and 

ownership of land, as an essential collateral, limited knowledge and capacity in elaborating bankable 

business plans, limited access to information on how and where to access finance, lack of guarantee 

for climate change related risks, mind-sets about the agriculture; considered as for households needs;  

etc.    The available data in Ghana are not gender disaggregated to indicate the number of female-

owned agribusinesses borrowing for agricultural production, but based on the qualitative information 

and estimates, women are poorly involved in the sector, due essentially to the mind-sets and 

perceptions of agriculture: cultivating for households needs and not for businesses.   In most financial 

institutions, women generally receive smaller loans than men, even for the same activities. Female-led 



 

15 

 

agribusinesses largely source financing from microfinance institutions, small savings and credit 

services and some types of micro insurance, for food processing and marketing. Women are 

underrepresented as borrowers and members in many rural and urban finance programs and 

cooperatives that tend to favour larger agricultural production loans.  

3.2.4.3 To address these challenges of women in agricultural financing and increase the number of 

women owned businesses in the agriculture sector, the GIRSAL Project intends to put in place the 

following actions & measures: (i)propose a Gender policy, including for the key affiliated institutions;  

(ii) The selected PFIs may elaborate or review their credit policy to reflect their commitment to 

advancing the empowerment of women;(iii) Create a networking platform for women entrepreneurs 

in the agriculture sector to foster peer-to-peer learning, mentoring and the sharing of information and 

knowledge within communities, and enhance their ability to elaborate the Bankable projects (through 

the TAF) (iv)  Provide incentives to PFIs lending to women; v) Develop and provide innovative bank’s 

products specific to the needs and interest of women; vi) Organise the sensitization campaigns to uplift 

the level of consideration of agriculture’s sector among the population.  The budget allocated to 

implement specific activities and measures for gender equality and women’s empowerment is 

equivalent to 0, 5million UA.  

 

3.2.5  Involuntary Resettlement 

There is no involuntary resettlement or land acquisition or any loss, by the population, of property, 

sources of income and livelihoods envisioned within the implementation of the Project activities.  

IV. IMPLEMENTATION 

 

4.1.  Implementation arrangements 

4.1.1   The GoG, through the Ministry of Finance (MoF) will be the borrower of the loan. GIRSAL 

Limited (also the Company) will be the executing agency. The loan proceeds will be on lent by MoF 

to the Company (an autonomous, specialized limited liability company focused on enabling the 

acceleration of access to risk adjusted credit in Ghanaian agriculture), by signing a subsidiary loan 

agreement (on-lending) on terms and conditions acceptable to the Fund. . The Company will operate 

independently of BoG, and other agents and institutions of the Government of Ghana. Its structural 

and operational designs were arrived at after close collaboration with various stakeholders including 

farmer groups, financial institutions (FIs), Ministries, Departments and Agencies (MDAs), other 

agribusiness ecosystem participants, donor partners and financial services providers.  

 

4.1.2 The National Insurance Commission (NIC) and Bank of Ghana (BoG) will regulate the 

Company. The CEO will be in charge of the day-to-day operation supported by the Chief Operating 

Officer (COO) and Credit Risk Officer (CRO). The various functional units including the Treasury, 

Financial Control, and Administration will report to the CRO whilst Agriculture Insurance, Technical 

Assistance, Marketing and DFS report to the COO.  The Board of Directors shall provide overall 

governance of the Company whose operational guidelines would follow the Basel Guidelines on 

Corporate governance principles. The Board shall also have the overall responsibility for approving 

and overseeing management’s implementation of the entity’s strategic objectives, governance 

framework and corporate culture. To enhance control, there shall be an internal audit function, which 

will carry out periodic reviews of the Company’s operations and report to the audit committee of the 

Board. Internal Audit will also monitor implementation of external audit recommendations. 

 

4.1.3 The Company will have the full complement of staffing with the requisite qualifications and 

experiences to ensure that it operates effectively. External recruitment will complement the initial staff 



 

16 

 

who may be seconded from Bank of Ghana (bound with an MOU signed for return at the end of 2 

years) to ensure that the Company operates efficiently from the onset.  

 

 Financial Management 

 

4.1.4  The overall financial management of the Company including the Fund’s funding will be 

handled by the Finance and Administration Manager (competitively recruited), who shall be a 

seasoned chartered accountant with hands-on experience in the application of International Financial 

Reporting Standards (IFRS) in the banking and insurance environments, with some knowledge of 

agricultural products and multilateral projects. He will be assisted by an experienced Accounts Officer, 

who would also be chartered accountant (to be hired) with reasonable experience in the application of 

IFRS and knowledgeable in financial services, insurance, agricultural financing and donor funded 

projects.  An accounting software (ERP) would be procured and used for accounting entries and 

financial reporting. An accounting policies procedures manual (in draft) that has been customised from 

BoG’s existing finance Manual and will be implemented to ensure unified financial management 

practices within GIRSAL Limited. The Finance and Administration Manager will use the accounting 

software to produce monthly, quarterly and annual reports. Quarterly interim unaudited financial 

reports must be shared with the Bank within 30 days of the end of each calendar quarter reported on, 

while the annual financial statements must be audited in accordance with terms of reference approved 

by the Bank, and submitted to the Bank within six months of the end of the year audited. 

4.1.5 Other key draft manuals customised from existing BoG’s manuals including: (i) Human 

resources policy; (ii) Internal Audit Procedures; (iii) Information Security Policy; (iv) 

Communications Policy;, and (v) Procurement Manuals will be finalised in time to ensure a smooth 

start to operations. 

  

4.1.6     Disbursement: Three (3) of the Bank’s four disbursement methods shall be used in disbursing 

funds from the Bank to GIRSAL namely: (i) Reimbursement; (ii) Direct payments; and (iii) Payments 

through Special Account (SA). All payments relating to consultancies will be made through direct 

payments based on milestones achieved, as verified by GIRSAL Limited’s management. The ADF 

resources to fund the risk sharing facility (RSF) will be advanced in a single tranche to a segregated 

USD denominated Special Account (approved by the Minister of Finance), opened at the Bank of 

Ghana (BoG) for GIRSAL. A second local currency investment account will be opened at BoG, for 

investing all GIRSAL RSF funds (in less risky instruments) and drawdowns made as and when the 

guarantee is called upon. All disbursements under the Project will follow the disbursements procedures 

outlined in the Bank’s Disbursement Handbook. 

  
4.1.7    External audit arrangements: An external audit firm will audit the Company in full compliance 

with the country’s practices for limited liability companies. In fulfilment of the Ghana’s Companies 

act,1963 (Act 179) and registration, GIRSAL has appointed PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) as its 

external auditor, whose  appointment shall be renewed annually based on satisfactory performance for 

a maximum of 5 years. PwC is experienced in the Bank’s auditing requirements and the audit ToR 

must be agreed with the Bank before commencement of the audit. The audited financial statements 

and the accompanying management letter must be submitted to the Bank within 6 months after each 

financial year.  As neither the financial management staff, nor the proposed system is in place, the 

overall financial management risk at appraisal is deemed substantial. To mitigate the risk, the GIRSAL  

team will need to ensure appropriately qualified and experienced staff are brought on board at the 

earliest, and further actions as listed in the FM action plan are implemented. 

  



 

17 

 

4.1.8  Procurement arrangements: “Procurement of goods (including non-consultancy services), 

and the acquisition of consulting services” financed by the Fund for the Project, will be carried out in 

accordance with the “Procurement Policy and Methodology for Bank Group Funded Operations” 

(BPM), dated October 2015 and following the provisions stated in the Financing Agreement. 

Specifically, procurement would be carried out as follows: 

 

i. Bank Procurement Policy and Methodology (BPM): Bank standard PMPs, using the relevant 

Bank Standard Solicitation Documents (SDDs), will be used for International Competitive 

Bidding (ICB), and National Competitive Bidding (NCB) procedures for contracts of goods, 

while the procurement process for the acquisition of Consulting Services will be undertaken 

through shortlists as indicated in the Technical Annex B5, Para. B.5.3.2.  
 

ii. Procurement Risks and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): The assessment of procurement risks at 

the Country, Sector, and Project levels and of procurement capacity at the Executing Agency 

(EA), were undertaken9 for the Project and the output have informed the decisions on the 

procurement regimes (Banks PMP) being used for specific transactions or groups of similar 

transactions under the Project. The appropriate risks mitigation measures have been included 

in the procurement PRCA action plan proposed in Annex B5, Para. 5.3.8. 
 

4.2.  Monitoring 

4.2.1 The foundation for the overall Project monitoring and evaluation systems will be the logical 

framework, a series of key performance indicators and project operational manual (POM) which will 

be prepared by the PMU within GIRSAL Limited shortly after Project loan approval. MOF will have 

an oversight role and monitor all operations for planning and facilitation purposes. The PMU will 

monitor and evaluate overall impact of the Project including environmental and social compliance and 

performance and compile the Project’s half year (first year and quarterly thereafter) and annual reports 

for dissemination to the Bank Group, MOF, and relevant line ministries. A mid-term review (MTR) 

will be undertaken two years after Project start to review the Project’s achievements and constraints. 

Similarly, upon completion of project investments at the end of program year four, the PMU will 

prepare a Borrower’s project completion report.  

 

4.2.2  The initial assessment of national capacity indicates a satisfactory rating. The Ghana Statistical 

Service leads the efficient production and management of quality official statistics based on 

international standards, and will be used to assess the contribution of the Project towards the country 

and regional development goals and objectives as defined in the relevant development plans. In using 

the performance indicators and targets specified in the results-based framework, Project implementers 

tracking progress towards Project results are expected to take special note of changes that reflect 

advancement towards the translation of outputs into development outcomes. In developing monitoring 

and planning indicators, they will be disaggregated along gender lines. The key functions of the M&E 

Officer in the PMU will be to ensure quality and accountability of monitoring; information 

management; facilitation of knowledge building; and knowledge sharing on monitoring and 

evaluation. 
 

4.3.  Governance 

4.3.1 Based on Bank’s experience in implementing projects in Ghana, the existing governance 

practices and controls have been deemed satisfactory. The implementation of GISAL requires 

                                                 
9 See Technical Annexes for details 



 

18 

 

excellent governance across multiple layers of the agriculture ecosystem and within multiple value 

chains. This is in relation to better responsiveness, transparency, accountability and efficiency in the 

use of resources. Hence, the institutional arrangement has been designed to ensure good governance, 

and will serve as an instrument for achieving Project objectives.  
 

4.4.  Sustainability 

4.4.1  The ownership and sustainability of the Project is enhanced by the roles that various 

stakeholders played during formulation and preparation of the Project. Leading the process on behalf 

of the Government of Ghana was the BoG. The BoG chaired a systematic review, consultation and 

design process that has since resulted in the formation of the Company. On a day-to-day basis, the 

BoG Team Leader worked with and consulted parties from inside the Government including the 

Ministry of Food and Agriculture and Ministry of Finance. The BoG chaired process acted as a 

technical review team of experts with respect to the various reports and recommendations produced 

by PwC.  

 

4.4.2  Post-launch, the Company has been transferred to the MOF and will function as an 

autonomous and independent legal entity for accelerating growth in Ghana’s agribusiness sector. That 

structure is important in order to avoid any conflicts of interest between BoG’s role as a financial 

systems regulator and GIRSAL Limited’s role that also participants in the agriculture financial sector.  

 

4.4.3  A key part of that crystallization will be achieved by ensuring that GIRSAL Limited is 

launched with a start-up operating budget that would be sufficient to fund its annual recurrent budget. 

It is anticipated that within 3 to 5 years of launch, GIRSAL Limited will be able to self-fund itself 

using a combination of its fee income and drawdowns from its investment portfolio.  
 

4.5.  Risk management 

4.5.1 The current agricultural finance policy and sectoral strategies of Ghana have been developed in 

a consultative manner with the full participation of all relevant stakeholders. The Bank Group will 

engage in continuous policy dialogue to ensure that the policy, institutional and funding (particularly 

public expenditure) environment remain conducive to agricultural growth and development. 

Furthermore, social risks will be reduced through gender-sensitive approaches and ensuring that the 

poor are not excluded from Project benefits. GIRSAL is expected to be classified as a Category 4-FI 

C because the Project activities are expected to have environmental and social impacts that can be 

avoided and minimised since they will mostly be transaction-specific. Direct impact on climate change 

is expected to be immaterial to limited; hence, climate screening was approached with a degree of 

flexibility. The following are the main risks identified and with mitigation measures.  

 
Risks  Mitigation measures 

Macroeconomic risks - High probability: slow 

economic growth and deterioration of the country’s 
creditworthiness due to fall in cocoa and other 

commodity prices.  

Mitigation measure: GIRSAL will intensify the dialogue with the government to adopt 

supportive macroeconomic policies to rationalize fiscal expenditure, protect exchange rate 
flexibility, strengthen the banking system to prevent systemic crisis, and implement structural 

reforms for economic diversification. 

Productivity risks - Moderate to High probability: 
failure to achieve forecast crop and livestock yields 
due to soil conditions, inadequate access to extension 

workers, delays in rainfall, and inability to eradicate 

biological threats such as locusts 

Mitigation measure: GIRSAL will proactively support the Ministry of Food and Agriculture 

to ensure that deep collaboration occurs between GIRSAL and itself, to ensure that critical 

productivity enablers are mobilized on schedule and at scale. Such support may occur in the 
context of normal technical assistance, or in addition to it 

Commercial risks - High probability: sharp rise in 
supply of agricultural commodities  domestically and  

globally, exerting downward pressure on prices, 

resulting in lower than planned price realization for 

farmers and other ecosystem participants  

Mitigation measure: GIRSAL will work closely with its Ghana based and global crop market 

experts to gather pricing data as well as monitor early warning systems issued by 3rd parties 
e.g. US Dept. of Agriculture price forecasts for rice, corn, etc. If additional action is necessary 

based on the anticipated pathway for crop prices, then the Bank will work with GIRSAL to 

provide support to lenders on how to best communicate the shift, as well as prepare them for 

potential events of default. In addition, as appropriate, the Bank will support GIRSAL as it 

seeks out potential price hedging solutions and innovative tools to protect farmer earnings. 



 

19 

 

Environmental, Social and Climate Risk – 

Medium probability: The Project activities are 

anticipated to have transaction and site specific 

environmental and social risks. The proposed Project 
area (all of Ghana) is likely subject to climate change 

impacts, with impact zones more intensive in 

northern Ghana. 

Mitigation measures: An ESMS will be developed for the Project and the Project will 

undergo climate screening and categorisation as appropriate. During project implementation, 

if required - and it is unlikely to be the case given the Project type - transaction site specific 

ESMPs will incorporate integrated pest management plans and climate risk mitigation and 

adaptation measures. As specific transactions warrant it, ESMP development and 
implementation will be part of the monitoring and reporting of the Project activities.  

 

4.6.  Knowledge Building 

Knowledge building will be vital to the success of the Project. Considering the new approach in 

agricultural value chain finance, the results of the Project will be monitored closely. Knowledge will 

be built on the evolving concept of risk sharing systems; the likelihood of reducing default probabilities 

by deploying technical assistance; the impact on interest costs; the role of value chain actors including 

farmers and farmers’ organization, women, youth, private sector, commercial and public sector. 

Knowledge will be captured using analysis of M&E database, supervision missions, mid-term reports, 

and periodic impact assessments and field exchange visits of the stakeholders within and outside the 

production clusters. In addition, knowledge would be disseminated using GIRSAL’s knowledge portal 

and the Bank’s communication systems (Intranet, short documentaries on Bank website, etc.). For the 

purposes of publicity and sharing of Project results, the Project may recruit a local firm as and when 

the need be. The Technical Assistance projects will serve as sources of innovative knowledge and 

information sharing learning tools empowering farmers and other actors of the value chain to train 

their peers, share knowledge and experiences, thus reducing their overdependence on the public 

extension agents. This will also expand significantly the number of value chain actors having access 

to the disseminated knowledge and information. The technical assistance supports will introduce and 

consolidate knowledge and skills, and facilitate technology and skills transfer at both the community 

and national levels.  

V. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

5.1. Legal instrument 

5.1.1 The legal instrument to finance this operation is an ADF loan agreement for UA 10 million 

between the Republic of Ghana and the Fund. 

  

5.2.  Conditions associated with the ADF intervention  

Entry into Force of the Loan Agreement 

5.2.1 The entry into force of the Loan Agreement shall be subject to the fulfilment by the Borrower of 

the provisions of Section 12.01 of the General Conditions of the Fund applicable to Loan Agreements 

and Guarantee Agreements.  

 

A. Conditions precedent to first disbursement:  
 

5.2.2 The obligation of the Fund to make the first disbursement of the loan shall be conditional upon 

the entry into force of the Agreement and the fulfilment by the Borrower, in form and substance 

satisfactory to the Fund, of the following conditions: 

  

(i) Submission of certified copies of GIRSAL Limited’s: (i) constitutional document or bylaws; 
(ii) certificate of registration; and (iii) applicable operating licenses; 

 

(ii) The execution and delivery of the Project Agreement between the Fund and GIRSAL Limited 

in form and substance satisfactory to the Fund;  

 



 

20 

 

(iii) The execution and delivery of a Subsidiary Agreement between the Borrower and GIRSAL 

Limited in form and substance satisfactory to the Fund;  

 

(iv) Submission of evidence of the deposit of the Borrower’s counterpart contribution to the Project 

in the amount of Two Hundred Million Ghana Cedis (GHS  200,000,000) in a bank account 

acceptable to the Fund; and 

  

(v) Provision of evidence of the competitive recruitment or secondment of key staff of GIRSAL 
Limited, with qualifications and terms of reference acceptable to the Fund, as follows: (a) a 

chief executive officer; (b) a chief risk officer; (c) a chief operating officer; (d) a finance and 

administration manager; and (e) a procurement officer.  

 

B. Other Conditions:  
 

The Borrower shall provide evidence, in form and substance satisfactory to the Fund, of the fulfilment 

of the following conditions: 

 

(i) Prior to disbursement, the opening of a foreign currency denominated account in the name of 
GIRSAL Limited at the Bank of Ghana into which Loan proceeds towards the Credit Guarantee 

Scheme (CGS) will be deposited by the Borrower; 

(ii) Prior to disbursement, the opening of an additional foreign currency denominated Special 
Account and a local currency account in the name of GIRSAL Limited at the Bank of Ghana 

for operational purposes; 

(iii) The establishment of Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), in form and 
substance satisfactory to the Fund, within three (3) months of Loan disbursement; 

(iv) The appointment of a Board of Directors of GIRSAL Limited with a mandate and 
responsibilities satisfactory to the Fund, within six (6) months of Loan disbursement; and 

(v) Development of a risk management framework and procedures (including but not limited to 
risk pricing and AVC prioritization criteria), within six (6) months of Loan disbursement.   

 

C. Undertakings: 
 

The Borrower undertakes the following under the Loan Agreement: 

  

(i) To deliver to the Fund, Project half year during the first year, and thereafter quarterly and 
annual reports in form and substance acceptable to the Fund, setting out the Borrower’s 

implementation of the ESMS (including but not limited to any implementation failures and 

related remedies, if any);  

(ii) To submit to the Fund updated lists of PFIs which would from time to time sign the Master 
Agreement with GIRSAL Limited; 

(iii) To take all appropriate measures and actions necessary to ensure that the Loan proceeds shall 
not be used to guarantee or otherwise finance any of the activities under the Bank Group’s 

Negative List; 

(iv) To take all appropriate measures and actions necessary to ensure that the Loan proceeds shall 
not be used to guarantee banks, financial institutions or other, or otherwise to finance projects, 

involving predatory lending or other forms of financial exploitation; 

(v) To take all appropriate measures and actions necessary to ensure that no transfer of shares in 
GIRSAL Limited held by the Ministry of Finance or otherwise in excess of five percent (5%) 



 

21 

 

of the total issued share capital, either individually or cumulatively, is made unless with prior 

written approval of the Fund; 

(vi) To take all appropriate measures and actions necessary to ensure that the Executing Agency 
shall not use the Loan proceeds to guarantee loans or portfolios of loans contracted prior to 

signature of the Loan Agreement between the Fund and the Borrower; and  

(vii) To take all appropriate measures and actions necessary to ensure that the Executing Agency 
shall use the Loan proceeds to provide guarantees to PFIs pursuant to sound banking principles, 

including but not limited to the ability of the borrowers to repay the guaranteed PFIs.   

 

5.3.  Compliance with Bank Policies 

● This Project complies with all applicable Bank policies. 
● Non-standard conditions (if applicable): N/A  

VI. RECOMMENDATION 

 
Management recommends that the Board of Directors approve an ADF loan of UA10 million to the 

Republic of Ghana for the purposes of the activities in the proposed Project and subject to the 

conditions stipulated in the present report.  

 

















































 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 
 
 

 
 

 

GUINEA  

 

 SUPPORT PROJECT FOR THE TRANSFORMATION OF GUINEAN 
AGRICULTURE AND YOUTH AGRICULTURAL ENTREPRENEURSHIP 


 
November 2018 

 
 

 
 
 
Project Information Sheet  
Client Information 
 
BORROWER/DONEE: Republic of Guinea  
 
EXECUTING AGENCY:  Ministry of Agriculture (MA) 
 
Financing Plan (TSF Supplemental Support Window)  

Source  Amount  Instrument 

TSF (Pillar I)  UA 3.240 million   UA 4.630 million 
Grant 
Loan 

Government  UA 0.897 million - 
Beneficiaries   UA 0.220 million - 
TOTAL COST  UA 8.987 million  

  
Key TSF Financing Information  
 

TSF grant currency  
TSF loan currency  

UA 
UA 

  
Service fee  0.75% 
Commitment fee  0.50% 
Loan maturity  40 years 
Grace period  10 years 

IRR (baseline scenario) 
ERR (baseline scenario) 
NPV 

 
12.7% 
18.8% 
UA 5.688 million  

Framework – Main Milestone (expected) 
  
Concept Note Approval 10 September 2018 
Project Approval  16 November 2018 
Effectiveness  January 2019 
Completion Date  31 December 2022 
Closing of Loan and Grant  30 June 2023 

___________________________________________________________________________ 



 

v 

Executive Summary 

Project Overview: In Guinea, agriculture remains at the core of development policies and the main source of 
income for 631%  of people living in rural areas, and generates 80% of the country's jobs. It contributes about 
25% to GDP and employs nearly 80% of the Guinean population. Rice is the dominant food crop, accounting for 
67% of the area cultivated, 65% of the country's cereal requirements, 37% of the workforce, 80% of farmers, 
23% of primary GDP and 6% of national GDP. On average, rice represents 20% of the population's consumption 
budget. To compensate for the food deficit, around 600 000 tonnes of rice are imported yearly. The Support 
Project for the Transformation of Guinean Agriculture and Youth Agricultural Entrepreneurship (PATAG EAJ) 
was designed as part of a participatory and inclusive approach involving all stakeholders – farmers’ organisations, 
local communities and devolved technical services. The discussions and studies conducted with the PATAG EAJ 
Project Preparation Facility (PPF) in 2018 led to a thorough assessment of the situation and to identify not only 
the investments needed for the transformation of Guinea’s agriculture through promotion of the rice and market 
gardening value chains, but also the implementation modalities most appropriate for the Boké and Boffa 
Prefectures. In formulating PATAG EAJ, account was also taken of the country’s fragile context, lessons from 
Bank projects and those of other partners in Guinea, and the need to develop synergies and complementarities. 
In view of the Bank’s strategic orientations for the country, the project was designed with special emphasis on 
the following: (i) irrigation and market access infrastructure; (ii) value chain development; (iii) decent youth 
employment, empowerment of women and promotion of women’s leadership; and (iv) improvement of resilience 
and adaptation to the impacts of climate change. 

The specific goal of the proposed project, which is expected to cost UA 8.987 million and span a four-
year implementation period, is to ensure the development of climate-smart agricultural value chains and the 
promotion of youth entrepreneurship through the sustainable revival of rice production and market gardening 
value chains in the Boké and Boffa Prefectures. In addition to the basic transformative infrastructure that will 
result from the project (development of 237 ha of lowlands comprising 25 ha for off-season market gardening 
based on the use of shallow wells, 50 ha for seed production, 15 ha for women's gardening activities and 31 ha 
for youth-run modern market gardening activities; 65.5 km of access roads, 1 weekly market/consolidation centre, 
2 markets (stalls), and 6 stores and 2 input shops.), the project will support 20 agricultural processing units and 
contribute to the dissemination of 25 innovative techniques for increasing productivity (TAAT), improving 
storage and promoting food processing. These activities will be accompanied by local and organisational capacity 
building, and special attention will be paid to the creation of value added, youth employment and 
entrepreneurship, and to women's empowerment. PATAG EAJ will target at least 1 000 young people and 
women, 5 000 producers, 200 seed companies, 100 groups and 20 women’s and youth unions. It will affect a 
total 39 252 direct beneficiaries and 247 287 indirect beneficiaries through its various activities. The project will 
eventually increase rice production by about 1 030 tonnes, including 210 tonnes of certified seeds, and market 
gardening production by about 2 000 tonnes, generating a 19% boost in income. It will create 3 526 direct decent 
jobs, including 147 jobs generated by agricultural development works, 2 780 jobs by strengthening 
entrepreneurship and SMEs, and 600 temporary jobs. 

Needs Assessment: The project area covers two prefectures - Boké and Boffa - located in agricultural 
development hubs A and D, whose hydro-agricultural and socioeconomic potential requires the establishment of 
a rehabilitation and upgrading mechanism, in light of several factors: (i) the existence of high development 
potential (rice farming and market gardening); (ii) the proximity of consumption areas (Boké, Kamsar, Sangarédi, 
Fria Kindia, Boffa, Dubréka, Conakry, etc.); and (iii) current and future Bank interventions (the Forécariah road, 
the Boké-Quebo road and the future Boké agricultural hub). The project is based on the geographic concentration 
of operations at sector, village and priority site level, designed to maximise impact on target groups and to 
guarantee the sustainability and visibility of activities. 

In line with the country's strategic orientations, PATAG EAJ will contribute to the improvement of productivity 
and production in priority sectors by transforming Guinean agriculture and improving food and nutritional 
security through rice production and market gardening. The country has an annual rice deficit of more than 600 
000 tonnes. The project will also develop market gardening, whose current production covers only 53% of needs. 
This activity will help to improve the nutritional status of the beneficiaries, contribute to women’s empowerment 
and develop youth entrepreneurship. Therefore, the project will serve as a catalyst for agricultural expansion in 
the area by facilitating water control and the development of abundant quality natural resources (water, soil and 
solar energy), strengthening agricultural infrastructure, promoting sustainable, resilient and smart production, 

                                                 
1 PNIASAN 2018 – 2025 Republic of Guinea 



 

vi 

packaging and processing technologies, and facilitating access to product markets by supporting the growth of 
the two strategic sectors, i.e. rice production and market gardening.  

Value-added for the African Development Bank: Agriculture remains at the core of development policies 
and the main source of employment. The Bank financed the Nerica Rice Development Project, the Upper Guinea 
Rural Development Support Project (PADER-HG) and the Beyla-Kérouané Agro-Pastoral Development Project 
(PRODABEK), etc. These operations made it possible to develop certain specific expertise and provide new 
insights into key areas (irrigation, seed production and control, processing, etc.). To consolidate these gains, the 
Bank will support the Government in financing the Support Project for the Transformation of Guinean 
Agriculture and Youth Agricultural Entrepreneurship (PATAG EAJ), in an effort to encourage the emergence of 
production hubs. By supporting the development of infrastructure in areas that are economically and socially 
disadvantaged, but endowed with huge irrigated agriculture potential, the Bank will contribute to reducing 
poverty, promoting decent employment for young people and women, strengthening adaptation to climate change 
and increasing the resilience of people vulnerable to food and nutrition insecurity. 

Knowledge Building: PATAG EAJ will help to train producers and consolidate their expertise. In an inclusive 
way, it will enable young people and women to develop technical and entrepreneurial capacity by accessing 
modern factors of farming, and will promote the emergence of leadership. In terms of resilience to climate change, 
it will develop and disseminate innovative technologies in the agricultural sector for the production, storage and 
processing of agricultural products, while enhancing local knowledge. PATAG EAJ will support the development 
of expertise in drip irrigation and solar pumping techniques, as well as in new processing technologies. In 
addition, support for quality improvement and labelling/certification will help to ensure compliance with norms 
and standards that promote access to new markets. Knowledge building will also be carried out through 
mechanisms for the communication and capitalisation of project results and best practice, and generation of 
endogenous value for the benefit of vulnerable groups via value chain development. Therefore, this project will 
contribute greatly to improving the attractiveness of the agricultural sector for private enterprise and youth 
employability. 



 

vii 

                                                               RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  
 

Country and Project Name: GUINEA –  Support Project for the Transformation of Guinean Agriculture and Youth Agricultural Entrepreneurship (PATAG EAJ)  
Project Goal: Contribute to the development of climate-smart agricultural chain and the promotion of youth agricultural entrepreneurship  

RESULTS CHAIN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 
RISKS/ 

MITIGATION MEASURES  Indicator  Baseline  Target  2022  

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Climate-smart agricultural and agribusiness value chains are 
developed 

Agriculture's contribution to GDP 23% (2016) 27%  

-INS/PNDES 
-CILSS 
- Reports by institutions (FAO, 
UNICEF, MS, etc. 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S 

The volume of rice and market gardening production is increased 
in the Boké region (the Boké and Boffa Prefectures) 

Increase in rice yield per hectare (ha)  
Increase in market gardening yield per ha 
Volume of rice production 
Volume of market gardening production 

1 T/ha (2018) 
8 T/ha 

106 T (2018) 
150 T of market gardening  

produce (2018) 

3 T/ha 
18 T/ha 
1138 T  
2075 T  

-Annual report, agricultural 
statistics  
 
-Periodic monitoring reports  
 
- Midterm review reports and 
project completion report  
 
 

Risks:  
- Political instability coupled with a difficult 
economic situation 
- Poor ownership of the project (technical 
management, works implementation, etc.) 
 
Mitigation Measures:  
- Contribution to the improvement of 
socioeconomic and environmental resilience for 
better stability  
- Involvement and participation of beneficiaries 
in all stages and capacity building (producers, 
Ministry of Agriculture) 
- Involvement of actors in the external 
communication of the project 
- Continuous participatory monitoring and 
evaluation 

 
Rural producers in both regions generate higher additional income  
 
 
 
Jobs created for of young people and women 

 
Average annual income of rice-farming  
households (including women) 
 
Average annual income of market garden 
households 
 

Jobs created 

 
GNF 4 800 000 (2018) 

 
 

GNF 975 000 (2018) 
 
 

0 

 
GNF 10 000 000  

 
 

GNF 1 625 000 /farmer  
 
 

35262 (50% women, 60% youths) 

1. Modernisation and Development of Agricultural Infrastructure 
 
Rehabilitation/development of rice farming facilities 

1.1 Development of lowlands 
1.2 Development of seed-producing areas  
 
Rehabilitation/development of market gardening areas 
1.3 Women's market gardening with solar energy (BF) 
1.4 Women's market gardening areas 
1.5 Farms for young entrepreneurs 

Agricultural infrastructure 
1.6 Development of access roads  
1.7 Rehabilitation/revitalisation of markets 
1.8 Construction of warehouses and input shops 
1.9 Construction of agricultural product processing centres 
  

 

 
 
 
1.1 Areas of lowlands developed 
1.2  Size of seed-producing area rehabilitated  
 
 1.3 Developed area with wells and pumps  
1.4 Area with drip equipment and solar panels   
1.5  Farms with drip equipment and solar panels   
 
1.6     Length of access roads rehabilitated 
1.7 Number of markets rehabilitated  
1.8 Number of input shops opened  
1.9  Number of processing centres built  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Project Area  
 
 
1.1 0 
1.2 0 
 
 
1.3 0 
1.4 0  
1.5  0 

 
  

1.10  0 
1.11 0 
1.12 0 

  1.9      0       
   

 

Project Area  
 
 
 

1.1 237 ha (30% W) 
1.2 50 ha 
 
 
1.3 25 ha (100% W, 50% Girls),  
1.4 15 ha (80% W, 50% of them 

G) 
1.5 31 ha (100% Youths, 30%  

of them 30% Girls)   
 

1.6 65.5 km 
1.7 1 market 
1.8 6 stores and 2 shops  
1.9 6 centres (80% W) 

 
 

- Progress reports of technical 
services in charge of 
monitoring  
- Contracts signed with 
contractors 
- Reports of control bureaux  
 
- Project progress reports  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Risks 
 - Land conflicts and conflicts of interest  
 - Procurement bureaucracy, weak capacity of 
technical services  
- Weak capacity of contractors  
 
Mitigation Measures  
- Identification of prior beneficiaries and 
establishment of an adequate management 
mechanism 
- Preparation of priority BDs  
- Use of specialised NGOs and private 
companies 
- Central State departments supported to play 
their sovereign role 
 - Raising of community awareness on land 
tenure issues and management of processing 
units 
 
 

                                                 
2 Annex B7 – The economic and financial rates of return present the detailed estimated impacts on job creation.  



 

viii 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S 

  2. Development of Youth Entrepreneurship Value Chains  

 Agricultural extension, structuring and organisation of FO, and 
improvement of access to inputs and improved seeds 

2.4 Training of groups on resilient and smart TAATs  
2.1 Demonstration units (DU) put in place 
2.2 Young seed-producing groups monitored and strengthened 
2.3 Supervision, advice on technical matters and producer 
management  
2.4 Group training on resilient and smart TAATs 
2.5 Developed sites secured in terms of land tenure requirements 
 
Access to production and processing 
 
2.6 Setting up a revolving fund for inputs 
2.7 Input stores operationalised  
2.8 Operators of farm machinery and craftsmen trained and supported  
2.9 Post-harvest equipment provided to FOs 
2.10 Women’s EIG for processing set up 
2.11 Parboilers provided to women's groups 

  Agricultural entrepreneurship and nutrition 

2.12 Training  of young people and FOs on agricultural entrepreneurship 
2.13 Development  and financing of business plans for youths and FOs 
2.14 Customised training (refresher courses for youths in activity) 
2.15 Setting up of SMEs for maintenance and servicing 
2.16 Pilot school canteens supported 

 

 

 

2.1 Number of DUs put in place  
2.2 Number of seed-producing groups 
2.3 Number of producers supervised 
2.4 Number of groups trained  
2.5 Number of sites secured   
 
 
2.6       Number of beneficiaries  
2.7      Number of shops operational  
2.8      Number of beneficiaries trained and 

supported  
2.9   Number of pieces of equipment 
 provided to FOs  
2.10 Number of women’s EIGs set up  
2.11 Number of parboilers provided  
 
2.12  Number of persons trained  
2.13  Number of business plans developed and 

financed  
2.14  Number of youths trained 
2.15   Number of SMEs set up  
2.16  Number of school canteens supported  

 

 

 
2.1         0 

2.2 0 
2.3 0 
2.4 0 
2.5 0 
 
 

2.6    0 
2.7    0 
2.8    0  
2.9    0 
 
2.10  0 
2.11  0 

 
 

2.12. 0 
2.13  0 
 
 
2.14  0 
2.15   0 
2.16  0 

 

 

2.1       51 units (17 for rice and 34
for market gardening) (50% W) 
2.2 10 (100% Y) 
2.3 900 (40% W and 30% Y) 
2.4 15 (50% W) 
2.5 25 sites (50% W and Y) 
 
 
2.6      100 producers 
2.7       2 shops (100% Y, 50% W) 
2.8       10 (100% J, 40% W) 
2.9 10 kits (80% W) 
2.10 5 EIGs (80% W) 
2.11 20 parboilers (100% W) 
 
 
2.12      600 youths trained (50% W) 
2.13      50 business plans (40% W) 
 
 
2.14      30 youths trained (40% W) 
2.15      4 SMEs (100% Y, 25%W) 
2.16      3 canteens  

- Project progress reports  
 
- Pest and pesticide 
management policy  
 
- Bank supervision reports  
 
 
- Government’s external 
monitoring reports  
 
Monitoring and evaluation 

reports  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Risks  
- Mobilisation of counterpart funding  
- Limited ownership and management of 
infrastructure 
- Conflicts between farmers and herdsmen  
- Limited own financial resources   
- Need for start-up capital  
- Environmental risks  
 
Mitigation Measures  
- Counterpart funding resources limited to 
taxes and subsidies for fertilisers and inputs  

 - Participatory approach adopted and 
awareness-raising among/involvement of 
various stakeholders  
- Business plan selection and evaluation 
committee, programme contracts  
- Preparation of environmental notices for 
business plans  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

  
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
      
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 3. Project Management  

3.1 Procurement activities carried out  
3.2 Project activities conducted  
3.3 Financial management performed  
3.4 Monitoring and evaluation conducted 
3.5 Communication ensured 

 
 
3.1  PP kept and followed  
3.2  Compliant disbursement rate  
3.3  Audit reports produced  
 
3.4   M&E system operational  
3.5  Communication plan implemented  

 
 
3.1 PP developed (end-2018) 
3.2 0% (December 2018) 
3.3   Consulting firm recruited 
(January 2019) 
3.4  Set up  (Q1 2019) 
3.5  Plan developed (2018) 

 
3.1 PP updated at least once a year  
3.2 20% per year, on average  
3.3  4 Annual  audit reports validated  
3.4 Midterm and final M&E reports 
produced  
3.5  Communication tools 
disseminated  

 
Procurement Plan (PP) 
Early warning system (EWS)  
Audit reports  
M&E progress reports   
Brochures, web site, films, etc. 

Risks 

- Weak capacity  
 
Mitigation Measures 

Recruitment through calls for candidature after 
appraisal, performance contracts, capacity 
building  

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S 

 

COMPONENTS  RESOURCES 

Component A:  Modernisation and Development of Agricultural Infrastructure 
      Studies, construction and control of works (lowlands, market gardening irrigated areas, farm-to-market roads, markets, 
shops and stores, etc.), etc. 

.  
Component B:   Development of Value Chains and Youth Agricultural Entrepreneurship 

Advisory support, structuring, land tenure security, access to seeds and fertilisers, support for mechanisation purposes, training 
and installation of young people, support for women, nutrition support, institutional support, etc. 
 

Component C: Project Management  
Coordination, procurement, monitoring and evaluation, financial management, audit, communication, leadership, etc. 
 
Component D:   PPF 
 
 

Components:  Sources of Financing: 
Component A          : UA 4.846 million (53.9%) TSF Loan    : UA 4.630 million (51.5%) 
Component B          : UA 2.189 million (24.4%) TSF Grant                  : UA 3.240 million (36.0%) 
Component C          : UA 0.963 million (10.7%)  Govt.    : UA 0.897 million (10.0%)  
Component D PPF   : UA 0.990 million (11.0%) Beneficiaries     : UA 0.220 million (2.4 %) 
  

 
Remark: CSI refers to the Bank’s key sector indicators  

  



 

ix 

                                                                                                Project Implementation Schedule 

 

 Year 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 
 Quarter Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 

1 INITIAL ACTIVITIES                      
 

 PATAG EAJ financing negotiations                       
 ADF approval                        
 Signing of financing agreements                       
 Effectiveness and fulfilment of conditions precedent to first disbursement                       

 
Publication of the General Procurement Notice 
Development of management and M&E tools  (PATAG EAJ PPF) 

                     
 
 

2 START-UP ACTIVITIES                        

 PMU staff confirmation                        
 Preparation of priority procurement agreements and BDs                       
 PATAG EAJ launching mission                       
 Procurement of equipment for the PMU (vehicles, IT, etc.)                       
 Signing of agreements with partner entities                       
3 AGRIC. INFRASTRUCTURE MODERNISATION AND DEVELOPMENT                        
 Preparation of documents on priority infrastructure and projects                       
 Procurement for priority infrastructure and structures                       
 Studies on complementary hydro-agricultural infrastructure, roads and buildings                       
 Irrigation and road works                       
 Marketing and processing infrastructure                       
 Implementation of the environmental management and monitoring plan                       

4 DEVELOPMENT OF VALUE CHAINS AND YOUTH ENTREPRENEURSHIP IN THE AGRICULTURAL SECTOR  
                 

     

 
Conduct of agricultural extension activities and improvement of access to inputs 
and improved seeds 

                 
     

 Agricultural advisory support, FO structuring and organisation                       
 Support for product conservation, processing and marketing                       
 Development of agricultural entrepreneurship                        
 Nutrition support                       
 Institutional support and capacity building                        
5 PROJECT MANAGEMENT                       
 Updating management and monitoring/evaluation tools                       
 Baseline situation and implementation of the monitoring and evaluation system                       
 Coordination, management, monitoring, evaluation and communication activities                       
 Annual accounts audit                       
 Midterm review                        
 TSF and Government Completion Report                       



 

1 

GUINEA: SUPPORT PROJECT FOR THE TRANSFORMATION OF GUINEAN 
AGRICULTURE AND YOUTH AGRICULTURAL ENTREPRENEURSHIP (PATAG EAJ) 

 
Management hereby submits this report and recommendations concerning a proposal to extend a UA 
4.63 million loan and award a UA 3.24 million grant from the Transition Support Facility (TSF) to 
the Republic of Guinea to finance the Support Project for the Transformation of Guinean Agriculture 
and Youth Agricultural Entrepreneurship (PATAG EAJ). 

I- Strategic Thrust and Rationale 

1.1. Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives 

1.1.1 In Guinea, agriculture remains at the core of development policies and the main source of income 
for 57% of people living in rural areas, and creates 80% of the country's jobs. It contributes about 23% to 
GDP and employs nearly 80% of the Guinean workforce. In the medium term, it will remain the engine of 
growth and the source of jobs, and an indispensable sector for achieving the objectives of poverty reduction 
and food security in Guinea. Rice is the dominant food crop, accounting for 67% of the area cultivated, 
65% of the country's cereal requirements, 37% of the workforce, 80% of farmers, 23% of primary GDP 
and 6% of national GDP. On average, rice represents 20% of the population's consumption budget. To 
compensate for the food deficit, around 600 000 tonnes of rice are imported yearly, representing about 15% 
of requirements. The rate of coverage of market gardening was 53% in 2015. 

1.1.2 In addition to occupying the 12th place among the most fragile countries, Guinea ranked 183rd out 
of 188 countries in the 2017 Human Development Report. The level of poverty has remained high, with 
the incidence of poverty rising from 41.9% in 2002 to 55.2% in 2012. About 80% of Guineans live in rural 
areas, where poverty is exacerbated by the lack of production infrastructure, basic social services and access 
to markets. The sector's contribution to economic growth was only 0.99% in 2015. The agricultural 
subsector is the driver of growth in the primary sector, but its contribution to the growth of the rural sector 
remains considerable, and stood at 4.1% in 2015.  The sector’s performance has been weak in terms of: (i) 
the cereal balance sheet; (ii) the productivity and processing level; and (iii) entrepreneurial capacity. The 
lack of infrastructure for improved access, production with poor water management and processing stifles 
the development of value chains, product competitiveness and improvement of the living conditions of 
Guineans. The principal challenge is to strengthen institutional, economic and social resilience while 
building the capacity of actors and reducing disparities between men and women, and to support the 
country's structural transformation by setting up key infrastructure for inclusive and green growth. The 
transformation of agriculture through the development of value chains, the promotion of youth employment 
and agricultural entrepreneurship, gender mainstreaming and increased involvement of non-State actors 
(including civil society and the private sector), will help to strengthen the resilience and mitigate the 
economic, socio-demographic and environmental dimensions of the country's fragility.  

1.1.3 In pursuing its objective to develop agricultural value chains, PATAG EAJ will help in increasing 
the sector’s contribution to GDP and in creating jobs and business opportunities by promoting the rice and 
market gardening sectors in targeted areas. It is an essential response for supporting production and 
processing activities, and contributing to the improvement of the people's living conditions by promoting 
value chains and creating entrepreneurship opportunities for young people and women. Therefore, it will 
contribute to the operationalisation of the National Economic and Social Development Plan (PNDES) 
2016-2020, which is in line with the 2040 forward-looking vision for a prosperous and emerging Guinea 
reliant on the agricultural sector to ensure that: (i) the productivity of the primary sector is doubled between 
2014 and 2020; (ii) food security is assured (reducing the incidence of food poverty from 18.2% in 2012 
to 9.1% in 2020); and (iii) sustainable agriculture is promoted. PATAG EAJ aligns squarely with the four 
PNDES pillars: (i) promotion of good governance for sustainable development; (ii) sustainable and 
inclusive economic transformation; (iii) inclusive human capital development; and (iv) sustainable natural 
capital management. This project is also in synergy with the various existing strategies, including the 
revised National Agricultural Development Policy (PNDA 2016-2025), the overall objective of which will 



 

2 

be to increase the contribution of the agricultural sector to food security, nutrition and reduction of poverty 
among Guineans by boosting growth and agricultural trade through: (a) increased productivity; (b) 
improved access to promising markets; and (c) improved governance of the agricultural sector. PATAG 
EAJ also concords seamlessly with: (1) the National Agricultural Investment and Food and Nutrition 
Security Plan (PNIASAN); (2) the Accelerated Programme of Food and Nutrition Security and Sustainable 
Agricultural Development (PASANDAD), the precursor to the implementation of PNIASAN through four 
components: (i) promotion of a favourable environment for sector development (promotion of 
transformative investments and the institutional framework); (ii) strengthening agricultural chains 
(structuring of actors and improving the performance of agricultural chains); (iii) promoting nutrition and 
gender; and (iv) sustainable natural resource management. 

1.2. Rationale for Bank Intervention 

1.2.1 Despite having many assets (fertile soils, water resources, fishery resources, etc.), Guinea still 
faces poverty (72% below the poverty line) and food insecurity (around 18%). The low unemployment 
rate (5.2% in 2014) in fact masks the scope of underemployment, unstable jobs and disparities. The 
unemployment rates of graduates of vocational schools and higher education institutions stand at 27.7% 
and 34.7%, respectively. Poverty is essentially rural, with a rate of about 80%, although these areas have 
proven hydro-agricultural potential. Rice is the staple food and the food deficit is filled annually by 
imports of about 600,000 tonnes. The main constraints facing the sector include: inaccessibility to 
production areas, poor water management, degradation of production systems, especially the mangroves 
owing to salinity and acidity, poor access to inputs, and low processing capacity. The aim of various 
strategies put in place is to reverse that trend, in particular by boosting investments in the agricultural 
sector and in production, marketing and processing infrastructure, and by promoting youth 
entrepreneurship and private sector involvement. It is vital to develop potential water resources and 
optimise the soil resource management, and to add value to products by reducing post-harvest losses 
through storage and quality processing that will open access to various markets. PATAG EAJ will fulfil 
that mission by modernising systems and factors of production, improving access to production areas, 
restructuring actors and improving conservation, processing and marketing conditions, with increased 
attention to value chains, youth/women's employment, and learning. PATAG EAJ is also a tool for 
implementing the CSP (2018-2022), which is built on two pillars: improving access to energy (Pillar 
1); and developing agricultural and industrial value chains (Pillar 2). Since it supports the 
transformation of the Guinean agricultural sector, this project is founded on Pillar 2. Through the 
development of agricultural value chains, agribusiness and agricultural entrepreneurship, it will 
contribute to inclusive and green growth, and to the improvement of people's living conditions. The 
project is in synergy with current and future operations, including those related to the construction of 
the Boké-Québo road and the Agricultural Processing Area Project. The area of intervention was also 
chosen based on the presence of an agricultural economic hub with identified potential in the rice and 
market gardening sectors. Hence, this project will seek to build on ongoing activities in targeted 
intervention areas and ensure complementarity to create greater impact. 

1.2.2 The objectives of PATAG EAJ are consistent with the Bank’s "High 5s", which aim to feed 
Africa by 2025 and improve the people’s living conditions through the development of agricultural 
value chains, build the capacity of stakeholders, create jobs and generate income. The project is aligned 
on the Bank's Ten-Year Strategy (TYS) 2013-2022 and its two guiding objectives of inclusive growth 
and transition to green growth, as well as three areas of special interest: gender, agriculture and food 
and nutrition security. It plugs into the Bank's Strategy for Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience 
in Africa, and will help in achieving the objectives of the Enable Youth Initiative and the Jobs for Youth 
in Africa Strategy by creating opportunities for young people. It is consistent with the Bank's 
Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) programme, which focuses on the 
adoption of new production and processing technologies in agricultural value chains. Specifically, it is 
in harmony with climate change adaptation initiatives by promoting renewable energies, water-saving 
techniques and resilient systems. 



 

3 

1.3. Aid Coordination  

Development aid is coordinated by the Government of Guinea through the Coordination and Consultation 
Framework (CCC) of the Permanent Secretariat in the Prime Minister’s Office. In addition to the CCC, a 
strategic mechanism for coordination between the Government and technical and financial partners (TFPs), 
a technical monitoring committee (TMC) to strengthen inter-sector coordination, and thematic dialogue 
groups (TDGs) bringing together TFP and Government representatives have been set up at the sector level. 
The "rural development, food security and environment" thematic group is chaired by the World Bank for 
TFPs, and the Ministry of Agriculture for the Government. Through its Country Office in Guinea (COGN), 
the Bank is an active member of the CCC and some TDGs. The key ongoing projects with an agricultural 
value chains and youth agricultural entrepreneurship support component backed by TFPs, and with which 
PATAG EAJ will need to develop synergies, are highlighted in Volume 2. The project will also establish 
synergies with Bank projects: the Boké-Quebo Road Construction Project with a rural roads component 
for the supply of agricultural products (ongoing) and the Boké Agropole Agricultural Processing Area 
Project (2019). In the wider rural sector (agriculture, livestock, fisheries, and environment), the intervention 
of the different partners is presented in Annex A4 of Volume 2, and is summarised as follows: 

Sector or Sub-Sector 
Size of  

GDP Exports Labour 

[Rural sector] [23%] 5% (2015) 80% 
Stakeholders – Public Expenditure (ongoing programmes or projects) 

Government Donors   Amounts (USD million) 

 
 

  Period 

 World Bank 308.2 2013-2023 

 AfDB 
247.55 
 

2018-2022 

7.3% of public budget  IFAD 141.8 2013-2024 

 IsDB  29.4 2018-2025 

 BADEA 44 2017-2021 

 AFD 45.93 2017-2022 

 USAID  30 2017-2022 

 Abu Dhabi Fund  33.7 2018-2024 

 
Existence of thematic working groups No 
Existence of a comprehensive sector programme No 
Role of AfDB in aid coordination Reinforced with COGN 

 

II- Project Description  

2.1. Project Objectives and Components  

2.1.1 PATAG EAJ’s sector goal is to help foster strong and inclusive economic growth. The specific 
objectives are to contribute to the development of climate-smart agricultural and agribusiness value 
chains, and to promote youth agricultural entrepreneurship in the Boké and Boffa Prefectures. It will: 
(i) help to boost production and productivity, and improve access to production and processing factors 
and markets; (ii) contribute to the development of climate-smart agricultural value chains that can 
employ a high number of young people and women; (iii) help to improve access to basic socioeconomic 
services for economic development; and (iv) build the capacity of the stakeholders involved in 
implementing PNIASAN/PASANDAD to achieve the objectives of PNDES in general, and of the 
PNDA in particular, and for better sector governance. 

2.1.2 PATAG EAJ was designed in light of results and lessons from the Bank's experience in the 
country and in the sub-region, acquired from efficient operating procedures, targeting of high-impact 
priority activities, and strong stakeholder involvement. The activities will take place in the two hubs – 



 

4 

A (Boffa) and D (Boké) – and will target poor, highly inaccessible areas with huge agricultural potential. 
Beyond the development of production, processing and marketing infrastructure in the areas concerned, 
the project will support: (i) the strengthening of the organisational and technical capacity of actors, 
particularly young people and women; (ii) the promotion of processing and marketing through the 
dissemination of new technologies (TAAT) and support for product labelling; (iii) the promotion of 
youth entrepreneurship and women’s empowerment; and (iv) the improvement of governance in the 
sector through the organisation of beneficiaries and capacity building. The selection and involvement 
of committed farmers, the choice of proven techniques and transformative actions will aim to ensure 
the sustainability of interventions and infrastructure. PATAG EAJ will support 5 000 farmers, 1 000 
young people and women, 100 seed growers, 100 groups and 20 unions, and will impact 39 252 direct 
beneficiaries and 247 287 indirect beneficiaries through its different activities. It will be implemented 
over a four-year period (January 2019 - December 2022) and will include three components, 
summarised below. 

Table 2.1: Project Components 

Component Cost Component Description 

Component 1: 
Modernisation and 
development of 
agricultural 
infrastructure 

UA 
4.846 

million 

A1 Rehabilitation/development of rice-cultivation facilities and access roads: (i) 237 ha of rice-
growing lowlands (with 25 ha of gardens irrigated from wells) and 50 ha for rice seed production, 
(ii) 65.5 km of access roads; (iii) 32.7 kilometres of hedgerows, and 10 ha of stone barriers. 
A2. Rehabilitation/development of market gardening areas: (i) 15 ha for women’s market 
gardening (solar pumping and drip irrigation); (ii) 31 hectares of modern farms for young 
entrepreneurs. 
A3. Construction of agricultural and social infrastructure: (i) Construction of the Lisso market and 
two stalls; (ii) construction of two input shops and six product storage warehouses; and (iii) 
construction of six processing centres. 

Component 2: 
Development of 
value chains and 
youth agricultural 
entrepreneurship  

 

B1 Production and productivity support: (i) support for access to inputs: development of the 
Koba seed centre; support for 10 groups of young seed growers; establishment of revolving 
fertiliser and seed funds; operationalisation of two input shops for young entrepreneurs; (ii) support 
for agricultural mechanisation: establishment of four service centres for young entrepreneurs, 
training and support for the establishment of ten young drivers and ten repairers; (iii) advisory  
support and structuring of farmers’ organisations (FOs): dissemination of 15 TAATs; guidance 
for 900 farmers and 15 groups, setting up of 50 management committees and 4 maintenance SMEs, 
land security and conflict prevention on 25 sites. 

2.189 
million 

B2 Promotion of processing and market access: (i) support for product processing: supply of 10 
post-harvest kits to young FOs; capacity building for 5 women unions/economic interest groups 
(EIGs) (rice, groundnut and fonio parboiling) and 40 groups of parboilers; training of 40 groups 
and unions in quality and packaging standards management; (ii) promotion of market access: (i) 
organisation of group sales and matching of farmers and wholesalers; promotion of the “Consume 
Local/Made in Guinea” label; (iv) support for the certification of agricultural products and the 
labelling of parboiled rice; and (v) education and nutritional monitoring of the population, and 
communication for behavioural change. 
 B3 Development of agricultural entrepreneurship: (i) training of 600 young people on 
agricultural entrepreneurship; (ii) support for the establishment 50 young project proponents; (iii) 
made-to-measure training for 30 young people. 

Component 3 
Project management 

UA 
0.963 

million 

(i) Coordination of project activities; (ii) administrative, accounting and financial management; (iii) 
acquisition of goods, works and services; (iv) establishment of a communication plan; and (v) project 
implementation monitoring and evaluation. 

2.2. Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Explored  

2.2.1 The technical solutions used in PATAG EAJ are based on field data and lessons learned from 
similar projects, and based on design methods adapted to the specific context of the intervention area. 
It involves development of medium-sized sites of lowlands with access to new technologies and solar 
energy for the dewatering. 



 

5 

 

2.2.2 The technical options selected took into consideration the ease of work management and 
equipment, the willingness of the beneficiaries to adhere and adopt these choices. The main arguments 
are: (i) to maximize the intensification level in these areas where two campaigns can be made, (ii) to 
achieve better water efficiency and control; (iii) to introduce solar energy, clean and renewable resource 
and appropriate mechanization; (iv) to promote new irrigation technologies through the introduction of 
drip systems, (v) mastering management and maintenance aspects to ensure sustainability. 

Table 2.2: Alternatives Explored and Reasons for Rejection 

Alternative Short Description Reason for Rejection 

Development of one large 
area, with total water 
control where the project 
would be concentrated 

Build a large pumping station, 
coated water transport channels 
with large civil engineering 
structures for water collection, 
supply and delivery for the 
various blocks and 
neighbourhoods 

This alternative is not technically feasible and does not 
ensure the availability of labour, in terms of both quantity 
and quality, for the development of the facilities and the 
investments to be made. It is highly likely that the area 
will not be fully exploited, since available labour on 
several sites close to small villages or large towns can be 
used to better exploit irrigated areas and develop the 
facilities. 

Development of market 
gardening areas with 
improved wells without 
any means of dewatering 

Build large-diameter wells at a 
rate of one well per hectare where 
irrigation water is manually 
drawn and carried by farmers to 
the parcels 

The challenge for the development of market gardening 
production is the manual removal of water from wells. 
This takes up a considerable amount of work time in 
return for mediocre efficiency and makes the task, which 
is performed mostly by women, very tedious and limits 
the production capacity of women involved in market 
gardening, consequently leading to a loss of interest. This 
method is also only feasible on small gardens not 
exceeding a few dozen square metres, especially during 
the dry season, when the demand for water is high. 

Development of 
intermediate animal-
draught cultivation 
instead of motorized 
ploughing 

Animal-draught cultivation in the 
project regions is adapted to light 
soils and a limited amount of 
moisture for high productivity. 
Its effectiveness depends highly 
on the physical state of the area to 
be ploughed 

The large areas of arable land in the region, the short 
period conducive to land preparation and the reduction of 
the rainy season impede animal-draught cultivation and 
militate in favour of mechanised ploughing. 
Consolidation of the network of agricultural 
mechanisation service providers in the project area will 
contribute to the achievement of this objective. 

2.3. Project Type  

PATAG EAJ is an investment operation financed from TSF resources. The Government of Guinea has 
not yet committed to implementing programmes using the sector approach, given a number of 
institutional constraints and fragility context. The project approach is the most appropriate, to ensure 
the achievement of results and the efficient and effective use of the resources allocated to the project. 

2.4. Project Cost and Financing Arrangements  

2.4.1 The cost of the project is estimated at UA 8.987 million or GNF 113 274 million. The foreign 
exchange portion is UA 3.845 million and constitutes 43% of the total cost. Customs duty and taxes are 
the responsibility of the State, which must take the necessary measures to ensure the enforcement of 
this provision. The provision for physical contingencies is expressed as a percentage of the base cost 
(5%) and applied for civil engineering works, mainly in the form of construction/rehabilitation of 
irrigation facilities, roads, markets, stores, shops and storage centres. The provision for price escalation, 
commonly referred to as "financial contingencies", is calculated based on the inflation level. The 
inflation rate used was 8%. The breakdown of project cost is presented in the tables below, by 
component and expenditure category. An expenditure schedule by component is also provided. The 



 

6 

detailed table of project costs and the list of goods and services are provided in Annexes B2 and B8.2 
of Volume II, respectively. 

Table 2.3: Estimated Cost by Component 

Components 
GNF Million  UA Million  % 

Foreign 
Exchange 

Foreign 
 Exchange 

Local 
Currency Total 

Foreign 
Exchange 

Local 
Currency Total 

A. Modernisation/development 
of agricultural infrastructure 

27 820 26 445 54 265 2.207 2.098 4.306 51% 

B. Support for the development 
of value chains and youth 
agricultural entrepreneurship 

9 783 15 758 25 541 0.776 1.250 2.027 38% 

C. Project management 2 001 10 006 12 006 0.159 0.794 0.953 17% 
D. Project Preparation Facility 
(PPF) 

5 772 67 05 12 478 0.458 0.532 0.90 46% 

Total base cost 45 376 58 914 104 290 3.600 4.674 8.275 44% 
Provision for physical 
contingencies   

1 293 11 81 2 474 0.103 0.094 0.196 52% 

Provision for price escalation  1 797 47 13 6 510 0.143 0.374 0.517 28% 

Total project cost 48 466 64  808 113 274 3.845 5.142 8.987 43% 
 

Table 2.4: Estimated Cost by Expenditure Category  

CATEGORIES 
GNF Million UA Million  

% F.E. % Categ. F.E. L.C. Total F.E.  L.C. Total 
Works 25 857 23 620 49 477 2.052 1.874 3.926 52.3% 43.7% 

Goods  6 902 44 88 11 390 0.548 0.356 0.904 60.6% 10.1% 

Services 12 617 20 730 33 347 1.001 1.645 2.646 37.8% 29.4% 

Operation - 3 034 3 034 - 0.241 0.241 0.0% 2.7% 

Personnel - 7 042 7 042 - 0.559 0.559 0.0% 6.2% 

Base cost 45 376 58 914 10 4290 3.600 4.674 8.275 43.5% 92.1% 
Provision for physical 
contingencies   

1 293 1 181 2 474 0.103 0.094 0.196 52.3% 2.2% 

Provision for price escalation 1 797 4 713 6 510 0.143 0.374 0.517 27.6% 5.7% 

TOTAL 48 466 64 808 11 3274 3.845 5.142 8.987 42.8% 
100.0

% 

2.4.2 The project will be financed through a grant of UA 3.24 million and a loan of UA 4.63 million 
from the TSF, representing 87.6% of the project cost, net of taxes and customs duty. The Government's 
financial participation, estimated at UA 0.898 million, will be limited to covering the costs of taxes and 
customs duty, and the establishment of a revolving fund for the procurement of inputs (fertilisers and 
seeds). The contribution of beneficiaries will be limited to their participation in routine maintenance 
and upkeep, which can easily be carried out, and their 10% participation in the financing of young 
entrepreneurship projects, estimated at UA 0.220 million. The breakdown by source of financing is 
shown in Table 2.5 below. 

Table 2.5: Sources of Financing 

SOURCES 
GNF Million UA Million 

% source Foreign 
 Exchange 

Local  
Currency Total 

Foreign  
Exchange 

Local  
Currency  Total 

TSF loan 37 220 21 136 58 356 2.953 1.677 4.630 51.5% 
TSF grant 11 246 29 590 40 837 0.892 2.348 3.240 36.1% 
Govt. - 11 310 11 310 - 0.897 0.897 10.0% 
Beneficiaries  - 2771 2 771 - 0.220 0.220 2.4% 

TOTAL 48 466 64 808 11 3274 3.845 5.142 8.987 100.0% 



 

7 

 
Table 2.6a: Expenditure Schedule by Component (in UA million) 

COMPONENTS 2019 2020 2021 2022 Total 

A. Modernisation/development of agricultural 
infrastructure 

1.512 2.721 0.073 - 4.306 

B. Support for the development of value chains 
and youth agricultural entrepreneurship  

0.443 0.928 0.440 0.215 2.027 

C. Project management 0.296 0.211 0.221 0.225 0.953 
D. PPF advance 0.990 - - - 0.990 
Base cost 3.241 3.859 0.735 0.440 8.275 

Provision for physical contingencies  0.098 0.095 0.004 - 0.196 

Provision for price escalation  0.229 0.215 0.048 0.025 0.517 

TOTAL 3.568 4.168 0.787 0.465 8.987 
 

Table 2.6b: Expenditure Schedule by Source of Financing (UA million) 
SOURCES 2019 2020 2021 2022 Total % 
TSF loan 1.367 2.894 0.364 0.005 4.630 51.5% 
TSF grant 1.841 0.575 0.369 0.455 3.240 36.1% 
Government 0.280 0.559 0.054 0.004 0.897 10.0% 
Beneficiaries 0.080 0.140 -   - 0.220 2.4% 

TOTAL 3.568 4.168 0.787 0.465 8.987 100.0% 

2.5. Project Beneficiaries and Target Area  

2.5.1 The project area, consisting of the Boffa and Boké Prefectures (A and D hubs), is part of the 
Boké region, located in the North-West of the Republic of Guinea. The Boké region covers an area of 
35 234 km² and has 5 prefectures (Boké, Boffa, Fria, Gaoual and Koundara), 32 rural municipal councils 
(“communes”) and 5 urban municipal councils. The region’s climate is conducive to agriculture, with 
abundant rainfall in coastal areas (2 500-3 000 mm/year) that decreases gradually towards the north to 
800 mm and 1 000 mm in Gaoual and Koundara. Estimated at 1 190 724 inhabitants (INS/Demographic 
Prospects, General Population and Housing Census (RGPH3), 2017 projection), the Boké region 
population is highly cosmopolitan and is primarily engaged in agro-pastoral activities. The average 
population density is 32 inhabitants/km². 

2.5.2 The Boké region is one of the most important bauxite areas in Guinea. Currently, 14 mining 
companies are active in the region, attracting a large number of people to the area (accelerated 
population growth), with growing demand for food and nutrition. Young people, who account for more 
than 60% of the region's population and the bulk of its agricultural workforce, are abandoning 
agriculture and opting for work in the mining sector. They are involved in the social unrest that the area 
has been experiencing because of its status as the bauxite basin par excellence. 

2.5.3 The intervention sites were selected based on an analysis comprising multiple criteria: (i) 
accessibility; (ii) existence of a participatory and community/local operating set-up; (iii) absence of 
latent land conflict; and (iv) overall consistency with project objectives (availability of labour, level of 
organisation and spirit of initiative of future beneficiaries, expertise and participation of women and 
young people). Various types of sites have been pre-identified: (i) development of lowlands: with partial 
control of irrigation water (sites in rice-cultivation lowlands), and with total control of irrigation water 
(Koba sites for rice seed growers and mixed rice cultivation and market gardening areas in the Boké 
area); (ii) mixed areas of rice cultivation and market gardening alternating over the agricultural year 
with total water control; (ii) market gardening areas (wells, solar pumping equipment, loading tank and 
drip irrigation). 



 

8 

2.5.4  The population of the area is mainly engaged in agriculture (rice, maize, cassava, groundnuts, 
sorghum/millet, cowpeas, market garden produce, cashew nuts, etc.), livestock farming and trade. 
Traditional and family-type agriculture faces various challenges, including lack of or dilapidated state 
of facilities, difficulty of accessing factors of production (certified seeds, quality inputs, ploughing and 
post-harvest equipment, etc.) and markets. Women are involved in all rural agricultural activities and 
participate mainly in work on rice fields and market gardens, as well as in produce processing and 
marketing. The project is aimed at small farmers, particularly women and young people, who constitute 
the bulk of the vulnerable segments of the population in terms of food and nutrition insecurity and 
poverty. The project will reach 1 000 young people and women, 5 000 farmers, 200 seed growers, 100 
groups and 20 unions. Other direct targets are artisans, processors, traders, young entrepreneurs, 
students in pilot school canteens, various service providers and NGOs, etc. Through its activities, 
PATAG EAJ will reach 39 252 direct beneficiaries and 247 287 indirect beneficiaries. 

2.6. Participatory Approach for Project Identification, Design and Implementation  

2.6.1 The project design is the result of a participatory process that involved all stakeholders: 
government departments, farmers’ organisations, women's groups, civil society, private sector, TFPs, 
projects, etc. Initiated as part of implementation of PATAG EAJ PPF activities, these broad 
consultations continued during the project preparation and appraisal mission. Consultation meetings 
organised in each of the two prefectures with all the parties (decentralised technical services, NGOs and 
support and advisory associations, local authorities, beneficiary representatives, including women) led 
to a consensual identification of the challenges and needs of the intervention area, and for the two sectors 
concerned. Focused discussions with local institutional and civil society partners and visits to various 
potential sites, followed by working sessions with beneficiaries, including women and young people, 
made it possible to draw up an exhaustive inventory of development needs in the area and to identify 
the support needs for the two sectors and the most appropriate methods of implementation, as well as 
the appropriate measures for the effective action. The sites and activities were chosen following several 
investigations and fruitful discussions with the beneficiaries and other stakeholders. 

2.6.2 This participatory process revealed strong enthusiasm for the project and a broad consensus on 
its design and implementation methods. For instance, farmers reaffirmed the need to fully exploit the 
high potential of the intervention area (land, natural watercourses, mangroves, lowlands, etc.). Women 
emphasised their interest in market gardening, farm produce processing and marketing with 
modernisation of production and processing tools, and improved market access. During visits to various 
sites, stock was taken of existing facilities and infrastructure, and technological options to be adopted 
for their construction/rehabilitation proposed. Developing a good communication plan around PATAG 
EAJ and maintaining the participatory approach during its implementation will ensure that local actors 
take ownership of the project during its execution.  

2.7. Consideration of Bank Group Experience and Lessons Learned in the Project Design  

2.7.1 PATAG EAJ design drew largely from lessons learned from projects executed by the Bank in 
Guinea and the sub-region, with every effort made to reflect the context of the country's fragility and to 
address some of the weaknesses identified during project implementation and highlighted in portfolio 
reviews and completion reports. At the last review conducted in July 2018, the portfolio performance 
was deemed satisfactory, but efforts will have to be made with regard to: (i) the effectiveness timeframes 
(11 months instead of the 6 months recommended by the Bank); (ii) the timely appointment of project 
management teams, including the coordinator and financial management and procurement officers; (iii) 
the lengthy procurement timeframe; (iv) delays in the release of counterpart funding, which impedes 
smooth project execution; (v) the systematic introduction of performance contracts and objective-based 
annual evaluation; (vi) the timely preparation of the baseline situation and deployment of monitoring 
and evaluation systems; and (vii) the availability of studies to improve the quality-at-entry of operations. 

  



 

9 

2.7.2 The Portfolio Performance Improvement Plan (PPIP 2018) also advocates the implementation 
of specific measures to accelerate project execution and the implementation pace. These lessons were 
taken into account in this project, as reflected in: (i) continuous dialogue and close monitoring by the 
Country Office to gradually reduce the long delays and fulfil the conditions for effectiveness; (ii) 
improvement in project quality by supporting the formulation and preparation of the detailed 
designs/competitive bidding documents (APD/BDs) and management and monitoring/evaluation tools 
prior to project start up (with PPF resources); and (iii) building of the procurement and financial 
management capacity of project management teams. It should be noted that the current portfolio has 
become significantly younger in recent years, the average age of operations having dropped from 5.5 
years in 2011 to 2.7 years in 2017. Moreover, the portfolio had no problematic projects (PP) or 
potentially problematic projects (PPPs) in 2017. 

2.7.3 PATAG EAJ was designed to take the following into account: (i) the need to enhance the 
quality-at-entry of the project by making feasibility studies available and by preparing the initial 
competitive bidding documents; (ii) the need to pay special attention to the involvement of local actors, 
notably farmers directly concerned, through an inclusive participatory approach; (iii) the intervention 
of other partners (World Bank, World Food Programme, etc.) to ensure coherence, complementarity 
and synergies in the activities selected; (iv) the need to pay attention to the procurement process and 
methods; and (v) the primordial importance of building the capacity of the different actors. In light of 
the above-mentioned strategic thrusts, special emphasis was also placed on certain thematic areas in 
formulating the project: (a) food and nutrition security; (b) value-chain approach; (c) decent youth 
employment and women's empowerment; and (d) resilience to climate change. All these provisions will 
make it possible to satisfy the design and execution criteria contained in Presidential Directive No. 
002/2015. 

2.8. Key Performance Indicators 

The monitoring and evaluation system of the project's logical framework indicators is part of the 
Ministry of Agriculture’s monitoring and evaluation system. The system will come under the 
supervision of the monitoring and evaluation officer, with the support of Project Management Unit 
experts (rural engineer, value chain expert, etc.), the Prefectural Directorate of Agriculture (DPA) and 
the Rural Engineering Technical Office (BTGR). Particular emphasis will be placed on targeting 
parameters that may be tracked and collected internally, and those relating specifically to women and 
young people (disaggregated data for women and young people). The main performance indicators that 
will be monitored from the baseline scenario include: (i) surface area of lowlands developed for rice 
farming with partial water control; (ii) surface area developed for rice farming with total water control; 
(iii) surface area developed for market gardening; (iv) infrastructure built (number of hectares with drip 
irrigation, number of garden farming hectares protected with grill fences, number of markets 
commissioned, number of kilometres of farm roads, number of product storage warehouses, number of 
input shops, etc.); (v) level of additional production (tonnes) and crop yields (tonnes/hectare); (vi) 
number of farmers (including women) by type of development; (vii) number of demonstration units 
(DUs) and TAATs distributed; (viii) number of farmers’ organisations structured and management 
committees established; (ix) level of increase in farmers' income, including those of women and young 
people; (x) number of jobs for young people and women created through entrepreneurial initiatives and 
number of young entrepreneurs established; (xi) number of farmers, processors and merchants trained 
and organised; (xii) level of involvement of women in decision-making bodies (leadership), and 
women’s rate of access to land following the development; (xiii) number of processing units established 
and allocated (including to women); and (xiv) number of nutrition activities and school canteens 
supported, and level of impact on food and nutrition security. The indicators selected for the project will 
be aligned on those selected under PNIASAN and will be used to assess the impact of the project on 
fragility, resilience and inclusion. The Bank’s various supervision missions and periodic progress 
reports will reflect the level of achievement of the indicators.  

 



 

10 

III- Project Feasibility  

3.1. Financial and Economic Performance 

Table 3:  Key Economic and Financial Data 

NPV (baseline scenario) GNF 20 370 million  
IRR (baseline scenario) 12.7% 
ERR (baseline scenario) 18.8% 

 

3.1.1 The project’s financial and economic analysis was conducted based on the cost/benefit of the 
additional cash flow from the production models of the two priority sectors (rice and market gardening). 
The following assumptions were used: (i) the period for evaluating the impact of PATAG EAJ is 25 
years; (ii) the average basic prices, yields and production costs of the 2016/2017 crop year were selected 
for the baseline scenario and realistic projections were made covering up to full project development, 
taking into account the existing potential and the absorptive capacity of beneficiaries; (iii) additional 
income was determined by calculating the difference between the baseline scenario and the “with-
project” scenario, based on gross proceeds minus production costs; (iv) an equal inflation rate was 
selected for jobs and resources on the cash flow table; (v) for the calculation of the economic rate of 
return, a cost correction coefficient was added for factors related to distortions inherent in customs 
duties. The detailed assumptions of the financial and economic analysis, the tables of the operating 
models (baseline scenario and “with-project” scenario) and financial and economic flows are presented 
in Annex B7 of Volume 2. The results of the financial and economic analysis show that PATAG EAJ 
is financially and economically sustainable.  

3.1.2 Financial performance: The hydro-agricultural improvements and land exploitation will 
generate additional production of approximately 1 030 tonnes of paddy rice, 210 tonnes of certified 
seeds and about 2 000 tonnes of market gardening products, in addition to creating 3 500 permanent 
jobs. The additional income resulting from the various development and farming models selected are 
the following: (i) lowlands with partial water control (rice): GNF 3 205 641 per ha; (ii) lowlands with 
total water control (double cropping for rice seeds): GNF 10 309 850 per ha; (iv) lowlands with total 
water control (double cropping for rice and one cropping for market gardening): GNF 12 325 695 per 
ha; and (v) irrigated market gardening: GNF 24 326 025 per ha. The overall additional income generated 
will help to increase the value added brought about by the project, thus increasing the project's 
contribution to agricultural GDP. The financial internal rate of return (IRR) is estimated at 12.7% for a 
NPV of GNF 20 370 million. 

3.1.3 Economic Performance: The basic economic rate of return (ERR) stands at 18.8%, for a net 
present value (NPV) of GNF 71 691 million and a cost-benefit ratio (CBR) is 1.81. This result is 
significant, especially since some benefits could not be included in the calculations due to the lack of 
data to permit their evaluation, notably improvements in living conditions and food security brought 
about by increased income and food availability, the effects of watershed and environmental protection 
measures, capacity building in other types of economic activities carried out by the beneficiaries and 
the multiplier effects on sector actors (suppliers of inputs, equipment, services, etc.). Sensitivity tests 
were performed based on the assumption of a possible escalation in costs (10%), a decline in agricultural 
production with the risk of non-adoption of farming techniques by farmers (10%), and a reduction in 
the benefits generated by the rehabilitation of agricultural products and  agricultural infrastructure, and 
the availability of processing and storage units for agricultural products (10%). Based on the results 
summarised in Annex B7 of Volume 2, the EIRR seems insensitive to any decreases in the benefits 
generated by rice and market gardening productions (-10%) (for an IRR of 16.6%), in storage, 
processing and rural roads infrastructure (-10%) (for an IRR of 18.5%). Similarly, a possible escalation 
(+10%) in investment and maintenance costs reduces the IRR to 16.8%. 



 

11 

3.1.4 The project’s other economic impacts may be summarised as follows: (i) upstream effects of 
additional income on service providers (NGOs, businesses, suppliers, consulting firms); (ii) downstream 
effects of the generation of additional income on producers, traders and processors who are essentially 
women; (iii) decrease in foreign exchange costs owing to the sharp drop of rice import costs in the trade 
balance; and (iv) impact on wealth creation in the country due to the increase in GDP resulting from the 
generation of additional value added. For households, project benefits will translate into, among other 
things, better nutrition for vulnerable groups (children, women of childbearing age and the elderly); 
lower medical bills and reduction of the difficulty of farm work, especially for women, decline in the 
incidence of monetary and non-monetary poverty; strengthening of livelihoods and the resilience of 
PATAG EAJ targets in relation to food insecurity and the effects of climate change.  

3.2. Environmental and Social Impact 

3.2.1 Environment: The project is classified in Category 2 under the Bank's Environmental and 
Social Safeguards Policies. It was subjected to an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment, the 
summary of which was posted on the Bank's Website on 12 September 2018. PATAG EAJ activities 
will be carried out in 18 areas located in the Boffa and Boké Prefectures. The project’s environmental 
impacts will be minimal given the relatively modest size of the infrastructure/development and their 
distribution across several locations. Moreover, the impact assessment reveals that the project 
implementation will be really beneficial for the socioeconomic development of the Boké and Boffa 
Prefectures since it will enable: (i) better management of soil and water resources, thanks to technical 
supervision of the irrigation methods and the rational distribution of the water to the plots, which will 
limit their over-exploitation and degradation; (ii) proper water control through adapted and appropriate 
(environmentally friendly) facilities, and the use of renewable energy; (iii) the reduction of agricultural 
land degradation, water and soil conservation, the development of vegetation cover, through the 
installation of erosion-control structures; and (iv) the development/promotion of new technologies and 
resilient/smart practices. In short, the project’s physical activities will cause no major environmental 
and social impacts. The impacts, if any, will be very short-lived on the receiving environments and on 
the environmental components as a whole. The summary of the Environmental and Social Management 
Plan (ESMP) was posted on the Bank's Website on 15 October 2018. 

3.2.2 Climate change: The project complies with the Bank's climate protection policies since the 
climate risks have been identified. The programme’s climate sensitivity has been analysed in accordance 
with the Climate Screening and Adaptation Review and Evaluation Procedures Booklet and the Climate 
Safeguards System (CSS). Based on the preliminary analysis of project activities, some operations will 
be more sensitive than others. The roads and facilities will be more climate-sensitive than other 
infrastructure. The design of the roads that will be built will incorporate engineering structures to ensure 
the normal flow of waterways crossed by the roads. In addition, the longitudinal and transverse profiles 
of feeder roads will be so designed as to facilitate the evacuation of water that falls or flows onto the 
road surface and to avoid water stagnation along the right-of-way. The building materials that will be 
used should promote a good compaction level that can strengthen the adhesion of different primary 
particles to reduce their crumbling with the falling of exceptional showers. In building supporting 
infrastructure for the agricultural sector other than the roads, account will be taken of their likely 
exposure to hazards (high winds, rising temperatures, exceptional rainfall, etc.). In addition, the project 
will favour the use of solar energy for dewatering in irrigated areas and for operating the equipment that 
will be installed. This alternative will make project activities cleaner and greener. 

3.2.3 Involuntary Resettlement: PATAG EAJ activities will not lead to any people resettlement or 
restriction of access to goods and livelihoods. 

3.2.4 Gender: Women play a major role in the agricultural economy, and are found throughout the 
value chain from production, processing to marketing. However, they face major constraints in gaining 
access to resources and factors of production, including land, inputs, fertilisers, financing, new 
technologies and extension services. As a result, they work under less favourable conditions compared 



 

12 

to men, which considerably undermines their performance. In rural areas, the income gap between men 
and women in the agricultural sector may be as high as 50%. To address the gender disparities described 
in the above gender analysis, PATAG EAJ pays specific attention to women's strategic interests and 
aims to improve their socioeconomic status in the two regions covered by the project. 

3.2.5 Based on consultations and exchanges with individual women and women's groups, as well as 
with other partners involved in the agricultural value chain and entrepreneurship, the project will 
implement the following activities: (i) Build capacity in  agricultural production, entailing the 
development of 237 ha of lowlands for rice cultivation that will enable women to have at least two rice 
seasons and one market gardening season per year;  development of 46 ha strictly for market gardening, 
of which 15 ha will be for women's market gardening activities, and 50 ha for the production of rice 
seeds. In addition, 30% of the rice schemes to be developed will be reserved for women's groups. 
Despite the strong involvement of women in the rice-farming sector, the management of rice farms 
remains a male preserve (only 9% of rice areas are managed by women). To address this situation, the 
project will train all women and men directly affected by the project (5000 producers), on issues 
pertaining to land tenure security and women's right to acquire land. An awareness campaign on the 
respect of the community's right of use and conflict prevention and management mechanisms will be 
organised to facilitate support for rice producer groups to acquire land and title deeds in newly 
developed areas. The project also includes a package of integrated services for women and young 
people, aimed at improving their access to socioeconomic infrastructure and innovative production 
technologies. Through the rehabilitation of rural roads, the project will help to open up the Boké and 
Boffa areas and facilitate the evacuation of agricultural products to the markets. Socioeconomic 
infrastructure (rural markets, processing units, market gardens and storage warehouses) will be provided 
primarily for the benefit of women and young people, with a view to improving their working 
conditions, easing their tasks, strengthening their economic empowerment, and improving food and 
nutrition security. The project will apply affirmative action in favour of women and vulnerable groups, 
wherever local traditions tend to exclude them from decision-making bodies or from certain benefits. 
Generally, the project will ensure that women are included when it comes to access to factors of 
production (managed land, agricultural inputs, equipment and production equipment), organisation and 
management of the new infrastructure (shops, markets, etc.), and training. Therefore, the project will 
help to strengthen women's economic autonomy and decision-making power; (ii) Enhance skills in 
agricultural production and processing, management, marketing and market access, which entails 
developing the skills of women and young people through the dissemination of Technologies for 
African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT), with focus on production and processing. Skills will also 
be developed in management, packaging, marketing and networking for market access, procurement 
and inventory management, leadership and entrepreneurship. In this regard, study tours will be 
organised for women engaged in processing to enable them to draw on the experience of neighbouring 
countries such as Burkina Faso; and (iii) Entrepreneurship, job creation and leadership and market 
access for women and young people: Increasing production and improving processing conditions will 
rekindle young people's interest in the agricultural sector, which will reduce youth unemployment rates. 
Women and young people will be trained in business plan development and given the support needed 
to set up their own businesses. In addition, women in the processing sector will be put in touch with 
private economic operators that have been identified as well as with WFP to ensure the direct purchase 
of their products. The project is classified in Category 2, according to the Gender Marker System. The 
budget allocated to specific gender promotion and economic empowerment activities stands at 
approximately UA 2.7 million. Details on the gender analysis are provided in the Technical Annex on 
gender. 

3.2.6 Nutrition: The project will develop initiatives to improve the hygiene and nutritional quality 
of food consumed by the people, especially by women and children, and will collaborate with the World 
Food Programme (WFP) to supply school canteens with food products from the area. The additional 
production of rice (1 000 tonnes) and horticultural products (2 000 tonnes) will help to improve feeding 
and nutrition, and hence the people’s health. Incorporating direct nutrition events into project activities 



 

13 

is essential to impacting the people’s nutritional status. Furthermore, activities aimed at supporting 
product quality, labelling and certification will help to improve the nutritional intake. Activities to 
prevent the resurgence of waterborne diseases and rice urticating caterpillars will also contribute to 
improving the health and nutrition of the local population.  

3.2.7 Social: The different activities implemented under the project (improved access to factors of 
production, technical routes for production, processing and marketing) will considerably help to 
enhance food and nutrition security and improve income levels, thereby significantly reducing the 
incidence of poverty. The project will further strengthen the connectivity between producers and the 
market through partnerships that will be beneficial to all stakeholders of the rice and horticulture value 
chains. Enhancing food security through the developments, coupled with awareness raising concerning 
dietary best practice, will help  to improve the people’s nutritional status, particularly that of  vulnerable 
groups such as women of childbearing age and children below the age of five. The rehabilitation of 
roads, construction of the storage/conservation warehouses, rehabilitation of the markets and the support 
of the processing units, will contribute to reducing post-harvest losses (expected to decline by at least 
30%), as well as facilitate product marketing. As a result, the income of households will increase, putting 
them in a better position to bear food, health and education expenses. By making it easier for 
beneficiaries to participate in decision-making processes and to secure land (management of community 
infrastructure, management of conflicts between farmers and herders, maintenance of access roads, 
etc.), the project will also bolster the local development process and promote good governance. Project 
activities will lead to: (i) a 19% increase in the people’s income; (ii) the creation of 3 526 direct decent 
jobs, including 147 in agricultural development works, 2780 in entrepreneurship and SME 
strengthening activities, and 600 temporary jobs; (iii) the creation of self-promotion capacity among 
project beneficiaries in terms of rural development operations in agricultural value chains; (iv) increased 
accountability and the development of human resources, leading to better organisation of rural 
communities; and (v) promotion of small operators (workmen, craftsmen, agricultural workers, micro-
enterprises), following the experience acquired by associations from participating in works 
implementation. The number of direct and indirect project beneficiaries is estimated at 39 252 and 247 
287, respectively. The increase in income will benefit the most vulnerable rural households, as they will 
henceforth be in a better position to bear the food, health and education expenses. Overall, by improving 
living conditions, the project will help to reduce rural poverty and exodus by retaining the people, 
especially the youths, in the localities. 

3.2.8 The promotion of rural entrepreneurship among young people and women (nearly 100 persons 
targeted) will help to develop the entrepreneurial culture among project initiators with a view to 
increasing income, creating decent jobs and promoting leadership among young people and women. 
The development of agricultural entrepreneurship will improve the attractiveness of the rural 
environment and create several production hubs in the area. This will produce concrete results and 
ensure the sustainability of the activities. The project will also facilitate the access of young promoters 
to critical materials, equipment and inputs (basic kits), depending on their business plans and areas of 
specialisation. The training will provide basic concepts and will include specialisation modules. There 
will also be tailor-made training designed to address the specific needs identified. 

IV- Implementation 

4.1. Implementation Arrangements 

4.1.1 Implementation modalities: Project implementation will be overseen by an autonomous 
Project Management Unit (PMU), comprising a small team based in Boké and placed under the 
supervisory authority of the Ministry of Agriculture (MA). The Ministry shall exercise its authority 
through the National Directorate of Agriculture (DNA), which shall be responsible for the technical 
supervision. The team will be recruited through a call for candidature and will include: (i) a project 
coordinator; (ii) a responsible for monitoring and evaluation; (iii) a rural engineering specialist, 
responsible for monitoring the implementation of agricultural infrastructure works; (iv) a value chain 



 

14 

expert, specialised in farmers' organisations and gender issues; (v) an administrative and financial 
officer; (vi) a procurement specialist; and (vii) an accountant. All experts will sign a performance 
contract that will be evaluated annually. 

4.1.2 The Technical Directorates of the Ministry of Agriculture will monitor the implementation of 
operations in consultation with decentralised services. Partnership agreements will be signed with 
DNGR (infrastructure monitoring), ANPROCA (advisory support and PO), IRAG (research 
development), AGUIPE (youth employment and entrepreneurship), etc. The Strategy and Development 
Bureau (BSD) will be responsible for project external monitoring. These entities will receive capacity-
building support and will adjust their operational mechanisms, if need be, to allow close monitoring on 
the ground. An agreement will also be established with BGEEE for project environmental monitoring. 
The project will also ensure the close involvement of Prefectural Directorates of Agriculture and the 
Rural Engineering Technical Office (BTGR) of Boké and Boffa. Private service providers (enterprises, 
consulting firms, NGOs, individual consultants, etc.) will be responsible for the delivery of certain 
works, goods and services, in accordance with the procurement methods defined in the financing 
agreements. The local population will take part in some labour-intensive works (ring dike, hedgerows 
and routine maintenance), under the supervision of specialised NGOs and with the support of the 
Directorate General of Forests and Wildlife. 

4.1.4 Supervision of activities: A Steering Committee will be set up, chaired by the Minister of 
Agriculture or a designated representative. The Committee’s secretarial services will be provided by the 
Project Coordinator. In addition to the relevant technical directorates of the Ministry of Agriculture, the 
Steering Committee will comprise (indicative only) designated representatives of MPDE, MEF, 
MASPFE, ME, MPAEM, MEEF, METFPET, MC, MIPSP, and representatives of the Chamber of 
Agriculture and CNOP-G, the private sector and civil society. Its function will include: (i) monitoring 
the project implementation; (ii) ensuring coherence and planning of eligible activities; (iii) conducting 
the annual review of the progress report, and approving the annual technical programme and budget; 
(iv) evaluating the project impact; (v) identifying constraints to and opportunities for improving the 
project impact; and (vi) ensuring technical and methodological compliance with project objectives, 
PNDES objectives and relevant sector policies, including the PNIASAN and the rice development 
strategy. The Steering Committee will meet twice a year to review project outcomes, validate financial 
statements, discuss programmes and approve the related budgets.  

4.1.5 Procurement. Goods, works and consultancy services financed by the Bank will be procured 
in accordance with the Procurement Policy for Bank Group-Financed Operations (AfDB Procurement 
Policy), October 2015 edition, and the provisions set out in the Financing Agreement. In line with this 
policy and following various evaluations conducted, it was agreed that procurement of goods, works 
and services under the project be made using the Bank's procurement system (AfDB System). 

4.1.6 Procurement Risk and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): In order to take project specificities 
into account, the Bank assessed: (i) risks at country, sector and project levels; and (ii) the capacity of 
the executing agencies. The outcomes of these assessments pointed to the existence of a substantial level 
of procurement risk. Therefore, the Bank's procurement methods and procedures will be used for project 
implementation, with the understanding that the capacity development action plan proposed in 
paragraph B.5.9 of Annex B5, Volume 2, will be discussed with the Guinean authorities so that the latter 
may carry out the reforms identified as necessary to expedite the use of the national procurement system. 

4.1.7 Financial management: Given that the public management system in force at the Ministry of 
Agricultural was deemed unsatisfactory upon assessment, a parallel accounting system based on the 
SYSCOHADA accrual accounting method will be set up and managed by the PMU responsible for 
project administrative, financial and accounting management. In addition to the other experts, the PMU 
in charge of PATAG EAJ will comprise an administrative and financial officer (AFO) who will have at 
his/her disposal the management tools that were procured under the PATAG EAJ PPF. These tools, 
comprising the administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual, and the accounting 



 

15 

management software, will be developed and staff trained in their use. The AFO will produce quarterly 
financial monitoring reports providing details on the implementation of project activities and the use of 
financial resources, and an annual financial statements consisting of the balance sheet, the consolidated 
financial statements, the status of the capital assets and notes to the financial statements to which the 
reconciliation statement of the special account will be appended. Training on Bank financial 
management requirements will be provided by Bank experts at the project launch.  

4.1.8 Disbursements: Project financial implementation will mainly involve the reimbursement, 
special account and direct payment methods. An account will be opened with a commercial bank 
acceptable to the Bank to receive part of the TSF loan resources and will be used to finance operating 
expenses. This special account will be used for an initial advance whose amount will be determined 
based on the estimated budget for six months of project activities. The special account will be 
replenished on the same basis after the Borrower must have justified the use of at least 50% of the 
amount of the previous advance. The direct payment method will be used for disbursements relating to 
goods, services and works contracts. Training in Bank disbursement rules and procedures will be 
provided at the project launch  

4.1.9 Audit: In accordance with the general conditions applicable to African Development Fund 
financing agreements, the country shall account for the use of the resources allocated. Therefore, an 
independent and competent external audit firm will verify once a year the reliability of the consolidated 
annual financial statements prepared by the project management team, and will assess the functioning 
of the internal oversight system of the entire project. The audit firm will be recruited according Bank 
terms of reference and following a competitive bidding procedure prescribed by the Bank. The terms of 
reference shall be subject to the Bank’s prior approval. The continuation of audit services during the 
last two years will be contingent on the Bank's validation of the audit report for the first year. The audit 
expenses will be financed with ADF resources. Audit reports will be forwarded to the Bank yearly latest 
six months following the close of the audited fiscal year.  

4.2. Monitoring  

4.2.1 Monitoring mechanisms: The project’s monitoring and evaluation mechanism will be 
integrated into the PNIASAN monitoring mechanism of the Ministry of Agriculture. It will be designed 
taking into account the common target indicators adopted in the project logical framework to enable the 
production of homogeneous and regular information (on a half-yearly basis) on the operations. The 
baseline situation will be consolidated through the Project Preparation Facility (PPF), with gender-
disaggregated data. This system will be participatory and will provide regular information on 
performance and impact indicators, as well as on the implementation of activities planned. The project 
partners will be systematically involved in the data collection and monitoring effort. A baseline situation 
will be established, based on the final hydro-agricultural sites selected. The monitoring and evaluation 
framework will systematically include gender-disaggregated data to highlight the impacts on women, 
young people and the most vulnerable groups. Targeted surveys will also be conducted to better 
understand issues relating to income, food security, nutrition, job creation, gender mainstreaming,  
vulnerability, and resilience. The information collected will be fed into the computerized monitoring 
and evaluation system to capture actual values and gauge project impacts and outcomes. This 
information will be recorded in periodic progress reports, highlighting the level of project progress and 
the achievement of outcomes. External monitoring and evaluation missions involving the relevant sector 
departments and the Strategy and Development Bureau (BSD) will also be organised regularly by the 
Government, in addition to the two annual supervision missions fielded by the African Development 
Bank with support from its Conakry Office. The ESMP will be monitored by the Guinean 
Environmental Studies and Evaluation Bureau (BGEEE). 

  



 

16 

4.2.2 The following is a summary of the provisional project implementation schedule: 
 
Activities  Date/Period   Responsibility 
Preparation July 2018  AfDB/Govt. 
Preparation of the ESMF September 2018  AfDB 
Appraisal 2nd half September 2018  AfDB/Govt. 
Preparation of priority PDs and BDs 4th quarter 2018  AfDB/Govt./PPF PMU  
Establishment of the PMU December 2018  Govt./AfDB 
PATAG EAJ negotiation 17 October 2018  Govt./AfDB 
Board presentation 16 November 2018  AfDB 
Signing of the financing agreement December 2018  AfDB/Govt.  
Effectiveness of first  disbursement January 2019  Govt./AfDB 
Launch of PATAG EAJ January 2019  AfDB/Govt./PMU 
Signing of agreements with partners 1st quarter 2019  PMU/Partners/TS 
Preparation of remaining PDs and BDs 1st half 2019  PMU/MAEP 
Works implementation and services 2019 to 2022  Contractors/Firms/PMU 
Implementation of operational activities 2019 to 2022  PMU/Govt./Service Providers  
Midterm review 1st quarter 2021  AfDB/Govt./PMU 
Project completion date 31 December 2022  PMU/Govt./AfDB 
Completion report 1st quarter 2023  AfDB/Govt. 

4.3. Governance 

4.3.1 Indicators of political, economic and social governance remain mixed in Guinea, despite the 
strides made in recent years. The country’s weak performance in terms of governance and combatting 
corruption generally translates into a higher frequency of political and institutional hazards. The trend 
of the corruption perception index indicates that despite the slight improvements witnessed over the 
past five years (2012-2017), the situation remains virtually unchanged. Guinea is ranked 148th out of 
180 countries with an average score of 25, compared with a regional average of 34. 

4.3.2 As part of PATAG EAJ implementation, and with a view to mitigating the risks inherent in the 
weaknesses highlighted, capacity building for actors and institutional support are envisaged as a means 
of contributing to sector good governance. Furthermore, it was decided that financial management and 
monitoring/evaluation tools would be developed and the PMU team recruited through a call for 
candidature prior to project start up. In addition, although progress has been made in aligning the 
procurement system on WAEMU guidelines, the sluggishness of the procurement system is one of the 
major weaknesses encountered during the implementation of development projects. With regard to 
procurement, operational arrangements were adopted to address the weaknesses observed.  

4.4. Sustainability  

The sustainability of project investments mainly relates to the beneficiaries' ability to regularly and 
sustainably maintain and manage the infrastructure. In this regard, the project will pay special attention 
to the quality and sustainability of the facilities that will be put in place. Transformative works will be 
carried out based on detailed technical studies and using qualified companies or specialised jobbers. 
Other activities that will contribute to the sustainability of structures relate to the security of tenure over 
the land needed for the structures, support for the organisation of beneficiaries, provision of 
management tools to ensure better maintenance, support of recurrent costs of infrastructure (hydro-
agricultural development, markets, shops, farm road, etc.), and strengthening the structuring of 
producers both men and women. The management committees will be offered technical skills, for the 
introduction of an annual fee that allows the management of facilities and building maintenance fund. 
The managerial, accounting and logistical capacity of these entities will be built to enable them, upon 
project completion and in the long term, to become autonomous enterprises capable of initiating income-
generating activities in such areas as maintenance of structures, mechanics, transportation, agricultural 
product processing, etc. Moreover, the developments will enhance the people's adaptation and resilience 
capacity in the face of recurrent climate risks, as well as reduce the economic vulnerability of the 



 

17 

beneficiaries. The strong motivation observed among the beneficiaries during field missions is a factor 
that guarantees the sustainability of the facilities and the participation of beneficiaries in all activities 
and maintenance works. Other project activities that will contribute to its sustainability include land 
security for the facilities, support for the organisation of beneficiaries and the availability of 
management tools to ensure better maintenance, support of the recurrent costs of infrastructure (hydro-
agricultural development, markets, shops, farm roads, etc.), and strengthening of producer 
organisations. In addition, the activities included in the rural entrepreneurship promotion, 
transformation and market access components will generate value added and wealth, which are factors 
that would foster the ownership of project developments by the direct beneficiaries. 

4.5. Risk Management  

Besides the risk posed to this project and to other operations of the portfolio (i.e. the risk of political 
instability coupled with a difficult economic situation), several other risks were identified, for which 
mitigation measures are proposed. 

Risk Mitigation Measure Level 
Political instability, coupled with a 
difficult economic situation  

Contribution to improving socioeconomic and environmental 
resilience for greater stability. High 

Low mobilisation of counterpart resources   Counterpart resources limited to providing premises and paying the salaries of project employees. Low 

Inadequate commitment on the part of 
technical services of the relevant 
Ministries and weak capacity of the 
Project Coordination Unit (PCU) 

Prior involvement of technical services in PPF preparation from the 
project preparation phase; provision of support and capacity 
building services; recruitment of PCU staff on a competitive basis 
and establishment of performance contracts. 

Low 

Procurement and works implementation 
delays  

Enhancement of quality-at-entry through the use of the PPF 
mechanism; use of the delegated contracting management method 
(this will be confirmed at the end of the evaluation mission); and 
use of the community labour system. 

Moderate 

Inadequate ownership by the beneficiaries 

Involvement of beneficiaries in the selection of sites, clarification 
of land tenancy through an inclusive social assessment process, 
structuring and training of Management and Maintenance 
Committees 

Moderate 

Risks of conflicts between farmers and 
transhumant herders 

Involvement of municipalities in the management of cattle 
corridors, development of reception areas for transhumant herders 
and protection of facilities. 

Moderate 

Weaknesses in financial management and 
monitoring/evaluation 

Prior preparation of the procedures manual and establishment of the 
monitoring and evaluation mechanism as part of the PPF. Moderate  

4.6. Knowledge Building  

PATAG EAJ operations that will lead to better knowledge management and building may be 
summarised as follows: (i) strengthening of local expertise in local community resilience and 
adaptability to the recurrent impacts of climate change, through hydro-agricultural works and better 
water resource management; (ii) dissemination of new production and processing technologies: 
dissemination of improved seeds and resilient farming techniques, development of drip irrigation and 
solar pumping techniques, dissemination of new technologies for processing agricultural products,  and 
promotion of mechanisation; (iii) the establishment of demonstration units and the dissemination of best 
practice will help to protect and preserve resources, and mitigate the vulnerability of soil resources; (iv) 
support for quality improvement and labelling/certification will help to ensure compliance with norms 
and standards that promote access to new markets; (v) organisation of workshops and exchange of visits, 
as tools for interaction between researchers, support staff and producers for the purpose of adapting 
technologies to the local context;  (vi) conduct of awareness and information campaigns through various 
communication channels (community radios, media programmes, websites, films, etc.); and (vi) 
promotion of innovative youth and women's employability actions. 

  



 

18 

V- Legal Framework  

5.1. Legal Instrument  

The legal framework of the project will be a Grant Protocol Agreement and a Loan Agreement signed 
between the Republic of Guinea, on the one hand, and the African Development Bank and the African 
Development Fund (hereinafter collectively referred to as the "Fund"), on the other hand, acting as 
administrators of the Transition Support Facility (TSF). 

5.2. Conditions Associated with ADF Intervention, in its Capacity as Administrator of the 
 Transition Support Facility (TSF) 

5.2.1 Effectiveness: The effectiveness the TSF Loan Agreement will be subject to the fulfilment by 
the Borrower, to the satisfaction of the Fund, of the conditions set out in Section 12.01 of the General 
Conditions Applicable to Loan Agreements and Guarantee Agreements of the African Development 
Fund (Sovereign Entities) of February 2009.  

The TSF Grant Protocol Agreement will become effective on the date of its signature by the parties, in 
accordance with Section 10.01 of the General Conditions Applicable to Loan Agreements and Protocol 
Agreements Relating to Grants from the African Development Fund (Sovereign Entities) of February 
2009. 

5.2.2 Disbursement: In addition to the respective effectiveness of the financing agreements, the first 
disbursement of the TSF loan and the TSF grant will be subject to the fulfilment of the following 
conditions by the Borrower/Donee, to the Fund’s satisfaction: 

(i) Provide evidence of the establishment of the Project Management Unit (PMU) in Boké 
Region, under the supervision of the Executing Agency; and 

(ii) Provide supporting documents attesting to the recruitment of key members of the Project 
Management Unit, including: (i) a coordinator; (ii) an administrative and financial manager; 
and (iii) a procurement specialist, whose qualifications and terms of reference will have 
been deemed acceptable by the Fund. 

5.2.3 Institutional arrangements: The Borrower/Donee undertakes to put the following 
institutional arrangements in place: 

(i) Within three (3) months following the first disbursement of the loan/grant, provide 
supporting documents attesting to the PMU’s recruitment of: (i) monitoring and evaluation 
specialist; (ii) a rural engineering specialist in charge of technical monitoring of 
infrastructure construction; (iii) a value chain specialist for youth entrepreneurship and 
farmers' organisation; and (iv) an accountant, whose qualifications and terms of reference 
will have been deemed acceptable by the Fund; 

(ii) Maintain the PMU established under the supervision of the Executing Agency in  Boké 
Region, until project completion; 

(iii) Within three (3) months following the first disbursement of the loan/grant, provide 
supporting documents attesting to the establishment of the Project Steering Committee, 
which will be specifically charged with monitoring project activities; and 

(iv) Within three (3) months following the first loan/grant disbursement, provide supporting 
documents attesting to the appointment of Project Steering Committee members, including 
a representative of the Ministry of Agriculture who will chair the Committee. 



 

19 

5.2.4. Other conditions. The Borrower/Donee also undertakes: 

(i) Within three (3) months following the first loan/grant disbursement, to develop and submit 
to the Fund the administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual and an 
accounting management software package, the terms of which will have been deemed 
satisfactory to the Fund; and 

(ii) Within three (3) months following the first disbursement of the loan/grant, to submit copies 
of the conventions and protocols signed with: (i) the National Directorate of Rural 
Engineering (DNGR); (ii) the National Rural Promotion and Agricultural Advisory Agency 
(ANPROCA); (iii) the Institute of Agricultural Research of Guinea (IRAG); (iv) the 
Guinean Employment Promotion Agency (AGUIPE); and (v) the Guinea Environmental 
Studies and Evaluation Bureau (BGEEE), the terms of which will have been deemed 
satisfactory by the Fund. 

5.2.5 Environmental and social safeguards clauses: The applicable provisions will be provided in 
the Grant Protocol Agreement and the Loan Agreement. 

5.3. Compliance with Bank Policies 

This project complies with all applicable Bank policies.  It will be implemented as part of the Bank's 
intervention strategy in Guinea, as defined in the CSP (2018-2022). 

VI- Recommendation 

Management recommends that the Boards of Directors approve the proposed award of a UA 4.63 
million loan and a UA 3.24 million grant from the Supplemental Support Window (Pillar I) of the 
Transitional Support Facility, to the Republic of Guinea, for the purpose and according to conditions 
set out in this report. 

 














































 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 

 
 

 
 

 

 

PROJECT : VALUE CHAINS, AGRICULTURAL AND RURAL 

ENTREPRENEURSHIP SUPPORT PROJECT (PACVEAR) 

   

COUNTRY : GUINEA-BISSAU 
 

APPRAISAL REPORT 
Date: June 2019 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 


Project Information Sheet 

 

Client Information Sheet 

 

BORROWER/DONEE: Republic of Guinea-Bissau  

 

EXECUTING AGENCY: Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MADR) 

 

Financing Plan 

Source of Financing  Amount Instrument 

TSF  UA 5.46 million Grant 

TSF  UA 3.04 million Loan 

ADF  UA 1.06 million Loan 

Government  UA 0.20 million - 

Beneficiaries  UA 0.86 million - 

TOTAL COST  UA 10.62 million  

 

ADF and TSF Key Financing Information 
 

TSF Grant and Loan Currency UA 

ADF Loan Currency UA 

Tenor 40 years 

Grace Period 10 years 

ERR (baseline scenario) 16.9% 

NPV (8%) XOF 20 944 million 

 

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected)  
  

Concept Note Approval April 2019 

Project Approval  July 2019 

Effectiveness October 2019  

Midterm Review June 2022 

Project Completion December 2024 

Project Closure January 2025 

___________________________________________________________________________ 



 

v 

 

Project Executive Summary 

Project Overview: the Value Chains, Agricultural and Rural Entrepreneurship Support Project 

(PACVEAR) will be implemented in three regions, namely Bafata, Oio and Gabu, in northern and eastern 

Guinea-Bissau. The project’s objective is to improve the rice and market gardening subsector production 

environment, and promote enterprises in all targeted subsector value chain links to create sustainable jobs 

and increase rural income. 

The project will be implemented over five years (November 2019 to December 2024). The total project 

cost, exclusive of taxes and customs duties, is UA 10.62 million (XOF 8.607 billion) financed through a 

UA 5.46 million Transition Support Facility  (TSF) grant (51%), a UA 3.04 million TSF loan (29%) and 

a UA 1.06 million African Development Fund (ADF) loan (10%). 

The project will directly benefit 4 400 households and farmers in the project area, i.e. 35 000 people, at 

least 13 000 of them women. The expected project outcomes are: (i) an additional annual production of 

4 000 tonnes of rice and 2 000 tonnes of market garden produce; (ii) creation and/or strengthening of 600 

agricultural and rural enterprises to create 2 000 sustainable jobs, 30% of them for women and 40% for 

youths; and (iii) increase in average rural income to XOF 250 000 per household. 

Needs Assessment: Irrigated areas (18%) are still too small to reduce the shortfall in rice production, 

estimated at 80 000 tonnes per year. The project will increase irrigated areas by developing additional 

660 hectares of land, half of which will be equipped for full irrigation water control with the availability 

of detailed designs and bidding documents for 720 hectares. In addition, the main sources of fragility in 

the country include political instability, extreme poverty and high youth unemployment, as well as lack 

of opportunities for youth socio-professional integration. Consequently, it is necessary to design an 

agricultural and rural enterprises development programme targeting youths and women that would 

contribute to addressing this unemployment challenge. 

Value Added for the African Development Bank: Through its previous operations, the Bank has helped 

to increase developed areas and to acquire specific expertise in key domains (irrigation, seed production 

and control, solar energy, processing, etc.). With PACVEAR, the Bank will help to consolidate the gains 

of previous operations and promote rural entrepreneurship, with a view to boosting growth and the 

professionalisation of the agricultural sector. By supporting the development of agricultural 

infrastructure, the Bank will create factors conducive to the development of agricultural and rural 

enterprises in all targeted subsector value chain links, thus creating employment particularly for youths 

and women (production, processing and marketing). 

Knowledge Management: The project will generate knowledge that will be used to create numerous 

jobs through the upgrading of incubation centres to train and support youths willing to embark on 

agribusiness activities. The project will also support the Food and Nutrition Security Information System 

(SISSAN) in collecting and processing data for use in developing relevant sector policies. In addition, 

PACVEAR’s specific contribution to structuring the seed subsector through the introduction of 

technologies for African agricultural transformation (TAAT) will help to generate knowledge that will be 

used to consolidate production methods, thus increasing production. The setting up of demonstration units 

and the dissemination of best practice, as well as the introduction of solar energy in drainage and 

agricultural product processing and conservation systems will further enhance knowledge, particularly on 

new technologies in these areas. 

 



 

vi 

 

Results-Based Logical Framework 
Country and Project Name: Guinea-Bissau: Value Chains, Agricultural and Rural Entrepreneurship Support Project (PACVEAR)  

Project Goal: Improve the rice and market gardening subsector production environment, and promote enterprises in all targeted subsector value chain links. 

RESULTS CHAIN  
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 
RISKS/ MITIGATION MEASURES 

Indicator Baseline Situation Target 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Improved agricultural growth  Average agricultural growth/year 6% in 2017 8% in 2022 and 9% in 2024 - PRP/AGIR/EDS 
- Monitoring of PNIA 
- ILAP/CILSS 

 

Contribution of agriculture to GDP 50% in 2017 60% in 2024 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

Additional direct and indirect sustainable jobs created by 

agricultural and rural enterprises 

Number of additional jobs 0 in 2019 2 800 jobs, 30% of them for 

women 

- Annual reports and 
agricultural statistics 

- Periodic project 
monitoring reports 

- Midterm review report 
and project completion 

report 

Risks 

- Political instability coupled with a difficult 
economic situation 

- Climate instability 
- Difficulty in mobilising counterpart 

contributions 

 

Mitigation measures 

- Contribution to improving socio-economic and 
environmental resilience for greater stability 

- Small share of counterpart contributions 
- Water storage and control facilities; resistant 

seeds; and use of short-cycle, high-yield species. 

Increased volume of agricultural production Volume of rice production 

 

Rice: 135 000 tonnes  (2018-

2019) 

Rice: 137 000 tonnes (2022); 

139 000 tonnes (2024)  

Volume of market garden production Market garden produce: 6 000 

tonnes (2018) 

Market garden produce: 7 000 

tonnes (2022); 8 000 tonnes 

(2024) 

Improved average income of rural farm households  

Annual income of rice-farming households XOF 104 500 (2018) 
XOF 210 000 (2022);  

XOF 355 000 (2024) 

Annual income of market-garden households XOF 85 862 (2018) 
XOF 140 000 (2022);  

XOF 198 000 (2024) 

 

Component I: Improve the Competitiveness of Agricultural Value Chains (rice and market gardening)  

Infrastructure rehabilitation / development     

 

Risks  

- Weak capacity of technical services involved 
- Low project ownership by stakeholders and 

beneficiaries 

- Outbreak of plant diseases 
- Weak capacity of implementing partners and 

enterprises 

Mitigation measures 

- Capacity building of the technical services 
involved in the project 

- Involvement and participation of beneficiaries at 
all stages and capacity building (producers and 

MADR) 

- Training producers in plant disease management 
and use of eco-friendly pesticides 

- Careful selection of implementing partners and 
enterprises 

- Close control of partners and enterprises. 
-  

1.1 Rice cultivation infrastructure 
1.2 Market gardens with solar powered drainage systems  

1.1 Area under rice cultivation (ha) 
1.2 Area under market gardening (ha) 

0 

0 

660 hectares, 30% of them 

cultivated by women 

60 hectares, 90% of them 

cultivated by women 

Transformative infrastructure 

1.3 Feeder road 1.3 Length of feeder road (km) 0  25  

1.4 Storerooms 1.4 Number of rooms 0 8 

1.5 Livestock vaccination yards 
1.6 Water points 
1.7 Seed processing units 

1.5 Number of yards 
1.6 Number of water points 
1.7 Number of units 

0 

0 

0 

6 

5 

1 

Organisation and capacity building of management committees (MCs) 

1.8     Setting up and strengthening of MCs 1.8 Number of MCs   0 44  

Environmental and social monitoring 

1.9  Construction of anti-erosion bunds 

1.10  Scheme protection through tree planting 

1.9   Number of kilometres 

1.10  Number of kilometres 

 0 

0 

20 

30 
 

Structuring, organisation and support of farmers’ organisations (FOs) and producers Risk 

Low ownership of support equipment by 

beneficiaries 

Mitigation measures 

- Establishment of PIUs 
- Strengthening the participatory process for 

implementing IEC actions and activities  

1.11 Building the capacity of FOs/unions 1.11 Number of FOs 0 35  

1.12 Support for the structuring of women’s organisations 
(EIG/associations) 

1.12 Number of organisations 0 32 

 1.13 Organisation of technical training in farm production and 
management  

1.13 Number of beneficiaries 0 22 000, 30% of them women 

1.14 Setting up of demonstration units (DUs) 1.14 Number of DUs 0 25 



 

vii 

 

Structuring and development of the rice seed subsector - Collaboration with supervision and extension 
entities. 

1.15 Support for the design of a seed action plan 1.15 Action plan designed 0 Yes 

1.16 Logistical support to the Central Seed Laboratory and INPA 1.16  Support provided to the Central Seed 
Laboratory and INPA  

0 Yes 
 

1.17 Establishment and capacity building of seed operator EIGs  1.17 Number of EIGs 0 2 

 

1.18 Development of seed multiplication areas by INPA 1.18 Surface area (ha) 0 15 

1.19 Development of seed multiplication areas 1.19 Surface area (ha) 0 40 

Component II: Promote Agricultural and Rural Entrepreneurship 

2.1  Identification, incubation and support of young 
entrepreneurs 

2.1 Number of youths trained in incubation 
centres 

0 100, 30% of them women 

2.2 Support for the transformation of existing private economic 
initiatives into sustainable enterprises 

2.2 Number of private initiatives 0 450, 30% of them women’s private 

initiatives 

2.3 Building the capacity of and organising young operators in 
agricultural services centre 

2.3 Number  of beneficiaries 0 12, 30% of them young women 

2.4 Setting up of agricultural mechanisation service centres 2.4 Number of centres 0 3 

2.5 Setting up of agricultural product processing units 2.5 Number of hulling machines 0 30 (for youths and women) 

2.6 Installation of mini-dairy plants 2.6 Number of mini-dairy plants 0 1 

2.7 Training and equipping of veterinary assistants  2.8 Number of veterinary assistants 0 15 

2.8 Nutrition awareness-raising, education and monitoring 2.8 Number of beneficiaries 0 3 000, 50% of them women  

2.9  Initiatives in the production and marketing of local products 
and fortified foods 

2.9 Number of private initiatives 0 50, 30% of them women’s private 

initiatives 

 Building the capacity of the MADR and other government partners 

 1.10 Building the capacity of MADR sTSFf and of other 
government services 

2.10  Number of beneficiaries 0 80 

n
s 

Component III: Project Coordination and Management  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Risk 

- Weak capacity of the PMU team 

Mitigation measure 

Performance contracts and capacity building 

3.1 Procurement activities implemented 3.1 Procurement Plan (PP) prepared and 
deployed 

PP prepared (end-2019) PP updated at least once a year PP approved 

3.2 Project activities implemented 3.2 Compliant disbursement rate 0% (December 2019) 25% per annum on average SAP System 

3.3 Financial management provided 3.3 Audit reports prepared Audit firm recruited (March 

2020) 

4 annual audit reports validated Audit reports 

3.4 Monitoring and evaluation conducted 3.4 M&E system operational System established  (first half of 

2020) 

Midterm and final M&E reports 

prepared 

Progress and M&E reports 

3.5 Communication provided 3.5 Communication plan implemented Plan prepared (2020) Communication tools 
disseminated 

Brochures, website, films 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

 

COMPONENTS RESOURCES 

Component A: Improve the Competitiveness of Agricultural Value Chains (rice and market gardening) 

Component B: Promote Agricultural and Rural Entrepreneurship 

Component C:   Project Coordination and Management  

Resources           :     UA 10.62 million 

Component A     :     UA 5.82 million (55%)  

Component B      :     UA 3.87 million (36%)  

Component C      :     UA 0.93 million (9%)  

Sources of Financing 

ADF (Loan)          :           UA 1.06 million 

TSF  (Grant)              :     UA 5.46 million 

TSF (Loan)             :       UA 3.04 million 

GVT + Beneficiaries   :    UA 1.06 million 

  



 

viii 

 

Project Implementation Schedule 
 Year 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 

 Quarter T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 

1 INITIAL ACTIVITIES                         

 PACVEAR financing negotiations                        

 TSF grant and ADF loan approval                        

 Signing of financing agreements                         

 Effectiveness and fulfilment of conditions precedent to first disbursement                         

 Publication of the General Procurement Notice                         

2 START-UP ACTIVITIES                        

 Confirmation of PMU sTSFf (including the recruitment of experts)                        

 Fielding of project launching mission                         

 Procurement of equipment for the PMU (vehicles, computer hardware, etc.)                          

 Signing of agreements with partner entities                         

3 Improve the Competitiveness of Agricultural Value Chains (rice and 

market gardening) 
                  

     

 
Review and launching of competitive bids for the  development of 12 lowlands 

(anchor programme) 
                  

     

 Technical studies and  competitive bids for one lowland and support infrastructure                        

 Award of contracts                         

 Execution of development works                        

 Execution of support infrastructure works                        

 Implementation of the ESMP and environmental monitoring                        

4 Promote Agricultural and Rural Entrepreneurship                        

 Organisation of national and regional project launching workshops                        

 Structuring and organisation of FOs and MCs                         

 Improvement of the quality and availability of seeds and other inputs                        

 Production, processing and marketing counselling support                        

 Development of youth and women’s agricultural entrepreneurship                         

 Support for nutrition and school canteens                        

 Support to MADR and stakeholders                        

5 PROJECT MANAGEMENT                        

 Update of management and monitoring/evaluation tools                         

 
Establishment of the baseline situation and set up of the monitoring and evaluation 

system  
                  

     

 
Update of data on monitoring and evaluation, coordination, management and 

communication activities 
                  

     

 Annual financial auditing                        

 Fielding of supervision mission (AfDB/Government)                        

 Midterm review                        

 Project completion/closure                        



 

1 

VALUE CHAINS, AGRICULTURAL AND RURAL ENTREPRENEURSHIP 

SUPPORT PROJECT (PACVEAR) 

Management hereby submits the following report and recommendation concerning a proposal to award a 

UA 5.46 million TSF grant and extend a UA 3.04 million TSF loan and a UA 1.06 million ADF loan 

to the Republic of Guinea-Bissau to finance the Value Chains, Agricultural and Rural Entrepreneurship 

Support Project (PACVEAR). 

I. Strategic Thrust and Rationale 

1.1  Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives 

1.1.1  PACVEAR is fully consistent with Guinea-Bissau’s strategic orientations, particularly the Terra 

Ranka Strategic and Operational Plan (2015-2020), which hinges on four main engines of economic 

growth, including agriculture and agro-industry. It also plugs into Sub-programme 1 of the second 

generation of the National Agricultural Investment Programme (PNIA) “Promotion of Crop Production 

Sub-sectors”, adopted in December 2017, which focuses on the development of food crops (including 

rice) and market gardening through better control of water and increased access to factors of production. 

It aligns with the orientations of the Letter of Agricultural Development Policy (LADP) and its action 

plan, which aim to guarantee food security, increase and diversify agricultural exports and improve the 

living conditions of rural dwellers. It also embraces the orientations of the National Food Security 

Programme (PNSA) and the Rice Farming Development Programme (PDR - 2016). PACVEAR is 

consistent with the “Develop Infrastructure to Promote Inclusive Growth” pillar of CSP 2015-2019 

through the development of agricultural infrastructure and opportunities in agriculture (especially for the 

youth and women).  

1.1.2  Guinea-Bissau is characterised by fragility, further aggravated by overall institutional weakness 

and a non-inclusive development model without economic alternatives. Sector constraints include the 

isolation of production areas, the obsolescence of production systems, inadequate access to inputs and 

weak agricultural product processing capacity. The main challenge is to strengthen institutional, economic 

and social resilience, while building the capacity of actors, reducing gender disparities and supporting the 

country's structural transformation through the construction of key infrastructure to ensure inclusive and 

green growth. Agricultural transformation through the development of value chains, the promotion of 

youth entrepreneurship, the mainstreaming of the gender dimension and greater involvement of non-State 

actors (including the private sector) will contribute to building resilience and reducing fragility in the 

country. 

1.1.3  In spite of Guinea-Bissau’s agricultural potential, the State’s withdrawal from the agricultural 

sector and the political crises of the last few decades have impeded genuine agricultural development in 

the country. This lack of interest in the agricultural sector has led to a serious structural weakening of 

production systems (agricultural and livestock). This is compounded by vagaries of the weather and 

climate change, which pose a serious threat with consequences on the management of ecosystems and 

other renewable agricultural and natural resources, all of which can impede the country’s social cohesion, 

stability and sustainable development. This combination of structural and cyclical crises has far-reaching 

consequences on the entire agricultural, silvicultural and pastoral sector, food and nutritional security, and 

the livelihoods of most of Guinea-Bissau’s population who depend on agriculture (in the broadest sense). 

1.1.4  According to the agriculture sector study conducted in 2014 (Portuguese Cooperation Trust 

Fund), it is essential to optimise the use of farmland, create added value for products, and enable 

households to generate sufficient income to purchase certain commodities. Rice is the staple foodstuff 

(eaten by 90% of Guinea-Bissau’s households) and food deficit is made up annually by rice imports of 

about 80 000 tonnes. The promotion of market gardening, stockbreeding and related services will not only 

help to diversify the sources of food, but also improve the income of rural communities, particularly 

women and youths in the targeted regions in the northern and eastern parts of the country. Garden crop 

production currently meets only 60% to 70% of demand. The main constraints on growth subsectors (rice 

and market gardening) are the remoteness of production areas, the degradation of production systems, 

insufficient access to inputs (particularly quality seeds) and markets, weak processing capacity, the lack 

of information and economic opportunity exploration networks to promote the employability of rural 



 

2 

youths, and the inadequate private sector integration into the value chains of growth subsectors and related 

activities to act as an engine and a lever for private enterprises. 

1.2 Rationale for Bank Involvement 

1.2.1 PACVEAR is in line with two of the Bank’s High 5s, namely “Feed Africa” and “Improve the 

quality of life for the people of Africa”. The project will contribute to attaining these two priorities by 

developing rice and market garden value chains, building the capacity of actors, creating jobs and 

improving income. The project is aligned with the Bank’s Long-term Strategy (LTS 2013-2022) and its 

two overarching objectives: inclusive growth and transition to a green economy. 

1.2.2  PACVEAR is aligned with the Bank's Long-Term Strategy (SLT 2013-2022) and its two major 

objectives of inclusive growth and transition to green growth. The project is built on the three areas of 

special emphasis of the LTS: fragile States, agriculture and food security, and gender. It is consistent with 

the orientation of the Bank’s new Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa (2016-2025), which 

puts special emphasis on the development of value chains and agricultural entrepreneurship. In addition, 

it will contribute to achieving the objectives of the Enable Youth and Jobs for Youth in Africa flagship 

initiatives, by promoting capacity building and the creation of opportunities for youths. Furthermore, the 

project is in keeping with the Bank’s Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) 

programme, which focuses on the adoption of new production and processing technologies in agricultural 

value chains. 

1.2.3  PACVEAR concords with the Bank’s Gender Strategy (2014-2018) “Investing in Gender 

Equality for Africa’s Transformation”, more specifically Pillar II, “Economic Empowerment”. It also 

follows the recommendations of the gender profile prepared by the Bank and UNWomen in 2015, on the 

need to integrate women into value chains. Specifically, it plugs into climate-change adaptation initiatives 

by promoting renewable energy, water-saving technologies and resilient methods. 

1.2.4  Agriculture remains one of the country’s most important strategic sectors and the only sector 

that can benefit the largest number of people, combat food and nutrition insecurity and provide jobs for 

young people and women. The continuous support provided by the Bank to the sector is justified by: (i) 

the highly satisfactory performance of similar Bank-funded operations, notably the Agricultural and Rural 

Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project (PRESAR) (completed in 2012) and the Rice Value Chain 

Development Project (PDCV-Riz) (launched in 2017); (ii) unmet needs in terms of irrigation 

infrastructure and support as well as the development of value chains and agricultural entrepreneurship; 

and (iii) the strong mobilisation and involvement of the Government, local and regional actors and 

beneficiaries. The activities proposed by the project, namely the development of irrigation schemes 

(particularly full control of irrigation water), the integration of value chains and agricultural 

entrepreneurship will help to promote the employment of young people and women in rural areas, 

strengthen adaptation to climate change and increase the resilience of segments of the population that are 

vulnerable to food and nutrition insecurity. 

1.3  Aid Coordination 

1.3.1  Since the April 2012 crisis, the technical and financial partner (TFP) consultation framework 

that was operating through multi-sector thematic groups has been put on hold. However, it should be noted 

that, in general, aid coordination and monitoring mechanisms have always suffered from the structural 

weaknesses of public administration. In this regard, before the coup d’état of 2012, the Bank approved a 

technical assistance project (PECA II) to build coordination capacity. The project included the convening 

of donor round tables in Brussels in March 2015 as well as capacity-building activities organised by the 

Ministry of Economy and Finance. 

1.3.2  Based on the “Letter of Agricultural Development Policy”, several bilateral and multilateral 

partners provided significant support for rural development, food and nutrition security in Guinea-Bissau, 

including: (i) IFAD (Economic Development Project for the Southern Regions - PADES and design of a 

new project for the diversification of family farming in the eastern and northern regions); (ii) BOAD 

(Food Security Support Project - PASA and Project to Promote Rice Cultivation by Youths - PPRFJ); (iii) 

ECOWAS (support for the preparation of the National Agricultural Investment Programme - PNIA); and 

(iv) WAEMU (feasibility study on the Irrigated Rice Cultivation Intensification Support Project - PAIRI 

and the Crop and Grain Storage Warehouse Construction Programme). It is worth noting that ECOWAS, 



 

3 

WAEMU and CILSS set up the Global Alliance for Resilience Initiative – Sahel and West Africa (AGIR) 

whose objective is to achieve “zero hunger” in 20 years. From an institutional standpoint, the activities of 

partners are coordinated by the Ministry of Economy and Finance. For agriculture in particular, the 

partners reached a consensus on the sector strategy, notably PNIA, during the partners’ round table 

convened in Brussels in March 2015. The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) plays 

a major role in policy support and coordination of activities. 

The project will establish synergies with projects being implemented and those being designed. More 

broadly, the involvement of the various partners in the rural sector (agriculture, livestock production, 

fisheries and environment) is presented in Annex A4 of Volume 2 and summarised below:  

Sector or Subsector* GDP Size of Exports Labour 

[Rural sector] [+50%] 93% 80% 

Stakeholders – Public Expenditure (ongoing programmes or projects) 

Government         Donors Amounts (USD M) Period 

 World Bank 0.76 2015-2020 

 ADF 0.20 2014-2015 

0.73 IFAD 16.91 2015-2020 

 FAO 7.36 2015-2021 

 BOAD 2.95 2015-2020 

 EU 1.21 2014-2019 

 WAEMU 11.34 2015-2020 

 FAO 7.36 2015-2021 

 

Existence of thematic working groups No 

Existence of a comprehensive sector programme No 

AfDB’s role in aid coordination Participation  
 

 

II. Project Description 

2.1. Project Objectives and Components 

PACVEAR’s overall objective is to contribute to enhancing the competitiveness of subsector value chains 

(rice and market gardening) to boost inclusive and sustainable growth in the agricultural sector. Its specific 

objective is to improve the rice and market gardening subsector production environment, and promote 

enterprises in all targeted subsector value chain links, with a view to creating sustainable jobs and 

increasing rural income. PACVEAR, which will be implemented over a five-year period (November 2019 

to October 2024), comprises three main components: (i) Improve the Competitiveness of Agricultural 

Value Chains (rice and market gardening); (ii) Promote Agricultural and Rural Entrepreneurship; and (iii) 

Project Coordination and Management. The table below presents a summary of the activities selected. A 

detailed description of the activities is provided in Annex C3 of Volume 2. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

4 

Table 2.1: Project Components 

Components Cost (UA Million) Component Description  

A. Improve the 
Competitiveness of 

Agricultural Value 

Chains (rice and 

market gardening) 

5.82 (55%)  A1 Infrastructure rehabilitation/development: (i) development of 660 hectares of 

lowlands for rice cultivation: 7 lowlands covering 296 hectares with full irrigation 

water control and 6 lowlands covering 364 hectares with partial irrigation water control; 

and (ii) development of 60 hectares of market gardening areas for women and youths.  

A2 Development of support infrastructure: (i) rehabilitation of 25 kilometres of feeder 

roads; (ii) installation of 5 village water points; (iii) construction of eight (8) 50-tonne 

storage warehouses; (iv) construction of 6 vaccination yards; and (v) setting up of one 

(1) seed processing unit. 

A3 Organisation and capacity building of management committees: setting up and 

support of 44 management committees (irrigation schemes and market gardening areas), 

storage and processing warehouses, water points, etc.). 

A4 Environmental and social monitoring: (i) construction of 20 kilometres of anti-

erosion bunds (labour intensive); (ii) planting of 30 kilometres of protective trees around 

developed areas; (iii) monitoring of the environmental and social management 

framework (ESMF); (iv) environmental monitoring and surveillance; and (v) support to 

the Competent Environmental Assessment Authority (AAAC). 

A5 Provision of technical assistance, conduct of studies, infrastructure monitoring, and 

signing of agreements with partners. 

A6 Structuring, organisation and support of FOs and producers: (i) land management 

and land-use support (irrigation schemes and infrastructure); (ii) structuring and capacity 

building of FOs and their umbrella organisations, seed EIGs and women’s processing 

EIGs; (iii) setting up of networks of EIGs and support to improve access to markets; (iv) 
setting up of 15 PIUs; and (v) organisation of exchange visits. 

A7 Structuring and development of the rice seed subsector: (i) inventory of the seed 

subsector; (ii) FAO technical assistance for the preparation of a seed action plan; (iii) 
support to INPA (recruitment of 2 technicians, organisation of training sessions and 

provision of equipment); (iv) support to the Central Seed Laboratory (recruitment of 2 
technicians, organisation of training sessions, procurement of one (1) vehicle, and 

laboratory equipment and materials); (v) training of 2 seed officers and 12 seed 

inspectors. 

B. Promotion of 
Agricultural and 

Rural 

Entrepreneurship 

3.87(36%) B1 Promotion of entrepreneurship in agricultural mechanisation services, maintenance 

and upkeep of infrastructure and equipment: (i) upgrading and improvement of training 
skills, and provision of logistical support to incubation centres; (ii) establishment of 3 

agricultural mechanisation service centres for youths; (iii) training and incubation of 12 
youths in the management and operation of agricultural mechanisation centres; (iv) 
provision of equipment to 30 craftsmen and repairers; (v) provision of equipment to 12 

youth groups for the maintenance of feeder roads; (vi) supply of 100 start-up kits to 
young people and women implementing an economic initiative in the mechanisation and 

maintenance chain link; and (vii) customised capacity building of 100 young people and 

women with business plans. 

B2 Promotion of entrepreneurship in the production, processing and agricultural 

product marketing chain links: (i) procurement of 30 hulling machines, 6 rice threshers, 
and incubation/post-incubation monitoring of 42 young hulling machine and thresher 

operators; (ii) incubation/post-incubation monitoring of 100 youths implementing 
economic initiatives in targeted chain links; (iii) customised capacity building of 200 
young people and women with business plans; (iv) provision of support to 3 seed EIGs 

in seed processing and marketing; and (v) provision of 250 start-up kits to young people 
and women implementing an economic initiative in targeted chain links.   

B3 Promotion of entrepreneurship in other rural services: (i) customised capacity 

building of 200 young people and women with business plans; (ii) provision of 200 start-
up kits to young people and women implementing an economic initiative; and (iii) 

provision of kits to 15 veterinary assistants. 

B4 Promotion of entrepreneurship in nutrition: (i) provision of support to parboiled rice 

EIGs; (ii) provision of support for the processing of market garden produce; (iii) 

installation of a mini-dairy in Gabu with 3 collection centres and 6 milk sales stands, 

training of 16 youths in the management and operation of the mini-dairy, collection 

centres and milk sales stands; (iv) support for school feeding programmes, promotion of 

initiatives in the production and marketing of local products, and micronutrient-fortified 

foods for children; and (v) provision of 50 start-up kits to young people and women. 

B5 Institutional support to the agricultural sector: (i) purposive sampling in the 

agricultural sector; (ii) provision of support for the establishment of a framework for 

monitoring TFP operations and strategic reflections initiated by MADR; (iii) capacity 
building of technical services (provision of equipment, logistics and training); and (iv) 

provision of miscellaneous technical assistance (infrastructure, environmental and 

monitoring and evaluation experts). 

C. Project Coordination 
and Management 

0.93 (9%)   (i) Coordination and steering of project activities; (ii) administrative, accounting and 

financial management; (iii) procurement of goods, works and services; (iv) 

implementation of a communication plan; (v) monitoring and evaluation of project 

implementation; and (vi) environmental monitoring. 

 

 



 

5 

2.2 Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Explored 

2.2.1  The technical solutions adopted for PACVEAR are based on field data and lessons drawn from 

similar projects, discussions with beneficiaries, the specific characteristics of each site to be developed, 

the water resources to be mobilised as well as the ease of managing facilities and equipment. Therefore, 

the proposed works take into account not only rice cultivation, but also horticulture which is already being 

carried out in the lowlands with full irrigation water control, particularly during the dry season. Three 

options were considered: (1) lowlands with full irrigation water control will be developed into small plots 

that are easy to manage, maintain and improve; (2) market gardening areas will be systematically equipped 

with a mini submersible solar-powered borehole pump, a storage tank, a drip irrigation system1 and a 

protective grid fence and hedges; and (3) the mechanisation of tillage operations by providing support to 

agricultural mechanisation service providers (tractors and accessories) in project impact areas will 

contribute to improving tillage operations and creating new employment opportunities for youths. 

Table 2.2: Alternatives Explored and Reasons for Their Rejection 
Alternative Rejected Brief Description Reason for Rejection 

Develop just one large area 

with full irrigation water 

control where the project 

would be concentrated  

 

Construction of a large pumping station, covered 

water transportation canals with large civil 

engineering structures for water collection, 

carriage and distribution.  

This alternative does not ensure the availability 

of labour, in terms of quantity or quality, for the 

development of the facilities and the investments 

required. It is quite likely that the area will not be 

fully used. In addition, it will be quite difficult to 

manage and maintain the area. 

Develop market gardening 

areas with indurated wells 

without any dewatering 

mechanism  

Construction of one or more wells 5 metres to 10 

metres deep (one well per hectare) where 

irrigation water is collected manually and then 

stored in small basins and carried to the parcels 

by the farmers using watering cans or buckets.  

The manual collection of water from indurated 

wells and irrigation with watering cans makes the 

task, which is carried out mainly by women, very 

tedious and takes up an enormous amount of 

work time and water. This problem will be 

compounded in the medium term once 

groundwater dries up, obliging farmers to fetch 

water from a greater depth (20 metres to 30 

metres). 

Develop animal-drawn 

cultivation in the intermediary 

phase instead of motorising 

soil cultivation activities.  

Animal-drawn cultivation practised in the 

project regions is suited for light soils with 

limited humidity, to ensure high productivity. Its 

effectiveness largely depends on the physical 

conditions of the area to be cultivated.  

Large arable land in the region, the short period 

available for soil preparation and the short rainy 

season are factors militating against animal-

drawn cultivation.  

 

2.3 Project Type 

2.3.1 PACVEAR is an investment operation financed with ADF and TSF resources. The Government of 

Guinea-Bissau has not yet started implementing projects and programmes using the sector-based approach, 

given a number of institutional constraints and the fragility context. For now, the project approach is the most 

appropriate to ensure the achievement of outcomes and the effective/efficient use of the resources allocated to 

the project, which will also consolidate the gains achieved with PRESAR and PDCV-Riz. 

2.4. Project Cost and Financing Arrangements 

2.4.1. The project cost, exclusive of taxes and custom duties, is estimated at UA 10.62 million, (XOF 8.607 

billion). The foreign exchange portion represents 36% of the total cost, exclusive of taxes, or UA 3.85 million. 

Custom duty and taxes will be covered by the State, which shall to take the necessary measures to implement 

this provision. A 4% provision for physical contingencies and a 3% provision for price escalation have been 

included in the project cost. The summary of the project cost by component and expenditure category, as well 

as the expenditure schedule are presented in Tables 2.3, 2.4 and 2.5 below. 

 

 

 

                                                 
1  Overall, market gardening areas in Guinea-Bissau are irrigated manually (98% using watering cans). Consequently, drip irrigation will be 

introduced gradually over time. In this regard, basin irrigation (water is pumped from the well into a reinforced concrete storage tank and then 
conveyed gravitationally through buried pipes to supply small 2 metre to 3 metre brickwork basins) will first be used in market gardening areas. 

Each small basin will supply irrigation water to ten 250 m2 plots, or 0.25 hectares. Once women farmers are able to control the cost of managing, 

operating and maintaining their market gardening areas, a drip irrigation system will be established to replace the small basins. 

 



 

6 

Table 2.3: Estimated Project Cost by Component 

  (XOF Million) (UA Million) % % Total 
  L.C. F.E. Total L.C. F.E. Total F.E. Cost 

A. Improve the Competitiveness of Agricultural Value Chains         

 1. Infrastructure rehabilitation/development 1 674 975 2 649 2.07 1.20 3.27 36.8 33,0 
 2. Development of support infrastructure 462 332 794 0.57 0.41 0.98 41.8 9.9 
 3. Organisation and capacity building of management committees 52 6 58 0.06 0.01 0.07 10.0 0.7 
 4. Protection of facilities and environmental and social monitoring 62 29 91 0.08 0.04 0.11 31.7 1.1 

 5. Provision of technical assistance, conduct of study,  monitoring of 
infrastructure and signing of agreements with partners 

341 170 510 0.42 0.21 0.63 33.3 6.4 

 6. Structuring, organisation and support of FOs and producers 53 8 61 0.07 0.01 0.07 12.5 0.8 
 7. Structuring and development of the rice seed subsector 93 147 241 0.12 0.18 0.30 61.3 3.0 
Sub-total 2 738 1 666 4 403 3.38 2.06 5.43 37.8 54.8 

B. Promote Agricultural and Rural Entrepreneurship        - 
 1. Promotion of youth and women’s entrepreneurship 835 785 1 620 1.03 0.97 2.00 48.5 20.2 
 2. Promotion of entrepreneurship in nutrition 175 81 257 0.22 0.10 0.32 31.7 3.2 
 3. Institutional support to project partners 453 219 672 0.56 0.27 0.83 32.6 8.4 
 4. Operational and human resources of the PMU 338 38 377 0.42 0.05 0.46 10.2 4.7 

Sub-total 1 802 1 124 2 926 2.22 1.39 3.61 38.4 36.4 

C. Project Coordination and Management 580 126 705 0.72 0.15 0.87 17.8 8.8 

Total Base Cost 5 119 2 915 8 035 6.32 3.60 9.92 36.3 100.0 
 PHYSICAL CONTINGENCIES 205 117 321 0.25 0.14 0.40 36.3 4.0 
 PRICE ESCALATION 160 91 251 0.20 0.11 0.31 36.3 3.1 

Total Project Cost 5 484 3 123 8 607 6.77 3.85 10.62 36.3  

Table 2.4: Estimated Project Cost by Expenditure Category 

   (XOF Million) (UA Million) % % Cost 

   L.C. F.E. Total L.C. F.E. Total F.E. Base 

  I. Investment Cost         

  A. Works 2 212 1 295 3 508 2.73 1.60 4.33 36.9 43.7 

  B. Goods 263 426 688 0.32 0.53 0.85 61.9 8.6 

  C. Services 1 905 1 120 3 025 2.35 1.38 3.73 37.0 37.7 

 Total Investment Cost  4 380 2 841 7 221 5.41 3.51 8.91 39.3 89.9 

 II. Recurrent Cost 
        

  A. STSFf 581 - 581 0.72 - 0.72 - 7.2 

  B. Operation  158 74 233 0.20 0.09 0.29 31.9 2.9 
 Total Recurrent Cost 739 74 814 0.91 0.09 1.00 9.1 10.1 

Total Base Cost 5 119 2 915 8 035 6.32 3.60 9.92 36.3 100.0 
  Physical Contingencies 205 117 321 0.25 0.14 0.40 36.3 4.0 
  Price Escalation 160 91 251 0.20 0.11 0.31 36.3 3.1 

Total Project Cost 5 484 3 123 8 607 6.77 3.85 10.62 36.3  

 
Table 2.5: Expenditure Schedule by Component, including Provision for Contingencies and Price Escalation (in UA 

million) 
    Total, including Provision for Contingencies and Price Escalation 
    A1 A2 A3 A4 A5 Total 
          
A. Agricultural Infrastructure Modernisation and Development     

 Investment Cost   2.95 1.66 1.10 0.06 0.05 5.82 
 Recurrent Cost   - - - - - - 

B. Development of Value Chains and Agricultural Entrepreneurship   

 Investment Cost   1.47 0.83 0.49 0.40 0.35 3.54 
 Recurrent Cost   0.02 0.09 0.09 0.06 0.06 0.32 

C. Project Management        

 Investment Cost   0.14 0.02 0.04 0.02 0.05 0.27 
 Recurrent Cost   - 0.17 0.17 0.17 0.17 0.66 

Total Project Cost  4,58 2.76 1.89 0.71 0.68 10.62 
 Total Investment Cost  4.56 2.51 1.63 0.48 0.45 9.63 
 Total Recurrent Cost  0.02 0.25 0.25 0.23 0.23 0.99 

 

2.4.2 The project will be financed with a UA 5.46 million TSF grant (51% of the project cost), a UA 

3.04 million TSF loan (29% of the project cost) and a UA 1.06 million ADF loan (10% of the project 

cost). Considering the country’s fragile context, the Government’s financial contribution is estimated at 

UA 0.20 million (2% of the project cost). It will cover detailed design and BDs for sites already developed, 

the allocation of premises for the PMU (head office at Bissau and field office in Bafata), the procurement 

of subsidised fertilisers (INPA), support for the preparation of the seed subsector diagnosis and the 

implementation of the seed subsector action plan, support for the establishment of the framework for the 



 

7 

monitoring of TFP operations, and dissemination of data through the Food and Nutrition Security 

Information System (SISSAN). The contribution of beneficiaries will be limited to the computation of 

their participation in easy-to-undertake ongoing development and maintenance works, estimated at UA 

0.86 million (8% of the project cost). The breakdown of project cost by source of financing is given in 

Tables 2.6 and 2.7 below. 

Table 2.6: Sources of Financing 

  (XOF Million) 
% Total Cost 

(UA Million) % 
           L.C. F.E. Total L.C. F.E. Total F.E.           
Government  113 49 162 1.9 0.14 0.06 0.20 30.5 

 TSF Grant  2 835 1 590 4 425 51.4 3.50 1.96 5.46 35.9 

 TSF Loan  1 573 891 2 464 28.6 1.94 1.10 3.04 36.2 

 ADF Loan  521 335 856 9.9 0.64 0.41 1.06 39.1 

 Beneficiaries  441 257 698 8.1 0.54 0.32 0.86 36.8 

Total  5 483 3 123 8 606 100 6.77 3.85 10.62 36.3 

 

Table 2.7: Sources of Financing by Expenditure Category (UA million) 

       Gov. TSF Grant TSF Loan ADF Loan Benef. Total F.E. Local 

  Amt % Amt % Amt % Amt % Amt % Amt % Amt                 

 1. Works - - 0.10 2.1 2.82 60.8 0.88 18.9 0.84 18.2 4.64 43.7 1.71 2.92 

 2. Goods - - 0.81 87.5 0.00 0.3 0.08 8.7 0.02 3.5 0.91 8.6 0.56 0.35 

 3. Services 0.11 2.9 3.57 88.8 0.22 5.7 0.10 2.6 - - 4.00 36.4 1.48 2.52 

 4. STSFf - - 0.77 100.0 - - - - - - 0.77 8.6 - 0.77 

 5. Operation 0.09 24.4 0.22 75.6 - - - - - - 0.31 2.7 0.10 0.21 

Total Project Cost 0.20 1.7 5.46 51.4 3.04 28.6 1.06 9.9 0.86 8.2 10.62 100.0 3.85 6.77 

2.5 Project Target Area and Beneficiaries 

2.5.1  PACVEAR will cover three regions in northern and eastern Guinea-Bissau, namely Bafata, Oio 

and Gabu, out of the country’s nine regions. It will cover 57% of the national territory and accounting for 

43% of the country’s total population2. The project impact area was selected based on several criteria: (i) 

the need to consolidate the gains of other Bank operations implemented in Bafata and Oio, and to extend 

them to Gabu - a region with a huge irrigation potential; (ii) geographic concentration of operations and, 

hence, sustainability and better visibility of actions; (iii) absolute poverty rates prevailing in the area, 

namely 83% in Gabu, 75% in Bafata and 73% in Oio; (iv) food and nutrition insecurity (above 15.6%); 

(v) high youth unemployment (30% in 2010); (vi) small area of irrigated land (18% of the agricultural 

potential); (vii) lack and obsolescence of facilities, difficulty in accessing factors of production (certified 

seeds, quality inputs, ploughing and post-harvest equipment, etc.); (viii) eagerness of youths and women 

to farm the land to be developed; and (ix) existence of local private initiatives that provide a real breeding 

ground for local small- and medium-size enterprises capable of enhancing the growth of value chains3.  

2.5.2 The infrastructure sites were selected based on the needs expressed at the grassroots level and a 

multi-criteria analysis combining: (i) the existence of local and sector operational dynamics; (ii) the 

absence of latent land conflicts; (iii) the commitment of FOs and local communities to ensure the 

management of the facilities to be developed; and (iv) the optimisation of the outcomes of similar projects 

(PRESAR/AfDB, PAIRI/WAEMU, PPRFJ/BOAD, etc.) to improve data quality at project entry. Thirteen 

(13) lowland rice cultivation sites have been selected under PACVEAR (the detailed list of sites is 

presented in Annex C3 of Volume 2)4.  

2.5.3 Specifically, PACVEAR will benefit many rural producers who would have easier access to 

facilities, inputs and equipment, and probably sell their produce more easily and at reduced cost. Project 

activities will focus on two highly vulnerable target groups in rural areas - women and youths. The project 

will directly benefit 4 400 households/farmers, or 35 000 people, at least 13 000 of them women. It will 

indirectly benefit all households in the three regions concerned through the outcomes of its activities and 

transformational investments. From the institutional viewpoint, the project will involve some 110 FOs, 

unions, EIGs and management committees. The implementation of project activities will create 2 800 

                                                 
2  Projection derived from the results of the 2009 GPHS based on a population growth rate of 2.2%. 
3  There is a need to build on the innovative initiatives implemented by NGOs and associations operating in the project area, such as ADPP, 

APRODEL, COAJOQ and ADIC-Nafaia, to promote value chains and create jobs. 
4  Detailed design and BDs (PAIRI 2018) for 12 of the 13 lowlands selected are available. This would help to rapidly commence works during the 

first year after the review of BDs. 



 

8 

decent jobs (for men, women and youths)5. 

2.6  Participatory Approach for Project Identification, Design and Implementation 

2.6.1  The project design was based on a participatory and inclusive approach involving all 

stakeholders, namely technical services, producer organisations, women’s/youth groups, civil society, 

private sector, development partners, beneficiary populations, projects, etc. These broad-based 

consultations were carried out through numerous meetings held during project identification, preparation 

and appraisal. This helped to make sound technical and operational choices that could contribute to 

ensuring the sustainability of project outcomes. During several visits to potential project sites and the sites 

of previous projects, discussions were held with the communities concerned and the representatives of 

producers to better identify the difficulties they faced, prioritise the activities to be implemented and select 

the relevant sites. That process helped to win the support of various stakeholders and led to a broad 

consensus on project design and implementation arrangements. 

2.6.2 This entire participatory process revealed great interest for the project, which builds on the 

achievements of PRESAR, PDCV-Riz and other past and ongoing projects. Producers reaffirmed the need 

to fully exploit the project area’s considerable potential and opportunities to mainstream pilot activities in 

the livestock sector particularly in Gabu district. Women expressed their interest for market gardening, 

processing and marketing of farm products, with the modernisation of production and processing tools 

and improved access to markets. Youths showed their enthusiasm in promoting agricultural and rural 

entrepreneurship through training, incubation and post-incubation support for private individual or 

collective initiatives in all value chain links. The development of a good communication strategy for 
PACVEAR and the maintenance of the participatory approach during its implementation are guarantees 
that local actors will take ownership of the project during the implementation phase. 

2.6.3 The consultations and working sessions held with technical services such as the General 

Directorate of Agriculture, the General Directorate of Livestock, the National Institute of Agricultural 

Research (INPA), Directorate of Seed Control and Certification, and NGOs (ADPP, APRODEL, ADIC-

Nafaia and COAJOQ) on the implementation of some project activities will help to ensure the 

methodological ownership of the project by partners and to conclude partnership agreements upon project 

start-up. 

2.6.4 Sites were selected for the development of irrigation schemes through field visits, consultations 

with technical services, farmer organisations, women’s and youth associations, beneficiaries and the 

analysis of the relevance of studies and projects such as the Irrigated Rice Cultivation Intensification 

Support Project – PAIRI (WAEMU, 2018) and the Project to Promote Rice Cultivation by Youths – 

PPRFJ (BOAD, 2015). The outcomes of these consultations are reflected in this appraisal report. 

However, adjustments may be made during project start-up. 

 

2.7. Bank Group Experience and Lessons Reflected in Project Design 

2.7.1 The Bank’s active portfolio in Guinea-Bissau as at May 2019 comprised ten (10) operations for 

a total net commitment of UA 73.47 million, of which eight (8) national public sector projects (UA 45.52 

million) and two (2) regional operations (UA 27.95 million). There is no ongoing project under the Bank’s 

private sector window. There is no problematic project (PP) or potentially problematic project (PPP). The 

distribution of the national project portfolio by sector is as follows: energy (74.7%); governance (13.7%) 

and agriculture (11.6%). The portfolio’s age has dropped considerably, from 6.2 years in 2014 to 2.6 years 

in 2017, due mainly to the closure of old projects (Education III and Health II). There are three ongoing 

operations in the agricultural sector, namely the Rice Value Chain Development Project – PDCV-Riz (UA 

4.19 million), the Study on the Revival of the Cotton-Textile Sector (UA 0.35 million) and the Emergency 

Assistance for Fall Armyworm Control (UA 0.73 million). 

2.7.2 The Agricultural and Rural Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project (PRESAR) financed by the 

Bank to the tune of UA 5.8 million, which was completed in 2012, rehabilitated/developed 3 800 hectares 

                                                 
5  The Employment Impact Assessment of the Job Saving Plan (PES) conducted by AfDB in 2018 showed that agricultural sector investments have 

a significant multiplier effect on employment (every UA 1 million invested creates at least 282 direct and indirect jobs). This sector has the most 

significant impact on the poorest quintile and helps to increase the number of people in the middle class. 

 



 

9 

of lowlands and mangroves, and provided support for the development of 460 hectares of market 

gardening areas. The project completion report prepared in February 2014 rated the project performance 

as satisfactory (score of 3.12 on 4), despite its implementation in a difficult socio-political context. In 

addition, the PDCV-Riz initiated in 2017 envisaged the development of 470 hectares of lowlands and 

mangroves, and 19 hectares of women’s market gardening areas equipped with solar-powered pumps and 

the construction of access roads, markets, input stores, product storage and conservation areas. Thus, the 

two projects funded by the Bank have significantly increased the land area available for cultivation (about 

5 000 hectares), improved agricultural production (rice and market garden products), increased income, 

and opened up and integrated production areas into the market economy. Lessons from these experiences 

are that the implementation of an inclusive participatory approach to infrastructure development, together 

with a mechanism for supporting grassroots actors, offer genuine opportunities for improving food 

security and farmers’ income. PACVEAR will also focus on rural entrepreneurship, which is an 

innovative approach adopted to boost agricultural sector growth and professionalisation. 

2.7.3  The project is also based on the conclusions of the mid-term review of the Bank’s Country 

Strategy and Programme in Guinea-Bissau for the period 2015–2019 conducted by IDEV in September 

2018, which recommends that the Bank should improve the quality of its portfolio, supervise operations 

more effectively, build the capacity of government technical services, select local operators/implementing 

partners based on objective criteria, better mainstream gender particularly by involving community 

leaders in raising awareness on gender equity and equality in agricultural development and, lastly, make 

project outcomes and impacts more sustainable. 

These recommendations have been taken into account by: (i) improving the quality of project design 

through the involvement of the PDCV-Riz project team designated by the PACVEAR 

coordination/management unit, formulating and analysing the relevance of available engineering studies 

on irrigation schemes; (ii) setting up an internal monitoring committee to supervise the project (twice a 

year); (iii) planning government technical service capacity-building activities; (iv) involving sector 

leaders in the selection of beneficiary sites and infrastructure management; (v) building the technical 

capacity of management committee members in infrastructure maintenance with the participation of 

SMEs; (vi) assessing implementing partners and developing new selection criteria; (vii) establishing an 

effective results-based project monitoring and evaluation mechanism, and building the project team’s 

capacity in monitoring and evaluation; and (viii) mainstreaming the gender dimension in all project 

components by improving production capacity, rice and market garden product conservation, building the 

capacity of women and youths, improving product processing and marketing capacity, and raising 

awareness for behaviour change. 

2.7.4  Final design and BDs for sites for the development of irrigation schemes (with total or partial 

irrigation water control) are available (12 out of 13 lowlands covering about 560 hectares, or 85% of the 

area to be developed). These studies were analysed during project preparation/appraisal missions and used 

as a basis for estimating investments in the irrigation schemes envisaged under the project. Once the loan 

agreement is signed, the PDCV-Riz team will start adapting the BDs to Bank standard BDs and launch 

bid invitations for works, thus helping to comply with timeframes. Standard plans for storage warehouses 

and vaccination yards are also available. 

2.7.5  To select local partners responsible for coordinating and organising producers around value 

chains and supporting young economic project promoters, PACVEAR solicited the services of 

experienced local NGOs that have a satisfactory working relationship with the Bank or other partners. 

Agreements and protocols specifying their roles and expected outcomes will be concluded with these 

entities. 

The NGOs concerned are APRODEL (Bafata), ADPP (Oio), ADIC-Nafaia (Gabu) and COAJOQ 

(Cacheu). APRODEL and ADPP are currently involved in PDCV-Riz and will be maintained. ADIC-

Nafaia satisfactorily implemented many activities on behalf of several partners, including FAO, the 

European Union and the World Bank. It is currently supervising the beneficiaries of 500 hectares of 

lowlands in Gabu Region. COAJOQ, which is based in Canchungo Division in Cacheu Region, is 

involved in implementing the European Union-funded Integrated Project to Revitalise the Private Sector 

in Cacheu Region. It is currently collaborating with 37 local producer associations with 1 850 members, 



 

10 

50% of them women practising market gardening. It also participates in the training of youths in 

agricultural mechanisation within an associative and sustainable context. 

2.8 Key Performance Indicators 

2.8.1  A gender-specific baseline situation will be established to examine the context, the level of 

indicators to be informed and other relevant parameters before project start-up. This will help to regularly 

assess the progress made, particularly in terms of outcomes and impact. Special emphasis will be laid on 

targeting those parameters that can be monitored and collected internally, and others specifically related 

to women and youths (women- and youth-disaggregated data). It will be necessary to analyse youth 

employment, salt flats and climate change issues in the current project area. 

The monitoring/evaluation specialist will monitor and evaluate project activities and results-based logical 

framework indicators internally, in close collaboration with technical experts (infrastructure engineer, 

employment promotion specialist and value chain expert) and project partners, including support NGOs. 

2.8.2  The key performance indicators that will be monitored based on the baseline scenario include: 

(i) surface area of lowlands developed with partial irrigation water control for rice; (ii) rice-growing areas 

developed with full irrigation water control; (iii) market gardening areas developed; (iv) number of short-

cycle livestock units promoted by gender; (v) infrastructure developed and operated (number of markets 

commissioned, kilometres of feeder roads developed, stores for storage of produce built, etc.); (vi) level 

of additional production (tonnes) and crop yields (t/ha); (vii) number of farmers (including women) per 

type of facility; (viii) number of demonstration units (DUs); (ix) number of structured producer 

organisations and facility management committees established; (x) growth level of farmers’ income, 

including those of women and youths; (xi) number of jobs created for youths and women through 

entrepreneurial initiatives and number of young entrepreneurs trained, incubated and installed; (xii) 

number of producers, processors and traders trained and organised; (xiii) level of involvement of women 

in decision-making bodies and their rate of access to post-development land; (xiv) number of processing 

units established and allocated (including for women); and (xv) number of nutrition activities supported, 

number of school canteens supported and level of impact on food and nutrition security. 

2.8.3  All indicators selected for the project will be aligned on those selected for PNIA II and will help 

to enhance the performance of the agricultural sector in Guinea-Bissau. The Bank’s various supervision 

missions and periodic progress reports will reflect the level of achievement of the indicators. 

 

III Project Feasibility 

3.1 Financial and Economic Performance 

Table 3.1: Key Financial and Economic Data  

NPV (8%) XOF 20 944 million 

EIRR (baseline scenario) 16.9% 

 

3.1.1 The project financial and economic analysis was carried out based on the cost/benefit of 

additional cash flows from the two priority sector crop (rice and market gardening) and livestock (small 

ruminants, broilers and pigs) entrepreneurial production models. The detailed assumptions of the financial 

and economic analysis, the tables of farming models (the baseline and “with project” situations) and the 

financial and economic flows are presented in Annex B7 of Volume 2. The results of the financial and 

economic analysis show that PACVEAR is financially and economically profitable. 

3.1.2 Financial performance: the additional income from various farming models adopted are as 

follows: (i) farms benefiting from the development of 364 ha of lowlands with partial irrigation water 

control (rainy season rice cultivation) with an income of  XOF 0.237 million/ha; (ii) farms benefiting from 

the development of 296 ha of lowlands with full irrigation water control (double-cropping of rice and 

market garden products) with an estimated income of XOF 1.680 million/ha; (iii) 60 ha of market 

gardening areas for women (rainy season and off-season crops) with an income of XOF 5.867 million/ha; 

(iv) pig farms (introduction of 1 genitor boar for 3 sows for 30 beneficiaries) with an income of XOF 8.22 

million/beneficiary in peak year; (v) poultry farms (broiler chickens) with an average income of XOF 0.38 



 

11 

million/beneficiary; (vi) small ruminant farms (2 genitors and 8 female) ) with  an average income of XOF 

2.98 million/beneficiary. The additional income generated by the project will contribute to increasing 

overall value added, hence its contribution to agricultural GDP. The financial internal rate of return (FIRR) 

is estimated at 14.8% for an NPV, at the opportunity cost of capital 8%, of XOF 20.11 billion, which 

reflects a significant result. 

3.1.3 Economic performance:  the basic economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is 16.9% for a NPV, 

at the opportunity cost of capital 8%, of XOF 20.944 billion, and the cost/benefit ratio (CBR) is 2.1. This 

amount is significant, especially as some of the benefits could not be taken into account in calculations 

owing to lack of data for assessing them, notably the improvement of living conditions and food and 

nutrition security thanks to increased income, food availability, the impacts of watershed and 

environmental protection actions, capacity building for other types of economic activities carried out by 

beneficiaries and multiplier effects on sector players (suppliers of inputs, equipment, services, etc.).  

Sensitivity tests were conducted taking into account a possible increase in costs (+10%), a decrease in 

agricultural production in case farmers do not adopt the proposed farming techniques (-10%) and a 

reduction in benefits (-10%) caused by plant and animal species, coupled with an increase in investment 

costs (+10%).  The respective IRRs for sensitivity tests are 15.0%; 14.8% and 13.1%. Other sensitivity 

tests were conducted taking into account assumptions of flow variability resulting from endogenous 

variables, and are presented in Annex B7 of Volume 2. 

3.1.4 The other project economic impacts can be summarised as follows: (i) the upstream effects of 

additional income on service providers (contractors, suppliers, NGOs, consulting firms); (ii) the 

downstream effects of additional income generation on producers, traders and processors who are mostly 

women and youths; (iii) a decrease in foreign exchange costs in the trade balance, thanks to the significant 

reduction in rice importation; and (iv) the impact on wealth creation in the country owing to an increase 

in GDP resulting from the generation of additional value added. Project benefits for households will 

improve the nutrition of vulnerable groups (children, women of childbearing age and the elderly), ease 

the hardship of the tasks of agricultural workers, especially women, reduce the impact of monetary and 

non-monetary poverty, and strengthen the livelihoods and the resilience of PACVEAR target groups to 

food insecurity and the effects of climate change, among others. 

3.2. Environmental and Social Impact 

3.2.1  Environment: PACVEAR is classified under Environmental Category 2 according to the 

Bank’s Environmental Safeguards Policy. It underwent a strategic environmental and social assessment 

(SESA) and has an environmental and social management master plan (ESMP)6. The Competent 

Environmental Assessment Authority (Autoridad de Avaliação Ambiental Competente - AAAC) of 

Guinea-Bissau has also classified the project under Environmental Category B, which is equivalent to 

Environmental Category 2 of the Bank's safeguards, in accordance with Law No. 10/2010 of 24 September 

2010 relating to environmental assessment.  

3.2.2 PACVEAR’s infrastructure will not generate significant environmental and social impacts.  

However, there will be a few negative impacts during the lowland development and infrastructure 

construction phase. These will include sound emanations, increase in dust in the air, earthworks, risk of 

STI/HIV/AIDS transmission during the construction phase, and the outbreak of malaria and waterborne 

diseases during the operations phase. These impacts will be relatively moderate and limited to receiving 

environments with low ecological sensitivity. The dispersal of the facilities across the three regions in the 

northern and eastern part of the country will also reduce their impacts, which will be limited in time and 

mitigated by appropriate measures. The project impact area does not contain protected areas or gazetted 

forests7.  

                                                 
6  Engineering and environmental studies on irrigation scheme development sites are available. However, the sites for support facilities (water points, 

rural roads, storage warehouses, etc.) are not known at this stage. If necessary, they will be the subject of environmental impact assessments to be 

carried out by a private service provider at project start-up and submitted to the Bank. Against this backdrop, it was decided that a strategic 

environmental and social assessment (SESA) should be conducted and an environment and social management master plan (ESMP) prepared. 
7  Guinea-Bissau has no gazetted forest. The relics of primary forests are gradually being replaced by mono-specific cashew nut plantations, which 

considerably reduce biodiversity in these three regions. 

   



 

12 

3.2.3  Project facilities will not entail any displacement of people or restriction of their access to 

property or livelihoods. Deeds of transfer and operation will be issued to farmers’ organisations (FOs) 

that will act as representatives of beneficiaries. This will lead to secure land tenure for the sites to be 

developed. Consultation frameworks comprising traditional authorities, landowners, support/assistance 

organisations and beneficiary organisations will be established for the issuance of an operation permit in 

the form of a deed of gift to beneficiaries (at least 30% to women and 20% to youths) by land right holders. 

To ensure the sustainable operation of the facilities built, sensitisation and information meetings will be 

held, followed by a landowner and land right owner identification phase that will lead to the signing of a 

deed/declaration of gift by village landowners, endorsed by the village chief, the mayor of the municipality 

or even the governor of the region concerned. Most of the facilities to be built by the project will be a 

concrete response to priority development problems (lack of irrigation water, lack of infrastructure to 

support agricultural value chains, construction of access roads, access to markets, etc.). 

3.2.4  Impact mitigation measures to be implemented before, during and after construction works as 

well as the improvement activities envisaged (protection of facilities, fruit tree planting, etc.) will 

strengthen project environmental compliance. Project environmental management activities will be 

coordinated by PACVEAR’s environmental expert who, under a framework agreement, will be backed 

by the Competent Environmental Assessment Authority (AAAC) for better management of the 

environmental aspects of the project. The project will also use the services of environmental focal points 

(EFPs) in the Regional Directorates of Forestry and Wildlife to conduct environmental monitoring during 

the implementation phase. These workers will undergo training in environmental and social assessment, 

and will receive the support and permanent assistance of the AAAC in carrying out the various activities. 

3.2.5  The budget allocated for environmental monitoring and evaluation is UA 162 000. This amount 

will cover the development of specific ESIAs and ESMPs for some sites (provisions) by an external 

consulting firm, the implementation of the mitigation measures contained in them, campaigns to raise 

beneficiary awareness and institutional support to the AAAC.  The ESMP summary is presented in Annex 

B8 of Volume 2. The environmental and social management framework and its summary were approved 

by the Safeguards and Compliance Department (SNSC), and posted on the Bank's website on 13 June 

2019. 

3.2.6  Climate change: a climate change risk assessment was conducted for the project using the 

Climate Safeguards System (CSS). The project is classified under Climatic Category 2 and may be 

vulnerable to climate risks. Practical risk management and adaptation options will be incorporated into 

project design and implementation plans. 

3.2.7  There is no known history of severe drought in the project area. In the course of the rainy season, 

rice farms may sometimes become flooded in places during periods of normal rainfall. This phenomenon 

is primarily the result of sand silting in the natural canals that serve as outlets to the production sites. To 

address the impacts of climate change, the project will adopt measures prescribed by the National Action 

Programme for Adaptation to Climate Change (PANA) following participatory assessments of the 

country’s vulnerability and adaptation to climate change, based on the agricultural sector diagnoses. The 

project will fully align its activities with PANA’s strategic orientations by developing lowlands and 

horticulture, supporting school canteens and establishing school gardens with a view to strengthening the 

food and nutrition security of the beneficiaries. The project will use a holistic approach that is designed 

to eliminate constraints at all levels of rice and horticultural value chains. Specifically in horticulture 

areas, PACVEAR will introduce solar technology and the plot water-saving system to control water and 

reduce water extraction.  

3.2.8  For better management of occasional flooding in rice fields, the natural canals of the target sites 

will be drained and resized to allow for the evacuation of any excess flow in the rice-growing lowlands 

concerned. To prevent silting in rice fields, which is the primary cause of flooding in the lowlands, bunds 

consolidated with soil-fixing plants will be built opposite slopes with strong runoff. The project will also 

make it easier for producers to acquire certified seeds by putting in place a programme, in conjunction 

with the National Institute of Agricultural Research (INPA) and seed multiplier organisations. It will also 

introduce the rational use of fertiliser to improve yields and, hence, agricultural productivity. The related 

agricultural infrastructure will be set up and designed with additional measures for adapting to climate 

change, to make them more resilient.  



 

13 

3.2.9 Gender: the Value Chains, Agricultural and Rural Entrepreneurship Support Project (PACVEAR) 

takes into account all the components of the gender dimension through the following activities: 

- Improvement of rice and market garden produce production and conservation 
capacity: the project will facilitate women’s access to land by allocating 30% of the rice 

fields developed and 90% of market gardening areas to women. The risk of limited access 

to land by women and youths has been taken into account as this concern will be an integral 

part of the intervention criteria, and the land issue will be systematically clarified before 

any operation (prior authorisation, land negotiation by the competent authorities, etc.).  

- Capacity building: the skills of women and youths will be developed through training in 
the use of improved seeds and rice farming, market gardening and cereal farming 

techniques.  

- Improvement of product processing and marketing capacity: the project will provide 
women’s groups with equipment for rice processing and husking (rice parboiling) and 

processing into by-products. This will lighten their workload and improve the quality of 

rice produced.  

- Awareness-raising for behaviour change: awareness and communication campaigns 
will be organised to improve the nutritional status of under-five children and pregnant 

women. The selection of themes will vary according to the needs of each project area: for 

instance, nutrition and health (family planning and reproductive health, HIV/AIDS, etc.), 

education (education of the girl child), conflict management, gender and gender-based 

violence, etc. 

Gender categorisation: PACVEAR is classified under Gender Category 2 according to the “Gender 

Marker System”. The gender analysis and action plan for implementing gender promotion and women's 

empowerment activities are presented in Annex B10 of Volume 2. 

Gender promotion activities concern: rice-growing areas (30%), market gardening areas for women 

(90%), processing equipment, drying units, promotion of women-headed small- and medium-size 

enterprises (at least 30%), promotion of gender equity and equality within farmers' organisations through 

workshops, training of members of women and mixed farmers’ organisations in farming techniques, 

leadership and gender, experience-sharing trips and equitable access to socio-economic infrastructure 

(feeder roads, storage warehouses, etc.). The budget allocated for the gender dimension is estimated at 

UA 2.786 million, i.e. approximately 27% of the total budget (cf. Annex B10, Volume 2). 

3.2.10  Nutrition: horticultural production on approximately 60 hectares of land will contribute to 

improving the nutrition of beneficiary households and have a positive impact on the health of the most 

vulnerable segments of the population, namely children and women of childbearing age. The project will 

develop initiatives to improve the hygiene and nutritional quality of food consumed by the people, 

especially women and children. It will also collaborate with RESAN for the pilot development of six 

school canteens and six school gardens. Additional peak year production of horticultural and animal 

products will contribute to making people’s food and nutrition better. Activities aimed at informing, 

raising awareness and educating on nutrition, hygiene and the prevention of the resurgence of waterborne 

diseases will also contribute to improving people’s health and nutrition. To enhance market access for 

processed products, PACVEAR will sensitise and support processing units/SMEs in upgrading 

parcelling/packaging and labelling according to standards. The budget allocated for nutrition support 

measures is UA 123 000. 

3.2.11  Social issues: the envisaged infrastructure and support for rice farming and market gardening 

will help to reduce the problems of low productivity and product conservation, and to better structure 

value chains for the benefit of beneficiaries. The project will pay particular attention to women and youths 

who are very active in rural areas, but often lack adequate training and resources. The development of 

market gardening areas primarily for women will enhance their empowerment and promote a more 

balanced diet in households. Specific support will also target women and young people in the development 

of rural entrepreneurship. In addition, training in organisational development and the structuring of FOs 

and producer unions will improve their roles in local governance and decision-making bodies, as well as 

the monitoring of the outcomes of activities promoted within such organisations.  



 

14 

The rehabilitation of feeder roads, the construction of markets and storage warehouses, and the setting up 

of small processing units will help to reduce post-harvest losses, increasing the availability of food 

products and household income. Improving access to socio-economic infrastructure will contribute to 

easing daily tasks and allow beneficiaries to engage in income-generating activities such as market 

gardening, seed production, poultry and pig farming, as well as agricultural product processing and 

marketing, including small-scale breeding.  

The jobs that will be created through the promotion of rural entrepreneurship among young people and women 

(close to 2 000 people targeted) and the establishment of many enterprises by this population segment will 

contribute to developing a business culture among people proposing projects aimed at increasing income in 

the project area, and fostering the creation of growth poles that can reduce youth urban migration, including 

attempts to immigrate.  

3.2.12  Involuntary resettlement: PACVEAR’s activities will not lead to any people displacement or 

restriction of access to property or means of livelihood. 

IV. Project Implementation 

4.1. Implementation Arrangements 

4.1.1  PACVEAR will be under the supervisory authority of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 

Development (MADR). It will be attached to the General Directorate of Agriculture. Project piloting and 

supervision activities will be carried out by the PDCV-Riz steering committee set up by Decree No. 

1/2018 of 4 January 2018, which will be amended by ministry decision, at project start-up to take its 

specificities into account. The committee will meet once a year in ordinary session. The chairmanship 

will be ensured by the Minister MADR or his representative and the secretariat by the coordinator of the 

PMU. Also, a technical committee for monitoring the project will be set up. It will meet every three 

months to monitor project implementation, quarterly review of the activity report, as well as the technical 

program and the quarterly budget, and identify opportunities and constraints to improve project outcomes.  

4.1.2  PACVEAR will be coordinated by the PDCV-Riz Management Unit whose mandate will end in 

December 2020. This team satisfactorily implemented PDCV-Riz projects and, previously, PRESAR. It 

was also involved in PACVEAR preparation and appraisal. The PMU will be headed by the Coordinator, 

supported by the following sTSFf: an administrative and financial officer, a procurement specialist, a rural 

engineer, and an agronomist specialised in value chains, agricultural and rural entrepreneurship, and 

support sTSFf (drivers, secretaries, messengers, etc.). The team will be maintained and consolidated with 

the competitive recruitment of an environmental monitoring/evaluation specialist, a rural infrastructure 

specialist (technical assistance), a procurement specialist and an accountant. Apart from the fiduciary team 

(the Coordinator, the administrative and financial officer, the procurement specialist, the accountant, etc.) 

that will operate from project head office in Bissau, all other experts will be based at the field office in 

Bafata. 

4.1.3 The project intervention strategy will be based primarily on subcontracting. Under the 

agreements signed with the project, the national technical services (and their decentralised entities) will 

be strongly involved as project owner, works controller and supervisor, as well as executing agency, 

service provider or project manager. Private service providers (contractors, suppliers, consulting firms, 

individual consultants, etc.) will be recruited on a competitive basis and linked to the project by contracts. 

4.1.4  Applicable procurement policy and framework: the procurement of goods (including non-

consultancy services), works and consultancy services financed by the Bank under the project will be 

done in accordance with the Procurement Framework for Bank Group-funded Operations approved in 

October 2015, as well as the provisions set forth in the Financing Agreement. Specifically, procurement 

will be done in accordance with Bank Procurement Methods and Procedures (BPMPs), using relevant 

standard bidding documents (SBDs) for goods and works contracts as well as consultancy services for 

which BPMPs are considered most appropriate. An analysis of Guinea-Bissau’s procurement system as 

presented in Technical Annex B5 of this report showed that the procurement risk is substantial. As a result, 

the Bank’s Procurement Methods and Procedures will be used for PACVEAR’s implementation. A 

capacity building action plan will be discussed with the Guinea-Bissau authorities to enable the use, in 



 

15 

the short term, of the national procurement system following the conduct of reforms identified as 

necessary. 

4.1.5 Procurement risk and capacity assessment (PRCA): to take project specificities into account, 

the Bank assessed: (i) country, sector and project risks; and (ii) the executing agency’s capacity. The 

outcomes of these assessments revealed a substantial procurement risk level, and guided the decision to 

use BPMPs for all project activities. Appropriate risk mitigation measures have been included in the 

PERCA Action Plan presented in Annex B5, volume 2.  

4.1.6 Procurement arrangements: PACVEAR’s management will be under the responsibility of the 

PDCV-Riz actual management team. This institutional arrangement is the result of the desire to build on 

the achievements of the key sTSFf of this ongoing Bank-funded project. It is worth pointing out that the 

team had already implemented other Bank projects, including PRESAR. Support from a procurement 

expert was deemed necessary in view of the workload that will have to be added to the procurement 

activities of PDCV-Riz. The current team will be strengthened with the competitive recruitment of an 

environmental monitoring/evaluation specialist, a rural infrastructure specialist (technical assistance), a 

procurement specialist and an accountant. All experts will sign a performance contract that will be subject 

to an annual performance review. 

4.1.7  Financial management: the project implementation team will be responsible for the 

administrative, financial and accounting management of PACVEAR. The team will monitor and supervise 

project implementation, and should have sufficient technical, human and material resources to set up an 

efficient internal control system and an acceptable financial management system, particularly through 

proper and exhaustive recording of all transactions carried out during the project cycle, the safekeeping 

of financial information and assets, and information on and audit of the resources provided.  

The assessment of the PDCV-Riz implementation unit’s capacity revealed that it has the minimum 

capability and tools for proper recording of funds and accountability. However, given the unit’s duty to 

manage many projects simultaneously, it shall be strengthened with additional human resources, 

particularly an accountant experienced in managing development projects implemented using a private 

accrual accounting system. The accountant shall be recruited through open call for applications based on 

Bank rules and procedures. The recruitment will be monitored by the Bank's Fiduciary Services and 

Inspection Department (SNFI), which shall validate both the integrity of the process and the accountant's 

qualifications. 

The project administrative, accounting and financial procedures manual has already exist in PDCV-Riz. 

This document should be reviewed to take into account the multi-project management dimension of the 

executing agency and submitted to the Bank for approval. The manual will take PACVEAR’s components 

and categories into account. It will also include the general, budgetary and analytical accounting plans, 

the accounting principles and methods, as well as all applicable posting details.  

An integrated accounting and financial management software is also available. It should be reconfigured 

to make it multi-project, multi-user, multi-currency and multi-donor, thereby enabling the production of 

general, analytical and budgetary data required for financial and accounting monitoring, i.e. for producing 

financial statements by expenditure component, category and activity; and by source of financing for 

resources. At the minimum, the software should have the following modules: (i) general accounting; (ii) 

budget management; (iii) contract management; (iv) tangible assets management; (v) financial 

monitoring, etc. It will also be configured to have the three (3) levels of registration, validation and 

approval. At the end of the year, the software should help to obtain summary annual financial statements 

comprising a table of resource applications for the year, together with a balance sheet, a statement of 

special account reconciliation, and notes to the financial statements, among others. It will also allow for 

the monitoring of budget execution. 

Accounts will be kept based on the private accrual accounting system and using an integrated software 

adapted to development project management. The accounting plan will be drawn up based on the 

accounting standards of the revised Uniform Act of the Organization for the Harmonisation of African 

Business Law (OHADA) in force in Guinea-Bissau.   

Lastly, the project will produce an annual work programme and budget (AWPB) that will take into account 

all funding from all partners, as well as quarterly financial management reports based on the 



 

16 

implementation of the annual work programme and budget, and appended to the quarterly progress reports 

submitted to the Bank, in which a clear analysis must be made between budget forecasts and executions 

for the quarter. Any gaps should be analysed and explained.  

4.1.8  Disbursements: the Bank’s resources will be disbursed according to its rules of procedure, 

notably the disbursement manual. Disbursements will be made through the following three methods 

presented in detail in the project Appraisal Report (Annex B4 Volume 2): (i) the special account method; 

(ii) the direct payment method; and (iii) the reimbursement method. 

4.1.9 Auditing: the internal audit function as well as the PACVEAR internal control system will be 

assessed once or twice yearly by the General Inspectorate of Finance (IGF), depending on project risk 

assessment. An agreement will be prepared for that purpose and submitted for the Bank's no-objection 

opinion. An institutional support in the form of IT software and hardware will also be provided to the 

IGF. The external audit of project accounts will be conducted by an independent audit firm acceptable to 

the Bank and based on terms of reference agreed beforehand with the Bank. The recruitment of the 

external auditor will be in accordance with the Bank’s rules and procedures for the use of consultants. The 

auditor will be required to submit his/her report within six months following the close of the financial 

year audited. 

 

4.2. Monitoring 

4.2.1  Monitoring mechanisms: the project’s monitoring and evaluation system will be designed in 

relation to the expected impacts, outcomes and outputs contained in the project logical framework. The 

system will be participatory and will provide regular relevant information on performance and impact 

indicators as well as on the implementation of activities scheduled. A baseline situation will be 

established, based on the identified and selected sites many of which have already been studied. The 

monitoring and evaluation framework will systematically include gender-disaggregated data. 

Furthermore, targeted surveys will be conducted to better understand issues relating to income, food 

security, nutrition, job creation, gender mainstreaming, vulnerability and resilience. The information 

collected will be fed into the computerised monitoring and evaluation system to capture the actual values 

of project activities and inputs, and gauge project outcomes and impacts. In turn, these will be recorded 

in periodic progress reports highlighting the project implementation status and the achievement of 

outcomes.  

The Bank and MADR will supervise project implementation through a reinforced internal monitoring 

technical committee. Given the country’s weak capacity and fragility, the Bank, as part of its new 

development and business delivery model, will closely monitor all activities, especially by fielding 

periodic supervision missions (twice yearly). 

4.2.2  The project’s provisional implementation schedule is presented below. 

Activity Date/Period Responsibility 

Project preparation 25 March-5 April 20 19 AfDB/GVT 

Preparation of the ESMP March 2019 AfDB/GVT 

Project appraisal 6-22 May 2019 AfDB/GVT 

Preparation of priority PRs and CBDs 4th quarter 2019/ 2nd quarter 2020 PMU 

Negotiation of PACVEAR July 2019 GVT/AfDB 

Confirmation of the PMU July 2019 GVT/ AfDB 

Board presentation July 2019 AfDB 

Signature of financing agreement September 2019 AfDB/GVT 

First disbursement November 2019 GVT/AfDB 

Launching of PACVEAR November 2019 AfDB/GVT/PMU 

Signature of agreements with partners First semester 2020 PMU/Partners/TS 

Preparation of remaining PRs and CBDs Q2/Q4 2020 PMU/MADR 

Works execution and service delivery 2020 to Mid- 2021 Contractors/Firms/PMU 

Implementation of operational activities Q2 2020/2023 PMU/GVT/Service Providers 

Midterm review Q3 2022 AfDB/GVT/PMU 

Project completion December 2024 AfDB/GVT 

Project closure March 2025 PMU/GVT/AfDB 



 

17 

4.3. Governance 

4.3.1  Guinea-Bissau’s political, economic and social governance indicators remain mixed, in spite of 

the progress made in recent years. As regards political governance, it is necessary to find lasting solutions 

to possible conflicts and establish mechanisms for ensuring justice. Guinea-Bissau’s governance and anti-

corruption performance is low, due generally to frequent political and institutional crises. In 2018, the 

country was ranked 42nd out of 54 countries in the Mo Ibrahim Index of African Governance (and 
particularly the 42th in the rule of law sub-indicator), which is a slight improvement over the last three 

years. In the area of economic governance, particularly in public financial management, the country’s 
performance has deteriorated because of the crisis and the capacity to mobilise domestic resources remains 

weak, as noted in the Bank’s analysis on the governance of projects approved in 2015 and in the 2016 
Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) scores.  

4.3.2  As part of PACVEAR’s implementation, and in an effort to mitigate the risks inherent in the 

weaknesses and instability of the administration and improve project quality-at-entry, it was decided to 

maintain the PMU of the ongoing PDCV-Riz since the unit is already conversant with Bank procedures, 

and to build on existing implementation studies. Moreover, although progress has been made in aligning 

the public procurement system with WAEMU directives, the bureaucracy characterising the procurement 

system is still one of the main challenges in implementing development programmes. Regarding 

procurement, operational arrangements were adopted to address the weaknesses noted. 

4.3.3  With regard to professional organisation in Guinea-Bissau, much remains to be done to promote 

effective rural stakeholder representative institutions. Producers are organised within professional 

agricultural organisations, including the National Association of Farmers of Guinea Bissau (ANAG) and 

the National Consultation Framework of the Farmers’ and Agricultural Producers’ Organization of 

Guinea-Bissau (QNCOCPA/GB). In addition, due to lack of resources, the activities of these organisations 

have had limited impact on their members, particularly in producer management and training. Many local, 

cultural, youth and women's associations are also present, and a large number of producer groups have 

been set up, with some of them already well organised. They are indispensable relays for support to small 

producers and the professionalisation of farmers. Nevertheless, the development of these associations is 

facing various constraints, including: (i) legislation that is ill-adapted to the current conditions of 

producing, processing and marketing products; (ii) difficulties in obtaining legal recognition; (iii) lack of 

training of managers in management and facilitation; (iv) lack of access to technical and market 

information; and (v) poor knowledge of legislation, particularly as regards the taxation system. 

PACVEAR is intended to better structure and organise producers and value chains stakeholders by 

strengthening and empowering community entities that represent the target beneficiaries. 

4.4. Sustainability 

4.4.1  The sustainability of project investments relates mostly to the capacity of the beneficiaries to 

ensure infrastructure maintenance and management regularly and over time. Irrigation, pastoral and 

support infrastructure management committees will be set up prior to the start of the construction of each 

facility, and are expected to facilitate community mobilisation and participation. Management committee 

members will receive organisational, technical and facility management support to enable them to 

supervise the work of contractors, in collaboration with the project team and the works control firm. The 

involvement of these committees in close works monitoring and acceptance will enhance their ownership 

of infrastructure built, thus resulting in greater sustainability. The project will also organise exchange 

visits to other facilities by management committee members.  

4.4.2  The project will build the capacity of young local artisans in routine infrastructure and equipment 

maintenance (cleaning of canals, maintenance of pumps, cleaning of irrigation basins, etc.) and provide 

them with kits for these operations. These local artisans could operate as maintenance service providers 

and will be easy to mobilise in case of breakdown.  

Beneficiaries, particularly producer groups, farmers' organisations and management committees, will also 

be structured, in collaboration with technical partners. The managerial, accounting and logistical capacity 

of these entities will be built to enable them to continue to provide services over time. Project-driven 

development of local expertise will promote long-lasting technical capacity, thus guaranteeing 

infrastructure sustainability. 



 

18 

4.5. Risk Management 

The potential risks and proposed mitigation measures are presented in the table below. 

Risks Risk Level Mitigating Measures 

Political instability, due to a difficult 

economic situation  

High Contribution to improving socio-economic and 

environmental resilience for greater stability.  

Climatic instability, with direct effects on 

agricultural, livestock production and 

development 

Low Storage and water control facilities, resistant seeds; 

Use of short-cycle and high-yielding species. 

Difficulties in mobilising the counterpart 

contribution 

Low The counterpart contribution is limited, not exceeding 2% 

of project cost. 

Weak capacity of the technical services 

involved 

High Capacity building of the technical services involved in 

project implementation. 

Low project ownership by stakeholders and 

beneficiaries 
Low 

Involvement and participation of beneficiaries in all 

capacity building stages (producers, MADR). 

Outbreak of plant diseases 
Moderate 

Training of producers in plant disease management and 

ecologically appropriate use of pesticides. 

Low capacity of implementation partners 

and contractors, resulting in poor 

performance and delays in project 

implementation 

Moderate 

Careful selection of implementation partners and 

contractors. 

Close control of partners and works contractors by the PIU 

and consulting firms, the technical monitoring committee, 

the beneficiary management committee and the PMU. 

4.6. Knowledge Building 

PACVEAR will contribute to the development and consolidation of producer expertise.  Adopting an 

inclusive approach, it will enable young people and women to develop technical and entrepreneurial 

capacity by settling on land with modern farming infrastructure and resources. The project will also help 

to generate knowledge that will be used to create many jobs by upgrading incubation centres that could 

train and support young people wishing to engage in agribusiness. Moreover, it will support the Food and 

Nutrition Security Information System (SISSAN) in collecting and processing data that will be used to 

formulate sound sector policies. Furthermore, the project’s specific contribution to structuring the seed 

sector with the introduction of Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) will 

generate knowledge that will enhance production techniques, thus increasing production. The 

establishment of demonstration units, the dissemination of best practice, the introduction of solar 

technology into dewatering and processing systems, and the preservation of agricultural products will 

further strengthen the sector. 

PACVEAR will support MADR in preparing strategic and sector discussion themes through external 

service providers. The themes  include: (i) agricultural sector institutional study; (ii) diagnostic of the 

performance of youth incubation centres (ADPP and COAJOQ) and support for their evolution into pilot 

incubation centres; (iii) youth agricultural and rural entrepreneurship promotion strategy: potentials and 

constraints; (iv) support for updating legislation and veterinary regulations; and (v) support for the 

collection, processing and dissemination of data on the Food and Nutrition Security Information System 

(SISSAN).  

As regards communication and visibility of project actions, there will be: (i) awareness-raising and 

information dissemination through various communication channels (community radios, media 

programmes, website, films, etc.); and (ii) promotion of innovative youth and women's employability 

actions and activities to build the resilience of vulnerable groups to food and nutrition insecurity. 

V. Legal Framework 

5.1. Legal Instrument 

The legal framework of the project will be a grant protocol agreement and two loan agreements signed 

between the Republic of Guinea-Bissau and the Bank.  

5.2. Conditions for Bank Intervention 

The legal framework of the project will be a TSF Grant Protocol Agreement, a TSF Loan Agreement and 



 

19 

an ADF Loan Agreement between the Republic of Guinea-Bissau and the Bank. The agreements thus 

signed, to the satisfaction of the two parties in both form and substance, will include the usual terms and 

conditions. 

5.2.1 Conditions precedent to effectiveness: effectiveness of the ADF and TSF Loan Agreements 

shall be subject to the Borrower’s fulfilment of the conditions set forth in Section 12.01 of the General 

Conditions Applicable to Bank Loan and Guarantee Agreements (ratification of Loan Agreement and 

legal opinion). The TSF Grant Protocol Agreement shall become effective on the date of signature. 

5.2.2 Conditions precedent to first disbursement of loan resources: in addition to effectiveness of 

the three financing agreements, the first disbursement of the ADF and TSF loans, and the TSF grant 

resources shall be subject to presentation of following conditions: 

(a) The submission of satisfactory evidence of the extension of the mandate of the key personnel of the 

project management unit PDCV-Riz to the Project (the coordinator, the administrative and financial 

manager, the procurement specialist and the specialist in agricultural entrepreneurship); and 

(b) Submission of satisfactory evidence of the extension of the mandate of the Steering Committee of the 

project "PDCV-RIZ" to the Project.  

5.2.3 Other conditions: the Borrower/Donee shall also submit, to the Fund’s satisfaction, within six 

(6) months following first disbursement: 

(i) The project’s updated administrative, accounting and financial management procedures 
manual;  

(ii) Evidence of recruiting an environmental monitoring/evaluation specialist, a rural 
infrastructure specialist (technical assistance), a procurement consultant and an accountant 

which have experience and qualifications have been found acceptable by the Fund, and 

(iii) The agreements signed between PACVEAR and its key partners (NGOs APRODEL, 
ADPP), COAJOQ and ADIC-Nafaia), which shall have been submitted beforehand to the 

Fund for approval. 

5.3. Compliance with Bank Policies 

This project complies with all applicable Bank policies. The project will be implemented within the 

framework of the Bank’s intervention strategy in Guinea-Bissau, as defined in CSP 2015-2019. 

VI. Recommendation 

Management recommends that the Board of Directors approve the proposal to award a UA 5.46 million TSF 

grant and extend a UA 3.04 million TSF loan and a UA 1.06 million ADF loan to the Republic of Guinea-

Bissau to finance the Value Chains, Agricultural and Rural Entrepreneurship Support Project (PACVEAR) 

described above, under the conditions set forth in this report. 





























































AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 

 

 

 
 

SPECIAL AGRO-INDUSTRIAL PROCESSING ZONES 

DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (PDZTA-BK):  

P-GN-AA0-023 

 

COUNTRY:  REPUBLIC OF GUINEA 
 

APPRAISAL REPORT 

 

 

 
 


 
PROGRAMME INFORMATION SHEET 

Client Information 

BORROWER:   Republic of Guinea 
 

EXECUTING AGENCY:  

 

Financing Plan 

Source Amount (MUA) Instrument 

 

ADF Loan 

 

2.99 

 

Loan 

ADF Grant 2.941 Grant 

TSF Loan 3.69 Loan 

Government of Guinea 2.42  

TOTAL COST 12.04 
 

 

ADF’s and TSF’s Key Financing Information 

 ADF TSF ( Pillar 1) 

 
Loan/Grant Currency 

 
UA 

 
UA 

Interest rate type* N/A N/A 

Interest rate spread* N/A N/A 

Commitment fee* 0.5% (5 basis points) 0.5% on 

undisbursed 

commitments 
Other fees* 0.75% (service charge) 0.75% (service 

charge) 

Tenor  40 years 20 years 

Grace period 10 years 7 years 

IRR (baseline scenario) : 24.21% NPV amount:  USD 109.17 million 

ERR (baseline scenario) : 26.97% NPV amount:  USD 123.03 million 

 

 

Timeframe – Main Milestones (expected) 

 

Concept note approval 

 

8 February 2019 

Programme approval 19 September 2019 

Effectiveness 25 November 2019 

Last disbursement 31 December 2024 

Closing date 15 March 2025 

 

  

                                                
1 Including UA 331,461 from cancelled resources 



 

 

 

iv 

 

PROGRAMME SUMMARY 

General Overview: The Republic of Guinea covers an area of 245,857 km² and had an 

estimated population of about 11,555,061 in 2017, comprising 51.61% women and 48.39% 

men. The rural population, estimated at 64.41%, derives most of its income (79%) from 

agricultural activities. There is, however, a marked contrast between the country’s economic 

situation and its natural potential. In addition to its mineral wealth, there are significant surface 

water (188 km3) resources and 72 km3 of groundwater. Estimated arable land potential is 6.2 

million hectares, of which 25% are cultivated annually. According to 1993 estimates, there were 

70,000 km² of rich and varied grazing land composed of almost 350 fodder species. The country 

has about 300 km of coastline with significant artisanal and industrial fisheries potential. 

However, Guinea’s imports of fresh food products are valued at almost USD 745 million 

(2016), most of which can be produced locally, in particular, cereals with an import value of 

USD 339 million in 2016. 

In order to reverse this trend and boost sustainable development, the Government has launched 

many development initiatives on the basis of growth sources and lessons learned from past 

decades, including Vision 2040, reflected in the Plan for Economic and Social Development 

(PNDES).  The PNDES is being implemented through the National Agricultural Development 

Policy (PNDA) whose implementing instrument is the National Agricultural Investment, Food 

and Nutrition Security Plan (PNIASAN). PDZTA is the 1st phase of a programme of ten (10) 

agrihubs under the PNIASAN and is intended to strengthen economic activity in the Boké and 

Kankan regions, particularly in agriculture, livestock, fisheries, forestry, industry, mines, 

handicrafts, trade, catering, hotels, banks, etc. Over 80% of these activities are carried out in 

the informal sector. Cereal production is very important as well as market garden and food 

crops. These regions are considered to be cereal basins and provide real opportunities for the 

supply of maize, the manufacture of cattle and poultry feed but also of fortified cereals to reduce 

chronic malnutrition. The establishment of storage facilities and a processing zone for 

aggregating cereal products, in particular maize and even sesame, might boost the agricultural 

sector in these two regions that lack commercial and road infrastructure and have limited 

opportunities for reaching outlets. Other crops such as mangoes and cashew nuts are becoming 

increasingly important. Since there is no processing unit in the region, most of the output is 

exported as raw products. 

The Bank’s intervention will contribute to the development of two (2) major regions in Guinea 

with an administrative area of about 103,333 km², of which 31,186 hectares lie in the Boké 

Region with an arable land area of about 2,720,000 ha, of which 800,000 ha lie in the Boké 

Region alone.  The programme will cover about 110,000 ha throughout the entire programme 

area (PA) and have a significant impact on about 220,000 direct beneficiaries and 670,000 

indirect beneficiaries, 50.7% of whom will be women. 

Needs Assessment: The programme area covers the two (2) regions of Boké and Kankan, 

whose hydro-agricultural and socio-economic potential warrants the establishment of a 

production and processing system for agricultural products which constitute these regions’ 

potential.  The programme is based on the establishment of agro-parks for the upstream 

processing of production and to serve as outlets for agricultural products, thereby contributing 

to an all-round drop in imports of agro-food products whose volume and amounts are 

approaching worrisome levels.  

 



 

 

 

v 

In accordance with its strategic directions, the country will contribute to the processing of 

agricultural products while improving productivity and production in growth sectors, resulting 

in a reduction in the imports of various agro-food products, with as main outcome the 

transformation of Guinean agriculture and improvement of food and nutrition security. 

Bank’s Value Added:  The PDZTA-BK’s objective is to provide Guinea with support to   

implement its agricultural transformation process by promoting private investments by 

establishing conditions and implementing a wide range of incentive measures that will attract 

national and international private sector investors to the Boké and Kankan agro-industrial parks.  

These conditions and measures concern: (i) the implementation of measures likely to create an 

enabling environment for the establishment of agro-industrial enterprises in the parks; (ii) the 

establishment of long-term smart infrastructure to facilitate the installation of private operators, 

their operations and transactions linked to their activities; and (iii) improved operation of 

growth-bearing sectors. This innovative approach was proposed as the flagship programme of 

the Bank’s 2016-2025 ‘Feed Africa’ Strategy  known under the flagship’s programme name of 

‘Special Agro-Industrial Processing Zones’ (SAPZs). Its proposed approach is to increase 

private investment in the agricultural sector through the creation of favourable conditions by 

central government, an area in which the Bank has both experience and expertise. It can also 

mobilise its domestic financial resources as well as additional resources from its technical and 

financial partners and private banks on the basis of its Triple A rating. The Bank has also 

acquired experience in setting up such operations in Togo, Ethiopia, DRC, Zambia and 

Tanzania.  It will, therefore, be able to roll out this operation with every chance of success.  

Knowledge Building and Management: Implementation of the Special Agro-Industrial 

Processing Zones Development Project (PDZTA-BK) will help to build a body of knowledge 

that could be replicated throughout the programme to develop ten (10) agricultural development 

hubs in the country including those of Boké and Kankan. This will concern knowledge on: 

(i) the most effective way of working with the private sector, either on the basis of a PPP 

formula or in the form of a non-sovereign operation (NSO) or a combination of the two 

formulae ; (ii) a multi-sector approach involving the intervention of sectors such as transport, 

energy, water and sanitation, agribusiness, agriculture, communication (NICT), education, 

health and nutrition, employment and trade; (iii) a combination of: (a) two of the Bank’s 

strategies, namely ‘Feed Africa’  and ‘Jobs for Youth’ to enhance the skills of youth, and (b) at 

least  four (04) flagship programmes , namely, the Special Agro-Industrial Processing Zones 

(SAPZs), Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT), Agricultural Value 

Chains (AVC), Post-Harvest Losses Reduction and ENABLE Youth programmes.  (iv) product 

processing, as a great challenge for which solutions will be sought under this programme; 

(v) employment in general and in the agricultural sector in particular, as a solution proposed in 

the Programme; and (vi) a contribution to the reduction of massive imports of agro-food 

products by the Continent, and by Guinea, in particular. 

 



 

 

 

vi 

Results-Based Logical Framework 

O
U

T

P
U

T

S
 Output 1 : Good governance and 

incentive measures established 

Number of agro-industrial hubs 

established and operational 
0 2 

 Programme Monitoring and 
Evaluation Reports 

Risks: slow acceptance by certain stakeholders 

could delay the programme’s implementation. 

                                                
2 The respective chronic malnutrition prevalence rates of 33.3% and 35.9% in the regions of Boké and Kankan will be reduced by at least 35%, i.e.  21.65 % in Boké and  
23.34 % in Kankan. 

REPUBLIC OF GUINEA: BOKÉ AND KANKAN SPECIAL AGRO-INDUSTRIAL PROCESSING ZONES DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (PDZTA-BK) 

Programme Goal: Promote the inclusive transformation of wealth-generating and job-creating agriculture through the reduction of imports of agro-food products by increasing 

private investment in the priority value chains. 

RESULTS CHAIN 

PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 

MEANS OF VERIFICATION 
RISKS/ 

MITIGATION MEASURES Indicator  
(including CSIs) 

Baseline 
Situation 

Target 

 LONG TERM 2015/2016 2025    

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Impact 1 : Contribute to the reduction of 

agro-food imports 
Value of agro-food imports MUSD 725  MUSD  575  

 Annual Report on Guinea’s 
economic performances 

 

Impact 2 : Contribute to the 

improvement of food and nutrition 

security  

Severe/moderate prevalence of food 

insecurity 
17.6%  15.0 % 

 MICS survey  
 Periodic report on Guinea’s 

socio-economic performances Chronic malnutrition prevalence rate (6-59 
months)2 

32.4 % 20.0% 

 MEDIUM TERM 2020 2025   

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

Outcome 1 : agricultural product 

processing time is improved 

Average agricultural product 

processing rate  3 %  12 % 
 Ministry of Agriculture and 

Rural Development’s Annual 

Report 

Risk: Risk of weak private sector mobilisation / 

Political risk that could influence the choice of 

options and result in slippage on implementation 

Mitigation Measure: the programme was 

designed on the basis of a platform of exchange 

of information with the private sector whose 

concerns are taken into account in the 

programme’s final formulation, a guarantee of 

SME involvement in, and ownership of, the 

programme. 

The political risk is mitigated by ongoing 

consultation with the Authorities, stakeholders 

and technical and financial partners to guide their 

choices in an objective manner and factor this 

constraint into the programme’s planning. 

Outcome 2 : Level of private 

investment in agriculture has 

increased 

Number of operational private small 

and medium-sized agricultural 

enterprises 

 3  10 
 Ministry of Agriculture’s 

Monitoring Report 

Outcome 3: the living conditions 

of people living in the PIA have 

improved 

Number of direct and indirect jobs 

created benefiting men/women (M/F). 

 

% of  children 6-23 months of age who 
receive a minimum acceptable diet in 

Boké / Kankan 

 

 

 

 

0/0 

 

 

 

0.5%/ 1.6% 

 

 18,000 / 

 7,000 

 

 

10% / 12% 

 Guinean Employment 
Promotion Agency’s 
(AGUIPE) Annual Report 

 

 MICS Survey 

 SHORT TERM 2019  2024   



 

 

 

vii 

Number of texts and codes prepared3 0  2 Mitigation: the programme was designed on the 

basis of systematic sensitisation and consultation 

to ensure its gradual ownership by all 

stakeholders 

Output 2 : Processing 

infrastructure completed 

Service infrastructure in the Boké 

agro-industrial park (site development 

lot) 

0 1 
 Monitoring and Evaluation 

Reports 
KW of transformers installed 0 155,705 

Length of fibre optic installed (Km) 0 50 

Output 3 : Programme steering, 

coordination, management and 

monitoring-evaluation carried out 

Programme’s physical implementation 

rate   

0 ≥ 95%  Quarterly Status and 
Monitoring and Evaluation 
Reports and Annual Activity 
Reports 

 Programme Mid-Term Review 
Report 

 Programme Completion 
Report 

Number of supervision missions  0 10 

Mid-term report is approved  0 1 

Completion Report is completed  0 1 

A
C

T
IV

IT
IE

S
 COMPONENTS INPUTS (million UAs) 

Component 1: Support for Governance and Incentive Measures: MUA 3.25  

Component 2 : Development of Agricultural Processing Support Infrastructure     MUA 7.51  

Component 3 : Programme Management and Coordination: MUA 1.28  

ADF Loan:  2.99 

ADF Grant:  2.944 

TSF Loan:  3.69 

Government:  2.42 

TOTAL :  12.04 

                                                
3 Land Code implementing texts; SESIA implementing texts;  
4 Including UA 331,461 from cancelled resources 



 

 

 

viii 

Indicative Programme Implementation Schedule 

 

No. ACTIVTIES 
2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 

Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 

1 ADF and TSF loan negotiations                     

2 Signature of Grant Agreement                      

3 Fulfilment of conditions precedent to 1st disbursement                      

4 Publication of General Procurement Notice                      

5 Recruitment of PMU staff                      

6 PDZTA-BK Launching workshop                      

7 Procurement of goods for PMU and agencies (vehicles, IT, etc.)                     

8 Updating of Programme baseline situation                       

9 Signing of agreements with partner structures                     

10 Preparation of Annual Work Plan (AWP)                      

11 Establishment of Agro-park infrastructure                      

12 Recruitment of contractors to build infrastructure                      

13 Installation of Agro-park internal infrastructure: BDs                      

14 Mobilisation of private sector/park asset holding companies                      

15 Recruitment of an agro-industrial specialist                      

16 Land zoning and fertilisation                     

17 Validation of Priority Value Chains                     

18 Selection of technical packages (TAAT)                     

19 Establishment of private sector installation mechanism                      

20 Establishment of production/processing system                     

21 Production, processing, transportation and marketing activities                     

22 Monitoring and evaluation                     

23 Annual external audit                     

24 Completion Report                     



 

 

1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE MANAGEMENT OF THE BANK 

GROUP TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS ON A PROGRAMME TO DEVELOP 

THE BOKÉ AND KANKAN SPECIAL AGRO-INDUSTRIAL PROCESSING ZONES 

Management submits this report and its recommendation on a proposed ADF loan of UA 2.99 

million, an ADF grant of UA 2.94 million (including UA 331,461 from cancelled resources) 

and a TSF loan of UA 3.69 million from the ADF country allocation to the Government of 

Guinea to finance the activities of the PDZTA_BK, the first phase of Guinea’s Agri-hub 

Development Programme. 

I. STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE 

1.1 Programme Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives 

1.1.1 The Programme is consistent with Pillar 2 of the National Plan for Economic and 

Social Development (PNDES) 2016-2020, i.e. sustainable and inclusive economic 

transformation that will result in the establishment of development hubs in Boké and Kankan 

based on agricultural potential which is one of the major assets of Guinea and these regions. It 

also has a strategic linkage with the three (3) other PNDES pillars: (i) Pillar 1: Promoting good 

governance for sustainable development by promoting good governance of the country’s 

agricultural wealth; (ii) Pillar 3: Inclusive development of the human capital by investing in it 

in order to take charge of the development of Guinea’s Special Agro-Industrial Processing 

Zones; and (iii) Pillar 4: sustainable management of natural capital by ensuring that agricultural 

development hubs are not established at the expense of natural resources.  

1.1.2 At sector level, the PNDES is implemented through the National Agricultural 

Development Policy (PNDA) whose implementing instrument is the National Agricultural 

Investment and Food and Nutrition Security Plan (PNIASAN) 2018-2025 which itself is in 

keeping with the Special Agro-Industrial Processing Zones Development Programme (PDZTA-

BK) through its priority activities which are the development of plant, animal and fisher y   

products. Therefore, PDZTA-BK is, , an operational means of focusing efforts on achieving a 

6% growth rate of agricultural value added and a central government budget allocation of 10% 

to the agricultural sector (Maputo Commitment). PDZTA-BK is, therefore, fully aligned with 

the country’s strategic objectives. 

1.2 Programme Alignment with Bank Policy 

1.2.1 This programme is considered as a priority by the Bank as part of its  strategic choice 

of transforming Guinean agriculture as reflected in Pillar 2 of the 2018-2022 CSP concerning 

the development of agricultural and industrial value chains. It is also consistent with the Bank’s 

second strategic thrust, its Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa (2016-2025) [the  

2016-2025 ‘Feed Africa’ Strategy], one of the Bank’s Hi-5s, which are to: (i) Light Up and 

Power Africa; (ii) Feed Africa; (iii) Industrialise Africa; (iv) Integrate Africa; and (v) Improve 

the quality of life for the people of Africa. The programme’s alignment with the Bank’s policy 

is further underscored by the fact that it will help to boost the transformation of Guinea’s 

agriculture, industrialisation and increase Guinea’s energy capacity.  More specifically, it is 

fully in keeping with the promotion of smart agriculture and product enhancement on every 

link in the priority value chains promoted under this operation. 

  



 

 

2 

 

1.3 Rationale for Bank’s Involvement 

1.3.1 Like most RMCs, Guinea imports most of its fresh food products which are valued at 
almost USD 745 million (2016), most of which can be produced locally, in particular, cereals 

with an import value of USD 339 million in 2016. However, Guinea has strong agricultural 

potential, particularly in terms of its abundant land and water resources, a 43,000 km2 

continental shelf and enjoys mild temperatures providing it with significant opportunities for 

the development of a varied range of agro-silvo-pastoral products and significant potential for 

the development of a blue economy. The Bank has defined 5 operational priorities for such a 

situation, one of whose four objectives is to reduce imports and make Africa a net exporter. 

Guinea has, therefore, followed in the Bank’s footsteps with different strategies aimed at 

addressing this situation by developing Guinea’s agricultural potential, by establishing long-

term infrastructure in the areas of transport, energy, agricultural production, marketing and 

processing with private sector involvement in the sector. 

1.3.2 The Bank’s interventions, through the PDZTA-BK, which is the first phase of a 
programme of ten (10) agro-hubs, are consistent with the Bank’s CSP (2018-2022) and Hi-5s. 

The programme will help to effectively boost economic development since it is consistent with   

the Bank’s strategies by consolidating the role of the private sector and communities in rural 

development, a guarantee of inclusiveness in Africa, and in Guinea, in particular.  It was, 

moreover, designed on the basis of complementarities with ongoing operations and those under 

preparation, especially those relating to implementation of the Boké-Québo Road Project and 

the Support Programme for the Transformation of Guinean Agriculture and Youth Agricultural 

Entrepreneurship (PATAG-EAJ), with a view to seeking synergies. This programme will, 

therefore, seek to leverage the ongoing actions in the Boké and Kankan Regions to ensure the 

operation’s relevance and effectiveness. 

1.4 Aid Coordination 

1.4.1 Development aid is coordinated by the Government of Guinea through the Coordination 
and Consultation Framework (CCF) at the level of the Permanent Secretariat at the Office of the 

Prime Minister. All the TFPs align their operations with those of the Guinean Government. While 

implementing the PNDES 2016-2020, the Government affirmed its will to strengthen aid 

coordination by setting up consultation mechanisms. In addition to the Coordination and 

Consultation Framework (CCF), which is the strategic coordination forum between the Government 

and the TFP, a Technical Monitoring Committee (TMC) has been set up to strengthen inter-sector 

coordination and Thematic Dialogue Groups (TDGs) established, bringing together TFP and 

government representatives at sector level. The ‘rural development, food security and environment’ 

thematic group is chaired by the World Bank representing the TFP and the Ministry of Agriculture 

for the Government. 

1.4.2 The Bank, through COGN, is an active member of the CCF and some TDGs. The key 
ongoing programmes supported by the TFPs with an Agricultural Value Chain (AVC) 

component with which the PDZTA must seek synergies are contained in Volume 2. These 

are: (i) the Agri-hub G Agricultural Development Support Programme (PADAG –Abu Dhabi 

Fund); (ii) the Family Farming, Resilience and Markets Programme in Upper and 

Middle Guinea (AgriFARM - IFAD) ; (iii) the World Bank’s Guinea Integrated Agricultural 

Development Programme (PDAIG); (iv) the WB’s Agricultural Sector Support Programme 

(PASAG); (v) the World Bank’s Enclave Programme for Agribusiness Development in the 

Boké Region, being prepared for 2019; (vi) the JICA (Japan) Rice Sub-Sector Technical 

Assistance Operation; (vii) the USAID Guinea Agricultural Services (GAS) Programme; and 

(viii)  the Programme for the Socio-Economic Integration of Guinean Youth (INTEGRA-ITC). 



 

 

3 

 

1.4.3 The programme is also designed in phases and on the basis of complementarities with 
the Bank’s programmes, in particular, the Boké-Québo Road Construction Programme with a 

rural roads component for access to agricultural production zones and the Support Programme   

for the Transformation of Guinean Agriculture and Youth Agricultural Entrepreneurship  

(PATAG-EAJ). This first phase that only involves the Bank will be followed by others, 

gradually mobilising several technical and financial partners (TFP). 

SECTOR OR SUB-SECTOR 
IMPORTANCE 

GDP Exports Labour  

[Rural Sector] [23%] 5% (2015) 80% 

STAKEHOLDERS – ANNUAL PUBLIC EXPENDITURE 

(2010-2012 TPIP AVERAGE IN MILLION UAs)  

Government Donors 

 Name Amounts Period 

53 million UAs World Bank 308.2 2013-2023 

(per year: 2010-2013) AfDB 247.55 2018-2022 

 IFAD 141.80 2013-2024 

 IDB 29.40 2018-2025 

 ABEDA 44.00 2017-2021 

 AFD 45.93 2017-2022 

 USAID 30.00 2017-2022 

 Abu Dhabi Fund 33.70 2018-2024 

Level of Aid Coordination 

Existence of thematic working groups No 

Existence of an overall sector programme No 

AfDB’s aid coordination role Strengthened with COGN 

II. PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION  

2.1 Programme Components 

2.1.1 The Boké and Kankan Special Agro-Industrial Processing Zones Development 

Programme (PDZSTA-BK) is the first phase of a programme to develop ten (10) agrihubs. Its 

goal is to contribute to the reduction of food imports and improve Guinea’s food and nutrition 

security by establishing private sector-driven agro-industrial development hubs. The 

programme will be implemented through the following three (3) components: (i) Establishment 

of governance in the Special Agro-Industrial Processing Zones (APZ); (ii) Development of 

processing and access infrastructure; and (iii) Programme coordination and management.  

 

2.1.2 The programme will build on production activities as well as those concerning the 

establishment of access and marketing infrastructure for operations that are starting up or being 

prepared for 2019, upstream of the agro-industrial parks, for the supply of raw materials in the 

first phase. In Boké Region, these programmes are the Bank’s PTAG-EAJ programme (UA 

8.99 million), the Bank (UA 40.04 million) and European Union (EUR 20.38 million) Boké-

Québo Programme and the World Bank’s Enclave Programme for Agribusiness Development 

(USD 50.00 million).  In the Kankan region, these are the IFAD AgriFarm (USD 61 million) 

ABEDA (USD 20 million) and OFID (USD15.00 million) Programmes.  Additional financing 

is, therefore, required in equivalent amounts of USD 137.57 and USD 96 million for the Boké 

and Kankan regions. The first phase of the programme will not be exposed to the risk of lack 

of agro-park production or supply if the actions are well coordinated between the different 

sectors and technical and financial partners. 

 



 

 

4 

 

2.1.3 The key activities of these components are summarised in Table 2.1 below: 

 
Table 2.1  

SUMMARY OF PROGRAMME COMPONENTS 

No. COMPONENT 

TOTAL 

ESTIMATED 

COST 

COMPONENT DESCRIPTIONS 

A. 

Support for 

Agro-Park 

Management  

Governance and 

Incentive 

Measures 

UA 3.25 

million 

(27.02%) 

A1. Establishment of a governance system for APZ management 

 Support for the establishment of agribusiness hubs (Agro-parks) 

 Support for the preparation of agro-park specifications 

 Feasibility study for new APZ in Guinea 

A2. Support for APZ management governance 

 Support for the preparation of implementing texts for the Land Law 
and operationalisation of the one-stop-shop for land registration 

 Support for the preparation of legal, regulatory and operational 
framework for the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment 
(SESA) 

 Support for the structures in charge of quality standards and norms as 
well as food fortification with micronutrients 

 Technical assistance for the implementation of measures to promote 
private investment in agro-parks (instruments, incentives, etc.) 

 Holding of fora  to promote APZ investments 

B. 

Development of 

Agricultural 

Processing 

Support 

Infrastructure 

UA 7.51 

million 

(62.36%) 

Establishment of servicing infrastructure for the Boké & Kankan 

agro-parks: 

 Site development works and roads and other networks (roads, DWS, 
sanitation, electricity, telecoms, enclosure, etc.), DWS station, WTPP, 
etc. 

 Construction of buildings: (i) administrative and residential block; (ii) 
services unit (training centre, conference centre, laboratories, etc.); (iii) 
social community infrastructure unit (school, health centre, guest 
house, etc.); 

 Works on laying the LV and MV power transmission and fibre optic 
lines 

 Assistance for the establishment of a business incubator (service 
provider) 

 Works implementation, control and monitoring studies 

 The establishment of a single window for start-ups in Kankan 

 Digitalization of information and transactions 

 Coordination with a Chinese Co. Winning, in establishing corridors for 
development of aggregation centers from the agro-industrial park to 
Kamsar barge port. 

 Jobs promotion for the youth & women through enterprise incubators 
for youth (Enable Youth Program), and women (AFAWA) 

C. 
Programme 

Management and 

Coordination 

UA 1.24 

million 

(10.63 %) 

(i) Coordination of programme activities, (ii) administrative, accounting 

and financial management, (iii) procurement of goods, works and 

services, (iv) establishment of a communication plan, and (v) monitoring 

and evaluation of programme implementation 

2.2 Technical Solutions Retained and Other Alternatives Explored 

2.2.1 The PDZTA-BK’s objective is to approach the key issue of the transformation of 

Guinean agriculture, through an approach that puts the private sector in a leadership role 

while the public sector attempts to create incentive conditions that are likely to attract 

private investors to fully developed and serviced agro-industrial parks. It is necessary to 

adopt an agricultural development approach based on Special Agro -Industrial Processing 

Zones (APZ). The APZs for spatial development initiatives are based on agriculture and 

designed to concentrate agricultural processing activities in areas of high agricultural 

potential in order to boost productivity and integrate the production, processing and 

marketing of a number of agricultural crops. These initiatives may or may not enjoy Special 

Economic Zone status. They contribute to the operationalisation of the ‘agricultural value 



 

 

5 

 

chain’ concept by giving it content, i.e. : (i) agricultural production sites in compliance with 

the required standards through the Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation 

(TAAT) Programme which proposes cutting-edge technological innovations adapted to 

production conditions; (ii) agro-industrial parks for the processing of raw materials from 

the production sites serving as outlets for agricultural output; (iii) establishment of  key 

physical and smart infrastructure for connections to markets and major mass consumption 

centres countrywide and outside the country.  In some cases, they are also known as Agro-

Industrial, Agribusiness parks, Mega Supply Parks, agro-hubs and agro-clusters, etc. 

2.2.2 The approach is integrated and pragmatic, innovative and inclusive in all the 

agricultural value chain links and is wealth-creating through the jobs it generates but also   

because it contains foreign exchange outflows due to a reduction in imports of agro-food 

products. It is the focus of efforts of all the other sectors that contribute to the success of 

agricultural development, in particular, the industrial, transport, energy, water and NICT 

sectors, including within the Bank. It also incorporates the interventions of the other 

development partners in a systematic bid to seek synergy-creating complementarity.  In the 

case of the PDZTA-BK, this concerns the World Bank, IFAD, the European Union, AFD 

and the Abu Dhabi Fund. 

2.2.3 The APZ approach also focuses on support from the key actors of promising sub-

sectors through the implementation of a capacity building programme to develop specific 

advanced skills to meet the programme’s requirements. 

2.2.4 In the case of the PDZTA-BK, the main crops and stock farming activities concern 

(i) cash crops such as cashews, oil palms, sesame and soya; (ii) food products such as rice, 

fonio, groundnuts, maize, potatoes, yams and cassava ; (iii) fruit such as oranges, mangoes 

and pineapples; (iv) market garden products, in particular, tomatoes, onions, okra and 

chillies; (v) poultry and sheep breeding; (vi) fishery products from fish farming; (vi) non-

wood forest products such as honey, leaves, wild seeds and fruit, oils and resins, infusions, 

etc. 

2.2.5 The APZ technical solutions break with the traditional approach adopted to 

improve productivity, production and sales without specifying the content . 

Table 2.2  

ALTERNATIVE SOLUTIONS EXPLORED AND REASONS FOR REJECTION  

ALTERNATIVE 

SOLUTION 
BRIEF DESCRIPTION REASONS FOR REJECTION 

Traditional approach for 
agricultural programmes 

Approach aimed at improving productivity, 
production and sales  

This approach has no value chain content 
and is, therefore, constrained by the reality 
on the ground concerning the key issues of 
processing, markets and outlets. 

Mono-sector agriculture-
based approach 

Sector approach based solely on agricultural 
activities  

It does not integrate the other development 
sectors that impact on agricultural 
development and thus constitute factors for 

that sector’s success.  

Mainly use of Bank’s 
public resources 

The programmes are mainly financed from 
the Bank’s and Government’s public 
resources 

AVC financing needs exceed the Bank’s 
public resources for they include private 
sector financing, co-financing by 
development partners and non-sovereign 
operations. 

Extension of 

technological innovations 
using the traditional 
method of training and 
visits to producers 

Approach based on regular visits to producers  

in accordance with a specific schedule and a 
supervisory framework with tools such as the 
contact group (CG), observation point (OP) 
and the system study point (SSP) 

In addition to being cumbersome and costly, 

this method has shown its limitations in the 
past and is less effective is less effective 
than the client-supplier system that focuses 
on skill development in all the relevant 
areas of activity. 



 

 

6 

 

2.3 Programme Type 

The Special Agro-Industrial Processing Development Programme (PDZTA-BK) is a public 

investment programme aimed at creating the required conditions for increasing private 

investment in value added creating sub-sectors, especially regarding agricultural product 

processing, the supply of inputs and provision of agricultural and marketing services.  This 

programme will be implemented in several phases on the basis successive ADF allocations and 

the mobilisation of additional donor resources. 

2.4 Programme Cost and Financing Arrangements 

2.4.1 Programme Cost: The total programme cost for the ten (10) Special Agro-Industrial 

Processing Zones (SAPZ) is estimated at around UA 550 million (about USD 758 million), the 

first phase of which was appraised at UA 120.84 million (GNF 1,535.75 billion), including a 

pilot phase.  The total cost of the pilot phase which fully covers Boké and partly Kankan, is 

estimated at UA 12.04 million (GNF 152.92 billion), excluding taxes and customs duties. These 

costs comprise UA 7.19 million (GNF 91.32 billion) in foreign exchange and UA 4.85 million 

in local currency (GNF 61.65 billion). They include provisions for physical contingencies and 

financial contingencies which are respectively estimated at an average of 3% and 4 %.  The 

provision for financial contingencies was estimated on the basis of current and forecast average 

annual inflation rates for respective local currency and foreign exchange costs of 8.0 % and 

1.8 %. The provision for physical contingencies is estimated at between 0 and 7 %. A summary 

of the programme’s estimated cost by component and expenditure category is presented in the 

Tables below, including the detailed costs. The first phase of the programme will concern the 

establishment of APZ governance and the total or partial completion of the respective agro-

parks of Boké and Kankan.  The programme will be rolled out gradually, as and when the 

additional resources are mobilised.  The pilot and first two phases will cover Boké and Kankan. 

Table 2.3 

Summary of estimated costs by component 

COMPONENTS 
GNF  billion  UA  thousand % 

F.E. 

% 

BC L.C. F.E. Total L.C. F.E. Total 

A. ESTABLISHMENT OF APZ 

GOVERNANCE 11.44 28.37 39.82 900.51 2 232.32 3 132.83 71 27 

B. DEV. OF PROCESS. AND ACCESS 

INFRASTRUCTURE 34.57 55.26 89.83 2 720.05 4 347.93 7 067.98 62 62 

 Agro-park infrastructure 34.57 55.26 89.83 2 720.05 4 347.93 7 067.98 62 62 

D. PROGRAMME MANGEMENT AND 

COORDINATION 
12.42 3.37 15.79 977.06 265.25 1 242.31 21 11 

TOTAL BASE COST 58.43 87.00 145.43 4 597.62 6 845.51 11 443.12 60 100 

 Physical Contingencies 1.24 1.98 3.22 97.34 156.01 253.35 62 2 

 Financial Contingencies 1.98 2.34 4.32 156.02 183.95 339.98 54 3 

TOTAL COST OF 1st  PHASE 61.65 91.32 152.97 4 850.98 7 185.47 12 036.45 60 105 

 
  



 

 

7 

 

 

Table 2.4 

Summary of programme costs by expenditure category 

COMPONENTS 
GNF billion  UA thousand  % 

F.E

. 

% 

BC L.C. F.E. Total L.C. F.E. Total 

I. INVESTMENT COSTS 46.57 84.05 130.63 3 664.56 6 613.57 10 278.13 64 90 

 A. WORKS 32.18 48.26 80.44 2 531.73 3 797.59 6 329.32 60 55 

  Infrastructure 32.18 48.26 80.44 2 531.73 3 797.59 6 329.32 60 55 

 B. GOODS 0.48 1.50 1.97 37.39 117.92 155.30 76 1 

  Vehicles 0.12 0.66 0.78 9.21 52.17 61.37 85 1 

  Equipment 0.36 0.84 1.19 28.18 65.75 93.93 70 1 

 C. SERVICES 13.92 34.29 48.21 1 095.45 2 698.06 3 793.50 71 33 

  Training 4.58 5.60 10.18 360.53 440.65 801.18 55 7 

  Technical assistance 0.93 17.73 18.66 73.43 1 395.17 1 468.60 95 13 

  Studies 3.48 6.46 9.94 273.74 508.37 782.10 65 7 

  Contractual services 4.48 3.67 8.15 352.50 288.41 640.90 45 6 

  Audit 0.45 0.83 1.28 35.25 65.46 100.71 65 1 

II. RECURRENT COSTS 11.86 2.95 14.81 933.06 231.94 1 165.00 20 10 

 A. PERSONNEL 7.71 - 7.71 606.93 - 606.93 - 5 

 B. TRAVEL ALLOWANCES 1.07 0.36 1.43 84.29 28.10 112.38 25 1 

 

C. MAINTENANCE. UPKEEP AND 

REPAIRS 0.28 0.73 1.00 21.77 57.13 78.90 72 1 

  Vehicles 0.22 0.65 0.87 17.17 51.50 68.67 75 1 

  Equipment 0.06 0.07 0.13 4.61 5.63 10.24 55 - 

 D. GENERAL OPERATING COST 2.80 1.86 4.66 220.07 146.71 366.79 40 4 

TOTAL BASE COSTS 58.43 87.00 145.43 4 597.62 6 845.51 11 443.12 60 100 

 Physical contingencies 1.24 1.98 3.22 97.34 156.01 253.35 62 2 

 Financial contingencies 1.98 2.34 4.32 156.02 183.95 339.98 54 3 

TOTAL COST OF FIRST PHASE 61.65 91.32 152.97 4 850.98 7 185.47 12 036.45 60 105 

 

Table 2.5  

Expenditure Schedule by Component (in thousand UAs) 

COMPONENTS 
PROGRAMME YEARS Total 

2020 2021 2022 2023  

A. ESTABLISHMENT OF APC GOVERNANCE 2 001.95 736.74 380.08 131.78 3 250.55 

B. DEV.  OF PROCESSING & ACCESS INFRASTRUCTURE 2 441.89 2 310.04 2 753.99  7 505.92 

 Agro-park infrastructure 2 441.89 2 310.04 2 753.99  7 505.92 

D. MANAGEMENT AND COORDINATION 304.76 321.16 325.05 329.02 1 279.98 

TOTAL COST OF FIRST PHASE 4 748.60 3 367.94 3 459.12 460.80 12 036.45 

2.4.2 Financing Arrangements: The programme will be financed by an ADF loan of UA 2.99 

million (24.80%), an ADF grant of UA 2.94 million (24.40 %, ncluding UA 331,461 from 

cancelled resources), a TSF loan of UA 3.69 million (30.70%) and a contribution by the 

Government of Guinea equivalent to UA 2.42 million. The breakdown of expenditure financing 

by source of financing and in accordance with the list of goods and services is presented in 

Table 2.6 below. 

Table 2.6  

Programme financing plan  

SOURCES 
(Billion GNFs) ('000 UAs) 

% 
L.C. F.E. Total L.C. F.E. Total 

ADF Loan 15.47 22.53 38.00 1 216.98 1 773.02 2 990.00 24.8 

ADF Grant 11.75 25.62 37.37 924.36 2 015.64 2 940.00
5
 24.4 

TSF Loan 18.14 28.75 46.90 1 427.56 2 262.44 3 690.00 30.7 

Government of Guinea 16.29 14.42 30.71 1 282.08 1 134.37 2 416.45 20.1 

TOTAL 61.65 91.32 152.97 4 850.98 7 185.47 12 036.45 100.0 

                                                
5 Including UA 331,461 from cancelled resources 



 

 

8 

 

2.5 Programme Target Area and Beneficiaries 

The Special Agro-Industrial Processing Zones Development Programme (PDZTA) covers two 

regions and the Bank’s intervention will contribute to the development of two (2) major regions 

in Guinea with an administrative area of about 103,333 km², of which 31,186 hectares lie in the 

Boké Region with an arable land area of about 2,720,000 ha, about 800,000 ha of which lie 

solely in the Boké Region.  The programme will cover about 110,000 ha throughout the entire 

programme area (PA) and have a considerable impact on about 220,000 direct beneficiaries and 

670,000 indirect beneficiaries, of whom 50.7% will be women. It concerns the Kankan Region 

in Upper Guinea where several small and medium-sized agro-food enterprises have been set up 

including the Guinea Fruit Corporation, Maden Mining Ltd, Diaoune Agro-Industry and the 

Coopération des professionnels agricoles de Guinée (Guinean agricultural professional 

organisation) (CPA-G) and the Boké Region where agro-food SMEs are also developing. 

Economically, the region is very dynamic as a result of the mining of minerals by Chinese and 

American companies.  

The Bank’s intervention will contribute to the development of two (2) major regions in Guinea 

with an administrative area of about 103,333 km², of which 31,186 hectares lie in the Boké 

Region with an arable land area of about 2,720,000 ha, of which 800,000 ha lie solely in the 

Boké Region.  The programme will cover about 110,000 ha throughout the entire programme 

area (PA) and have a considerable impact on about 220,000 direct beneficiaries and 670,000 

indirect beneficiaries, 50.7% of whom will be women 

2.6 Participatory Process for Programme Identification, Design and 
 Implementation 

2.6.1 A consultation-based participatory process was the guiding principle for the project’s 

design. It was adopted for discussions and consultations with officials from the Ministries 

concerned (agriculture, industry, transport, energy, trade, etc.), public administrations, the 

private sector,  local authorities (of Kankan and Boké), producer organisations, civil society 

and TFP (World Bank, AFD, IFAD, European Union, Chinese and Japanese Cooperation and 

the Abu Dhabi Fund). It was implemented in the following stages: (i) preparation and proposal 

by the country team of terms of reference for the programme feasibility studies; (ii) preparation 

by the Bank team of a report on the establishment of a Programme Preparation Facility (PPF); 

(iii) preparation of the PPF by the Bank until its approval by the country team; (iv) broad-based 

consultation of stakeholders during project appraisal in Conakry, Boké and Kankan, especially 

during the assessment of environmental safeguard measures required for environmental 

categorisation and publication of the summary of the Strategic Environmental and Social 

Assessment (SESA) Report; (v) continuation of consultations during the appraisal mission 

during field visits to Kankan and Boké, consultations with all the stakeholders and key actors 

(civil society, public administration, private sector and technical and financial partners) in 

Conakry. 

2.6.2 This proposal is also a response to strong demand from grassroots communities, due 

to inconsistencies between the potential of the regions concerned and weak agricultural 

development in the zones concerned. This participatory process will continue during the 

programme’s implementation through: (i) a steering structure that will bring together  

representatives of all parties, (ii) capacity building for institutions and communities on the 

participatory process, (iii) community involvement in the implementation of activities; and (iv) 

the establishment of a programme results-based monitoring and evaluation system.  In addition, 

the Bank’s Country Office in Guinea will constantly ensure that the consultation mechanism is 

operational throughout the programme’s implementation. 



 

 

9 

 

2.7 Bank Group Experience, Lessons Reflected in Project Design 

2.7.1 The PDZTA’s formulation incorporates the lessons learned from the Bank’s previous 

and ongoing operations in Guinea and through the regional member countries taking into 

account issues concerning portfolio performance and the country’s fragility. These lessons were 

reiterated in the most recent July 2018 review following which portfolio performance was 

considered to be satisfactory.  However, the review noted that efforts should be continued in 

order to improve: (i) the effectiveness period (11 months instead of the Bank’s recommended 

6 months); (ii) mobilisation of programme management teams; (iii) procurement periods 

considered to be too long; (iv) mobilisation of counterpart funds; (v) the programme personnel 

performance monitoring system  by the systematic establishment of performance contracts and 

renewal of staff contracts on the basis of the results of the annual staff evaluation; and (vi) the 

time taken to update the baseline situation and establish the monitoring and evaluation system. 

2.7.2 The Portfolio Performance Improvement Plan (2018 PPIP) also recommended that   

specific measures be taken to accelerate the programme implementation rate.  This 

recommendation, which has been  taken into account in this proposal,  is reflected in: (i) the 

maintenance of stakeholder dialogue and close monitoring by the Bank’s Country Office 

(COGN) in order to mitigate risks relating to delays in the PDZTA-BK implementation and 

administration period and process and the fulfilment of conditions precedent to effectiveness; 

(ii) improvement of quality at entry by using advance procurement action for preparing bidding 

documents and management tools (Manual of Accounting and Financial Procedures-MAFP, 

Computerised Accounting and Financial Management System – SIGCF, and of monitoring and 

evaluation prior to Programme commencement; and (iii) capacity building for programme 

management teams in procurement and financial management. It is also worth noting that the 

ongoing portfolio has been considerably rejuvenated in recent years, that the average age for 

operations fell from 5.5 years in 2011 to 2.7 in 2017 and that it contained no problematic 

programme (PP) or potentially problematic programme (PPP) in 2017.  

2.7.3 The PDZTA design, therefore, took into account the lessons learned from previous 

operations and incorporated in the 2018 PPIP in order to meet the design and implementation 

criteria contained in Presidential Directive 002/2015. 

Table 2.7  

BANK EXPERIENCE AND LESSONS LEARNED 

Lessons learned Actions integrated in the design  

Need to mitigate risks  concerning delays in the 
PDZTA-BK implementation and administration 
period and process and the fulfilment of conditions 
precedent to effectiveness 

Maintenance of stakeholder dialogue and close monitoring by the 
Bank’s Country Office (COGN) 

Need to mobilise project management teams at 

programme commencement 

It will be required under the Programme’s ‘other conditions’ 

Need to reduce procurement periods considered to 
be too long 

This topic was the subject of lengthy exchanges with the Guinean 
Authorities which gave guarantees in this regard 

Need to regularly mobilise counterpart funds  Same as previous point 

The programme staff performance monitoring 
system  by the systematic establishment of 
performance contracts and renewal of staff contracts 

based on the results of the annual staff evaluation 

This provision will be systematically applied during the programme’s 
implementation 

The time taken to update the baseline situation and 
establish the monitoring and evaluation system 

The programme baseline situation will be updated during the 

1st quarter of the 1st year of the programme’s implementation 



 

 

10 

 

2.8 Key Performance Indicators 

The programme performance measurement indicators are listed below 
 

Table 2.8  

KEY PROGRAMME PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT INDICATORS 

LIST OF INDICATORS 
Impact Indicator 

Value of agro-food imports 
Severe/ moderate food insecurity prevalence 
Chronic malnutrition prevalence (6-59 months) 
Incidence of poverty in the Programme Area (PA) 

Outcome Indicators 

Average agricultural product processing rate 

Number of operational  private agricultural small and medium-sized enterprises 

Number of direct and indirect jobs created that benefit men/women (M/W) 

Number of direct and indirect jobs created that benefit men/women (M/W)  

% of children 6–23 months of age who receive a minimum acceptable diet in Boké / Kankan 

Output Indicators 

Number of agro-industrial hubs established and operational 

Number of texts and Codes prepared 

Kilometres of roads and tracks constructed/rehabilitated 

Number of APC constructed and equipped 

Agro-park area (ha) serviced benefiting M/W 

Number of hydraulic structures constructed 

KW of transformers installed 

Number of SMEs/OPAs benefiting from programme support services 

Number of farmers benefiting from agricultural insurance 

Number of actors using alternative sources of energy 

Number of crops whose certified seeds are produced locally 

Number of women/young people receiving support for the processing of food and nutrition education activities 
Programme physical implementation rate   

Number of supervision missions fielded by the Bank   

Mid-term report is approved  

III. PROGRAMME FEASIBILITY 

3.1 Economic and Financial Performance 

3.1.1 The programme is designed to have direct spinoffs in terms of crops promoted and 

developed through private investments to establish agribusinesses, i.e. about 100 units per agro-

industrial park in Boké, with a total of 200 agribusinesses in under ten (10) years in these two 

regions. In addition to the spinoffs from private enterprises established in the Boké and Kankan 

agro-industrial parks, significant income will be earned by the beneficiaries of the agricultural 

production sites, also developed and from which enterprises will be supplied with raw materials 

concerning the crops and stock farming activities already mentioned in Section 2.2, i.e. cashew 

nuts, oil palms, sesame, soya, rice, fonio, groundnuts, maize, potatoes, yams, cassava, fruit 

(oranges, mangoes and pineapples), tomatoes, onions, okra and chillies, poultry, sheep, 

fishery products, non-wood forest products such as honey, leaves, wild seeds and fruit, oils 

and resins and infusions, etc..  However, the analysis does not take into account revenue 

generated at farm level given that this first phase of the programme only concerns agro-

industrial parks. 

3.1.2  In addition to these spinoffs, the programme is designed to generate other benefits 

such as: (i) the creation of temporary and permanent jobs as a result of the programme’s 

achievements estimated at 500 per processing unit (i.e. 10,000, for the agro-industrial units 

alone).  



 

 

11 

 

3.1.3 Financial Analysis: Much of the above-mentioned spinoffs does not concern 

commercial transactions or is not even tangible and is not suitable for an analysis of financial 

performance on the basis of existing markets.  Under these conditions, it was not considered 

relevant to factor it in to a quantitative analysis on the basis of a production or profitable   

business model approach.  It was, however, possible, to carry out a cost/benefit analysis of 

different agro-industrial enterprise and agricultural production models (FARMOD). 

3.1.4 With regard to agro-industrial enterprises, a scenario is proposed on the basis of three 

(3) types of processing unit, i.e. small, medium and large enterprises with respective 

investments of USD 2, 5 and 11 million each in accordance with the average investment profiles 

for this type of model.  Under these conditions, annual turnover per enterprise is USD640,000, 

1.6 million and 3.52 million respectively for small, medium and large-sized units from the 5th 

year over an operating period of about 20 years. 

3.1.5 As regards agricultural crops on production sites for farmers and suppliers of agro-

industrial park enterprises, FARMOD type production models and a cost-benefit model 

(input/output, with or without programme implementation) will be applied over a 20-year 

operating period. 

3.1.6 The financial analysis results were: (i) a financial impact of over USD109 million per 

year from the 5th year of operation over a 20-year period in accordance with similar types of 

operation, depending on the investment life cycle. This implies that the financial impacts of the 

programme over the operational period exceed the cost of investments required to finance it ; 

(ii) a cost/benefit ratio of 2.27, where the benefits are higher than the cost of investments; 

(iii) an internal rate of return of 24.21 %, which is higher than the opportunity cost of capital 

(the cost of tying up financial resources for investments under the programme), estimated at 

12 %.  On the basis of these results, it may be concluded that the programme has a rate of return 

profile that financially justifies the cost of its investments. 

3.1.7 Economic Analysis: The economic analysis was carried out using the reference price 

method, i.e. prices under conditions of economic efficiency in accordance with the Pareto 

optimum. It was also carried out by comparing the ‘no programme’ and ‘with programme 

implementation’ situations of production models used in the financial analysis. In this model, 

tradeable goods are those likely to be the subject of commercial transactions outside the country 

(FOB port CIF to port of Marseille).  Under these conditions, the reference prices for these 

products (economic prices) are estimated on the basis of the ex-ante equilibrium of these crops 

that will give the export parity price at farm gate.  Labour was economically valued at 65 % of 

its financial value of USD3/day to factor in the inelasticity of demand for labour in the country 

in general and in the programme area, in particular. 

3.1.8 On the basis of realistically defined scenarios, the programme’s economic rate of return 

(ERR) was estimated at 26.97%, with a cost-benefit ratio of 2.38. As a result, the Programme’s 

overall rate of return may be considered to be satisfactory in light of these results. 

  



 

 

12 

 

 

IRR (baseline scenario) : 24.21% NPV amount :  USD109.17 million 

ERR (baseline scenario) : 26.97% NPV amount :  USD 123.03 million 

3.1.9 Sensitivity Analysis: The sensitivity tests on the basis of a reduction in production 

prices measured the stability of financial and economic performance indicators. The tests showed 

that it is necessary to lower prices to 39.17% (break-even point or switching value) to cancel out 

the additional benefits generated respectively at the economic and financial level, with IRR and 

ERR equal to the opportunity cost of capital, i.e. 12 %.  This test shows that the programme’s rate 

of return profile is robust, although it was not carried out on all the model’s endogenous values.  

However, the price variable is the most important and is the only one that is outside the 

Programme’s management and operation. A summary of the sensitivity analysis is presented in 

the technical annexes, page 72 of volume II of this report. 

3.2 Environmental and Social Impact 

3.2.1 Environment: The PDZTA has been classified in Category 1 and, at this stage of its 

formulation process, subjected to a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment that was 

posted on the following link: https://esa.afdb.org/document/etudes-dimpact-environnemental-

et-social-21., on Monday, May 06, 2019.  Category 1 programmes are likely to have significant 

or irreversible environmental and/or social impacts or severely impact the environmental or 

social impacts considered by the Bank or borrowing country to be sensitive. Boké Department 

is located in the administrative region of Boké which, itself, is located in Maritime or Lower 

Guinea. With the presence of the Atlantic coast, Lower Guinea is the alluvial basin for major 

coastal rivers such as the Kogon, Fatala, Konkouré and Kolente Rivers. The area is also covered 

by mangrove swamps (Rizophora racemose and Avicennia nitida). This natural region of Lower 

Guinea is also home to the country’s main mining centres: the Guinean Bauxite Company 

(CBG) in Boké, ACG in Fria and the Kindia Bauxite Company (Débélé), etc. 

3.2.2 With regard to potential sites mainly for the PDZA-BK’s anchor programmes, in 

particular the irrigation schemes in Boké Prefecture, the Denken plains covering an area of 

almost 600 ha located in Kolaboui rural municipality and the Kapatchez plains covering about 

9,200 ha located in Kamsar rural community provide significant development opportunities. In 

the Boké Administrative Region, there are also the 9500 hectare Mankountan Plain, the 4,000 

hectare Monchon Plain and the 6,000 hectare Koba Plain. 

3.2.3 Kankan Department, the programme’s target area, is located in Upper Guinea. This 

natural region covers the entire north-east and centre of Guinea’s territory. It is a region of 

plains and savannah, located between 200 and 400 metres of altitude. The Niger River and its 

tributaries have cut moist terraced flatlands into it. 

3.2.4 In relation to the programme, large sedimentary plains in Upper Guinea border the 

main water courses and cover vast areas: the Niger plains in Faranah, Kouroussa, Siguiri, the 

Milo plains, the Fié plains and the Banié –Tinkisso plains. In Kankan prefecture, the following 

sites have significant irrigation potential:  the Bafèle plain with about 11,000 ha of irrigable 

land located in Moribaya rural municipality and the Samanka plain with 800 ha located in Tinti 

Oulen rural municipality. 

3.2.5 Climate Change: Guinea, at the gateway to the Sahel, is highly exposed to climate 

change. According to 2,100 climate projections, temperatures will rise throughout the country 

and, more specifically: (i) in Middle and Upper Guinea (north-east and north-west areas of the 

https://esa.afdb.org/document/etudes-dimpact-environnemental-et-social-21
https://esa.afdb.org/document/etudes-dimpact-environnemental-et-social-21


 

 

13 

 

country), by about 0.4 to 3.3°C, with a sensitivity of 2.5°C; (ii) in Lower Guinea and Forest 

Guinea (south-west and south-east areas of the country), from 0.3 to 2.7°C with a sensitivity of 

2.5°C. This rising temperature will be accompanied by changes in the distribution and volume 

of rainfall.  These changes could reach 36.4 % of the present norm from 2050 and 40.4 % in 

2100.  Forest resources are among the most vulnerable resources to climate change because of 

the impact of human activities on forest ecosystems (carbonisation, excessive tree felling, 

nomadic pastoralism, agricultural clearing, mining and uncontrolled food gathering, etc.). 

3.2.6 In terms of greenhouse gas emissions, Guinea remains a very low emitting country, 

with GHG emission per capita of 2.1 tCO2e/inhab. in 1994 and less than 0.1% of global 

emissions.  They have, however, increased fairly rapidly. Between 1994 and 2015, these 

emissions rose 21.5 times, that is, an average annual increase of almost 10 %. This means they 

doubled almost every 7.2 years. Guinea’s objective in this area is to reduce its greenhouse gas 

emissions by 13% by 2030, compared to the 1994 level. In the forestry sector, this commitment 

concerns the stabilisation by 2030 of the mangrove areas, the reforestation of 10,000 hectares 

per year and the preservation of classified forests and protected areas. 

3.2.7 Gender: On average, Guinean agriculture contributes an average of 17.5% to 23% to 

GDP and occupies 50% of the work force 75% of which is in rural areas (RGPH3, 2014). It is   

largely dominated by family-type farms.  Over half of those in work (52.6%) are employed in 

the ‘agriculture, livestock, forestry and fisheries’ sector, 50.9% of whom are male and 53.5% 

female. Guinea has a gender policy, dating back in January 2011.  This policy covers: (i) Access 

to basic social services: education - health - HIV/AIDS - water- hygiene and sanitation; 

(ii) compliance with human rights and the elimination of violence: fundamental rights - little 

girl - violence - human trafficking; (iii) access, control of resources and equitable income 

sharing: economy - poverty - environment; (iv) improving governance and equitable access to 

decision-making bodies: power - media - institutional mechanisms - armed conflicts - ICT; and 

(v) gender integration into macro-economic framing: national development policies and 

programmes. This policy helps to minimize gender inequalities. 

3.2.8 Women play a major role in the agricultural economy throughout the agricultural 

chain from production and processing to marketing. However, despite their impact in the 

agricultural production chain, they still face many difficulties, including: 

 Access to resources and factors of production, in particular land, inputs and 
fertilisers. Because of customs and traditions women are not usually the owners 

of farmed land;  

 In decision-making and conflict management in the agricultural sector, women 
have less influence;  

 In terms of financial resources: the lack of resources is a real problem both in 
the agricultural sector and in other areas (education, health etc.); and  

 Concerning training: this remains a real concern, especially regarding capacity 
building, entrepreneurship, management… The literacy level of some women is 

also a handicap. 

3.2.9 In order to alleviate these difficulties, the Special Agro-Industrial Processing Zones 

Development Programme proposes the following gender promotion and women’s 

empowerment actions throughout its implementation: i) entrepreneurship, job creation for 



 

 

14 

 

women and young people and access to markets; ii) agricultural production capacity building; 

iii) skill building in agricultural production and processing, starting and managing a business, 

marketing and market access; iv) sensitisation campaigns on behavioural changes regarding 

birth control and reproductive health, balanced nutrition, gender and the prevention of gender-

based violence, the prevention of early marriages, HIV/AIDS, lifestyle management and 

environmental sanitation.  

3.2.10  According to the Gender Classification System, the programme is classified in 

Category 2.  The detailed gender analysis and gender action plan are presented in the Technical 

Annex on gender.  The budget allocated to gender promotion and women’s empowerment 

actions is UA 2.883 million. 

3.3 Involuntary Resettlement 

3.3.1 Operational Safeguard 2 (OS 2): Involuntary resettlement: land acquisition, 

population displacement and compensation: the risk of physical displacement or resettlement 

of the population is minimal as well as the loss of major assets during the programme’s 

implementation.  However, the issues of land tenure and nomadic livestock breeding are two 

key challenges that should be taken into consideration. In the event of the physical displacement 

or resettlement of population, Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) will be prepared and 

implemented in accordance with the Bank’s procedures and in compliance with OS2. 

3.4 Cost of ESMP Measures 

3.4.1 The costs of some measures will be included in the BDs and others covered by the 

FESMP. Some measures such as the application of good practices, the reforestation 

programmes, erosion control and resettlement will be taken into account in the cost of works 

and included in the bidding documents (BDs) and contractors will be obliged to implement 

them under the supervision of the control office and Programme Implementation Unit (PIU). 

The cost of the additional gender and women’s empowerment programme to be formulated on 

a participatory basis will be included in the programme’s budget. 

3.4.2 The estimated costs of the FESMP activities will primarily concern environmental and 

social measures not taken into account in the BDs.  Control Mission services will be covered in 

its contract.  

3.4.3 The overall ESMP cost is estimated at USD 500,000. Details are provided in the 

following Table. 

Table 3.1  

ESMP COST 

MEASURES COSTS IN USD 

Environmental and social assessment (ESA) expert  PM (covered by the 

programme)  

Estimates for the preparation and implementation of RAPs PM 

Additional Gender and Women’s Empowerment Programme PM 

Environmental regeneration and protection (reforestation and erosion control)  PM 

Formulation and implementation of a water borne disease control and 

STI/HIV/AIDS sensitisation programme 
100,000 



 

 

15 

 

MEASURES COSTS IN USD 

Preparation and implementation of a capacity building6 programme in the 

areas of (i) environmental and social assessments and (ii) pesticide 

management 

50,000 

Preparation of an information and sensitisation programme 50,000 

Provisions for ESIA preparation 150,000 

Support for monitoring FESMP implementation  100,000 

Environmental audit/Mid-term and Final Review  50, 000 

Total 500,000 

 

3.5 FESMP Indicative Implementation Schedule 

The following Table presents the indicative FESMP implementation schedule. 

 

Table 3.2:  

INDICATIVE IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE FOR ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL 

MEASURES 

 

ESMP implementation will be the subject of periodic reports on monitoring and supervision 

but also on evaluation and supervision by the different actors or structures involved in its 

implementation. 

IV. IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1 Implementation Arrangements 

4.1.1 At national level, programme management will be placed under the oversight of the 

Authority for the Development and Administration of Special Economic and Industrial Zones 

(ADAZZ), attached to the Presidency of the Republic. This institutional arrangement is due to 

the multi-sector nature of the programme and the need for strong leadership to provide 

coordination among all the programme’s actors. For this purpose, ADAZZZ will be 

strengthened institutionally through the PDZTA Programme Management Unit (PMU). The 

PMU will be lightly structured and responsible mainly for coordination, financial management, 

procurement and programme monitoring and evaluation activities. It will comprise: (i) a 

national coordinator; (ii) a monitoring and evaluation officer; (iii) a procurement officer; (vi) 

an environmental specialist, (vii) an administrative and financial officer; and (ix) an 

accountant. 

                                                
6 The preparation of manuals on good environmental practices has been factored in to the programme 

MEASURES PROPOSED ACTIONS  
WORKS DURATION 

Year1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 

Mitigation 

Measures 

 

FESMP 

During 

implementation  

   

Monitoring 

Measures 

Programme 

environmental 

monitoring and 

supervision 

Close 

monitoring 

During 

implementation  

    

Supervision Monthly during the 

works 

    

Assessment  Mid- term 

Final 

2nd year 

Works completion  

    

Production of reports (monthly, quarterly, half-yearly and 

annual) on FESMP implementation 

 
    



 

 

16 

 

4.1.2 The PMU will also be supported by periodic technical assistance (international and 

national consultants). On the ground, it will be assisted by partner organisations, in particular, 

administration structures, the Guinean Institute for Agricultural Research (IRAG), the Private 

Investment Promotion Agency (APIP) as well as the Ministries and technical agencies involved 

in the programme. The signing of agreements with these partner structures, including IRAG, 

will be one of the loan and grant conditions under ‘other conditions’. The documentation on 

these agreements will have to be included as soon as possible and prior to effectiveness in order 

to facilitate the programme implementation no-objection process. 

4.1.3 A Strategic Orientation Committee (SCO) will be set up to provide strategic direct ion 

for the implementation of the programme.  It will be chaired by the Minister Secretary General 

for the Presidency of the Republic. The Vice-Presidency will be held by the Minister in charge 

of the Plan. The committee will be composed of Ministers in charge of Economy and Finance, 

Agriculture, Industry and SMEs, Investments and PPPs, Mines, and Trade, as well as the 

President of the National Chamber of Agriculture. The SCO will meet at least once a year, and 

its Secretariat will be provided by ADAZZ. 

4.1.4 A Program Steering Committee (PSC) will also be established. It will be chaired by 

the Secretary General of the Ministry of Agriculture or its representative. In addition to the 

representatives of the Ministries within the SCO, ADAZZ, the National Chamber of 

Agriculture, the PSC will be composed by representatives of the Regional Governors, the 

private sector and the Civil Society. The PSC Secretariat is provided by the representative of 

the Ministry of Industry and SMEs. The PSC will be responsible: (i) for reviewing and 

approving the annual work programme and budget (AWPB), (ii) for validating the results of 

the program's performance, and (iii) for framing innovations and ensuring the relevance of the 

major choices to be made at the implementation. It will meet at least twice a year. 

4.2 Procurement and Disbursement Arrangements 

4.2.1 Procurement Arrangements: The procurement of goods (including services other 

than consulting services), works and the acquisition of consulting services financed by the Bank 

under the programme will be carried out in accordance with the Procurement Framework for 

Bank Group-financed operations, 2015 edition, and in compliance with the provisions of the 

financing agreement. More specifically, procurements will be made in accordance with the 

Bank’s Procurement Methods and Procedures (BPP), on the basis of the relevant standard 

bidding documents (SBDs) for goods and works contracts as well as consulting services for 

which the BPP are considered to be the most appropriate. Indeed, following an analysis of the 

Guinean procurement system as presented in Technical Annex B5 of this report, the 

procurement risk was considered to be substantial. As a result, for the implementation of this 

programme, the Bank’s Procurement Methods and Procedures will be used, since a capacity 

building action plan will be the subject of dialogue with the Guinean Authorities in order to 

rapidly ensure use of the national procurement system following the reforms identified as 

necessary. 

4.2.2 Procurement Risks and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): The assessment of 

procurement risks at country, sector and programme level as well as the capacity of the 

executing agency (EA) was carried out and the results were used to influence the decision to 

choose the BPM for all activities planned under the programme. The appropriate risk mitigation 

measures were included in the PRCA action plan presented in Annex B5. 



 

 

17 

 

4.2.3 Organisation of Procurement Implementation: Programme procurement will be 

carried out by the Programme Executing Agency. In light of the conclusions of the assessment 

of the executing agency’s capacity, a management unit including a procurement expert will be 

recruited to implement the procurement process but also to build the capacities of the different 

actors involved in procurement. 

 

4.2.4 Advance Procurement Action (APA): The Government intends to submit to the Bank 

for approval a request for the use of APA in order to recruit consultants to conduct studies on 

agro-park infrastructure and irrigation schemes.  This request shall be submitted to the Bank 

prior to the programme’s presentation to the Bank’s Board of Directors. 

4.2.5 Disbursement: The disbursement methods to be used to mobilise the ADF loan 

financing are: (i) the direct payment method; (ii) the special fund/revolving fund method and 

(iii) the reimbursement method. Direct payments will be made in respect of contracts for works, 

goods and services signed between the Borrowers and suppliers, in accordance with the Bank’s 

procurement rules and procedures and national procurement legislation. The special account 

method will be used to settle operating expenditure, training costs, field mission costs etc. It 

will require the opening of a Special Account at the Central Bank of Guinea, which will, in 

turn, pay all the funds received from the ADF into the PMU bank account opened in a bank 

acceptable to AfDB. The opening of the Bank account will be a condition precedent to the first 

disbursement. The reimbursement method will be used when eligible expenditure on ADF loan 

resources are pre-financed with the Bank’s prior approval. These disbursements will be made 

in accordance with the list of goods and services and the Bank’s rules and procedures as 

described in the Disbursement Handbook. Details of the disbursement arrangements will be 

presented in the Technical Annexes (Volume II of the Programme Appraisal Report). 

4.3 Financial Management 

4.3.1 The Programme Management Unit (PMU) will be responsible for the programme’s 
overall coordination and financial management. Its financial management staff will comprise the 

programme coordinator, the administrative and financial officer, the accountant and cashier, all of 

whom will be recruited in accordance with the programme’s procurement arrangements. 

4.3.2 The financial management systems of the ADAZZ management unit whose structures 
will be used under the PDZTA are not satisfactory on the whole and the overall fiduciary risk is 

substantial because of the absence of: (i) a financial coordinator and personnel as mentioned above; 

(ii) an administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual; (iii) operational accounting and 

financial management software; and (iv) financial management tools and reference framework. 

4.3.3 As a result, the PMU should take the following measures: (i) as soon as the programme 
is launched, prepare a budget plan coupled with the indicative activities schedule; (ii) when the 

programme is launched, recruit a consultant to prepare the administrative, financial and accounting 

procedures manual (AFAPM), and another responsible for establishing the computerised 

accounting and financial management system (SIGCF) ; (iii) assign financial tasks as soon as the 

financial staff are recruited; (iv) establish the financial management framework and instruments in 

accordance with Annex B6 of Volume II of the Programme Appraisal Report. 

4.3.4 Audits: Once a year, a competent and independent firm of external auditors will verify 
the reliability of the consolidated financial statements prepared by the PMU and will assess the 

operation of the internal control system of the entire programme. It will be recruited in accordance 

with the terms of reference and bidding procedures recommended by the Bank.  Audit costs will be 

financed by the ADF loan. The audit reports must be forwarded to the Bank each year, no later than 



 

 

18 

 

six months after the closure of the audited period. Audits will be performed in accordance with 

SYSCOA international audit standards and the Bank’s comprehensive terms of reference which 

will be communicated to the programme. 

 

4.4 Monitoring 

Internal monitoring and evaluation will be carried out by the Programme Monitoring and 

Evaluation Unit, while external monitoring-evaluation will be the responsibility of the Ministry 

of Planning and the Ministry in charge of Finance. The objective of external monitoring and 

evaluation is to assess the efficacy and efficiency of the programme’s outputs and their 

contribution to the achievement of the development objectives which are the programme 

outcomes and impacts. It will be carried out with the involvement of the other stakeholders in 

addition to two annual supervision missions organised by the Bank. The mid-term review will 

be carried out in year 3. Following the programme’s closure, the Bank and Government will 

produce a completion report within the required timeframe. 

4.5 Governance 

4.5.1 The government authorities’ efforts to improve good governance during the past five 

years have made some positive progress especially in the area of procurement.  However, these 

efforts have not yet produced any tangible results, insofar as the corruption perceptions index 

in Guinea still averages 25 compared to a regional average of 34 with a ranking of 143rd out of 

180 countries, virtually unchanged over the 2012-2017 period. The political, economic and 

social governance indicators for Guinea are, therefore, mixed despite the progress made in 

recent years. This is mainly due to poor performances in the areas of governance and the fight 

against corruption, the consequence of repeated political crises that have weakened the 

government institutions that are required to ensure regular monitoring of the governance system 

in Guinea. 

4.5.2 In light of the foregoing, the PDZTA-BK design includes capacity building support 

for actors as well as institutional support to contribute to the reduction of governance-related 

risks to the programme’s implementation.  This support concerns the preparation and 

establishment of financial management and monitoring and evaluation tools as well as the use 

of recognised   transparency and competitive methods in the PMU staff recruitment process and 

the establishment of a system to reduce procurement delays, one of the main reasons for the 

shortcomings noted in the performance of the development portfolio in Guinea despite the 

alignment of the public procurement system with regional guidelines. These procurement-

related operational measures will resolve the shortcomings raised. 

4.6 Sustainability 

4.6.1 The Special Agro-Industrial Processing Zones Development Programme (PDZTA-

BK) was designed on the basis of a participatory process initiated following the APZ dialogue 

mission to Guinea and throughout all the programme formulation stages, i.e. the PPF 

preparation as well as the preparation and appraisal missions concerning this proposal. This 

approach has helped to raise awareness among the population and central government of the 

economic importance of agricultural transformation by promoting the processing of agricultural 

production (agro-industrial), in addition to the technological innovations disseminated to 

farmers.  Against this backdrop, the key actors in growth-bearing sub-sectors will be 

sufficiently strengthened to guarantee the regular supply of raw materials on the basis of a plan 

that will ensure the sustainability of their jobs and incomes.  This system should ensure the 

autonomy of this development model whereby the agro-industrial enterprises established in the 



 

 

19 

 

parks operate with a guaranteed supply of raw materials and central government is assured of 

revenue from corporate taxes and dividends from the asset holding companies to be established 

to manage the agro-industrial parks.  

4.6.2 The agro-industrial park management system will be formalised through the 

establishment of an asset holding company with a clear legal status including land tenure.  The 

agro-industrial parks will be established, then managed in accordance with the existing 

investment code and the special status of the Special Agro-Industrial Processing Zones 

(SAIPZ). 

4.7 Risk Management  

4.7.1 Achievement of the PDZTA outcomes is subject to a number of risks for which it is 

necessary to find mitigation solutions in order to guarantee the programme’s success.  In 

addition to the risks already identified that are common to the entire portfolio, specific risks 

were identified and mitigation measures proposed:  

 

No. POTENTIAL RISKS MITIGATION MEASURES 

01 Lack of commitment of oversight authorities to 

support the coordination team and slippage on 

programme implementation 

The programme is one of central government’s 

priorities and was designed on the basis of the 

systematic consultation of stakeholders including 

representatives of the administration and 

municipalities concerned 

02 Risk of weak private sector mobilisation The programme was designed on the basis of a 

platform of exchange of information with the 

private sector whose concerns are taken into 

account in the programme’s final formulation, a 

guarantee of the SME involvement in, and 

ownership of, the programme 

03 Slow acceptance by certain stakeholders could 

delay the programme’s implementation 

The programme was designed on the basis of 

systematic sensitisation and consultation to ensure 

its gradual ownership by all stakeholders 

4.8 Knowledge Building  

4.8.1 The Special Agro-Industrial Processing Zones Development Programme (PDZTA-

BK) was designed to reflect the approach and principles of the Special Agro-Industrial 

Processing Zones (SAIPZ) Programme of the Bank’s 2016-2022 ‘Feed Africa’ Strategy.  The 

key to this programme’s success is the transformation of agriculture through the involvement 

of the private sector in a leadership role while central government will guarantee the conditions 

for its establishment and success.  To ensure its success, the PDZTA-BK was designed to build 

knowledge on how to work more effectively with the sector, either on the basis of a PPP formula 

or in the form of a non-sovereign operation (NSO), or a combination of the two formulae.  Its 

development will be guaranteed by private sector involvement on the basis of public sector 

financing. 

4.8.2 The other types of knowledge generated are: (i) a multi-sector approach involving the 

intervention of sectors such as transport, energy, water and sanitation, agribusiness, agriculture, 

communication (NICT), education, health and nutrition, employment and trade. At this level, it 

is necessary to generate a 2nd type of knowledge concerning the pooling of efforts in order to  

produce rapid results in the area of agricultural transformation (ii) a combination of: (a) two of 

the Bank’s strategies, namely ‘Feed Africa’  and ‘Jobs for Youth’, enhancing the skills of youth, 



 

 

20 

 

and (b) at least  four (04) flagship programmes, namely, the Special Agro-Industrial Processing 

Zones (SAPZs), Technologies for the African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT), 

Agricultural Value Chains (AVC), Post-Harvest Losses Reduction and ENABLE Youth 

Programmes. The combination of strategies and programmes is the third level of knowledge 

provided  by PDZTA-BK;  (iii) product processing, as a great challenge for which solutions 

will be sought under this programme is the third level of knowledge provided  by this operation; 

(iv) employment in general, and in the agricultural sector, in particular, as a solution proposed 

in the Programme is the fourth level of knowledge likely to be generated by this proposal; (v) a 

contribution to a reduction in the massive imports of agro-food products by the Continent, and 

by Guinea, in particular which offers a fifth level of knowledge  to be generated by the PDZTA-

BK. 

4.8.3 Lastly, this programme’s success will help to build a body of knowledge that could 

be replicated throughout the programme to develop ten (10) agricultural hubs in the country, 

including those of Boké and Kankan. 

V. Legal Framework 

5.1 Legal Instrument  

The legal framework for the PDZTA-BK will comprise two (2) Loan Agreements signed 

between the Republic of Guinea, on the one hand, and the African Development Bank and 

African Development Fund (collectively called ‘the Fund’), on the other, acting in their capacity 

as administrators of the Transition Support Fund (TSF).  

5.2 Conditions Associated with Bank’s Involvement 

5.2.1 Conditions precedent to effectiveness: effectiveness of the TSF Loan Agreement 

will be subject to fulfilment by the Borrower, to the Fund’s satisfaction, of the conditions set 

out in Section 12.01 of the General Conditions Applicable to the African Development Fund 

Loan Agreements and Guarantee Agreements (Sovereign Entities) of February 2009. 

5.2.2 Conditions precedent to the first loan disbursement: in addition to the respective 

effectiveness of the financing agreements, the first disbursements of the ADF loan, ADF Grant 

and TSF loan will be subject to fulfilment by the Borrower/Donee, to the Fund’s satisfaction, 

of the following conditions: 

(i) Providing the Bank with evidence of the establishment of the Programme 
Management Unit (PMU); 

(ii) Following a call for applications, providing the Bank with evidence of the 
recruitment of the Coordinator and Head of Administration and Finance, whose 

qualifications will be submitted for the Bank’s prior approval. 

5.2.3 Other Conditions: The Borrower shall, moreover, provide the Bank, no later than 

six (6) months after the first disbursement of Loan resources with: 

(i) Evidence of the establishment of the Steering and Monitoring Committee (COS), 
whose composition and operational provisions will have been submitted for the 

Bank’s prior approval; and 



 

 

21 

 

(ii) The Agreements with the Administration structures, the Guinean Institute for 

Agricultural Research (IRAG), the Private Investment Promotion Agency (APIP) 
and Ministries and Technical Agencies involved in the programme. 

 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies  

This programme complies with all the Bank’s applicable policies. The programme will be 

implemented as part of the Bank’s intervention strategy for Guinea defined in the CSP (2018-

2022). 

VI. RECOMMENDATION 

Management recommends that the Boards of Directors approve a proposal for an ADF loan of 

UA 2.99 million, an ADF grant of UA 2.94 million (including UA 331,461 from cancelled 

resources) and a TSF loan of UA 3.69 million from the ADF country allocation to the 

Republic of Guinea for the purposes and subject to the conditions set out in this report. 

 
 



 
























































AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND 

 
 

 

 
 

 

GUINEA-BISSAU 

 

 

 
RICE VALUE CHAIN DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (PDCV-RIZ) IN THE BAFATA 

AND OIO REGIONS 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
Project Information Sheet  

 

Client Information  

 

BORROWER /DONEE: Republic of Guinea-Bissau  
 

EXECUTING AGENCY:  Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development   

   (MADR) 

 

Financing Plan  

Source  Amount  Instrument 

ADF 
 UA 0.493 million 

 UA 3.722 million 

Grant 

Loan 

Government  UA 0.14 million - 

Beneficiaries   UA 0.21 million - 

TOTAL COST  UA 4.56 million  

 

Key Information on ADF Financing  

 

Distribution of ADF resources 
Loan 

(UA M) 

Grant 

(UA M) 

Total 

(UA M) 

Country allocation under ADF-13 - PBA 0.118 0.082 0.200 

Country allocation under ATF-13 Pilar 1 3.325 -0.008 3.317 

Remainder of resources deriving from ADF cancellations 0.279 0.017 0.296 

Remainder of resources deriving from ATF Pilar 1 cancellations - 0.402 0.402 

TOTAL  3.722 0.493 4.215 

 

ADF grant currency  

ADF loan currency  

UA 

UA 

  

Loan maturity  40 years 

Grace period  10 years 

IRR (baseline scenario) 

ERR 

NPV 

 

14.6% 

17.1% 

CFAF 7.378 million 

 

Timeframe – Key Milestones (expected) 

  

Concept Note approval  3 October 2016 

Project approval  14 December 2016 

Effectiveness  February 2017 

Closing of the loan and grant  31 December 2020 

___________________________________________________________________________ 



 

iv 

Executive Summary 

Project overview: The Rice Value Chain Development Project (PDCV-Riz) was designed as part of a 

participatory and inclusive process bringing together all the stakeholders, including producer 

organizations, local communities and local technical services. Those discussions as well as the studies 

conducted by the Bank helped to make a thorough assessment of the situation and identify the 

development needs of the rice value chain, and the most suitable methods of implementation in the two 

regions concerned. The formulation of PDCV-Riz also took into account the fragile context in the 

country, lessons drawn from Bank projects and those of other partners in Guinea-Bissau, while 

developing synergies and complementarities. Factoring in the Bank’s strategic orientations for the 

country, the project was formulated with special emphasis on the following: (i) hydro-agricultural 

infrastructure and access to markets; (ii) food and nutrition security; (iii) value chain development; (iv) 

employment of young people and women; and (v) adaptation to the impacts of climate change. 

The specific goal of the proposed project, which is expected to cost UA 4.56 million and last four years, 

will be to ensure the sustainable recovery of the rice value chain in the Bafata and Oio regions. In 

addition to basic structuring infrastructure resulting from the project (development of 470 hectares of 

lowlands and mangroves, 7 km of roads, 2 markets, 5 stores and shops, etc.), innovative techniques 

needed for quality assurance, conservation and processing of food products will also be developed and 

disseminated. These activities will be accompanied by local and organizational capacity building, and 

specific focus will be placed on women’s access to land and all project benefits. The project will affect 

close to 1 720 farmers directly, 55% of whom will be women, representing about 12 000 members of 

agricultural households. It will have an indirect impact on approximately 60 000 people. 

Needs assessment: The project area is located in two of Guinea-Bissau’s nine regions, namely Bafata 

and Oio, which occupy 31.5% of the national territory and in 2015 had a population estimated at 494 

000 (27% of the national population). The project area is rich in water and land resources, owing in 

particular to the Corubal, Geba and Mansôa river basins. In keeping with the country’s strategic 

orientations, the project will help to improve productivity and production in the flagship sector for food 

security: rice. The country has an annual rice deficit of more than 80 000 tonnes. The project will also 

develop market gardening, the current production of which covers only 60% of needs, for certain sites 

and school canteens. This activity will help to improve the nutritional status of the beneficiary 

population, particularly women and children. The project will serve as a catalyst for agricultural 

development in the area by facilitating water control, strengthening agricultural infrastructure, 

promoting sustainable production, packaging and processing technologies, and facilitating access to 

product markets by supporting the development of the strategic sectors of rice and market gardening. 

Value added for the African Development Bank: Agriculture remains the main focus of development 

policies and the principal source of employment. In 2006, the Bank financed the Agricultural and Rural 

Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project (PRESAR), which was followed by three studies on the agricultural 

sector financed by trust funds between 2012 and 2014. These operations helped to develop specific 

expertise and shed new light on key areas (irrigation, seed production and control, solar energy, 

processing, etc.). To consolidate these gains, the Bank and the Government elected to finance the Rice 

Value Chain Development Project (PDCV-Riz), as a way of setting up production areas. By supporting 

the development of infrastructure in areas that are economically and socially depressed but have 

considerable irrigation potential, the Bank’s activities will help to reduce poverty, promote the 

employment of young people and women, strengthen adaptation to climate change and increase the 

resilience of people who are vulnerable to food and nutrition insecurity.  

Knowledge management: PDCV-Riz will contribute to farmers’ training and consolidate their 

expertise. It will allow young people and women to develop technical and entrepreneurial skills in an 

inclusive manner by setting up operations on land that has modern operational resources and 

infrastructure, and promote the expansion of para-agricultural activities. With regard to resilience to 

climate change, the project will develop and disseminate innovative agricultural technologies for 



 

v 

production, storage and processing, while promoting local expertise. It will support the development of 

drip irrigation expertise with the establishment of a demonstration site. Knowledge management will 

also be carried out through mechanisms for communication and capitalization of project results and best 

practices, and through the process of generating endogenous value for vulnerable groups by developing 

value chains.  

 



 

vi 

 

Results-Based Logical Framework  

 

 Guinea-Bissau: Rice Value Chain Development Project in the Bafata and Oio Regions (PDCV-RIZ)  

 Project Goal: The goal of the PDCV-Riz is to contribute to the improvement of the of food and nutrition security, and poverty reduction in at the national level 

RESULTS CHAIN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF  

VERIFICATION 

RISKS/ 

MITIGATION MEASURES  Indicator  Baseline Situation  Target 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Food and nutrition security is improved and the 

incidence of poverty reduced 

Prevalence of severe/moderate food insecurity 

Prevalence of chronic malnutrition (0-23 

months) 

Percentage of the total population of poor 

people, including women  

19% (2014) 

34.7% (2014) 

 69.3% and 75.6%) (2010) 

18% (2018) and 15 % (2020) 

32% (2018) and 28% (2020) 

65.5% and 70% (2018) and 60% and 65% 

(2020) 

-PRP/AGIR/EDS 

-MICS  

-ILAP/CILSS 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
 

The volume of rice and market gardening production is 

increased 

Volume of rice production  

Volume of market gardening production  

Rice: 819 T (2015) 

Market gardening: 35 T 

(2015) 

Rice: 3 058 tonnes (2020) 

Market gardening products: 570 tonnes 

(2020) 

-Annual reports; Agricultural  

statistics  

 

- Periodic project monitoring 

reports  

 

-Mid-term review report and 

project completion report  

Risks:  

- Political instability coupled with a difficult 

economic situation  

- Weak project ownership  

 

Mitigation measures:  

- Contribution to the improvement of socio-

economic and environmental resilience to 

ensure greater stability  

- Involvement and participation of 

beneficiaries in all stages and capacity-

building (producers and MADR) 

- Stakeholder involvement in the project’s 

external communication  

 

Improved additional income for producers in rural areas 

and in the two regions  

 

Average annual income of rice-producing 

households (including women) 

 

Average annual income of market gardeners 

 

CFAF 114 000 (2015) 

 

 

 

CFAF 37 000 (2015) 

 

 

 

CFAF 359 000 / per farmer (2020) 

 

 

CFAF 373 100 /per farmer (2020) 



 

vii 

 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

1.  Agric. infrastructure s modernisation and development 

 

Rehabilitation/development of rice-growing areas 

1.1 Development of lowlands 

1.2 Development of mangroves/anti-salt structures 

1.3 Areas under full control 

 Rehabilitation/development of market gardening areas 

1.4 Improved areas with wells and motor pumps 

1.5 Market gardening areas with solar energy 

1.6 Pilot market gardening areas used as ADPP training 

centres 

 Agricultural infrastructure  

1.7 Development of access roads 

1.8 Rehabilitation/revitalization of markets 

1.9 Construction of shops for sale of agricultural inputs 

1.10 Construction of stores for market gardening 

 products 
 

 

 

 

1.1 Area of lowland developed  

1.2  Area of mangroves developed 

1.3 Area of lowland under full control 

 

1.4 Developed area with wells and pumps 

1.5 Area equipped with solar energy panels 

1.6  ADPP developed drip irrigation area  

 

 

1.7 Length of road rehabilitated  

1.8 Number of markets rehabilitated  

1.9 Number of input shops built 

1.10 Number of stores built 

  

 

 

 

1.1 NA 

1.2  0 

1.3 NA 

 

1.4 NA 

1.5 0 ha 

1.6 0 ha 

 

 

1.7 0 km 

1.8 0  

1.9 NA 

1.10 NA 

 

Target indicator in 2020 

 

1.1 185 ha (50% W) 

1.2 180 ha (10% W) 

1.3 105 ha (50% W) 

 

1.4 15 ha (80% W) 

1.5 4 ha (80% W) 

1.6 1 ha (50% W) 

 

 

1.7 7 km 

1.8 2 

1.9 2 (50% of beneficiaries are women) 

1.10 3 irrigated areas for women market 

gardeners  

-Progress reports of technical 

services in charge of 

monitoring the 

implementation  

 

-Contracts signed with 

enterprises 

 

-Reports of control agencies  

 

- Project progress reports  

Risks 

 

- Procurement delays, weak capacity of 

technical services  

- Weak capacity of enterprises  

 

Mitigation measures  

 

- Preparation of priority CBDs based on 

available BOAD studies  

- Use of PRESAR’s Project Management 

Unit (PMU)  

- Use of specialized NGOs  

- Central State services supported in the 

sovereign activity  

  2.  Development of value chains 

  Advisory support  and structuring 

2.1 Demonstration Units (DUs) set up 

2.2 Number of farms monitored and support 

2.3 Developed sites secured in terms of land use 

2.4 Conflict management committees established 

2.5 AHA management committees set up 

2.6 Grassroots POs and their umbrella organizations  

established  

Access to means of production and processing 

2.7 Revolving funds in place for procurement of seeds 

2.8 Input shops operationalized 

2.9 Drivers of tillers and artisans trained 

2.10 Post-harvest equipment provided to POs 

2.11 Women's processing EIG set up 

Agricultural and nutrition entrepreneurship 

2.12 Young entrepreneurs trained at ADPP and established 

2.13 Youth trained, business plan and  established 

2.14 Pilot school canteens supported 

2.15 Women's awareness raised concerning  nutrition 

education 

 

 

2.1 Number of DUs in place 

2.2 Number of farms monitored 

2.3 Number of sites secured 

2.4 Number of local agreements established 

2.5 Number of management committees 

established 

2.6 Number of POs and umbrella 

organizations set up 

 

2.7 Quantity of seeds procured 

2.8 Number of shops operational 

2.9 Number of beneficiaries trained 

2.10 Number of equipment provided to POs 

2.11 Number of women's EIGs set up 

 

2.12 Number of youths trained at DAPP 

centres and established 

2.13 Number of other youths trained  and 

established 

2.14 Number of school canteens supported 

2.15 Number of women sensitized 

 

 

2.1 0  

2.2 0  

2.3 0 

2.4 0 

2.5 0  

2.6 NA 

 

 

2.7 0 

2.8 0 

2.9 NA 

2.10 NA 

2.11 NA 

 

 

2.12 NA 

2.13 0  

2.14 NA 

2.15 NA 

 

2.1 75 

2.2 1 720, including 960 owned by 

women- 

2.3 11 (55% of them belonging to women) 

2.4 5 

2.5 30 (10 irrigated areas for women 

market gardeners) 

2.6 60 (30% F) and 10 (umbrella org.) 

 

2.7 4.5 t (base) 50 t (certified) in 2017 

2.8 2 in 2018 (50% benefiting women) 

2.9 Drivers (15), artisans (8) 

2.10 20 (50% for women) 

2.11 15 (all - 100%- belonging to women) 

 

2.12 70, of whom 40 are established (30% 

of them women 

2.13 8 trained and established (30% of them 

women) 

2.14 3 (2017 and 2018)  

2.15 2 000 (all of them women) 

-Project progress reports  

 

 

- Bank’s supervision  reports  

 

 

- Government’s external 

monitoring reports  

Risks 

 

- Mobilization of counterpart funding 

- Limited infrastructure ownership and 

management 

- Conflicts between farmers /herders 

 

Mitigation measures  

 

- Counterpart funding limited to the 

provision of premises and payment of the 

salaries of project employees (3.5% of the 

project's total cost) 

- Participatory approach initiated 

- Involvement, organization and training of 

local actors 

- Framework for consultation between 

farmers and stockbreeders, facilities 

designed in a concerted manner, 

development, fencing of market gardens. 



 

viii 

 

3.  Project Management  

3.1 Procurement activities 

3.2 Project activities carried out 

3.3 Financial management assured 

3.4 Monitoring and evaluation conducted 

3.5 Communication ensured  

 

 

3.1  Procurement plan (PP) adopted and 

implemented 

3.2  Compliant disbursement rate 

3.3  Audit reports produced   

3.4  Operational M&E system 

3.5  Communication plan implemented 

 

 

3.1  PP prepared (end-2016) 

3.2  0% (December 2016) 

3.3  Firm hired (June 2017) 

3.4  Established (1st half of 

2017) 

3.5  Plan developed (2017) 

 

 

3.1  PP updated at least once a year  

3.2  25% a year on average  

3.3  Four annual audit reports validated 

3.4 Mid-term final M&E reports produced   

3.5  Communication tools disseminated  

 

 

PP 

SAP system 

Audit reports  

Progress and M&E  reports  

Brochures, website, films, etc. 

Risks 

- Weak capacity 

 

Mitigation measures  

- Confirmation of PRESAR’s PMU after 

evaluation, performance contracts, review of 

accounting and monitoring tools  

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

  

COMPOSANTES RESOURCES 

Component A: Agricultural infrastructure modernisation and development  

Studies, works implementation and control (lowlands, mangroves, market gardening, irrigated areas, roads, markets, shops and stores, etc.).  

Component B:   Development of value chains  

Advisory support, structuring, securing of land, access to seeds and fertilizers, support for mechanization, training and installation of young 

people, support for women, nutrition support, etc.  

Component C:   Project management  

Coordination, procurement, monitoring/evaluation, financial management, audit, communication, leadership, etc. 

Components  Sources of Financing 

Component A           :  UA 2.57 million (56%) ADF (loan and grant) :  UA 4.215 million (92.4%) 

Component B           :  UA 1.23 million (27%) Govt. : UA 0.14 million (3.0%) 

Component C           : UA 0.76 million (17%) Beneficiaries  :  UA 0.21 (4.6 %) 

 



 

ix 

 

Project Implementation Schedule  

 

 
 

 Year 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 

 Quarter T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 T1 T2 T3 T4 

1 INITIAL ACTIVITIES                        

 PDCV-Riz financing negotiations                        

 ADF grant and loan approval                       

 Signing of financing agreements                        

 Effectiveness and fulfilment of conditions precedent to 1st  disbursement                        

 Publication of the General Procurement Notice                       

2 START-UP ACTIVITIES                       

 PMU staff Confirmation                       

 Preparation of priority procurement  agreements and documents                       

 PDCV-Rice launching mission                       

 Procurement of equipment for the PMU (vehicles, IT, etc.)                       

 Signing of agreements with partner entities                       

3 AGRIC. INFRASTRUCTURE MODERNIZATION AND DEVELOPMENT.                       

 Development of documents on priority infrastructure and projects                       

 Procurement for priority infrastructure and structures                       

 Studies on  complementary hydro-agricultural infrastructure, roads and buildings                       

 Works on irrigation and roads                       

 Works on marketing and processing infrastructure                       

 Implementation of the environmental management and monitoring plan                       

4 VALUE CHAIN DEVELOPMENT                       

 Extension and improvement of access to production resources                       

 Support for the structuring and of POs and umbrella organisations                       

 Support for the conservation, processing and marketing of products                       

 
Development of agricultural entrepreneurship and mechanization in collaboration 

with DAPP 
                  

    

 Support for nutrition and 3 school canteens                       

 
Support for the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MADR) and 

Stakeholders 
                  

    

5  PROJECT MANAGEMENT                       

 Updating management and monitoring-evaluation tools                       

 Baseline situation and implementation of the monitoring and evaluation system                       

 Coordination, management, monitoring, evaluation and communication activities                       

 Annual accounts audit                       

 Mid-term review                       

 ADF and Government Completion Report                       



 

1 

RICE VALUE CHAIN DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (PDCV-RIZ) IN THE BAFATA  

AND OIO REGIONS  
 

Management hereby submits this report concerning a proposal to extend a loan of UA 3.722 million 

and award a grant of UA 0.493 million to the Republic of Guinea-Bissau to finance the Rice Value 

Chain Development Project (PDCV-Riz) in the Bafata and Oio regions. 

I Strategic Thrust and Rationale 

 

1.1 Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives  

1.1.1 Accounting for 67% of GDP and 80% of jobs, agriculture remains the focus of development 
policies and, over the medium term, will continue to be the driver of growth and the main source of 

employment. Rice is the dominant food crop and the food deficit is made up annually by importing 

approximately 80 000 tonnes of rice. PDCV-Riz, which aims to improve food and nutrition security and 

boost producers’ income by promoting rice production and market gardening in targeted areas, is in line 

with the strategic objectives for Guinea-Bissau.1 These are set out in such documents as the Letter of 

Agricultural Development Policy (LPDA) and its plan of action, aimed at ensuring food security, 

increasing and diversifying agricultural exports, while ensuring sustainable management of agricultural, 

silvicultural and pastoral resources, and improving the living conditions of the rural population. Similarly, 

the strategic pillars of the strategic and operational plan for the period 2015-2020, known as Terra Ranka, 

developed and adopted by the Government of the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, includes the following 

pillars: (a) governance and peace; (b) infrastructure; (c) industrialization; (d) urban development; (e) human 

development; and (f) biodiversity. The strategy underscores the need to work towards economic recovery 

based on structural reforms, in order to ensure sustainable development. It also highlights the four main 

engines of economic growth, including agriculture and agro-industry, which will be based on the 

development of cashew and rice production, while aiming for gender parity, equity and women’s 

empowerment. 

1.1.2 PDCV-Riz also plugs into Sub-programme 1 of the National Agricultural Investment Programme 
(PNIA) (“Promotion of Plant Production”), which focuses on the development of food crops (including 

rice) and market gardening, through better control of water and factors of production. It is also in line with 

the orientations of (a) the National Food Security Programme (PNSA), which aims to contribute to the 

gradual eradication of hunger and food insecurity, and promotion of the people’s comprehensive and 

sustainable socio-economic development; (b) the National Medium-Term Investment Programme 

(PNIMT), whose major goal is to speed up the growth of the agricultural and fisheries sector by increasing 

the flow of capital directed towards the sector, but also by enhancing the effectiveness of investments in 

terms of growth and poverty reduction; and (c) the Rice Farming Development Programme (PDR - 2016), 

which aims to stimulate rice production in sufficient quantity and quality to ensure supply and improve the 

balance of trade. The project is in keeping with the “Develop infrastructure to promote inclusive growth” 

pillar of the CSP 2015-2019 through the development of agricultural infrastructure and opportunities in 

agriculture (in particular for young people and women).  

1.2 Rationale for Bank Involvement  

1.2.1 According to the agriculture sector study conducted in 2014 (Portuguese Cooperation Trust 

Fund), it is essential to optimize the use of farmland, considering the limited land resources, to create added 

value for products, but also to enable households to generate sufficient income to purchase certain 

commodities that have to be imported. Rice is the staple foodstuff and food deficit is made up annually by 

rice imports of about 80 000 tonnes. The constraints in the sector are primarily the remoteness of production 

areas, the degradation of production systems, particularly mangroves, caused by salinity and acidity, 

                                                 
1  It also draws on the main findings of studies conducted by the Bank on the gender profile (financed by the Portugal Trust Fund and in partnership with 

UN-Women); agriculture (financed by the Portugal Trust Fund); Fragility in Guinea-Bissau, 2014 (financed by the Bank); and capitalization of 

PRESAR (financed by the South-South Cooperation Fund). 



 

2 

insufficient access to inputs, and weak processing capacity. It is against this backdrop that PDCV-Riz was 

prepared, to support the development of infrastructure in two of the country’s most vulnerable regions 

(poverty rates of 79% in Oio and 72% in Bafata). The Bank’s involvement will help to reduce poverty and 

regional and social disparities. The development of hydro-agricultural facilities, the integration of value 

chains and agricultural entrepreneurship will help to promote the employment of young people and 

women, strengthen adaptation to climate change and increase the resilience of the segments of the 

population that are vulnerable to food and nutritional insecurity.  

1.2.2 The objectives of PDCV-Riz are aligned on the Bank’s “High 5s” (five priorities), which 

include feeding the people of Africa by 2025 and improving their living conditions by developing the 

rice value chain, building the capacity of actors, creating jobs and generating income. The project is 

aligned on the Bank’s Long-Term Strategy (LTS 2013-2022) and its two overarching objectives: 

inclusive growth and transition to a green economy. The project is built on the three areas of special 

emphasis of the LTS: fragile States, agriculture and food security, and gender. PDCV-Riz is aligned on 

the Bank’s new strategy: “Feed Africa: Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa (2016-

2025)”, which puts special emphasis on the development of value chains and agricultural 

entrepreneurship. The project also plans to rely heavily on grassroots associations, local NGOs and the 

private sector, thereby fulfilling the requirement for non-State actors to participate in the Bank’s 

operations, identified in the CSP as a way of strengthening the country’s resilience to fragility. The 

project is also in conformity with the Bank’s Gender Strategy (2014-2018) “Investing in Gender 

Equality for Africa’s Transformation”, more specifically Pillar II, “Economic Empowerment”. It also 

follows the recommendations of the gender profile prepared by the Bank and UN-Women in 2015, on 

the need to integrate women into value chains and provide extension services for women’s economic 

entities in rural areas.  

1.3 Aid Coordination  

1.3.1 Since the crisis of April 2012, the TFP consultation framework that was operating through 

multi-sector thematic groups has been put on hold. However, it should be noted that, in general, aid 

coordination and monitoring mechanisms have always suffered from the structural weaknesses of public 

administration. In this regard, before the coup d’état of 2012, the Bank approved a technical assistance 

project (PECA II) to build coordination capacity. The project included the convening of donor round 

tables in Brussels in March 2015 as well as capacity-building activities organized by the Ministry of 

Economy and Finance. 

1.3.2 Based on the Letter of Agricultural Development Policy, several bilateral and multilateral 

partners provided significant support for rural development and food and nutrition security in Guinea-

Bissau, including Spain, Italy, Brazil, Portugal, China, the European Union, the World Bank, AfDB, 

the West African Development Bank (BOAD), IFAD and the United Nations system. From an 

institutional standpoint, the activities of partners are coordinated by the Ministry of Economy and 

Finance. For agriculture in particular, the partners reached a consensus on the sector strategy, notably 

the PNIA, during the partners’ round table convened in Brussels in March 2015. The Food and 

Agriculture Organization plays a major role in policy support and coordination of activities. More 

broadly, in the rural sector (agriculture, stock raising, fishery, environment), the involvement of the various 

partners is presented in Annex A4 of volume 2 and is summarized as follows: 

 



 

3 

Sector or Sub-sector* 
Size of 

GDP Exports Labour 

[Rural Sector] [+50%] 93% 80% 

Stakeholders – Public Expenditure (on-going programmes or projects) 

Government Donors   Amounts (USD M) 

 
 

  Period 

 World Bank 0.76 2015-2020 

 ADF 0.20 2014-2015 

0.73 IFAD 16.91 2015-2020 

 FAO 7.36 2015-2021 

 BOAD 2.95 2015-2020 

 EU 1.21 2014-2019 

 WAEMU 11.34 2015-2020 

 FAO 7.36 2015-2021 

 

Existence of thematic working groups No 
Existence of a comprehensive sector programme No 

AfDB’s role in aid coordination Participation  
 

 

II Project Description 

 

2.1 Project Components 

The overall objective of PDCV-Riz is to help improve nutritional and food security and reduce poverty 

across the country. Its specific objective is to ensure sustainable recovery of the rice value chain in the 

Bafata and Oio regions by improving productivity, strengthening infrastructure, ensuring resilience to 

climate change, managing natural agricultural resources in a sustainable manner and reducing gender 

inequality. Lasting four years, PDCV-Riz revolves around three main components: (i) Modernization 

and development of agricultural infrastructure; (ii) Development of value chains; and (iii) Project 

management. The table below shows a summary of the activities selected. A detailed description is 

provided in Annex C3 of Volume 2. 
  



 

4 

Table 2.1: Project Components 

Component Cost Description of Components 

A- 

Modernization 

and 

development of 

agricultural 

infrastructure 

UA 

2.57 

million 

(56%) 

A1 Rehabilitation/development of rice production infrastructure and facilities: (i) development 

of 185 hectares of lowland; (ii) development of 180 hectares of mangroves/anti-salt facilities; 

(iii) development of 105 hectares of areas with full water control; (iv) protection of developed 

areas with area dykes and erosion abatement measures. 

A2 Rehabilitation/development of land for market gardeners: (i) development of 15 hectares 

with improved wells and pumping motor units; (ii) setting aside a 4-hectare piece of land for 

market gardening by women, with solar energy; (iii) installation of a 1-hectare drip irrigation 

system at the NGO for People-to-People Development Assistance (ADPP) training centre in 

Bissora. 

A3 Development of various agricultural infrastructure: (i) development of 7 km of access 

roads, including a road dyke for access to the Olom site; (ii) rehabilitation/operation of 2 

markets (Bissora and Bantandjan); (iii) construction of two input shops and three stores for the 

storage and conservation of market gardening products. 

B- 

Development of 

value chains 

UA 

1.23 

million  

(27%) 

B1 Advisory support and structuring: (i) advisory support and research/development; (ii) 

support for the emergence and strengthening of the capacity of grassroots producer 

organizations (farmers’ organizations) and associated umbrella groups; (iii) support for the 

securing of developed sites; (iv) establishment and structuring of committees for the 

management of developed infrastructure. 

B2 Improvement of access to means of production and processing: (i) strengthening of access 

to certified seeds and quality inputs (in line with INPA and DCCS); (ii) establishment of 

revolving input funds (Japanese Cooperation); (iii) promotion of mechanization (Japanese 

Cooperation) and supply of post-harvest equipment (threshers, hulling machines, mills); (iv) 

support for 10 women’s economic interest groupings (EIGs) (parboiling of rice, drying and 

processing of vegetables, etc.). 

B3 Development of agricultural entrepreneurship: (i) training of 70 young people (from the 

Oio and Bafata regions) at the ADPP training centre in Bissora; (ii) entrepreneurship training 

for 10 young people or groups proposing agricultural and para-agricultural projects and support 

for them to set up their operations. 

B4 Nutrition support: (i) education, nutritional monitoring and aid for diversification of food 

rations among the population, particularly among infants aged 0 to 23 months; (ii) pilot 

operation for supplying local products to three school canteens (in line with WFP); and (iii) 

support for the promotion of family and community vegetable gardens. 

B5 Support for MADR and partners: (i) capacity building for the services and technicians 

involved in implementing PDCV-Riz; (ii) support for strategic discussions at the Ministry of 

Agriculture and Rural Development (MADR). 

C- 

Project 

management 

UA 

0.76 

million 

(17%) 

(i) Coordination and piloting of project activities; (ii) administrative, accounting and financial 

management; (iii) procurement of goods, works and services; (iv) implementation of a 

communication plan; (v) monitoring and evaluation of project execution; and (vi) 

environmental monitoring.  

 

2.2 Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Explored  

2.2.1 The technical solutions adopted for PDCV-Riz are based on field data and lessons drawn from 

similar projects, including those obtained from the PRESAR capitalization study, and on design 

methods tailored to the specific context of the two regions and each of the sites. 

 

2.2.2 With regard to the pre-selected sites, only the Bafata sites offered conditions conducive to the 

development of facilities with full irrigation water control. Several technical options were available in 

the Bafata region, including that of developing a single large area with water pumped from the Gébà 

River, where the project would be concentrated. That option was rejected in light of the management 

difficulties encountered in the past and the complexity of operating that type of facility, and the 

difficulty of having sufficient labour to develop the investments. The alternative was to develop several 

small areas on different sites, which would be easier to manage and set up. For other lowlands, the 



 

5 

solution adopted was that of partial control of runoff (cascading dykes equipped with regulators), but 

using manufactured structures, to ensure greater durability. For the mangrove sites, partial irrigation 

water control was the only technical solution possible. In essence, the process entails building an anti-

salt dyke equipped with regulators and partitioning the area using dykes and bunds for the retention and 

distribution of irrigation water on the parcels and partitions.  

 

2.2.3 Market gardening is a vitally important activity for improving the nutritional intake of 

households and is also a source of income for women. However, it has been noted that several pieces of 

land belonging to women, developed summarily, are abandoned owing to poor design and technical 

solutions that do not alleviate the tedious work of watering. To develop those pieces of land, the 

underground water will need to be captured by building or using large wells and/or boreholes, and 

equipping them with a dewatering system powered by a generator and/or solar panels. 

 
Table 2.2: Alternatives Explored and Reasons for Rejection 

Alternative Brief Description Reason for Rejection 

Develop just one 

large area with total 

control where the 

project would be 

concentrated 

Construction of a large pumping 

station, covered water 

transportation canals with large 

civil engineering structures for 

the collection, carriage and 

distribution of water to the 

various blocks and 

neighbourhoods. 

This alternative does not ensure the availability of 

labour, in terms of quantity or quality, for the 

development of the facilities and the investments 

required. It is quite likely that the area will not be 

fully used, whereas on several sites available labour 

could make better use of the irrigated areas and 

develop the project. 

Develop market 

gardening areas 

with improved 

wells without any 

dewatering 

mechanism 

Construction of one or more 

large wells (one well per hectare) 

where irrigation water is 

collected manually and carried 

to the parcels by the operators.  

The constraint for the development of market 

gardening production is manual dewatering of the 

wells. This takes up an enormous amount of work 

time, makes the task, which is carried out mainly by 

women, very tedious and limits the production 

capacity of women engaged in market gardening, 

causing them to lose interest. 

Develop animal-

drawn cultivation 

in the intermediary 

phase instead of 

motorizing soil 

cultivation 

activities 

Animal-drawn cultivation 

practised in the project regions is 

suited for light soils with limited 

humidity, to ensure high 

productivity. Its effectiveness 

depends a great deal on the 

physical conditions of the area to 

be cultivated.  

Large arable land in the region, the short period 

available for soil preparation and the short rainy 

season are factors militating against animal-drawn 

cultivation and in favour of motorized soil 

cultivation. The consolidation of the network of 

providers of agricultural mechanization services in 

the project region will help to achieve this goal. 

 

2.3 Project Type 

PDCV-Riz is an investment operation financed with ADF resources. The Government of Guinea-Bissau 

has not yet started implementing projects and programmes through the sector-based approach, given a 

number of institutional constraints and the context of fragility. At this juncture, the project approach is 

the most appropriate to ensure effective and efficient use of the resources allocated to the project, which 

will also consolidate the gains achieved with PRESAR. 

2.4 Project Cost and Financing Arrangements  

2.4.1 The project cost is estimated at UA 4.56 million, excluding taxes and custom duty (CFAF 

3.742 billion), with UA 1.45 million (CFAF 1.193 billion) in foreign exchange and UA 3.11 million 

(CFAF 2.549 billion) in local currency. Custom duty and taxes will be covered by the State, which will 

have to take the necessary measures to implement this provision. The foreign exchange portion 

represents 31.9% of the total cost, net of taxes, and the local currency portion represents 68.1%. The 



 

6 

physical contingency rate applied was 5% for works and 5% for equipment. A provision for 

compounded price escalation of 3% was applied on all components. The summary of the project cost 

by component and by expenditure category is presented in Tables 2.3 and 2.4 below. 

 
Table 2.3: Estimated Costs by Component 

COMPONENTS 

CFAF Million  UA Million  % 

Foreign 

Exchange 
Local 

Currency 

Foreign 

Exchange 
Total L.C. F.E. Total 

Modernization / development of agricultural 

infrastructure 
1 105.8 816.1 1 921.9 1.35  0.99  2.34  42.5% 

Support for the development of value chains 726.6 220.7 947.4 0.89  0.27  1.15  11.9% 

Project management 530.6 55.7 586.3 0.65  0.07  0.71  9.5% 

Base cost 2 363.0 1 092.5 3 455.6 2.88  1.33  4.21  31.6% 

Physical contingencies 30.1 34.2 64.3 0.04  0.04  0.08  53.2% 

Price escalation 155.6 66.3 221.9 0.19  0.08  0.27  29.9% 

TOTAL 2 548.7 1 193.0 3 741.8 3.11  1.45  4.56  31.9% 

 

Table 2.4: Estimated Costs by Expenditure Category  

CATEGORIES 

CFAF Million  UA Million  % 

Foreign 

Exchange 

% Local 

Currency 

Foreign 

Exchange 
Total L.C. 

Foreign 

Exchange 
Total 

Works 836.7 725.5 1 562.2 1.02 0.88 1.90 46.4 41.8% 

Goods  214.0 250.1 464.1 0.26 0.30 0.57 53.9 12.4% 

Services 802.0 117.0 919.0 0.98 0.14 1.12 12.7 24.6% 

Operation 135.4 0.0 135.4 0.17 - 0.17 - 3.6% 

Personnel 374.9 0.0 374.9 0.46 - 0.46 - 10.0% 

Base cost 2 363.0 1 092.5 3 455.6 2.88 1.33 4.21 31.6 92.4% 

Physical contingencies  30.1 34.2 64.3 0.04 0.04 0.08 53.2 1.7% 

Price escalation 155.6 66.3 221.9 0.19 0.08 0.27 29.9 5.9% 

TOTAL 2 548.7 1 193.0 3 741.8 3.11 1.45 4.56 31.9 100.0% 

 

2.4.2 The project will be financed by a grant of UA 0.493 million and loan of UA 3.722 million 

from the African Development Fund (ADF), representing 92.4% of the project cost, net of taxes and 

custom duty. Considering the country’s fragile state (see Annexes IV and V), the Government’s 

financial contribution, estimated at UA 0.136 million, will be limited to covering the salaries of civil 

servants seconded to the project and providing office space for the Project Management Unit 

(headquarters in Bafata and liaison office in Bissau), and setting up a revolving fund for the procurement 

of inputs (fertilizers and seeds). The contribution of beneficiaries will be limited to the computation of 

their participation in easy-to-undertake on-going development and maintenance work, estimated at UA 

0.21 million. The breakdown by source of financing is indicated in Table 2.5 below. 
 

Table 2.5: Sources of Financing 

SOURCES 

CFAF Million UA Million 

% Local 

Currency 

Foreign 

Exchange 
Total 

Local 

Currency 

Foreign 

Exchange 
Total 

ADF loan 2 053.4 999.9 3 053.4 2.50 1.22 3.722 81.6% 

ADF grant 211.3 193.1 404.4 0.26 0.24 0.493 10.8% 

Govt. 112.0 0.0 112.0 0.14 - 0.136 3.0% 

Beneficiaries 172.0 0.0 172.0 0.21 - 0.210 4.6% 

TOTAL 2 548.7 1 193.0 3 741.8 3.11 1.45 4.561 100% 



 

7 

2.4.3 The expenditure schedule is as follows: 

 
Table 2.6: Expenditure Schedule by Component (in UA million) 

COMPONENTS 2017 2018 2019 2020 Total 

Modernization / development of agricultural infrastructure  0.41 1.48 0.44 0.02 2.34 

Support for the development of value chains 0.40 0.44 0.24 0.08 1.15 

Project management 0.25 0.16 0.15 0.15 0.71 

Base cost 1.07 2.07 0.83 0.25 4.21 

Physical contingencies 0.01 0.05 0.01 - 0.08 

Price escalation 0.03 0.13 0.08 0.03 0.27 

TOTAL 1.11 2.26 0.92 0.28 4.56 

 

2.5 Project Target Area and Beneficiaries  

2.5.1 The project target area consists of two regions – Bafata and Oio – out of the eight (in addition 

to the autonomous region of Bissau) in Guinea-Bissau. It covers 31.5% of the national territory 

(representing a surface area of 36 125 km2) and has a population estimated in 2015 and 494 000 

inhabitants, compared with 1 783 000 inhabitants in the country (projection based on the General 

Population and Housing Census, 2009)2 The area is endowed with huge water resources (rain, the 

Corubal, Geba and Mansôa Rivers, sedimentary basin) and has strong potential of lowlands that can be 

developed (especially in Bafata) and mangrove plains (particularly in Oio). 

2.5.2 The project areas were selected following a multi-criteria analysis based on: (i) accessibility; 

(ii) existence of community/local operational dynamic; (iii) absence of latent land conflicts; and (iv) 

overall consistency with the project objectives (availability of labour, level of organization and sense of 

initiative of the future beneficiaries, expertise, participation of women and young people). A wide 

variety of sites were pre-identified: (i) Development of lowlands: (a) with partial irrigation water control 

(Carabina, Gêba, Cumuda and Olom sites); (b) with full irrigation water control (Contuboel, Gêba, 

Cumuda and Ponta Nova sites); (ii) Development of mangroves: partial irrigation water control 

(Binhomi); (iii) Market gardening areas: Contuboel, Carabina, Sormone, and ADPP training centre in 

Bissora.  

2.5.3 The majority of the population of the area is engaged in agriculture (rice, corn, cassava, 

peanuts, sorghum/millet, black-eyed peas, fruits and vegetables, cashew nuts, etc.), stock raising and 

trading. Traditional and family farming faces a variety of constraints, including the absence and age of 

facilities, difficulties in accessing factors of production (certified seeds, quality inputs, tilling and post-

harvest equipment, etc.). Women are involved in all rural farming activities and most participate in rice 

cultivation and market gardening work, and in product processing and marketing. The project target 

group comprises smallholders, in particular women and young people, the main segments of the 

population that are vulnerable to food and nutrition insecurity and poverty. The project will affect 1 720 

households/farmers, including 960 women farmers (55%), representing about 12 000 people (direct 

beneficiaries), including 6 400 women. The other direct targets are artisans, processors, traders, young 

entrepreneurs, about 200 students from three pilot school canteens, various service providers and NGOs, 

etc. In addition to infrastructure, innovative techniques needed for quality maintenance, conservation 

and processing of food products will be developed and disseminated, and accompanied by local and 

organizational capacity building. Specific attention will be paid to access to land for women and young 

people and all project beneficiaries. Therefore, PDCV-Riz will affect more than 60 000 people in all. 

 

                                                 
2  National Institute of Statistics (INE) / General Population and Housing Census 2009. 



 

8 

2.6 Participatory Approach in Project Identification, Design and Implementation  

2.6.1 The project design was based on a participatory approach involving all stakeholders: 

administration, producer organizations, women’s groups, civil society, private sector, technical and 

financial partners (TFPs), projects, etc. These broad-based consultations, which began with PRESAR 

and during studies supported by the Bank, continued during the PDCV-Riz preparation and appraisal 

mission. The consultation meetings convened in each of the two regions with all the parties (local 

technical services, NGOs and advisory support associations, local communities, representatives of 

beneficiaries, including women) helped with the identification by consensus of constraints and needs in 

the project area and for the two sectors involved. Focused discussions with institutional local partners 

and civil society and visits to different potential sites, followed by working sessions with beneficiaries, 

including women and young people, helped to fully examine the development of the area, identify 

support needs for the two sectors and the most appropriate methods of implementation, as well as the 

appropriate measures for effective implementation. The sites and activities were chosen following 

several investigations and fruitful discussions with beneficiaries and other actors involved. 

2.6.2 This entire participatory process showed that there was great interest for the project, which 

builds on the achievements of PRESAR and other past and on-going projects, and a broad consensus on 

its design and methods of implementation. Producers reaffirmed the need to fully exploit the project 

area’s considerable potential (land, natural watercourses, mangroves, lowlands, etc.). Women expressed 

their interest for market gardening, processing and marketing of farm products, with modernization of 

production and processing tools and improved access to markets. Following visits to various sites, the 

status of the existing facilities and infrastructure was assessed and technological options to be adopted 

for their construction/rehabilitation were proposed. The development of a good communication strategy 

centred on PDCV-Riz and the maintenance of a participatory approach during its implementation are 

guarantees that local actors will take ownership of the project during the execution phase.  

2.7 Bank Group Experience Reflected in and Lessons Learned from Project Design  

2.7.1 It will be recalled that since the start of cooperation with Guinea-Bissau, the Bank has carried 

out operations in the agricultural sector through five projects, the last of which was the Agricultural and 

Rural Infrastructure Rehabilitation Project (PRESAR) costing UA 5.80 million, completed in September 

2012. The project completion report, which was submitted in February 2014, showed satisfactory results 

(score of 3.12 out of 4), in a difficult socio-economic context. PRESAR contributed to the rehabilitation 

of rice farming land and other agricultural community infrastructure, while building administrative 

capacity. The formulation of PDCV-Riz takes into account, to a large extent, lessons drawn from Bank 

projects in Guinea-Bissau, particularly PRESAR, and in the sub-region, while striving to integrate the 

country’s context of fragility, and rectifying some of the weaknesses identified during project 

implementation and highlighted during portfolio reviews and in completion reports. During the last 

review in September 2016, the portfolio’s performance was deemed satisfactory, but efforts will have 

to be made in terms of: (i) availability of studies to improve the quality-at-entry of operations; (ii) timely 

designation of project management teams, including the coordinator and financial management and 

procurement officers; (iii) compliance with the procurement schedule; (iv) systematic establishment of 

performance contracts and annual evaluation of the contracts on an objective basis; and (v) timely 

development of the baseline situation and establishment of monitoring and evaluation systems. It is 

worth noting that even though the current portfolio does not include any problem projects (PPs), two 

projects have suffered considerable implementation delays and may be cancelled pursuant to Directive 

No. 02/2015: (i) the Economic Governance Strengthening Support Project (PARGEF), approved on 1 

July 2015, and the Project to Improve Electricity Service in the City of Bissau (PASEB), approved on 

8 July 2015. 

2.7.2 Therefore, the design of PDCV-Riz took into account: (i) enhancement of the quality-at-entry 

of the project by making feasibility studies available and preparing the first computer-assisted designs 

(CADs); (ii) special focus on the involvement of local actors, in particular producers directly concerned, 



 

9 

through an inclusive participatory process; (iii) involvement of other partners (BOAD, WFP, etc.), to 

ensure coherence, complementarity and synergies in selected activities; (iv) focus on the procurement 

process and methods, relying on an experienced project team that was already in place; and (v) 

indispensable capacity-building needs of the various actors. Taking into account the aforementioned 

strategic guidelines, the project formulation also emphasized certain topics, in particular: (i) food and 

nutrition security; (ii) value chain approach; (iii) employment of young people and women; and (iv) 

resilience to climate change. To ensure good quality-at-entry and to anticipate performance essential to 

the start-up of activities, the initial sites chosen for development were those for which studies were 

available or at an advanced stage (market gardening sites, Contuboel, National Agricultural Research 

Institute (INPA) station, etc.). All these arrangements will help to satisfy the design and implementation 

criteria set out in Presidential Directive No. 002/2015. 

2.8 Key Performance Indicators 

The monitoring and evaluation specialist will be responsible for the internal monitoring and evaluation 

of project activities and logical framework indicators, working in liaison with the technical experts (rural 

engineer, food crop specialist and producer organizations). Special emphasis will be placed on the 

targeting of areas that might be monitored and collected internally, and those relating specifically to 

women and young people (data disaggregated for women and young people). The main performance 

indicators that will be monitored from the baseline scenario include: (i) surface area of lowlands and 

mangroves developed with partial control for rice; (ii) surface area of rice-growing areas developed with 

full control; (iii) surface area of market gardening areas developed; (iv) infrastructure developed 

(number of markets commissioned, kilometres of farm roads, number of stores for storage of produce, 

number of input shops, etc.); (v) level of additional production (tonnes) and crop yields (t/ha); (vi) 

number of farmers (including women) per type of facility; (vii) number of demonstration units (DUs), 

technological review workshops organized; (viii) number of structured producer organizations and 

management committees established, (ix) growth level of farmers’ income, including those of women 

and young people; (x) number of jobs created for young people and women through entrepreneurial 

initiatives and number of young entrepreneurs who set up operations; (xi) number of producers, 

processors and traders trained and organized; (xii) level of involvement of women in decision-making 

bodies and their rate of access to post-development land; (xiii) number of processing units established 

and allocated (including for women); and (xiv) number of nutrition activities supported and level of 

incidence on food and nutrition security. All indicators selected for the project will be aligned on those 

selected for the PNIA and will help to enhance the performance of the agricultural sector in Guinea-

Bissau. The Bank’s various supervision missions and periodic activity reports will reflect the level of 

achievement of the indicators. 

III Project Feasibility 

 

3.1 Financial and Economic Performance 

Table 3.1: Main Economic and Financial Data 

NPV (baseline scenario) CFAF 7,378 million  

IRR (baseline scenario) 14.6% 

ERR (baseline scenario) 17.1% 

 

3.1.1 The project’s financial and economic analysis was conducted based on cost/benefit of 

additional cash flow from the production models of the two priority sectors (rice and market gardening). 

The following assumptions were used: (i) the period for evaluating the impact of PDCV-Riz is 25 years; 

(ii) the average basic prices, yields and production costs of the 2015/2016 farm year were selected for 

the baseline scenario and realistic projections were made up to the cruising period of the project, taking 

into account the existing potential and the absorptive capacity of beneficiaries; (iii) additional income 

was determined by calculating the difference between the baseline scenario and the with-project 



 

10 

scenario, based on gross proceeds less production costs; (iv) an equal inflation rate was selected for jobs 

and resources on the cash flow table; (v) for the calculation of the economic rate of return, a cost 

correction coefficient was added for factors related to distortions inherent in customs duty. The detailed 

assumptions of the financial and economic analysis, the tables of the operating models (baseline 

scenario and with-project scenario) and financial and economic flows are presented in Annex B7 of 

Volume 2. The results of the financial and economic analysis show that PDCV-Riz is financially and 

economically sustainable. 

3.1.2 Financial performance: The additional income resulting from the different development and 

operating models selected is as follows: (i) mangroves with partial water control (rice): CFAF 555 

000/hectare and CFAF 278 000 per operator; (ii) lowlands with partial water control (rice): FCFA 676 

000/hectare and FCFA 290 000 per operator; (iii) lowlands with full water control (double cropping of 

rice and seeds): CFAF 2 220 000/hectare and CFAF 555 000 per operator; (iv) lowlands with full water 

control (double cropping of rice for final consumption): CFAF 1 376 000/hectare and CFAF 344 000 

per operator; and (v) irrigated market gardening: CFAF 3 415 000/hectare and CFAF 341 000 per 

beneficiary. The additional income generated will help to increase the overall value added of the project 

and hence its contribution to the agricultural GDP. The internal rate of return (IRR) is estimated at 

14.60%, for an NPV of CFAF 6,974 million. With sensitivity tests established based on a 10% income 

reduction, a 10% cost increase and a 10% simultaneous cost increase and income reduction, the IRR 

comes to 12.3%, 12.5% and 10.3%, respectively. This IRR is relatively satisfactory and will help to 

reduce the poverty rates in the project area.  

3.1.3 Economic performance: The economic rate of return (ERR) stands at 17.1%, for a net present 

value (NPV) of CFAF 7,378 million. In the context of Guinea-Bissau, this amount is significant: by 

comparison, it represented 11.2% of the country’s tax revenue or 1.3% of its GDP in 2014. The 

sensitivity tests established on the same basis as above bring the ERR to 14.6%, 14.8% and 12.5%, 

respectively. The other project economic impacts can be summarized as follows: (i) upstream effects of 

additional income on providers (NGOs, businesses, suppliers, engineering firms); (ii) downstream 

effects of the generation of additional income on producers, traders and processors, essentially women; 

(iii) decrease in foreign exchange costs owing to the sharp reduction of rice import costs in the trade 

balance; and (iv) the incidence on wealth creation in the country owing to an increase in GDP resulting 

from the generation of additional value added. For households, the benefits of the project will translate 

into, among other things, better nutrition for vulnerable groups (children, women of child-bearing age 

and the elderly); reduction of medical bills and the difficulty of agricultural tasks, especially those 

performed by women; decrease in the incidence of monetary and non-monetary poverty; strengthening 

of livelihoods and resilience of the targets of PDCV-Riz in relation to food insecurity and the effects of 

climate change. 

3.2 Environmental and Social Impact 

3.2.1 Environment: The environmental and social impacts of the facilities of PDCV-Riz will not be 

significant. The facilities will be relatively modest and will be built in less environmentally sensitive 

communities. Their dispersion throughout the two regions of Oio and Bafata will also reduce their 

impacts. It is also worth noting that there are no protected areas or reserved forests3 in the project area. 

The main impacts anticipated are quite positive. Appropriate measures will be taken to address the 

potential negative impacts (conflicts between farmers and herders, poor use of pesticides, water-borne 

diseases, etc.). Under the Bank’s Environmental Safeguards Policies, the project was classified in 

Category 2 and was the subject of a strategic environmental assessment, and an environmental and 

social management framework was developed because the sites where the infrastructure will be located 

had not yet been selected. The Competent Environmental Assessment Authority (AAAC) of Guinea-

Bissau has also classified the project in Category B, the equivalent of the Bank’s Category 2 

                                                 
3 Guinea-Bissau does not have a forest reserve. Its primary forest relics are being gradually replaced by mono-specific cashew farms, considerably 

reducing biodiversity in the two regions.   



 

11 

classification, pursuant to Act No. 10/2010 of 24 September 2010 on environmental assessments. The 

environmental and social management framework as well as its summary were approved by the 

Safeguards Division and published on the Bank’s website on 7 November 2016. 

3.2.2 For the implementation of the environmental aspects of the project, the arrangements made 

with the AAAC include: validation of the environmental and social assessment reports at the national 

level, AAAC’s implication in the environmental screening of sub-projects, validation of impact studies 

related to the sub-projects, and where applicable, oversight of the implementation of mitigation 

measures, as well as environmental monitoring. In this regard, the project will sign a memorandum of 

cooperation with the AAAC for better management of the environmental aspects of the project. The 

budget for future impact studies of sub-projects, implementation of resulting measures, the capacity-

building programme for the administration and the beneficiary population, institutional support for the 

AAAC and environmental monitoring is estimated at slightly more than UA 71 000. The capacity 

building will address directly a constraint identified in the CSP for Guinea-Bissau.  

3.2.3 Climate change: The project was classified a Category 2 project following climate screening 

based on the Bank’s safeguards system against the effects of climate change. This category corresponds 

to projects that may be vulnerable to climate risks and that require a climate risk review and the proposal 

of appropriate adaptation measures to mitigate those risks.  

3.2.4 Main characteristics of the country’s climate: Despite the relative climate stability seen over 

the past few decades, there are still some variability in the country’s climate parameters, in particular 

irregularity in the frequency of rainfall and a worsening of the rainfall deficit in a few regions, notably 

the North and the East. Projections by the Weather Service for 2100 call for an 11.7% decrease in 

rainfall, a 2% increase in temperature and a 50-cm increase in average sea levels. However, rainfall 

surpluses can also be seen from year to year in certain parts of the country, due essentially to exceptional 

climate events attributable, in particular, to global climate disturbances. However, the level of variation 

in rainfall over the past decade remains low. 

3.2.5 Main climate risks in the project area: There is no known history of severe drought in the 

project area. During the rainy season, rice farms may sometimes become flooded in places during 

periods of normal rainfall. This phenomenon is primarily the result of sand silting in the natural canals 

that serve as outlets to the production sites. 

3.2.6 Mitigation measures: To deal with the effects of climate change, the project will adopt the 

measures prescribed by the National Action Programme for Adaptation to Climate Change (PANA) 

following participatory assessments of the country’s vulnerability and adaptation to climate change, 

based on the agricultural sector diagnoses. The PANA offers a set of adaptation measures, most notably 

a significant increase in the level of food security among the people by building the adaptation capacity 

of agricultural production systems, in order to reduce the pressure on forest and fishery resources, while 

improving access to drinking water for human consumption and for cattle. The project fully aligns its 

activities on PANA’s strategic orientations by developing lowlands and horticulture, with a view to 

strengthening the food and nutrition security of the beneficiary population. The project will use a holistic 

approach that is designed to eliminate constraints at all levels of the rice and horticultural value chains. 

More specifically, it will introduce in the horticultural areas solar technology for water control and for 

reducing substantially the use of fossil energies in the dewatering systems.  

3.2.7 For better management of occasional flooding in rice fields, the natural canals of the target 

sites will be drained and resized to allow for the evacuation of any excess flow in the rice-growing 

lowlands concerned. To prevent sanding in rice fields, which is the primary cause of flooding in the 

lowlands, bunds consolidated with soil-fixing plants will be built opposite slopes with strong runoff. At 

the foot of the bunds, evacuators will be created to make it easy for runoff to be drained laterally to 

appropriate deposition areas. Water resources will be better managed with facilities, which will be 

upgraded and equipped with an adequate drainage system. Irrigation will be offered on sites with water 



 

12 

potential that can adequately meet crop water needs. The project will also make it easier for producers 

to acquire certified seeds by putting in place a programme related to the INPA and multiplier 

organizations. It will also introduce reasoned use of fertilizer to improve yields, and hence agricultural 

productivity. The related agricultural infrastructure will be set up and designed with additional measures 

for adapting to climate change, to make them more resilient. 

3.2.8 Involuntary resettlement: The activities of PDCV-Riz will not lead to any resettlement of 

people or restriction of access to goods and means of living. 

3.2.9 Gender: In collaboration with UN-Women, the Bank established a gender profile for Guinea-

Bissau in 2014. The situational analysis shows that, out of a population of 1.7 million people (2014 

estimate), 50.3 % are women. The average number of school enrolment among women is 1.4 and 76.5 

% of women live below the poverty line. This unfavourable situation for women is even more 

pronounced at a time of political instability and weak economic performance in the country. Even 

though more than 80% of women work in the agricultural sector, including in the processing and 

marketing of farm products, access to land, particularly for rice farming, and to factors of production 

remains limited. They are confined to farm work and to processing with rustic implements. In the 

regions targeted by the project, 60% of rice farmers in the lowlands are women. The horticultural areas 

are essentially used by women, who occupy virtually the entire value chain. |For this project, and in 

keeping with its new strategy, the Bank will pay special attention to the strategic interests of women, 

promotion of inclusive growth and improvement of the status of women in the two regions covered.  

3.2.10 The project will give priority to rural activities undertaken by women, for which they have 

recognized expertise (market gardening, lowland rice farming, processing activities, marketing, etc.) 

and from which they can derive an income. The three horticultural areas are essentially reserved for 

women, as is a good portion of lowland rice fields, with land-securing mechanisms that will be 

supported by the project (social assessment, consultation frameworks, licensing, etc.). The increase in 

the purchasing power of beneficiaries (income rising from CFAF 114 000 to 359 000/rice farm and 

from CFAF 37 000 to 373 000/market gardening farm) will enable the 1 720 households concerned, 

particularly the women, to have easier access to basic socio-economic services. The project will apply 

affirmative action in favour of women and vulnerable groups in any area where local practices tend to 

exclude them from decision-making bodies or from certain benefits. In general, the project will ensure 

that women have access to factors of production (developed land, agricultural inputs, production 

equipment and materials), in the organization and management of new infrastructure (stores, markets, 

etc.), as well as access to training. Therefore, it will help to strengthen the economic empowerment and 

decision-making power of women, which will give them greater social visibility and bolster their socio-

economic status. Specifically, the budget allocated specifically to gender promotion activities is UA 

833 000. 

3.2.11 Nutrition: The project will develop initiatives to improve the hygiene and nutritional quality 

of food consumed by the people, especially by women and children, and will collaborate with the World 

Food Programme to develop three school canteens as a pilot. The additional production of rice (2 000 

tonnes) and horticultural products (390 tonnes) will help to improve feeding and nutrition, and hence 

the health of the population. The need to incorporate direct nutrition activities into the project activities 

is essential to have an impact on the nutritional status of the population. Specific and indirect nutrition 

activities of the programme will also help to improve the nutritional status of children and women. The 

setting up of vegetable gardens in some schools with the help of women’s groups will contribute to 

enhancing the food regime within the communities. Activities designed to prevent the resurgence of 

water-borne diseases will also help to improve health and nutrition among the population. 

3.2.12 Social: The different activities undertaken as part of the project (improved access to factors of 

production, technical itineraries for production, processing and marketing) will help considerably in 

ensuring food and nutrition security, and raising income levels. In so doing, they will help to reduce the 

poverty rate considerably. The project will further strengthen connectivity between producers and 



 

13 

markets through partnerships that will be beneficial for all actors of the rice and horticulture value 

chains. Strengthening food security through the developments and raising awareness of good feeding 

practices will help to improve the nutritional status of the population, particularly of vulnerable groups 

such as women of childbearing age and children below the age of five. The rehabilitation of roads, 

construction of storage/conservation stores, rehabilitation of markets and support of processing units 

will contribute to reducing post-harvest losses (expected to decline by at least 20%), make it easier to 

sell products, and therefore increase agricultural production and household income. By making it easier 

for beneficiaries to participate in decision-making processes and to secure land (management of 

community infrastructure, management of conflicts between farmers and herders, maintenance of access 

roads, etc.), the project will also be instrumental in bolstering the local development process and 

promoting good governance.  

3.2.13 The promotion of rural entrepreneurship among young people and women (close to 100 

persons targeted), will help to create a business culture among people proposing projects aimed at 

increasing the income of poor people and creating jobs for young people and women. The development 

of agricultural entrepreneurship will make the rural areas more attractive and create several production 

hubs in the project area, through training of young producers and helping them set up their operations. 

This approach will make it possible to obtain concrete results and ensure that actions are sustainable. 

The project will also make it easier for young promoters to acquire materials, equipment and critical 

inputs (basic kits) based on their business plans and areas of specialization. The training will involve 

basic concepts and specialization modules. There will also be a la carte training, taking into account the 

specific needs identified in the project area  

IV Implementation 

 

4.1 Implementation Arrangements 

4.1.1 Implementation procedure: The project implementation will hinge on an autonomous 

coordination arrangement, involving a small team based at Bafata and placed under the supervisory 

authority of the MADR, with a liaison office at Bissau. The team will comprise a national coordinator, 

an administrative and financial officer responsible for accounting management, a procurement 

specialist, a monitoring/evaluation officer, a rural engineering expert, an agricultural engineer 

specialized in value chains and a specialist in famer organizations and gender, a liaison officer based in 

Bissau and support staff. Given its experience (proper understanding of Bank procedures, participation 

in formulation, etc.), and good results obtained in the implementation of PRESAR, the PRESAR expert 

team will be responsible for implementing and monitoring PDCV-Riz activities. An order was issued 

by the MADR on 26 October 2016 confirming the team. The experts will all sign a performance 

contract, which will be evaluated annually.  

4.1.2 Considering the weak capacity of State services and actors at the grassroots, NGOs 

(APRODEL and ADPP, which are firmly implanted respectively in Bafata and Oio) will be recruited to 

strengthen the conduct of activities in the areas of leadership, advisory support and training, structuring 

and organization of producers, around value chains. Agreements and protocols will be signed with these 

entities, specifying their respective roles and the expected outcomes. An agreement will also be signed 

with the Competent Environmental Assessment Authority (AAAC) for the environmental monitoring 

of the project. Furthermore, the project will ensure close involvement of the regional directorates of 

agriculture in Bafata and Oio. Private service providers (contractors, consulting firms, NGOs, individual 

consultants, etc.) will be responsible for the delivery of certain works, goods and services, in accordance 

with the procurement methods defined in the financing agreements. The NGOs known as ADPP and 

APRODEL, which have specific infrastructure and expertise in the project area, will be responsible for 

training, structuring and producer support. The local population will take part in certain labour-intensive 

works (ring dykes, live hedges and routine maintenance) under the supervision of specialized NGOs 

and with the support of the Directorate-General of Forestry and Wildlife. 



 

14 

4.1.3 Supervision of activities: A Steering Committee will be set up, chaired by the Minister in 

charge of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MADR), or his/her designated 

representative. The Committee's secretarial services will be provided by the Project Coordinator. In 

addition to the relevant MADR technical departments, the Steering Committee will comprise: the 

Directorate-General for Planning, the Ministry of Infrastructure, the Secretariat of State for the 

Environment, the Ministry in charge of Women and Youth, ANAG and QNCOCPA. Its functions will 

include: (i) monitoring the project implementation; (ii) ensuring coherence and planning of eligible 

activities; (iii) conducting an annual review of the progress report, and approving the annual technical 

programme and budget; (iv) evaluating the project impacts and outcomes; (v) identifying constraints to 

and opportunities for the improvement of project impacts; and (vi) ensuring technical and 

methodological compliance with project objectives, the objectives of the Terra Ranka PSO and relevant 

sector policies, including the PNIA and the Rice Development Strategy. The Steering Committee will 

meet twice a year to review the project outcomes, validate the financial statements, discuss the 

programmes and approve the budgets related thereto. 

4.1.4 Procurement: The procurement of goods (including non-consultancy services), works and 

consultancy services financed by the Bank for the project will be carried out in accordance with the 

Procurement Framework for Operations Financed by the Bank Group, October 2015, and in accordance 

with the provisions set out in the financing agreements. However, although progress has been made to 

forge public procurement in Guinea-Bissau into a functional system, substantial progress remains to be 

made, notably in the regulatory and management frameworks, internal and external oversight, the 

complaints mechanism, building the capacity of all actors in public procurement, and putting in place 

mechanisms for the coherent and effective operationalization of the various bodies involved in the 

process (ANAP, DGCP and ARCP). Risk assessment was carried out at the country, sector and project 

levels and the procurement capacity of the executing agency evaluated. The outcomes (substantial risks 

for the most part) helped to guide the selection of the procurement system (Borrower, Bank, or Third 

Party) used for specific activities or for a set of similar activities under the project. Therefore, the Bank's 

Procurement Methods and Procedures (BPMPs) based on the relevant standard competitive bidding 

documents (SCBDs) will be used for the procurement of goods, works and consultancy services. 

Appropriate risk mitigation measures have been included in the PERCA Action Plan provided in 

paragraph B.5.2 of Annex B5, Volume 2.  

4.1.5 Financial management: Given that the public management system in force in the MADR was 

deemed unsatisfactory upon assessment, a parallel accounting system based on the SYSCOHADA 

accrual accounting method will be set up and managed by a PMU officer responsible for the 

administrative, financial and accounting management of the project. The PMU of PDCV-Riz will 

comprise, in addition to the other experts, an Administrative and Financial Officer (AFO) who will have 

at his/her disposal the management tools that were procured under PRESAR. These tools, comprising 

the administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual and the accounting management 

software package, will be updated and adapted to the new project prior to its start-up and the staff trained 

in the use of such tools. The AFO will produce quarterly financial monitoring reports providing details 

on the implementation of activities and the use of the financial resources of the project, and an annual 

financial statements consisting of the balance sheet, table of supply and use, status of the capital assets 

and notes to the financial statements to which the reconciliation statement of the special account will be 

annexed. The satisfactory experience acquired by the Project Management Unit of the Bank-financed 

PRESAR project warrants the maintenance of the same financial management staff since they have the 

requisite qualifications. Training on Bank financial management requirements will be provided by Bank 

experts at project launch. 

4.1.6 Disbursements: The financial implementation of the project will mainly involve the 

reimbursement, special account and direct payment methods. An account will be opened with a 

commercial bank acceptable to the Bank to receive part of the ADF loan resources and will be used to 

finance operating expenses. Opening of this account will be a condition precedent to first disbursement. 



 

15 

This special account will be used for an initial advance whose amount will be determined based on the 

estimated budget for six months of project activities. The special account will be replenished on the 

same basis after the borrower must have justified the use of at least 50% of the amount of the previous 

advance. The direct payment method will be used for expenses relating to goods, services and works 

contracts. Training in Bank disbursement rules and procedures will be provided at the project launch. 

4.1.7 Audits: In accordance with the general conditions applicable to African Development Fund 

financing agreements, the country shall account for the use of the resources that it will be allocated. 

Therefore, an independent and competent external audit firm will verify once a year the reliability of 

the consolidated annual financial statements prepared by the project management team, and will assess 

the functioning of the internal oversight system of the entire project. The audit firm will be recruited 

according the Bank’s terms of reference and following a competitive bidding procedure recommended 

by the Bank. The terms of reference shall be subject to the Bank’s prior approval. The continuation of 

audit services during the last two years will be contingent on the Bank's validation of the audit report 

for the first year. The audit expenses will be financed with ADF resources. Audit reports will be 

forwarded to the Bank on an annual basis latest six months following the close of the audited fiscal year. 

4.2 Monitoring  

4.2.1 Monitoring mechanisms: The project's monitoring and evaluation system will be designed in 

relation to the activities selected and the expected outputs and outcomes contained in the logical 

framework of the project. The system will be participatory and will provide regular information on 

performance and impact indicators as well as on the implementation of planned activities. The project 

partners will be systematically involved in the data collection and monitoring effort. A baseline situation 

will be established, based on the final hydro-agricultural sites selected. The monitoring and evaluation 

framework will systematically include gender-disaggregated data to make the outcomes concerning 

women, youths and the most vulnerable groups more visible. Targeted surveys will also be conducted 

to better understand issues relating to income, food security, nutrition, job creation, gender 

mainstreaming, and aspects related to vulnerability and resilience. The information collected will be fed 

into the computerized monitoring and evaluation system to capture actual values and gauge the impacts 

and outcomes of the project. This information will be recorded in periodic progress reports, highlighting 

the level of progress of the project and the achievement of outcomes. External monitoring and evaluation 

missions involving the relevant sector departments and GAPLA will also be organized regularly by the 

Government, in addition to the two annual supervision missions fielded by the African Development 

Bank with the support of its Dakar Office.  

  



 

16 

4.2.2 The following is a summary of the provisional project implementation schedule: 

 

Activities  Date/ Period   Responsible Entity 

Preparation May-August 2016  AfDB/Govt. 

Preparation of the ESMF September 2016  AfDB 

Evaluation 1st half October 2016  AfDB/Govt. 

Preparation of priority PDs and CBDs 4th quarter 2016/1st half 2017  PMU 

Appointment of PMU 26 October 2016  AfDB/Govt. 

PDCV-Riz negotiation 21 November 2016  Govt./AfDB 

Board of Directors 14 December 2016  AfDB 

Signing of the financing agreement January 2017  AfDB/Govt. 

Effectiveness of the first disbursement February-March 2017  Govt./AfDB 

Launching of PDCV-Riz end of 1st quarter 2017  AfDB/Govt./PMU 

Signing of agreements with partners 1st half of 2017  PMU/Partners/ST 

Preparation of remaining PDs and CBDs 2017 to 1st half 2018  PMU/MAEP 

Works implementation and service delivery 2017 to 2019  Contractors/Firms/PMU 

Implementation of operational activities 2017 to 2020  PMU/Govt./Sce. Providers  

Mid-term review 1st quarter 2019  AfDB/Govt./PMU 

Project completion date 31 December 2020  PMU/GVT/AfDB 

Completion report 2nd quarter 2021  AfDB/Govt. 

 

4.3 Governance 

4.3.1 Indicators relating to political, economic and social governance remain mixed in Guinea-

Bissau, despite the progress made in recent years. As regards political governance, it is necessary to 

find lasting resolutions to possible conflicts and establish mechanisms for ensuring justice. Indeed, in 

2016, the country was ranked 44th out of 54 countries in the Mo Ibrahim African Governance Index 

(and particularly 43rd in the rule of law sub-indicator). In the area of economic governance, particularly 

in public financial management, the country’s performance has deteriorated as a result of the crisis and 

the capacity to mobilize domestic resources remains weak, as noted in the Bank’s analysis on the 

governance of projects approved in 2015 and in the CPIA scores for 2016 (Country Policy and 

Institutional Assessment).   

4.3.2 As part of PDCV-Riz implementation, and in an effort to mitigate the risks inherent in the 

weaknesses and instability of the administration and improve the project quality-at-entry, it was decided 

to maintain the Project Management Unit (PMU) of the Agricultural and Rural Sectors Rehabilitation 

Project (PRESAR), since this PMU was already conversant with Bank procedures, and to capitalize on 

existing implementation studies, particularly those relating BOAD and PESAR capitalization. 

Moreover, although progress has been achieved in aligning the procurement system on WAEMU 

guidelines, the bureaucracy characterizing the procurement system is still one of the main challenges in 

the implementation of development programmes. Regarding procurement, operational arrangements 

were adopted to address the weaknesses observed.   

4.4 Sustainability  

Rudimentary facilities often have a limited lifespan and require major rehabilitation from time to time, 

which may exceed the capacity of beneficiaries, including women, who are heavily involved in rice 

farming. In this respect, the project will pay special attention to the quality and sustainability of the 

facilities that will be put in place. Structuring works will be carried out based on detailed technical 

studies and will involve specialized enterprises or skilled jobbers. That will concern works on large-

scale retention, anti-salt or protection dykes, major drainage ditches and irrigation canals, spillways, 

certain levelling works, etc. Labour-intensive techniques will be reserved only for certain secondary 

developments that can be reasonably carried out by the people, such as routine maintenance of facilities 

that been built already. On the other hand, the facilities enhance the people's adaptive capacity and 

resilience to recurrent climate risks, and reduce the economic vulnerability of beneficiaries. The high 

motivation of the beneficiaries observed during field missions is a factor that guarantees their 



 

17 

participation in all maintenance activities and works, and consequently the sustainability of the facilities. 

Other factors that will contribute to the sustainability of the project include secure tenure rights over the 

land where the project is located, support for the organization of beneficiaries and adoption of 

management tools to ensure the proper maintenance and the settlement of the recurrent costs of 

infrastructure (irrigation schemes, markets, stores, farm-to-market roads, etc.), and enhancement of the 

organization of producers. In addition, activities under the component for the promotion of rural 

entrepreneurship, processing and market access are sources that will generate value added and create 

wealth, which are factors of ownership of project achievements by the direct beneficiaries.   

4.5 Risk Management  

Political instability, coupled with a difficult economic situation, poses a real risk to the implementation 

of this project, and other portfolio operations. The weak capacity of the technical services involved, lack 

of familiarity with the procedures and the cumbersome procurement process, weak ownership of project 

achievements by beneficiaries and risks of conflicts between farmers and transhumant stockbreeders 

could adversely impact adherence to the project implementation schedule and the achievement of 

outcomes. However, these risks will be minimized by the fact that: (i) the development of the 

infrastructure needed to improve socio-economic and environmental resilience will lay the groundwork 

for inclusive growth and improved stability; (ii) the project team (formerly the PRESAR team) is already 

familiar with Bank procedures; (iii) the involvement of technical services and beneficiaries in the 

preparation of PDCV-Riz and the selection of sites, land tenure security measures, and the structuring 

and training of management and maintenance committees involving women, will lead to better 

performance and ownership. Through its second component, PDCV-Riz will scale up the support 

provided to communities in order to guarantee the sustainability and durability of investments, on an 

economically and socially viable basis.  

4.6 Knowledge Building 

PDCV-Riz operations that will lead to better management and knowledge development may be 

summarized as follows: (i) strengthening of local expertise in the area of local community resilience 

and adaptability to the recurrent impacts of climate change, through hydro-agricultural works and better 

control of water resources; (ii) dissemination of new production and processing technologies: 

development of expertise in drip irrigation techniques by setting up a demonstration site at the Bissora 

ADPP location, dissemination of solar dryers and onion storage sheds, and promotion of mechanization; 

(iii) establishment of demonstration units and dissemination of best practice: integrated soil fertility 

management (ISFM), sustainable land management (SLM), integrated water resource management 

(IWRM) and integrated pest and production management (IPPM) will help to protect and preserve 

resources, and mitigate the vulnerability of soil resources; (iv) organization of production and 

transformation technology review workshops and exchange visits as tools for encouraging interaction 

between researchers, consultants and producers in an effort to adapt technologies to the local context; 

(v) conduct of awareness and information campaigns through various communication channels 

(community radios, media programmes, websites, films, etc.); and (vi) promotion of innovative youth 

and women's employability actions in conjunction with ADPP, and activities to enhance the resilience 

of vulnerable groups to food and nutrition insecurity.   

V Legal Framework  

 

5.1 Legal Instrument  

The legal framework of the project will be a Protocol Agreement and a Loan Agreement signed between 

the Republic of Guinea-Bissau and the Bank. 

 

 



 

18 

5.2 Conditions Associated with the Bank’s Intervention  

5.2.1 The legal framework of the project will be an ADF Loan Agreement and an ADF Grant 

Protocol between the Republic of Guinea-Bissau and the Bank. The agreements thus signed, to the 

satisfaction of the two parties in both form and substance, will include the terms and conditions of use. 

The effectiveness of the ADF Loan Agreement will be subject to the fulfilment by the Borrower of the 

conditions set forth in Section 12.01 of the General Conditions Applicable to Loan and Guarantee 

Agreements of the Bank (ratification of the Loan Agreement and legal opinion). The ADF Grant 

Protocol will be effective from the date of its signature.  

5.2.2 In addition to the effectiveness of the two financing agreements, the first disbursement of the 

ADF loan and grant will be subject to the fulfilment by the Borrower/Donee, to the satisfaction of the 

Fund, of the following single condition: 

(i) Provide evidence of opening of an account, in the project's name, with a commercial 
bank acceptable to the Fund to receive part of the ADF loan resources, and including full 

bank references of the account. 

5.2.3 Regarding other terms and conditions, the Borrower/Donee will further transmit, to the 

satisfaction of the Fund, at the latest six months after the first disbursement: 

(i) The agreements signed with APRODEL and ADPP (both NGOs), which must have been 
previously submitted to the Bank for approval. 

(ii) The project's administrative, accounting and financial management procedures manual. 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

This project complies with all applicable Bank policies. The project will be implemented within the 

framework of the Bank's intervention strategy in Guinea-Bissau, as defined in the CSP 2015-2019. 

VI Recommendation 

 

Management recommends that the Board of Directors of the Fund approve the proposal to award an 

ADF grant of UA 0.493 million and extend an ADF loan of UA 3.722 million to the Republic of Guinea-

Bissau, for the purpose and according to the terms and conditions set out in this report. 

 
























































AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND 

 
 
 

 
 
 

MALAWI 
 
 
 
 

AGRICULTURAL INFRASTRUCTURE AND YOUTH IN AGRIBUSINESS PROJECT 
(AIYAP) 

 
APPRAISAL REPORT 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Loan Information 

Client’s information 

 
BORROWER:      Government of Malawi  

 

EXECUTING AGENCY:                             Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water 

Development  

 

Financing plan 

 

Source Amount (UA) Instrument 

 

ADF 

 

16.00 million  

 

Loan  

EU  1.60 million  Grant 

Government  1.76 million  In- Kind 

TOTAL COST 19.36million  

 

 

Important Financial Information (ADF Loan and EU Grant) 

   

 ADF Loan EU Grant 

Grant/Loan Currency UA EUROS 

Type of Interest N/A N/A 

Interest Rate Margin N/A N/A 

Commitment Charge/Fee 0.5% N/A 

Service Charge 

0.75%on 

disbursement/outstanding 

loan 
N/A 

Tenor 40 years N/A 

Grace Period 10 years N/A 

FIRR, NPV (base case) 23%, NPV value at 18% (USD 3.8 million) 

EIRR (base case) 26%, NPV value at 12% (USD 7.2 million) 

   

 

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected) 

 
Concept Note Approval  

 
February , 2016 

Project Approval September, 2016 

Effectiveness February, 2017 

Completion June, 2022 

Last Disbursement September, 2022 

Last Repayment  



 

iv 

Project Summary  

1 Project Overview  

1.1 The Malawi Agricultural Infrastructure and Youth in Agribusiness Project (AIYAP) is to 

deploy irrigation infrastructure as an enabler and facilitator to address the twin problems of food 

insecurity and high rate of youth unemployment within the context of 2011-2016 Malawi Growth and 

Development Strategy (MGDS) which identifies agriculture and food security, irrigation and green belt 

initiatives as drivers of economic growth. Malawi’s agriculture sector is highly vulnerable to the adverse 

impacts of climate change and extreme weather events, such as dry spells, droughts and floods. The 

sector is also characterized by low level of irrigation development, and low uptake of improved farm 

inputs. In addition, low profitability of smallholder agriculture is influenced by weak links to profitable 

markets which make value addition seemingly impossible because of lack of information between the 

farmers and the processors, high transport costs, weak farmer organizations, poor quality control, lack 

of market information, as well as limited participation of the youth in agricultural development and 

businesses. The proposed project, will develop two large scale irrigation schemes at Linga (Nkhata-

Bay) and Dwambazi (Nkhotakota) covering 1945 hectares, targeting 10,000 beneficiaries with special 

focus on the youth (about 50%). The project is to use irrigation infrastructure as an enabler to scale up 

the production of maize, rice, sugar and horticulture production and value chain in project areas in 

particular and Malawi in general.  

 

1.2 The project apart from mitigating the challenges arising from dependency on rain-fed production 

will also promote youth ownership of agribusiness, access to funding/credit through seed funds, loan 

facilities and risk sharing from Micro Finance Institutions, agro -processing, engaging in value addition, 

modern methods of crop diversification and market linkages. Socially, the project by introducing youth 

skill acquisition, entrepreneurship development and job creation will address social vices such abuse, 

prostitution, violent crime etc. In addition, the project will also reduce rural and urban migration as well 

as cross border migration of youth in the targeted areas. It is estimated that within four and half years 

the project will produce 500 Agripreneurs, train about 100 artisans for the maintenance of irrigation 

infrastructure, launching 175 new agribusinesses and employing about 4600 additional persons, 

including out-growers. It is expected that at least 50% of the beneficiaries will be female.  

 

1.3 The project has four components namely (i.) Irrigation Infrastructure & Watershed Management, 

(ii.) Youth Entrepreneurship, market linkages, agro-processing and Value Addition (iii.) Agro-

Cooperative Development and Enhancement and (iv) Project Management and Institutions 

Strengthening.  

2 Needs Assessment:  

The need for the Project is justified by the priorities in the Malawi Growth and Development Strategies 

II (MGDS II: 2011-2016) which emphasizes on agriculture, food security, irrigation and water 

development.  As a consequence, there is an urgent need for transformation of the agriculture sector to 

enhance sustainable growth and break the cycle of food insecurity as espoused in the National Export 

Strategy, 2015 Irrigation Master Plan and Investment Framework and the draft National Irrigation 

Policy, Green Belt Initiative and the National Agriculture Policy focusing on commercialization of 

agriculture.    In addition, the 2013-2018 Malawi National Export Strategy, identifies agriculture value 

chains driven by private operators including smallholder farmers, youth entrepreneurs, women’s 

groups, MSMEs and large businesses to boost and diversify exports in order to improve Malawi’s 

growth prospects as the bedrock of the economy. The Project is a direct response to GoM’s desire to 

enhance agricultural productivity by promoting irrigated agriculture and dynamize the sector through 

active youth participation in agribusiness for job creation in order to meet the objectives of these 

policies. 

 

 



 

v 

3 Cost and Financing   

The project total cost of AIYAP is estimated at $US27.50 million (UA19.36million), to be financed by 

the Bank UA16 million ADF loan, EU €2 million grant (parallel financing) about  UA 1.6 million and 

Government contribution in kind estimated at UA1.7 million.   

4 Implementation  

The project will have a PIU which staff will be externally recruited through a competitive process and 

serve on full time basis. The project will recruit competitively a Technical Adviser (TA)   at the 

commencement of implementation ENABLE YOUTH sub-component of the project. The TA will work 

with the Lilongwe University of Agriculture and Natural Resources (LUANAR) for one year after which 

LUANAR will take over the full implementation of the component. The PIU will be reporting to the 

Principal Secretary for the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development. There will be a 

Technical Committee comprising Directors of relevant Departments to assist with the implementation. 

The composition of the Committee will be determined by the Government. The Technical Committee 

will report to the Project Steering Committee chaired by PS MoAIWD which will approve the work 

plans and budgets and guide the project on policy matters.  

5 Bank’s Added Value  

The Bank’s intervention in this project will add significant value to the investments already made in 

agriculture and irrigation projects by the Government of Malawi, the Bank and other development 

partners. It will give impetus and acts as boost to the efforts/programmes of the GoM in youth 

development through entrepreneurship in agriculture value chains and agribusiness. The project is in 

line with the TYS 2013-2022 which focusses on inclusive growth and transitioning to green growth. 

The project focus on youth unemployment through skills development and entrepreneurship in is line 

with the TYS. Finally, the Bank’s intervention has the multiplier effect on economic development 

through infrastructure development and private sector development in line with the Malawi Country 

Strategy 2013-2017 and is aligned to three of the five pillars of Bank’s ‘High 5’ i.e. Feed Africa, 

Industrialise Africa, and Improved livelihood. 

6 Knowledge Management  

The knowledge gained through the implementation of several projects and studies in the sector in 

Malawi has been duly applied in designing this project. In the same pattern, the knowledge that will be 

generated by this Project will contribute significantly to the design and implementation of agricultural 

interventions within the Agriculture Sector Wide Approach (ASWAp) arrangement and build the 

capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development (MAIWD) and other 

Ministries particularly the Ministries of Labour, Youth and Manpower Development, and Trade and 

Industries. Consequently, useful information will be generated for similar future interventions. AIYAP 

will, in addition to irrigation development, focus on agro-processing and value addition, agriculture 

cooperative development and agribusiness along agriculture value chains as well as building of 

entrepreneurship skills and generations of bankable projects in agriculture value chains which will 

provide lessons in the post-harvest management, processing and marketing of various crops to inform 

project designs of similar projects in the future. The Bank is a key member of the Donor Committee on 

Agriculture and Food Security (DCAFS) and the lessons learnt from this project will be shared with 

other Development Partners through DCAFS platform. ASWAp, through the Bank, will provide 

information generated from AIYAP to key stakeholders for knowledge sharing and coalition building 

through the agriculture sector working group. The results from the various studies and surveys, 

including the socio-economic impact study will inform the stakeholders on how to put the acquired 

knowledge attributes into practical use for better results-oriented achievements and sustained benefit 

flows.  

 



 

vi 

Results Based Logical Framework 

Country and Project Name: Malawi: Malawi Agricultural Infrastructure and Youth in Agribusiness Project 

Purpose of the project: To increase agricultural productivity and incomes of households, develop youth entrepreneurs in agribusiness and poverty reduction in the project area. 

RESULTS CHAIN 

PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICA-

TION 

RISKS/MITIGATION 

MEASURES Indicator 
 (including CSI) 

Baseline (2015) Target (2019) 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

To Improved standard of living through 

enhancement of income 

. % Reduction in Poverty Level Nkhotakota(44.5), Nkhata Bay (32.1) 

 

Nkhotakota – (40.5), Nkhata Bay (28.1) 

National Statistical 

Office (NSO), 

Integrated Household & 

demographic survey 

Project monitoring 

reports, supervision 

missions, mid-term and 

end evaluations  

Assumption: Sustained economic 

growth and good governance 

 

Risk #1. Poor Farmers Organisation 

Mitigation: Strengthen of farmers 

unions and cooperatives 

 

Risk 1: Unpredictability of 
agricultural markets due to trade 

restrictions and price controls on 
some items.  

Mitigation: The Government is 

being urged by DPs, to deregulate 
agriculture markets including 

removal of bans and pegging the 

price on some strategic crops such as 

maize.   Enactment of the Goods 

Control Act would help to improve 

market predictability.      

4.5.2  Volatility of the world 

commodity prices 

Mitigation: The country enjoys 
accessibility to SADC market and 

the project lays emphasis on internal 

processing of raw materials and 
value addition. 

 

4.5.3 Project Cost Overruns: 

Project cost overruns due to 

exchange rate fluctuations, 

uncertainties in economic situation 
of Malawi and SADC and the rise in 

the cost of materials. 

 Mitigation: Project is costed in 
USD and efficient procurement 

timing to address the increases, as 

well as adequate price contingencies 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
 

 

2.1.Increased crop production and productivity 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.2 Increase in number youth engaging in farming 

and Agribusiness 

 

2.3.Increase in Household Income 

 

1.1.1 Crop production (t’000) 

 

 

 

 

1.1.2 Crop yield (t/ha) 

 

 

 

1.1.3 %age value added for each crop 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.2.1. No of youth in farming and agribusiness 

 

 

2.2 Average annual incremental income of 

farmers (MK) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Project Area (Baseline: 2015) 

1.1.1 Maize (0.51); Beans (0.075); Rice 

(0.85); Tomato (0.135); Onion (0.2); /potato 

(0.125); Sugarcane (0) cassava (2.66). G/nuts 

(0.075), Banana (0). 

 

1.1.2 Maize (2.7); Beans (0.75); Rice (3.0); 

Tomato (9.0); potato (.10.0); Sugar cane (12) 

Cassava (24.5) & G/nuts (0.75). Onion 

(10.5), Banana (15) 

 

1.1.3 Maize (6); Beans (1.5); Rice (6); Tomato 

(0); Onion (0); S/potato (20) Sugar cane (0) 

Cassava (20), G/nuts (2) 

 

 

 

2.2.1 TBD(To be provided with baseline 

survey) 

 

 

2.3.1  MWK 791,349 

 

Project Area (Targets by 2021) 

1.1.1 Maize (4.192) Rice (9.981); Sugarcane 

(3.78); Tomato (2.9) Onion (0.775) G/nuts 

(0.32); Beans (0.18), Cassava (2660) & 

potatoes (0.705). Banana (256) 

 

1.1.2 Maize (6.0); Beans (1.8); Rice (6.0); 

Tomato (20); Onion (15.5); potato (18); Sugar 

Cane (3.78) Cassava (28), G/nuts (2.0), 

Banana(30) 

 

1.1.3 Maize (60); Rice (60) Beans (70); 

Tomato (20); Onion (20) S/potato (80); 

Groundnuts (90); Cassava (100); & Sugar 

cane (100), Banana (256) 

 

 

2.2.1 5000 (50% women) 

 

 

 

2.3.1   MWK 1,575,120 

 

 

 

 



 

vii 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

3. Component 1:   Irrigation Infrastructure  & 

Watershed Management 

3.1 New Irrigation schemes developed. 

3.2 Catchment Management 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

4. Component 2:  Value Addition and Youth 

Entrepreneurship,   

4.1 Youth trained in agribusiness 

4.2 Agribusiness incubations established 

4.3.Youth Agribusiness Established 

4.4 4.4 Market linkages promoted. 
4.5 Agro-processing & value addition supported 

 

5. Component 3. Agro-Cooperatives 

Development for Employability   

5.1 Youth networking formed 

5.2 Cooperative societies developed and formed 

5.3  Total land put into use   

5.4 Total farmer trained 

5.5 Total Artisans trained 

 

 

 

 

 

 

6. Component 4: Institutional Strengthening 

and Capacity Building  

6.1 Public Sector staff supported 

6.2 M & E established 

6.3 Project Coordination 

 

 

3.1.1 Size of land developed (ha)  

 

3.2.1 No of farmers adopting agro-forestry 

initiative  

3.2.2 No of farmers adopting alternative 

livelihood technologies (% women and youth 

farmers) 

3.2.3 No. of rain water harvesting and soil and 

water conservation  structures  

3.2.4 Number of alternative livelihood 

activities for women 

 

 

4.1.1 No. of youth coordinators trained 

4.2.1 Youth Agripreneur trained 

4.3.1 Number of Agribusiness established 

4.4.1No of private sectors/value addition 

entities networked 

4.5.1No of agro-processing centres developed. 

 

 

5.1 Number of youth market networks  

5.2.1 Number of youth associations & 

cooperatives 

5.2.2 Number of farmer associations and 

cooperatives  

5.3.1 Rain fed crops (ha) 

5.3.2 Irrigated crops (ha) 

5.4.1 Number of staff trained 

5.4.2 Number of farmers trained 

5.5.1 number of local artisans trained 

 

 

6.1.1 No of staff and farmers trained 

6.1.2 Consulting firm recruited 

6.2 No. of M&E systems established and 

operational 

6.3 Tech. asst., vehicles $ equipment procured 

 

Project Area (Baseline: 2015) 

 

 

 

 

Project Area (Target Yr 2021) 

3.1.1 (1945ha) 

 

3.2.1  200 (50% female) 

 

3.2.2  1500 (50% female) 

 

3.2.3 500 

 

3.2.4 3(Bee keeping, mushroom&livestock) 

 

 

4.1.1 Youth Coordinators (4 of which 50% 

female)  

4.2.1Youth Agripreneurs (500 of which 50% 

female) 

4.3.1 New Agribusiness established (175 of 

which 50% female beneficiries) 

4.4.1 Number of marketing networks (2) 

 

4.5.1 Centre (2) 

 

 

5.2 youth networks (2) 

5.3.1 Youth WUAs (20); Youth cooperatives 

(20) 

Farmer WUAs (2); Farmser Cooperatives (2) 

 

5.3.1 Area (1945) 

5.3.2 Area (1945) 

5.4.1 Farmers (4,000 with at least 50% being 

women); Youth (5,000 with at least 50% 

being women) 

5.5 Local artisans (50 with at least 50% being 

women) 

 

 

6.1.1 GOM staff (70), Health 

workers(10)Tech. Support(10) 

6.1.2 Consulting firm (4) – including auditor 

6.2 M&E system (1) 

6.3 Project staff appointed (6), Vehicles and 

Equipment (4), Office Equipment(TBD) 

 

QPR 

Project monitoring 

reports, supervision 

missions Project    

         

 

 

Completion Report, 

Audited financial 

reports 

for the unavoidable increases will is 

provided in the project costing. 

4.5.4 Reduced precipitation, 

increased temperature, change in 

length of rainy season, increased 
incidences of drought and floods, 

due to climate risks:  

Mitigation: Training regarding 
vulnerabilities, assisting the 

communities to select various 

adaptation measures; e.g. rainwater 
harvesting, rotational grazing, using 

drought tolerant varieties e.g. 

cassava, sorghum etc. 

4.5.5 Delay in providing 

counterpart funding:  

Mitigation: The GoM contributions 
will largely be in kind in form of 

provisions of office spaces, 

furniture, salaries and wages.   
   

 

 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

 

ACTIVITIES INPUTS 

Component 1 : Irrigation  Infrastructure and Watershed Management: 

 Sub-component: 

1.1 Irrigation Infrastructure,  

1.2 Watershed management   

 

Component 2: Value Addition and Youth Entrepreneurship,   

2.1 Youth entrepreneurship  

4.2 Agro-processing  

2.3 Market  linkages 

 

Component 3 : Agro-Cooperatives Development for Employability  

3.1  Formation and support to youth farmer cooperatives    

3.2 On farm training and extension services  

3.3 Provision of matching grants for value addition equipment  

3.4 Market access and strengthening business network 

3.5 Training of artisans for maintenance of irrigation schemes 

3.6 crop production 

 

Component 4 

4.1Public Sector and smallholder farmers supported 

4.2 M & E  

4.3 Project management 

 

Component 1 –  UA 13.48  million 

Component 2 –  UA 2.34 million 

Component 3 –  UA 2.14  million 

Component 4 -  UA 1. 4   million 

 TOTAL   UA 19.36          



 

viii 

Project Time Frame  

Year 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 
2021 

 

Quarter 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 

Initial Activities                          

Appraisal                          

Loan and Grant negotiations and  approval                          

Signature of loan agreement and fulfilment of first disbursement conditions                         

Publication of  the General Procurement Notice                          

 Recruitment of project staff                         

Project Launching                         

Procurement of property goods works and services for the PIUs / PCUs                         

Signature of agreements with partner entities                          

Irrigation Infraastructure Development and Watershed Management                         

Award of contracts for the project supervision                          

Studies RFPs and bidding documents (BDs) preparation                         

Award of contracts for the construction of infrastructure                          

Award of contracts for the procurement of goods                          

Sensitisation and training of beneficiaries and communities on a number of issues, including on conflict management 

approaches 
            

 
   

 
   

    

Construction infrastructure/management committee                          

Agro-Cooperatives Development for Employability Additions                          

RFPs and bidding documents (BDs)preparation                         

Award of contracts for the construction of infrastructure                          

Award of contracts for the procurement of goods                          

Sensitisation and training of beneficiaries and communities                         

Construction of infrastructure /management committee                          

Value Addition and Youth Entrepreneurship                         

Selection of Consultants/Identification of Intern Service Centres                          

Selection of Candidates for Training                         

Commencement of training                          

Award of contracts for the procurement of goods                          

Sensitisation and training of beneficiaries and communities                         

Departture of trainees                          

Monitoring of Youth Progress                          

Project Mangement And Capacity Building                         

Establishment of accounting system and preparation of procedures manual                          

Establishment of the baseline situation and the M&E system                         

Management, monitoring and evaluation and communication activities                         

Capcity building interventions  including on institutions and resilience-building systems                         

Annual financial auditing                          

Mid-term review                         

Completion report                          



 

1 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE MANAGEMENT OF THE AFDB GROUP TO THE BOARD OF 

DIRECTORS ON A PROPOSED LOAN TO THE REPUBLIC OF MALAWI FOR AGRICULTURAL 

INFRASTRUCTURE AND YOUTH IN AGRIBUSINESS PROJECT (AIYAP) 
 

Management submits the following Report and Recommendation on a proposed ADF loan of UA16 

million to finance the Malawi Agricultural Infrastructure and Youth in Agribusiness Project.  

 

I STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 

 

1.1 Project linkages with country strategy and objectives 
 

1.1.1 The Malawi Growth and Development Strategy II. 2011-2016 has identified agriculture, 

irrigation and water development as some of the key priorities and drivers of economic growth and 

poverty alleviation. The Government formulated Agriculture Sector-Wide Approach (ASWAp 2011-

15) as the priority investment plan for the agriculture sector which focusses on (i) food security and risk 

management (ii) commercial agriculture, agro-processing and market development and (iii) sustainable 

land and water management and support services. The Government is implementing a Farm Inputs 

Subsidy Program (FISP) to address the food security problem and developed a National Export Strategy 

to promote crop diversification, value addition and export of agro-based commodities. The National 

Irrigation Policy which is currently at the draft level is aimed at enhancing farmers’ ownership through 

farmer managed irrigation and National Agriculture Policy, whose main objective is to commercialize 

the agriculture sector. In ASWAp, the Government also introduced a Green Belt Initiative (GBI) in 

order to promote irrigation and minimize reliance on rain-fed farming and achieve increased agricultural 

productivity for domestic and international markets. The Government is currently finalising a five year 

National Resilience Plan to break the cycle of food insecurity with irrigation as a key component. 

Regarding youth initiatives, the Government adopted the National Youth Policy in 2013 which 

recognises that the youth represent a vast human resource potential for promoting economic growth and 

if neglected it would be a lost opportunity.   AIYAP will address the twin problems of food insecurity 

and high rate of youth unemployment using irrigation infrastructure as an enabler, which will 

substantially contribute to the achievement of the objectives of these policies and strategies.  

 

1.1.2 The project is aligned with the Bank’s 2013-17 Country Strategy Papers (CSP) Pillars focusing 

on (i) addressing infrastructure bottlenecks to competitiveness and growth and (ii) supporting actions to 

expand private sector investments. While the former covers irrigation infrastructure development and 

agricultural market infrastructures the latter Pillar covers private sector investment and entrepreneurship 

in agro-processing, crop diversification and value chain development which are articulated in AIYAP. 

The country socio-economic indicators are presented in Appendix 2 and it is envisaged that AIYAP will 

contribute to improving these indicators and ultimately achievement of the Sustainable Development 

Goals (SDGs).  

 

1.1.3 Currently, only 26 percent (104,000 hectares) of the potential irrigable area (408,000 hectares) is 

under irrigation. In order to exploit this potential, Government has developed the National Irrigation 

Master Plan and Investment Framework (NIMPIF). The NIMPIF which was published in February 2015 

confirmed that the plan will be implemented in three phases: Phase I (2015-2020), phase II (2021-2025) 

and Phase III (2026-2035) comprising of approximately 20,000 hectares, 28,500 hectares and 67,500 

hectares of new irrigation schemes in Phases I, II and III respectively. The project is part of the Bank’s 

efforts to support the government of Malawi in the implementation of the Irrigation Master Plan given 

that the targeted sites are among the priority sites identified in the Master Plan which objectives are to: 

(1) accelerate economic growth, (2) reduce rural poverty, (3) improve food security, and (4) increase 

exports.  

 

 

 



 

2 

1.2 Rationale for Bank’s involvement  

1.2.1 The Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (TYS) 2013-2022, identify agriculture related infrastructure 

development as a key enabler for increased production, productivity and effective utilization of land 

resources. It also identifies agriculture and food security as an area of special emphasis. The 2016 

Bank’s Agriculture strategy: Feed Africa: Strategy For Agricultural Transformation in Africa 2016-

2025 is targeted at executing the Comprehensive African Agriculture Development Programme 

(CAADP) goals of contributing to elimination of extreme hunger, malnutrition, poverty, and increased 

prosperity, in partnership with alliances including farmers, agribusiness, and civil society, and 

exploiting regional comparative advantages and opportunities for trade and collaboration. The Bank’s 

Gender Strategy 2014-2018 calls for economic empowerment, knowledge and capacity building for 

women.  Furthermore, the Bank’s Fragility strategy “Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience in 

Africa, 2014 – 2019” which aims at effectively assisting countries build resilience to move forward 

towards more stable political and economic development with Youth employment as a special focus, as 

jobs are alternatives to rents or participation in illicit activities associated with fragile situations and 

thus help prevent the outbreak of violence related to critical unemployment.  

 

1.2.2 This project addresses all of the above key Bank strategies and policies as part of broader 

development efforts to achieve sustainable growth and poverty reduction thus, (1)  streamlining of the 

crops along value chains (economic crops) and crops to address food security as well as linking the agri-

prenuers to the value chains, ensuring that sustainable incomes will be achieved for the beneficiaries in 

particular and the country at large, (2)  focusing on youth with special emphasis on targeting women (at 

least 50% of beneficiaries) social and economic empowerment, while protecting the environment 

through various catchment activities, and (3) addressing the objectives of inclusive growth and 

transition to green growth by addressing infrastructure development, private sector development, and 

skills and technology adoption through promotion of irrigation for agriculture intensification and 

diversification.  

 

1.2.3 The project also resonates with three of the five pillars of Bank’s ‘High 5’ by addressing Feed 

Africa, Industrialize Africa, and Improved quality of life for the people of Africa.  At country level, the 

project is aimed at contributing to increase in agricultural exports, import substitution, generation of the 

much needed foreign exchange and job creation especially for the youth.    

 

1.3 Donor coordination 

 
1.3.1 Malawi’s recent progress towards the aid effectiveness agenda under Busan is mixed.  Whilst 

donor alignment with national policies remains strong, the use of the national country system and aid 

on the budget has significantly reduced following suspension of budget support in 2013. 1  Development 

Partners (DPs) are instead channelling the resources earmarked for budget support or basket funding 

through other aid modalities and off budget.2  The GOM is working with DPs to improve aid 

effectiveness guided by the new Development Cooperation Strategy launched late 2014. Successful 

outcome of   on-going PFM reforms will be indispensable in encouraging DPs to increase the use of 

country systems.   The current platform is on the Donor Committee on Agriculture and Food Security 

(DCAFS) as the key form for donor coordination, monitoring of sectoral plans and strategies and 

harmonizing interventions. The Bank is currently chairing the Irrigation Technical Sub-Group.   With 

the provision of Euro 2.00 million EU funding for catchment management in the project, the Bank is 

leveraging on collaboration with other Development Partners in Malawi.   

 

                                                 
1 According to the 2014 Global Partnership Monitoring Surrey, Malawi’s score on the aid on budget aid indicator declined 

from 62 in 2010 to 49 whilst that of use of national country system dropped from 65 to 50. 
2  51 % of planned externally financed development expenditure for FY 2014/15 is off budget.     



 

3 

Table: 1.1 Donor Support to Agriculture 2015/2016 

  
Sector or subsector* 

Size   

  GDP Exports Labor Force   

  Agriculture 30 90 80   

  Players - Public Annual Expenditure (average)**   

  
Government 

 

Donors 

 

 

ADB 

WB 
 

6% 

25%   

UA m [UA 1000.3 m] [UA 31.1 m]   DFID 12%   

% 71 29   EU 17%   

      USAID  12%   

     Irish Aid    3%  

    WFP   1%  

  

                                                                                GIZ                                       2% 

                                                                               WFP                                      1% 

                                                                                IFAD                                     6% 

                                                                                JICA                                      2% 

                                                                               FICA                                     3% 

Level of Donor Coordination   

  Existence of Thematic Working Groups [Y]   

  Existence of SWAPs or Integrated Sector Approaches [Y]   

  ADB's Involvement in donors coordination*** [M]****   

* as most appropriate ** Years [yy1 to yy2] *** for this sector or sub-sector   

**** L: leader, M: member but not leader, none: no involvement    

 

II PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

Project Objectives: The specific objective of the project is to alleviate poverty in the project area in 

particular and the country in general by contributing  to economic growth and food security through: 

(1) Deploying irrigation infrastructure to scale up improved crop production and productivity leading 

to improve net farm incomes of the project beneficiaries, (2) expansion of opportunities in agriculture 

and agribusiness among the  rural youth in Malawi as a means to advance and improve rural livelihoods 

and economic development, (3) enhancement of import substitution through improved value additions 

and processing, (4) introduction of revolving loan for agriculture purposes will grow and build the 

cluster youth entrepreneurs in agribusiness and value chains, and (5) Using cooperative societies as a 

vehicle to transit the smallholders farmers to commercial farmers.  

2.1 Project Components: AIYAP has four main components mainly; (1) Irrigation Infrastructure 

(Dwambazi 945 hectares and Linga 1000 hectares irrigation schemes) and Watershed Management, (2) 
Youth entrepreneurship and Value Addition, (3) Agro-Cooperatives Development and Enhancement, and 

(4) Project Management and Institutions Strengthening.  Table 2.1 below provides a summary of the 

project components and related estimated cost, including contingencies. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

4 

Table 2.1: summary of the project components and related estimated cost 

No Component Name Estimated 

Cost  

(UA) 

million 

Component/Sub-component and Activity Description 

 

1 Irrigation Infrastructure 

& Watershed 

Management  

13.48 Irrigation Development: (i) development of two (2) new 

gravity fed irrigation schemes: the works under this 

component will include construction of head works, main 

canal, secondary and tertiary canals, drainage system, and 

on farm roads as described in C.1.2 of the Technical 

Annex; Dwambazi (945 ha) and Linga (1000 ha), covering 

a total area of 1945ha;(ii) formation of two water Users’ 

Associations (WUAs) with 50% women and youth 

representation; (iii) provision of capacity development for 

farmers (men and women), extension agents (tapping on 

female extension to reach women famers), and relevant 

government officials. 

 Catchment Management: (Detail activities in Annex C1) 
(i) improved catchment conservation and development 

programme; (ii) alternative livelihood support; and (iii) 

capacity building and indigenous knowledge management 

systems. The hot spot areas in the catchment will be 

demarcated in consultation with the communities during 

implementation.     

2 Youth entrepreneurship 

and Value Addition and  
2.34  Youth Entrepreneurship, Storage Agro-processing and 

Value Addition  

 Youth Entrepreneurship (50% of female youth) 

 Market Linkages – trade facilitation, linking farmers with 
agro-processors, building bulk commodity network, 

eliminating middlemen, and exerting group effects on 

processors for better prices.  

 

3 Agro-Cooperatives 

Development for 

Employability 

2.14  Formation and support to farmer cooperatives and to 
strengthening the participation of female youth in these 

cooperatives)   

 On farm training and extension services  

 Agriculture Production, 

 Market access and strengthening business network 
linkages between the cooperatives and youth processors, 

and exchange programme with other similar organisations 

in the region and the rest of Africa  

4 Project Management and 

Institutional 

Strengthening  

1.4  Establish project implementation unit 

 Monitoring and Evaluation  

 Capacity building  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

5 

2.2 Technical Solution retained and alternatives explore  

Table 2.2: project alternatives considered and reasons for rejection or acceptance 

Alternative  Brief description Reasons for rejection/Acceptance 

Alternative 1 

 

Invest in gravity fed irrigation 

system (technical solution 

retained) 

Gravity fed irrigation system have proved to be 

more sustainable in terms of operation and 

maintenance with locally available material, 

requiring minimal training which translates to 

sustainability and profitability of the enterprise. 

Alternative 2 Invest in rain water 

harvesting infrastructure such 

as small water holding 

structures scattered all over 

the selected districts for 

agriculture, livestock and 

domestic use 

Rain water harvesting structures cannot sustain 

the impacts of climate change and their socio-

economic impact will be spread out thinly. In 

addition, it cannot provide food and cash crops 

two to three times a year.  

Alternative 3 Invest in pumped irrigation 

development by lifting water 

mechanically to higher 

ground for crop production 

Pumped irrigation schemes were dropped on 

account of the complex nature of their operation 

and maintenance, costs are high and the capacity 

to maintain at small farm level does not exist. 

Further it contributes to carbon emission.  

Alternative 4 Introduce spate irrigation 

system  

Not sustainable due to variability of rainfall; 

non-efficiency and drudgery. 

 

2.3 Project type 

 
AIYAP is designed in the form of a stand-alone Investment Project with the main aim of supporting 

irrigation infrastructure development (civil works) as an enabler of scaling up of high value crop 

production, value chain development, youth skill development in Agribusiness and capacity building 

activities largely funded by ADF 13 Loan and EU Grant resources. 

2.4 Project Cost and Financing Arrangements 

 
2.4.1 The total project cost, including physical and price contingencies, is UA 19.36 million which 
will be financed by: (i) ADF loan (UA 16.00 million covering cost of infrastructure, purchase of 

vehicles, youth training and provision of seed capital, etc. ), EU Grant (UA 1.60 million to finance 

catchment management) and (iii) the GoM and Beneficiaries (UA 1.76 million), through provision of 

office space and salaries for the counterpart staff on the project on the part of Government and provision 

of labour for maintenance of the irrigation infrastructures on the part of beneficiaries. The resources 

from EU will be made available to the project through parallel financing, since the Department of 

Irrigation will be responsible for the management of the resources using the EU procedures.  

2.4.2  The ADF Loan will be used to finance both local costs and foreign costs. The project will 
finance local costs such as training, personnel and operating costs while most of the activities under 

infrastructure development will attract foreign costs as detailed in the summary tables below. The GoM 

does not have the capacity to finance most of the project activities and has therefore committed to 

contribute to the project in kind through staff and office space. The details are indicated in Tables 2.3, 

2.4, 2.5 and 2.6 below. 

  



 

6 

Table 2.3: Project Cost Estimates  

Component Name 
MWK ‘000 UA ‘000 

Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total 

Infrastructure development 
      

3,535,269  

          

8,019,617  

      

11,554,886  

      

3,643  

       

8,264  

      

11,907  

Market Linkages, Agro Processing and 

Value Addition 
      

1,458,553  

             

655,039  

        

2,113,592  

      

1,503  

          

675  

        

2,178  

Agro-Cooperatives Development for 

Employability  
      

1,737,066  

             

225,139  

        

1,961,235  

      

1,790  

          

232  

        

2,021  

Institutional Strengthening and Capacity 

Building 
      

1,190,715  

               

98,013  

        

1,289,699  

      

1,227  

          

101  

        

1,329  

Sub Total 
        7,921,604  

              

8,997,808  

        

16,919,412  

          

8,163  

          

9,272  

          

17,435  

Physical Contingency 

         

196,026  

             

844,272  

        

1,040,299  

         

202  

          

870  
         

1,072  

Price Contingency 

         

390,112  

             

437,663  

          

827,775  

         

402  

          

451  
            

853  

Sub Total 

         

586,139  

          

1,281,935  

        

1,868,074  

          

604  

        

1,321  

         

1,925  

Grand Total     8,507,742  

       

10,279,744  

    

18,787,486  

      

8,767  

     

10,593  

      

19,360  

 

Table 2.4: Sources of Finance 

Source of Financing 

Total Amount (UA ‘000) and Percentage Contribution (%) 

Foreign Local Total 

UA % UA % UA % 

ADF 11,200 70 4800 30 16,000 83 

EU 319.2 20 1277 80 1,597 8 

GoM  0 0 1763 100 1,763 9 

Total 11,519   7840   19,360 100 

 

Table 2.5: Project Cost by Categories of Expenditure  

ADF and EU Categories of Expenditures (UA ‘000) 

  ADF EU 

Categories of expenditures Foreign  Local Total Foreign Local Total 

Works 9,168 2,292 11,460 22.07 5.52 27.59 

Goods 688 0 688 98.72 26.23 124.95 

Services 762 1,778 2,540 0 1,369 1,369 

Operation 0 1,312 1,312 0 78 78 

Total 10,617 5,382 16,000 120.79 1,479.33 1,600.00 

 

  



 

7 

 Table 2.6: Expenditure Schedule By Component and Year 

 Totals in UA '000 

Component PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 Total % 

Irrigation and watershed 

management 3001 5409 4719 174 174 13476 70 

Crop production, Value addition & 

Youth Entrepreneurship 251 1018 356 356 356 2336 12 

Youth Skills Development in 

Agriculture 1287 221 217 211 208 2144 11 

Project management & Institutional 

strengthening 366 259 261 259 261 1405 7 

Total 4905 6907 5552 999 999 19360   

 
2.5. Project’s target area and population: 

2.5.1 Demographic Aspects: According to 2016 data from the Department of Statistics, Malawi has 

an estimated population of nearly 17 million people with women constituting about 51% of the 

population3. The population is characterised as follows: (i) 0 – 10 years (33%); (ii) 10 – 20 years (22%); 

(iii) 20 – 40 years (29%); (iv) 40 – 60 years (10%) and (v) those above 60 years comprise (6%).  The 

districts of Nkhotakota and Nkhata Bay have populations of 229,460 and 164,761 respectively with 

combine total land mass of 8330km² representing 9% of country total land mass of 94,080km² 

(excluding Lake Malawi which covers an area of 24,404km²). The targeted beneficiaries are 10,000 

households estimated at 6 person per household. In the two districts only 1 in 30 women and 1 in 10 

men complete secondary education. However, 1 out of 7 women and 1 out of 9 men are unemployed.  

2.5.2 Location: The project is located mostly in the Green Belt Zone covering a total of 2 Districts of 

Nkhota-kota (Dwambazi) and Nkhata-Bay (Linga) Districts in the Central Region. These Districts were 

selected because they were ranked among the Phase 1 projects in the Malawi National Irrigation Master 

Plan. 

2.5.3 Climate: The climate in Malawi ranges from semi-arid in the Lower Shire Valley, semi-arid to 

sub-humid on the plateaux and sub-humid in the highland areas in the northern parts of the country. 

Average rainfall ranges from 763 mm to 1,143 mm per annum (p.a.) with only a few areas receiving 

over 1500 mm of rain annually. Such areas include Mulanje, Nkhata Bay and the northern end of Lake 

Malawi. Rainfall (almost 90%) occurs between the months of December and March, with no rain at all 

between May to October over most of the country. Mean annual temperatures vary with altitude, ranging 

from 25o C in the Lower Shire Valley to 13o C in the highland areas. 

 

2.5.4 The project area like other parts of Malawi is largely a semi-arid country hence greatly 

threatened by droughts and other negative impacts of climate change. The semi-arid nature of the 

country makes it highly fragile and susceptible to environmental degradation hence sustainable 

management of natural resources is not an option but a priority. The area is also prone to flooding which 

has been accelerated by extensive deforestation and tree cutting in most parts of the country which was 

highly experienced in the 1970s and the 1980s during which time annual deforestation rate was 

estimated at 3.5% per annum. Deforestation was and is still caused by (i) expansion for agriculture; (ii) 

demand for fuelwood for both domestic and other uses including industrial production. Soil erosion 

constitutes one of the major types of land degradation in Nkhotakota and Nkhata-Bay area of Malawi. 

 

 

 

 

                                                 
3 Malawi is largely rural. Despite rapid urbanization, nearly 85 percent of the total population of Malawi lives in rural areas. 



 

8 

2.5.5 Water Resources: Water for the irrigation schemes is supplied from Dwambazi and Mazembe 

rivers. Dwambazi is a perennial river with a minimum monthly flow of 3,305 l/s indicating that the 

water available is more than sufficient for the development of Dwambazi irrigation scheme. Mazembe 

River with a minimum monthly flow of 224 l /s demonstrates the need for a water harvesting structure 

to harness the water required to irrigate the Linga scheme. 

2.6 Participatory process for project identification, design and implementation  

2.6.1 The ESIA:  

2.6.1.1 During the project preparation, extensive public consultations were carried out to determine the 

environmental and social impacts of the project. The consultations were also aimed at identifying the 

key environmental challenges experienced in the project locations as well as project districts. Meetings 

were held with various departmental heads at the Ministry of Agricultural, Irrigation and Water 

Development, Ministry of Trade, Ministry of Gender and Ministry of Labour and Youth Development 

at the ministries’ Headquarters in Lilongwe. Consultative meetings were also held with various heads 

of department at Nkhotakota and Nkhata Bay District Headquarters including with the District 

Commissioner of Nkhata Bay District. Further meetings were held with Dwangwa Cane Growers Trust, 

Dwangwa Cane Growers Company Ltd and Senior Officers of Illovo Sugar Company Ltd. Other 

consultative meetings were held with various community leaders led by Senior Chiefs and their deputies 

together with community members, members and executives of Farmers Associations in Linga (Nkhata 

Bay District) and in Dwambazi (in Nkhotakota District). 

2.6.1.2 The reasons for consultative meetings were: (i) to generate a good understanding of the project 

by all stakeholders within the project area; (ii) to enhance ownership of the project by local leadership, 

the community and local farmers; (iii) to understand people’s and agency expectations about the project; 

(iv) to understand and characterise potential environmental, social and economic impacts of the project; 

(v) to acquire, but also advance local benefits that may accrue from the project; and (vi) to enable 

stakeholders involved in the project to provide views, hence participating in or refining project designs. 

In addition, site-specific investigations were also conducted to gain insight to the likely environmental, 

social, and economic impacts of the project. 

2.6.2 Community Participatory Processes: The community participatory processes were organised 

by the officers from the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development as well as the project 

team during the preparation and appraisal mission. Two town hall meetings at each project location 

were held where a range of issues including among others, project details, land issues, community 

development, choice of cropping, farmers associations –development, formations and operations, etc. 

were discussed and agreed upon. The team, also visited the projects sites and the existing farms on the 

land with a view for getting the understanding of the farmers, listen to their concerns – especially land 

distributions and beneficiaries of youth entrepreneurship, how to address them and incorporate them 

into the project design. Over half of the target population is youth and women who are already active in 

the agriculture sector. Most of the youth also own land that has been inherited or allocated by the 

traditional leaders in line with the customary land acquisition. Consultations also involved all relevant 

sector departments at the district and headquarter levels. The key players included the local 

administration structures spearheaded by the local chiefs headed by two Traditional Authorities, one of 

which is a woman and their assistants and included a significant proportion of the community members 

of which youth and women constituted more than 50%. The Mission met and held discussions with 

major private sector players among which are;  Crown Ministries, Illovo Sugar Company, Farmers 

Engineering Services, Public Private Partnership Commission in Blantyre, the Malawi Chamber of 

Commerce, Industry and Cooperative and Telekom Networks Malawi Limited (TNM) – a mobile 

company quoted on Malawi Stock Exchange. The project team held sessions with Civil Society 

Organisations, and Non-governmental Organisations as well as youth entrepreneurship training 

institutions in Malawi  

 

 



 

9 

2.7 Bank Group experience, lessons reflected in project design  

2.7.1 Experiences, challenges and lessons learnt in the implementation from the Bank’s past and 

current agricultural projects in Malawi have been taken into account in the design of the current project. 

These include the need for proper project orientation, emphasis on farmer group approach, strong M&E 

and capacity building for staff which AIYAP has incorporated by including project launching, regular 

training for implementing staff, emphasis on Cooperatives and Water Users Associations and support 

to M&E. To avoid future land disputes as noted from some of the projects due to inadequate 

consultations, adequate consultations were held with the beneficiaries and other relevant stakeholders 

during preparation and the Bank has received a letter of comfort from the Government confirming the 

support of the locals for the project. In addition, beneficiary farmers registered their names to confirm 

that their pieces of land will be made available for the project activities. Non availability of full studies 

and designs have always led to delays in disbursements and project implementation. To address this 

problems, AIYAP locations were selected based on readiness of the designs, drawings and feasibility 

studies already prepared under the National Irrigation Master Plan. In addition, the sites were also 

selected on the least cost based among the sites which are ready for development. The need for a full 

time Project Coordination Unit was noted from almost all the previous projects, therefore, provision has 

been made for the recruitment of technical experts to support the Project Coordination Team under 

ASWAp Secretariat to fully focus on the planned activities.   

2.7.2 Through the project team interaction with the DP and government officials it was noted that 

youth skill development program were bedevilled by; (1) Lack of transparency in the process of trainees 

selection, (2) In adequate or non-availability of financial support to raise start-up capital, and 

(3)Inadequate post training technical support, and (4) Uncoordinated monitoring processes. All these 

are taken into consideration in the design of AIYAP as a result, the selection processes of the trainees, 

the training as well as provision of seed capital will the carried out by an independent 

consultants/Financial Institutions. In addition the project has already confirmed with organised private 

sector – Ilovo, PressCane, etc. which have agreed to take the trainees as interns. 

2.7.3 The issues of sustainability of the irrigation facilities after project completion in Malawi have 

been highlighted in all the reports. Irrigation is capital intensive and demanding in terms of technical 

capacity. Some of the old irrigation schemes in Malawi have had to be rehabilitated.  By introducing 

value chains and agripreneur it is expected that the farmers will transit to commercial farmers who will 

be able to pay for the maintenance of infrastructure.  The project has built in resilience of the facilities 

to the effect of climate change by addressing the issues of catchment management which will be 

specifically addressed with Euros 2million mobilised from EU.   Furthermore, to enhance sustainability 

of other physical infrastructure, the facilities and resources to be provided for the youth after graduations 

will be on revolving loan basis.  To address the issue of week technical capacity to maintain the 

irrigation infrastructure, resources have been allocated to the training of technicians and artisans for 

maintenance of the infrastructure. More importantly, the project is designed to  enhance ownership of 

the infrastructures by the farmers through Farmers Associations, improving capacities for O&M, and 

importantly, using climate-smart designs (flood regulation, sediment control etc.) which objective is to 

prolong the lifespan of the infrastructures.  

2.7.4 Lessons from the Revised 2015 Country Portfolio Improvement Plan (CPIP) also highlighted 

the: (i) Weak Capacity in Financial Management , (ii)Weak Capacity of Project Implementation Units 

which are precipitated by the staffing configuration and modalities of assigning staff to project 

coordinating units,  (iii) Project Start-Up Delays, and (iv) Weak Procurement Capacity. In order to 

address these challenges, the project has embedded (i) the need to ensure adequate stakeholders 

consultations during project design to ensure ownership and compliance during implementations phase; 

(ii) Project designs and detailed feasibility studies are already in place;(iii) training on the Bank’s rules 

and procedures for consultants and contractors engaged in Bank’s funded projects will be carried out as 

part of the project launch and on regular basis thereafter (iv) baseline and annual targets data are 

established within the first year of a project where this is not available (v) reporting would be based on 

results framework including gender disaggregated data , (vi) supervision missions’ checklist to include 



 

10 

environmental and social management activities and projects’ quarterly reports and (vii) frontloading 

of procurement activities by adopting advance contracting which have been agreed with government.. 

While addressing catchment vulnerability through the catchment management program is valid, this 

doesn’t necessarily confront the challenge of weak technical capacities nor sustainability challenge of 

the irrigation infrastructure alluded to in this  

2.8. Key performance indicators  

2.8.1 The Project Results-Based Logical Framework contains key impact and outcome indicators for 

the monitoring of the performance of the Project. The main outcomes are expected are: (i) Increased 

crop production and productivity; (ii) Increase in number of youth engaging in farming and 

Agribusiness and (iii).Increase in Household Income. Progress towards achieving these outcomes will 

be monitored through the sector monitoring and evaluation system.  

2.8.2 The Project Implementation Unit will prepare quarterly and annual project progress reports 

presenting the progress on output indicators disaggregated by gender where appropriate. Outcome 

indicators will be monitored through PIU’s management system and national statistics. Indicators will 

be updated in the Implementation Progress Report (IPR) and necessary adjustments will be made as 

appropriate. A medium term report (MTR) and Project Completion Report (PCR) will be prepared. All 

of these reports are circulated widely within the Government, the Bank and to other development 

partners.   

 

III PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1 Economic and financial performance. 

3.1.1. Financial Analysis: At full operation, each farmer household will be making an income of MK 
1,575,119.74 (US$2300) per year from the current average income of MK 791,349.11      (US$1150). 

The analysis at the project level has been carried out by comparing with and without project costs, on 

farm crop establishment and operational cost with the benefits. The analysis also covered the benefits 

and costs of processing some proportions of selected crops such as maize, rice, cassava and selected 

horticultural crops such as tomatoes, onions and bananas.  The discounted cash flow (DCF) analysis 

carried out on the net cash-flow gave a Financial Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of 23%, and a Financial 

Net Present Value (NPV) of USD 3.8 million at an opportunity costs of 18%. The opportunity cost of 

18% takes into account the prevailing high interest rates on commercial loans in the country ranging 

between 42% and 47% with inflation rate of 23% and the bank interest rates on concessional loans. The 

high financial rates of returns are attributed to the benefits accruing to the project from the value chain 

development of three major crops namely rice, maize and sugarcane and other horticultural crops such 

as tomatoes, onion, bananas and chillies. In addition, there are other benefits such as employment 

generation along the value chains, spin off effects of the investments to boost local economy and other 

environmental benefits further justifies the project.  

3.1.2. Economic Analysis: The DCF analysis carried out on the net cash-flow gave an Economic 
Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 26% and the economic Net Present Value is estimated at USD 7.2 

million at an opportunity cost of 12%. The economic values for the goods and services were arrived at 

using a standard conversion factor of 1.1for traded goods and services while the non-traded items were 

estimated using the market prices which were good estimates of the economic values under the 

liberalized market system in the country. The results show high economic internal rates of return due to 

the focus of the project on modernisation and commercialisation of farming in the project areas for the 

selected crops which include horticulture crops. The project will also attract the participation of more 

small medium scale enterprises mostly owned by the youth in the project. The project intervention will 

also enhance productivity through capacity building of the key stakeholders in the project. Sensitivity 

analysis on the effect of increasing investments costs by 10% and reducing crop prices by the same 

margin resulted into decrease of EIRR to 25 and 24 % respectively which means EIRR is more sensitive 

to crop produce price variation. See table 3.2 for details. 

 



 

11 

Table 3.1: Key Economic and Financial Figures 

 
FIRR (base case )  23 %,  NPV (base case) (16,5%, USD    USD 3.8 million 

EIRR (base case) : 26  %, NPV (base case) USD 7.2 million 

 

Table 3.2: Results of the Sensitivity Analysis on the EIRR 

Scenario EIRR NPV (USD million, 12%) 

10% increase in crop prices 29 9.7 

10% decrease in crop prices 24 4.7 

10% increase in investment costs 25 5.9 

10% decrease in investment costs 29 8.4 

 

3.2 Environmental and Social impacts  

3.2.1 Environment: 

3.2.1.1 In accordance with the Bank’s Integrated Safeguards Systems (ISS), the project has been 

validated as category 2 by ORQR. This implies that the anticipated negative impacts are minimal and 

can be readily managed in line with measures elaborated in the Environmental and Social Management 

Plan. The project will have both positive and negative environmental and social impacts. Positive 

impacts will include among others: (i) improved environmental and ecological conditions; (ii) increased 

agricultural activities and enhanced agricultural production and outputs; (iii) improved food security 

and nutrition; (iv) enhanced value of agricultural produce through value addition; (v) improved social 

and economic well-being of the beneficiaries through improved economic activities; (vi) enhanced 

agricultural production capacities and skills; (vii) enhanced entrepreneurial and agro-processing skills; 

(viii) improved better quality water flow downstream; (ix) increased employment opportunities; (x) 

improved infrastructure in designated project areas; (x) capacity building including institutional 

strengthening, environment and natural resources management. Negative impacts will include: (i) 

vegetation, habitat and biodiversity loss during the development and construction phase of the project; 

(ii)  generation of solid wastes as a result of excavations during construction works; (iii) compaction of 

soils and destabilization of the geological balance; (iv) chances of threats of increased incidences of 

water-borne diseases and accidental deaths at the water conservation reservoirs; (v) dust, air quality and 

noise pollution; (vi) threats of occupational health and safety; (vii) soil, rivers and wetlands pollution 

from chemical fertilizers and other agricultural chemicals during the operational phase of the project; 

(viii) threats of transmissions of HIV/AIDs and other communicable diseases. The project ESMP for 

the two sites have been developed and posted on the Bank’s website on 9 August 2016.  

 

3.2.1.2 Though the environmental and social assessments of the project based on the African 

Development Bank’s Integrated Safeguards System (ISS) and the Environmental and Social Assessment 

Procedures, validated the project as Category 2, however according to Schedule A of the Malawi’s 

Environmental Impacts Assessment Guidelines of 1997, development of agricultural land of more than 

10 hectares requires implementation of a full EIA, thus qualifying such projects under Category 1 

Projects. However, this is annulled by Schedule B 2.1 and Schedule D (D.1, D2, D3, D4, D5, D6, D7, 

D8.1, D8.2, D8.5, D8.6, D8.8 and D10, of the Guidelines because the proposed project has limited and 

reversible negative environmental and social impacts. 

3.2.2. Climate Change: The Project is classified Category 2 by the Bank’s Climate Change Screening 

System. The design review includes climate change risks and proposal of adaptation measures. Risk 

management and adaptation options are integrated through promotion of gravity irrigation water flows. 

Catchment management programme has been incorporated as part of the climate change resilience 

programme. The proposed project interventions are imbedded with adaptation measures in the irrigation 



 

12 

and land and water management sub-sectors to secure and improve agricultural productivity against 

climate change impacts through enhancement of water supply and basin-wide management. Irrigation 

schemes will help address the challenges due to low rainfall while irrigation systems have been designed 

to control the flooding menace in the target areas. These measures are consistent with Malawi’s National 

Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPAs) and these include: (i) improved early warning systems (ii) 

use of improved crop varieties and livestock breeds, (iii) improved crop and livestock management 

practices, and diversification of agricultural activities within single farm units, e.g. introduction of agro-

forestry systems 

3.2.3. Gender Analysis: Malawi has a high gender disparity between men and women. The 2014 
female Human Development Index value for Malawi is 0.423 in contrast with 0.467 for males, resulting 

in a GDI value of 0.9074. Only 32% of individual holders of agricultural land in Malawi are women 

despite their significant contribution in the agriculture sector.5 Rural women in Malawi play an 

important role as subsistence farmers,6 and there is increasingly involvement of young female (91% of 

young males works and 96% of young female workers are employed in the agriculture activities).7 Yet 

their productive capacity is hindered by gender inequalities. The gender inequalities in the agriculture 

sector can be attributed to:  

(i)  Limited access to land ownership and land tenure. This has led to gender implications mainly hinge 

around women’s control over the land and agriculture inputs including improved technology, 

extension services, credit and finances. This has affected women’s decisions over the agriculture 

sectors. Sensitisation meetings have been done to promote women participation and ensuring that 

farmer participation will be based on head of household rather than on gender. However, adequate 

safeguard will be put in place to ensure that at least 30% of the women are reached.  

(ii) Low education rate and skills among women’s famers.  Illiteracy is high among rural women and 

gender inequalities persist in secondary education, 1 in 30 women compare to 1 in 10 men 

completed secondary school (reference to point 2.5 in the report). Furthermore, for example adult 

literacy rate in Nkhata Bay is 91% to 76.8 %, male to female respectively. The situation is a bit 

different for youth but still there is differential of 18 % (age of 25 – 34). Addressing female 

education and knowledge in the project would be very crucial for their effective participation. 

Sensitization, extension support and business support services will be provided by the Government 

district officers including the youth and gender officers in order to promote youth and women 

participation and development. In addition, the project include program in capacity development 

in areas of functional literacy, book keeping, business formation etc.   

(iii) Inequalities in rural employment; rural women´s participation in paid employment is hampered by 

a significant domestic work burden. Moreover, rural female workers face a greater burden 

combining domestic and probative workloads compares to their male counterparts, which further 

restrict their agriculture production capacity.  Women generally have limited control over money 

generated from sales of agriculture produce. Moreover, men, more often than not, have the overall 

say on the selection of crop types to be produced which eventually impacts household food security. 

This creates constraints regarding agricultural investments, since in real terms, women tenure 

insecurity is one decisive factor constraining agricultural production.   

(iv) Gender mobility patterns; women are more likely to move shorter distances and within districts.  

This resulted in limited access to markets. The project will promote women participation in agri-

business by providing business development services and also through collaboration with NGOs 

active in the area.  

                                                 
4
Female – male respective: Life expectancy at birth (63.7 - 61.7). Expected years of schooling (10.8 - 10.7), Mean years of schooling (3.4 - 5.20) GNI per 

capita (0.679 - 0,815) HDI values (0.423 0.467).  GDI value Malawi, 0.907. Major gap is realized in yeas if schooling, gross national income, and 

combine with low gender inequality index, which includes participation of women in decision-making. In 2014, the parentage of women in decision 

making position stands at i.e. women held 22.3% of seats in the national parliament. 
5 Gender Inequalities in Rural Employment in Malawi: An Overview, FAO, 2011.  
6 Ibid. 
7 Ibid.  



 

13 

3.2.4 Finally, the project will take into account these factors and support women famers in the decision 

making process. It is apparent that gender inequality is affecting the agricultural productivity in the 

targeted areas. Women farmers on average outnumber men farmers. However, women are not well 

represented in decision making positions in irrigation schemes in Malawi where women occupy as little 

as 25% of the decision making positions and are often deputies of men. For that reason the project will 

make a deliberate effort to ensure adequate participation of women (at least 40% of beneficiaries) in 

project implementation and will encourage committees and farmer-based groups to include a larger 

quota for women in management, training, community representation and decision-making, and other 

income generating activities. Women, will thus have the opportunity to participate in farm related 

income generating activities and contribute meaningfully to the socio-economic development of their 

communities. The gender perspectives have been integrated into project formulation in line with the 

Malawian Gender Equality Act, 2012 and the National Youth Policy, 2013, and also takes due 

cognizance of the Bank’s Gender Policy. 

3.2.5 Social  The outputs of this project as contained in the logframe will translate into multiple 

positive economic and social outcomes whose indicators include: (i) increased agricultural activities 

and agricultural outputs whose net impacts will include improved living standards, food security and 

improved nutrition; (ii) increased employment opportunities both directly and indirectly by people 

employed during the development works as well as those who will be employed in agro-processing, 

marketing, sale of farm inputs, etc.; (iii) improved agricultural production skills through training; (iv) 

enhanced environmental management skills; (v) improved rural as well as on-farm infrastructure to ease 

transportation; (vi) minimized post-harvest losses through the development of farm and off-farm storage 

facilities as well as processing facilities that will help improve socio-economic well-being of the 

beneficiaries. 

3.2.6 The youth profile in Malawi indicates that out of a population of 17 million people8, more 

than 40% are between 10 to 35 years old. Literacy rates within this age bracket is estimated at 81.8% 

with slightly more males (86.6%) than females (77%) being literate. Although youth constitute a 

significant proportion of the population, they lack basic opportunities that would enable them develop 

to their full potential. This has been compounded by the presence of a range of adverse conditions that 

impinge on the youth; the most perverse, being poverty. Discussions with youth groups indicated that 

lack of appropriate skills and training, limited access to land, lack of value addition equipment and lack 

of financial support are some of the major challenges facing the youth in Malawi. Therefore this project 

has built in activities that will help to address challenges being faced by the youth. The project will 

promote formation of youth farmer cooperatives to engage in agriculture as a business. The project will 

also provide training in entrepreneurship, promote entrepreneurship culture, enhance agro-processing 

and value addition and also improve access to finance through seed funds and credit schemes. 

3.2.7. Involuntary resettlement: There is no involuntary resettlement foreseen under this project. The 

project identified sites do not require land acquisition. The areas are already designated for agricultural 

production. Settlements are outside the scheme areas except in Linga where there are a few homes found 

within the scheme area. These do not pose major problems for the scheme development since the designs 

have already isolated those few homes to be affected which will benefit from the project through 

livelihood activities embedded in the Catchment Management.  

IV IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1 Implementation arrangements 

 
4.1.1 The project will be under ASWAp within MoAIWD, and will be implemented through the 

existing GoM structures. The MoAIWD is currently implementing six Bank’s projects satisfactorily 

which did not have any problems in meeting the pre-condition for first disbursement. To fast tracked 

and kick start the preliminary key activities of the project, the Government had put in place an Interim 

Project Implementation Unit which comprised of - a Project Coordinator (a Chief Irrigation Engineer), 

                                                 
8 Population and Housing Census, 2008 



 

14 

a Procurement Specialists, a Project Accountant, a Monitoring and Evaluation Expert and a Desk Officer 

to support the project. However, in order to fast-track the implementation process, the Project 

Coordinator, Supervising Irrigation Engineer, Cooperative Officer and  Procurement Specialist as well 

as the FM officer will be recruited competitively locally to serve on full time basis. The externally 

recruited staff will sign performance based contract with the GoM. The project has also allocated 

resources to recruitment a lawyer to guide the farmers on legal issues. 

4.1.2 The Lilongwe University of Agriculture and Natural Resources will implement the ENABLE 

YOUTH sub-component. A Technical Adviser which will serve for one year will be recruited 

competitively at the commencement of ENABLE YOUTH to support the university after which the 

university will take over full implementation of the component. The project will partner with a financial 

institution licensed by Reserved Bank of Malawi on risk sharing of the ENABLE YOUTH sub-

component of the project. The financial institution will be competitively recruited using Quality Based 

Method of Procurement.     

The Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development will sign a memorandum of 

understanding with Lilongwe University of Agriculture and Natural Resources (LUANAR) for 

selection, training and evaluation of business proposals and recommendation of seed funds for the 

Agripreneurs. The Bank will only release resources for the funding of Youth Agribusiness on the 

recommendation of the LUANAR. A criteria for the selection of the youth will be developed which will 

include the minimum qualification of the Malawi Schools Certificate of Education and targeting the 

youth from the project areas. The Agripreneurs will be provided with modern farming production 

technologies on loan such as tractors and agro-processing equipment for the crops being promoted in 

the area through a Microfinance Institutions upon completion of the training at LUANAR 

4.1.3 The PCT will ensure that project resources are properly accounted for and that all project targets 

are timely delivered. The PCT will be reporting to the Principal Secretary for the Ministry of 

Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development. There will be a Technical Committee comprising of 

Directors of relevant Departments. The Technical Committee will report to the Project Steering 

Committee chaired by PS MoAIWD which will approve the work plans and budgets and guide the 

project on policy matters. At field level the PIU will work closely with the District Commissioners 

Office especially the District Agriculture Development Officers, Irrigation Officers and Youth 

Development Officers. Program Managers, Divisional Irrigation Services Officers from Salima and 

Mzuzu Agricultural Development/ISD will provide technical support to the project.  

4.1.4 Steering Committee: The existing ASWAp Executive Management Committee in conjunction 

with members from the Department of Youth, LUANAR and Financial Institution to be recruited as risk 

sharing partner will act as the Project Steering Committee and will have the overall decision making 

responsibility. The Principal Secretary, MoAIWD will chair the Steering Committee. 

 

Procurement Arrangements 

 

4.1.5 Procurement of goods (including non-consultancy services), works and the acquisition of 

consulting services, financed by the Bank for the project, will be carried out in accordance with the 

“Procurement Policy and Methodology for Bank Group Funded Operations” (BPM), dated October 

2015 and following the provisions stated in the Financing Agreement. Specifically, Procurement would 

be carried out following: (1) Borrower Procurement System (BPS): Specific Procurement Methods and 

Procedures (PMPs) under BPS comprising its Laws and Regulations as stipulated under 2003 Public 

Procurement Act (PPA) and 2004 Public Procurement Regulations (PPR using the national Standard 

Solicitation Documents (SSDs) or other Solicitation Documents agreed during project negotiations” for 

various group of transactions to be entailed under components 3 and 4 under the Project, and (2) Bank 

Procurement Policy and Methodology (BPM): Bank standard PMPs, using the relevant Bank Standard   

Solicitation Documents SDDs, mainly for components 1 and 2 for contracts that are either: (i) above 

the thresholds indicated in Annex B5, Para. B.5.3;2, or (ii) in case BPS is not relied upon for a specific 

transaction or group of transactions; and (iii) in case BPM have been found to be the best fit for purpose 



 

15 

for a specific transaction or group of transactions. In order to gain time and specifically to meet the 

requirements of PD2 of 2015, the Interim Project Implementation Unit put in place by the Government 

has commenced the preparation of the procurement documents. In addition, the Government has 

selected to use Advance Procurement.  

4.1.6 Procurement Risks and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): the assessment of procurement risks at 

the Country, Sector, and Project levels and of procurement capacity at the Executing Agency (EA), were 

undertaken  for the project and the output have informed the decisions on the procurement regimes (BPS 

and Bank)   being used for specific transactions or groups of similar transactions under the project. The 

global rating of risk assessment was Substantial with possibility of reducing to moderate after the 

implementation of the mitigating measures. The appropriate risks mitigation measures have been 

included in the procurement PRCA action plan proposed in Annex B5, Para. 5.3.8.  

Table 4.1 Procurement Table  

Project Categories  UA ‘000 

NCB OCB OTHERS LCB TOTAL 

     

Works 

 Infrastructure 

 Building  

     

 11050   11050 

 410   410 

Goods 

 Machinery & 
Equip 

 Vehicles 

 Office 
Equipment 

     

 585.03   585.03 

   129.83 129.83 

15.38    15.38 

Services 

 Non Consulting 

 Consulting 

 Financial & 
Procurement 

 LUANAR  

 TA 

 TA –Fin.Inst. 

 African Harvest 

     

1263    1263 

  989.35  989.35 

     

  124.49  124.49 

  364.57  364.57 

  335  335 

  350 

85.00 

 350 

85.00 

Operating Expenses   873.00  873.32 

Salaries and others   991.26  991.26 

 1278.38 12045.03 4112.26 129.83 17566.26 

      

 

4.1.7 Financial Management Arrangements:  

 

4.1.7.1 MOAIWD has prior experience in implementing projects financed by various development 

partners and currently manages a total of three projects funded by the Bank. The Bank-funded projects 

are mainstreamed within the Ministry but the financial management function is performed by 

Consultants working together with Government Accountants. The frequent rotation of Government 

Accountants has hampered the reinforcement of capacity within the Ministry thus necessitating the 

retention of Consultants to support the PIUs. The existing projects have had a number of financial 

management challenges related to the poor quality of quarterly reporting, delays in the preparation of 

annual financial statements, non-compliance with the Bank’s audit submission deadlines, late 

submission of expenditure justification documents and inadequate controls at the district level. 

 



 

16 

4.1.7.2 In order the mitigate the identified FM risks based on prior experience, the project will recruit a 

Financial Management Specialist and an Accountant on a contractual basis to work together with the 

two Accountants designated by the Accountant General. The Financial Management Specialist will have 

primary responsibility for the FM aspects and report to the Project Manager and to the Director of 

Finance at MoAIWD.  The contracted FM consultants will be subjected to annual performance 

evaluations to ensure that they support the borrower’s compliance with the Bank’s financial 

management requirements. 

 

4.1.7.3 The project’s FM will be centrally managed within the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in 

MoAIWD. The PIU would coordinate all project FM-related issues. The overall conclusion of the 

assessment is that MoAIWD’s capacity to handle all the FM aspects of the project, satisfies Bank 

minimum requirements as laid out in the Bank’s FM guidelines subject to the recruitment on a 

contractual basis of a Financial Management Specialist and an Accountant . The overall FM risk for the 

project is assessed as Moderate (see Annex 1 – Risk Analysis summary).  

 

4.1.8 Financial Reporting and Auditing Arrangement:  

In accordance with the Bank’s financial reporting and audit requirements, the project will be required 

to prepare and submit a quarterly progress report to the Bank not later than forty-five (45) days after the 

end of each calendar quarter. The project will prepare and submit annual financial statements, audited 

by the National Audit Office or an independent private audit firm, together with the auditor’s opinion 

and management letter to the Bank not later than six (6) months after the end of the financial year. The 

detailed auditing arrangements are included in the Technical Annex B.4. 

4.1.9 Internal Audit:  

The Central Internal Audit Unit will be responsible for providing objective assurance and ensuring 

accountability in the utilization of public funds and assets. Various bank rules and guidelines (including 

procurement rules, FM guidelines and disbursement guidelines) would also provide additional guidance. 

The internal controls of the project will be spelt out in the project implementation manual which would 

include sections on accounting and administrative procedures and provide guidance on the day to day 

project FM issues. The internal control environment will be underpinned by the clear definition of roles 

and responsibilities allowing for segregation of duties. 

4.1.10 Disbursement Arrangements:  

The project would make use of the Bank’s various disbursement methods including (i) Direct Payment, 

(ii) Special Account (SA) and (iii) Reimbursement methods in accordance with Bank rules and 

procedures as laid out in the Disbursement handbook as applicable. The Bank will issue a Disbursement 

Letter of which the content will be discussed and agreed with the Government of Malawi (GoM) during 

negotiations.  

 

The government will open a special account which will be denominated in foreign currency, at a bank 

acceptable to the Bank for the Project’s use. A related local currency account will also be opened for 

eligible local currency operating costs.  

4.2 Monitoring  

 
4.2.1 The established ASWAp results framework will be used for M&E of the project performance. 

Support will be provided by the MoAIWD and Ministry Labour, Youth and Manpower Development 

(MLYMD) to undertake their roles in leading the M&E process. The M&E Units will generate gender 

disaggregated data and also assess socio-economic impacts on the target groups. The Environmental 

District Officers and Land Resources Conservation Officers will monitor the social and environmental 

impacts of the project. Project effect and impacts on the target groups will be monitored by constituting 

cross-section samples of beneficiaries. The component will facilitate stakeholder consultations, farmer 

organisation, nutrition and HIV/AIDS messages, promotion of women participation, field 

demonstrations including competitions and short-term consultancies.  

 



 

17 

4.2.2 Milestones 
 

Timeframe Milestone Monitoring process / feedback loop 

Year 0  Preparation of 

procurement packages  

 

Project Approval, 

launching, signature  

GOM, AFDB 

 

 

AFDB Board, GOM 

Year 1 – 5 Implementation  

Year 1 – 5 Oversight  Steering Committee () 

Year 1 – 5 Audit Reports   Annually by PCU 

Year 3 Mid-Term Review   Bank and PCU to monitor  

Year 5 Impact Study   PCU and Regions 

Year 5 Project Completion Report   ASWAP and PCU to monitor; Bank to participate 

 
4.3 Governance  

 

4.3.1 The Agricultural sector in Malawi is repositioning itself to institutionalize transparency and 

good governance as evidenced in earlier detection by the management and ordering of full investigation 

of suspected salary fraud in the ministry. It should be noted that the MAIWD was not involved in the 

Malawi Cashgate of 2013. However, the requisite fiduciary management framework still poise a lot of 

challenges which include lack of qualified and experienced project accounting staff due to high turnover 

or attrition of accounting staff, weak internal controls and non-compliance with key internal control 

procedures within line ministry.  

4.3.2 The 2015 report of Transparency International Corruption Perception Index showed that Malawi 

had slide from 37(88/176) to 31 (112/175) between 1912 and 2015. The overall score of 2015 was below 

Sub-Saharan average of 33 score. However, the overall average score for Malawi’s Country Policy and 

Institutional Assessment (CPIA) Governance component has been improving slowly between 2004-

2014 with intermittent slight decreases in 2010 (-0.1) and 2014 (-0.13). However, the theft of public 

funds amounting to about US Dollar 50 million in September, 2013 dubbed as Cash gate, exposed high 

level corruption and serious weaknesses in Malawi’s PFM system. The current administration has since 

coming into power shown strong resolve to address the root causes of Cash gate and reform the PFM 

system.  The Government is implementing the PFM Reform Action Plan to restore controls and integrity 

of the PFM system over the short term. The Government also is also implementing a broader Public 

Sector Reform Programme (PSRP) aimed at improving accountability and transparency in public 

service delivery.  Steady progress in reforms is being made as evidenced by recent improvement in 

financial reporting and completion of pay roll audit.  There are on-going efforts to strengthen the 

capacity of key governance institutions, such as the Anti-Corruption Bureau, Office of the Directorate 

of Public Procurement (ODPP) and the National Auditor General’s Office. 

4.4 Sustainability  

4.4.1 The participatory approach adopted during the project design and envisioned to be extended 

during the implementation phase will enhance the ownership of project’s activities and realizations by 

the main stakeholders ensuring its sustainability. The irrigation infrastructure will be operated and 

maintained by the Water Users Associations (WUAs) whose capacities will be developed through 

training. The project will ensure that at least 30% of women are represented in the irrigation 

management committees. Operation and Maintenance guidelines will be developed including tariff 

setting by the supervising consultant for the operation and maintenance of the schemes that takes into 

consideration past experiences in the management of irrigation schemes in the country. The WUAs are 

expected to cover the O&M costs from the contribution of farmers through water charges. Other 

sustainability of other components - Value Addition and Youth entrepreneurship and Agro-



 

18 

Cooperatives Development for Employability are hinged on making paradigm shift of agriculture from 

development to business/commercial activities.  

4.4.2 The project is financially sustainable. The analysis indicates 23% and 26% FIRR and EIRR 

respectively. It is evident that the farmers will be able to pay for the water usage (which is currently 

estimated at KWA50, 000 per annum) through the Water User Association given that farmers will be 

linked to processors who will be ready to buy their products. In order to strengthen the relationships 

between the two parties,   provisions have been made for legal services. The project also makes 

provision for the training of artisans and technicians for the maintenance of the irrigation infrastructure.  

In addition regarding the irrigation infrastructure, marketing of value added products, provision of 

institutional support and development of strong farmer groups will work in synergy to ensure 

sustainability. In particular it is expected that, under AIYAP, the farmers who will be organized in 

Farmer Associations/Cooperative Societies will operate as farming businesses. Cooperative and 

Extension Officers will be recruited to provide technical supports in farms management, operation and 

maintenance.  The analysis also indicates that the young entrepreneurs will be able to service their loans, 

as well as obtain handsome net profits for re-investments in running of their farms.    

4.5 Risk management  

 

4.5.1 One major risk is the unpredictability of agricultural markets due to trade restrictions and price 

controls on some items. The Government is being urged by DPs, for instance to deregulate agriculture 

markets including removal of bans and pegging the price on some strategic crops such as maize.   

Enactment of the Goods Control Act would help to improve market predictability.  However, there is 

already a guaranteed market for sugarcane production by linking the farmers with Dwangwa Cane 

Growers Trust and Dwangwa Cane Growers Company Ltd.     

4.5.2  Volatility of the world commodity prices 

Mitigation: The country enjoys accessibility to SADC market and the project lays emphasis on internal 

processing of raw materials and value addition. 

 

4.5.3 Project Cost Overruns: Project cost overruns due to exchange rate fluctuations, uncertainties in 

economic situation of Malawi and SADC and the rise in the cost of materials. 

Mitigation: Project is costed in USD and efficient procurement timing to address the increases, as well 

as adequate price contingencies for the unavoidable increases will is provided in the project costing. 

4.5.4 Reduced precipitation, increased temperature, change in length of rainy season, increased 

incidences of drought and floods, due to climate risks:  

Mitigation: Training regarding vulnerabilities, assisting the communities to select various adaptation 

measures; e.g. rainwater harvesting, rotational grazing, using drought tolerant varieties e.g. cassava, 

sorghum etc. 

4.5.5 Delay in providing counterpart funding:  

Mitigation: The GoM contributions will be largely be in kind in form of provisions of office spaces, 

furniture, salary and wages, allowances (including per diem of staff), payment of all utility bills, office 

equipment and payment of hotel bills for staff seconded to the project.  

 
4.6 Knowledge building  
 

4.6.1 The knowledge gained and lessons learnt through the implementation of various agricultural 

projects in Malawi, government policies as well as studies carried out in the sector have been duly 

applied in designing this project. Similarly, the knowledge that will be generated through 

implementation of this Project will be synergised with other projects on ground such as SIVAP and 

AISP to achieve maximum result. The results from the various studies and other surveys, including the 

socio-economic impact study will inform the stakeholders on how to put the acquired knowledge into 

practical use for better results-oriented achievements and sustained benefit flows. 

 



 

19 

4.6.2 At the project level, the project implementation review, quarterly progress reports, audit, sector 

M&E and completion reports will also provide information on various aspects of the project for further 

diagnosis. The knowledge obtained will be shared within the Bank and with other development partners 

as well as with RMCs. 

V LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

 

5.1 Legal instrument  

The Project will be financed by an ADF loan.  

5.2 Conditions associated with Bank’s intervention 

5.2.1 Conditions Precedent to Entry into Force of the Loan Agreement: The entry into force of 

the Loan Agreement shall be subject to the fulfilment by the Borrower of the provisions of Section 

12.01 of the General Conditions Applicable to Loans and Guarantee Agreements of the ADF. 

5.2.2 Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement of the Loan: The obligation of the Bank to make 

the first disbursement of the loan shall be conditional upon entry into force of Loan Agreement in 

accordance with 5.2.1 above and the submission by the Borrower of evidence in form and substance 

satisfactory to the Bank, of the opening of a special account in a bank acceptable to the Bank into which 

the proceeds of the Loan will be deposited.   

5.2.3 Other Conditions: The Borrower shall cause the Executing Agency to: (a) establish a Project 

Implementation Unit (PIU) within six months of the entry into force of the Loan Agreement.. 

 

5.2.4 Undertaking: The Borrower shall cause the Executing Agency to implement the project in 

compliance with national legislations and in accordance with the Environmental and Social 

Management Framework (ESMF) and submit to the Bank on an annual basis an acceptable 

Environmental and Social Monitoring Report. 

 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

 

This Project complies with all applicable Bank policies.  

 
VI RECOMMENDATION 

 

Management recommends that the Board of Directors approve the proposed ADF loan of UA16 million 

to the Government of Malawi for the purposes and subject to the conditions stipulated in this report. 



 















































 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 
 

 

 
 

 

DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME FOR THE SPECIAL AGRO-

INDUSTRIAL PROCESSING ZONE OF KOULIKORO AND SEMI-

URBAN BAMAKO REGIONS (PDZSTA-KB): 

P-ML-AAG-004 

 

COUNTRY:  REPUBLIC OF MALI 
 

APPRAISAL REPORT 

 
  



 



PROGRAMME INFORMATION SHEET 

Client Information Sheet 

BORROWER:   Republic of Mali 
 

EXECUTING AGENCY:  

 

Financing Plan 

Source Amount  

(UA Million) 

Instruments 

 

ADF Grant 

 

1.42  

 

Grant 

TSF Loan 10.50 Loan 

TSF Grant 1.16 Grant 

TSF Pillar I – Additional 

contribution of the Republic of 

Italy (EUR 1.38 million) 

1.102 Grant 

Government of Mali 2.08 N/A 

TOTAL COST 16.26 
 

 

Key ADF and TSF Financing Information 

 
 ADF TSF (Pillar 1) 

 

Loan/Grant Currency 

 

UA 

 

UA 

Interest Type* Not Applicable Not Applicable 

Interest Rate Margin* Not Applicable Not Applicable 

Commitment Fee* 0.5% (5 basis points) 0.5% on 

undisbursed 

commitments 
Other Charges* 0.75% (service charge) 0.75% (service 

charge) 

Maturity  40 years 20 years 

Grace Period 10 years 7 years 

IRR (baseline scenario) : 25.21% Amount NPV:  XOF 201.572 billion 

ERR (baseline scenario) : 26.07% Amount NPV:  XOF 219.03 billion 

 

 

Duration – Milestones (expected) 

 

Concept Note Approval 

 

6 August 2019 

Programme Approval 16 December 2019 

Effectiveness 15 January 2020 

Last Disbursement 31 March 2025 

Closing Date 31 June 2024 

 

  



 

 

 

iv 

PROGRAMME SUMMARY 

Overview: Mali covers an area of 1,241,238 km² and the rural sector is the mainspring of its 

development, with agriculture accounting for 45% of GDP, providing employment for 80% of 

the total population and generating more than 75% of export earnings. However, it is constantly 

subject to climatic hazards, degradation of its natural resources (degradation of soil, water, air, 

vegetation, biodiversity, climate, etc.) and deterioration of terms of trade (steady drop in the 

prices of its agricultural export products), which limit the incomes of the rural population and 

expose them, particularly young people, to immigration. 

The degradation of natural resources results in land production loss of 6.5 T/ha/year, which 

corresponds to significant losses of soil nutrients, with a financial impact of up to CFAF 

90,000/ha/year (Strategic Investment Framework for Sustainable Land Management (SIF-

SLM)). All the environmental degradation-related factors (soil erosion, deforestation, air, 

quality of life, water and solid waste, wildlife heritage, mineral resources, etc.) have a 

significant impact on GDP which has declined from 26.5% to 20.9%. 

In addition, the value-added created by the agro-industry sector (biscuits, pasta, confectionery, 

canning industry, brewery, bakery, oil works, sugar refinery, dairy products, textile and 

tobacco) fell by 46.61% from XOF 1,465.64 billion in 2013 to XOF 782.48 billion in 2014. 

This trend is continuing, with annual agro-food imports for about EUR 597 million to fill the 

gap. The foreign exchange losses are enormous, and high enough to develop the entire 

programme of the country's twelve (12) agricultural growth poles (agropoles). 

The Development Programme for the Special Agro-industrial Processing Zone of Koulikoro 

and Semi-urban Bamako Regions (PDZSTA-KB) is a proposal to reverse the downward trend 

in agro-industry value added in Mali and disseminate agricultural development technologies 

that can slow down the degradation of natural resources, thereby creating conditions for 

sustainable agriculture, with the support of an additional contribution of the Italian Government 

to TSF Pilar I. The programme will include sustainable land management (SLM) at each stage 

of the proposed technical itineraries, within and outside irrigation areas, unlike extensive or 

intensive agricultural practices that foster the excessive use of agrochemicals. 

The Bank's intervention will help to develop two (2) major regions of Mali with an area of 

28,571.43 km² (2.30% of the country's total area), a population of 1.6 million inhabitants 

(8.63% of the total population in 2017) and an annual growth rate of 3.4%. The population 

density of 56 inhabitants/km² is well above the national average of 14 inhabitants/km². 

Consequently, there is heavy pressure on natural resources, which are rapidly deteriorating in 

the absence of any strong action to control, monitor and curb the trend. 

Needs Assessment: The programme area covers two (2) regions (Koulikoro and Semi-urban 

Bamako) whose irrigation and socio-economic development requires facilities for the 

production and processing of agricultural products that constitute the regions’ potential. The 

programme involves establishing an agro-industrial park to process products upstream and 

serve as an outlet for marketing agricultural products, thereby helping to reduce all-out import 

of agro-food products whose volume and incurred expenditure are becoming alarming.  

In accordance with the country's strategic guidelines, the programme will contribute to the 

processing of agricultural products, while improving the productivity and production of growth 

sectors. This will reduce imports of various agro-food products, with the main outcome of 

transforming Malian agriculture and improving food and nutrition security. 



 

 

 

v 

Added Value for the Bank: PDZSTA-KB seeks to support Mali in its agricultural 

transformation programme by promoting private investment, as well as creating conditions and 

providing incentives likely to attract the national and international private sector to establish in 

Bacoumana agro-industrial park (AIP). The conditions and measures include: (i) adopting 

measures that can create an enabling business environment for the establishment of agro-

industrial enterprises in the agro-industrial park; (ii) constructing physical and smart long-term 

infrastructure to facilitate the establishment of private companies, their operations, and 

transactions related to their activities; and (iii) improving the operation of growth sectors. This 

innovative approach was proposed as a flagship programme of the Bank's Feed Africa Strategy 

2016-2025, known as the Special Agro-Industrial Processing Zones (SAPZs) Flagship 

Programme. It proposes an approach to increase private investment in the agricultural sector, 

with the Government creating favourable conditions. Therefore, this is an area in which the 

Bank has experience and expertise. It can also raise internal financial resources, as well as 

additional resources from its technical and financial partners and private banks, relying on its 

“Triple A” rating. The Bank has also gained experience in developing this type of operation in 

Togo, Ethiopia, Guinea, DRC, Zambia and Tanzania. Hence, it can develop this operation with 

a high probability of success.  

Knowledge Building and Management: The implementation of the Development Programme 

for Special Agro-Industrial Processing Zones (PDZSTA-KB) will provide a wealth of 

knowledge that can be replicated throughout the country's twelve (12) agricultural development 

poles, including those in Koulikoro and Semi-urban Bamako Regions. The knowledge 

concerns: (i) the best way to work with the private sector, through a PPP approach or as a non-

sovereign operation (NSO), or a combination of both; (ii) the multi-sector approach, involving 

sectors such as transport, energy, water and sanitation, agro-industry, agriculture, 

communication (NICT), education, health and nutrition, employment and trade; (iii) a 

combination of: (a) two Bank Strategies, namely "Feed Africa" and Skills Development, 

especially for young people, and (b) at least four (4) flagship programmes, namely, Special 

Agro-Industrial Processing Zones (SAPZ), Technologies for African Agricultural 

Transformation (TAAT), Agricultural Value Chains (AVC), Post-Harvest Loss Reduction and 

Youth Employability (Enable Youth);  (iv) product processing, as a major development 

challenge for which solutions will be sought in this programme; (v) employment in general and 

in the agricultural sector in particular, as a solution proposed in the programme; and (vi) 

contribution to reducing massive agro-food imports from the continent, and from Mali, in 

particular. 

 



 

 

 

vi 

 

Results-Based Logical Framework 

 
 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 Output 1: Good governance and 

incentive measures are in place 

Number of texts prepared and low on 

Special Economic Zones 
0  2 

Monitoring and evaluation 

reports of the Agropole 

Development Company 

Risks: Late engagement of some stakeholders 

may delay project implementation 

REPUBLIC OF MALI: DEVELOPMENT PROJECT FOR THE SPECIAL AGRO-INDUSTRIAL PROCESSING ZONE OF KOULIKORO AND SEMI-URBAN BAMAKO REGIONS (PDZSTA-KB) 

Project Goal: Promote inclusive agricultural transformation by reducing agro-food imports through private investment in priority value chains. 

RESULTS CHAIN 

PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 

MEANS OF VERIFICATION 
RISKS/ 

MITIGATION MEASURES Indicators  
(including CSIs) 

Baseline 
Situation  

Target 

 LONG TERM 2016/2017 2026    

IM
P

A
C

T
S

 

Impact 1: Contribute to reducing 

agro-food imports 
Value of agro-food imports (in EUR 

million) 
597  507 

INSTAT Surveys 

Study on non-tariff measures 

Custom Services  Report 

 

Impact 2: Contribute to improving 

food and nutrition security  

Prevalence of severe/moderate food 

insecurity 
13.5%  10.0 % 

INSTAT Surveys 
Periodic report on Mali’s socio-

economic performance 

Prevalence of chronic malnutrition (6-59 

months) 
37.4% 33.0% 

Impact 3: Contribute to poverty 

reduction  

Incidence of poverty in the Project Area 
51.5%  46.5% 

 MEDIUM TERM 2020 2025   

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

Outcome 1: Agricultural products 
processing capacity has improved Average processing rate for agricultural 

products 
 3 %  12 % 

Annual Reports of Sector 

Ministries (Agriculture, 

Livestock and Fisheries) 

 

Risk: Risk of low private sector mobilisation 

 

Mitigation Measures: The project design is 

based on a discussion platform with the private 

sector whose concerns are taken into account in 

the final formulation of the project, a guarantee 

of SME involvement and ownership of the 

project. 

Outcome 2: Level of private 

investment in agriculture has 

increased 

Number of  private small and 

medium-sized agricultural businesses 

operating  

 X  15 
Monitoring Report of the 

Ministry of Agriculture 

Outcome 3: Living conditions of 

people in the programme area 

are improved 

Number of direct and indirect jobs 

created and benefiting men/women 

(M/W) 

0/0 
 5 800 / 

3 125 
Agropole Company Report  

 

National Employment 

Observatory  

INSTAT Surveys 

 

MICS Surveys 

Proportion of 6-23 months children 

with minimum dietary diversity 
13.0 20 

Outcome 4: Number of economic 

and involuntary immigration 

seekers is reduced 

% reduction in number of economic 

and involuntary immigration seekers 

(young people/women (girls) 

0/0 30%/55% 

 SHORT TERM 2019  2024   



 

 

 

vii 

Output 2: Processing facilities 

constructed 

Km of highways and roads 

constructed/rehabilitated 
0 14.5 

Monitoring and Evaluation 

Reports 

Mitigation: The project design is based on 

sensitisation and systematic consultation for 

gradual stakeholder ownership. Number of ATCs constructed and 

equipped 

0 10 

Area (ha) of agro-park serviced and 

benefitting M/W 
0/0 100/100 

Quarterly implementation 

progress reports(QIPR), 

monitoring-evaluation reports 

(MER), and annual activity 

reports (AAR) 

 

Project Mid-Term Review 

Report (PMTRR) 

 

Project Completion Report 

(PCR) 

Number of hydraulic structures built 0 10 

Power of installed transformers (kW) 0 2000 

 

Output 3: Capacity of key 

stakeholders of growth sectors is 

strengthened (Additional 

contribution of the Republic of 

Italy to TSF Pilar I) 

Number of young people/women 

benefitting from the local 

employment promotion and economic 

empowerment fund 

0/0 1 

Quarterly implementation 

progress reports (QIPR), 

monitoring-evaluation reports 

(MER), and annual activity 

reports (AAR) 

 

Project Mid-Term Review 

Report (PMTRR) 

 

Project Completion Report 

(PCR) 

Risks: The project will not be implemented 

according to the implementation plan and 

schedule, particularly with delays in 

procurement. 

 

Mitigation: The institutional framework and 

project implementation arrangements will 

ensure implementation in accordance with best 

practices. 

In addition, a Procurement Expert will be 

recruited to assist in effective conduct of the 

procurement process. 

Review of the structural causes by the 

migration 
0 1 

Forest cover restored (ha) 0 800 

Number of women/young people 

benefitting from support for food 

processing and nutrition education 

activities 

0/0 500/500 

 

Output 4: Project management, 

coordination, monitoring and 

evaluation ensured 

Physical implementation rate of the 

project   

0 ≥ 95% QIPR, MER and AAR 

PMTRR 

PCR 

SAP 
Number of supervision missions  0 10 

Midterm review report is approved 0 1 

Completion report is approved  0 1 



 

 

 

viii 

A
C

T
IV

IT
IE

S
 

COMPONENTS RESOURCES  

Component 1: Support for Governance and Incentive Measures:  UA 2.63 million 

-Support for establishment of good governance in APZs 

-Promotion of incentive measures in APZs 

Component 2: Development of Transformation Support Infrastructure   UA 8.99 million 

- Construction of infrastructure for servicing the agro-park 

- Development and rehabilitation of access infrastructure 

- Construction of support infrastructure for agricultural production 

Component 3: Capacity Building for Key Stakeholders of Growth Sectors   UA 1.43 million 

- Central and Decentralised Services 

- Support for Migration-related Fragility Management 

Component 3: Project Management and Coordination         UA 3.21 million 

 

ADF Grant :  UA 1.42 million 

TSF Grant :  UA 1.16 million 

TSF Loan:   UA 10.50 million 

TSF Pillar 1: EUR 1.38 million (UA 1.102 million : Additional 

contribution of the Republic of Italy to TSF Pilar I) 

Government:  UA 2.08 million 

TOTAL:   UA 16.26 million 

 

 

 



 

 

 

ix 

Indicative Programme Implementation Schedule 

 No. ACTIVITIES 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 
Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 

1 ADF Loan/TSF Grant negotiations                     

2 Signing of ADF Loan and TSF Grant agreements                      

3 Fulfilment of conditions precedent to the first disbursement                      

4 Publication of General Procurement Notice                      

5 Recruitment of PMU staff                      

6 PDZSTA-KB launching workshop                       

7 Procurement of goods for PMU and Agencies (vehicles, IT equipment, etc.)                     

8 Updating of programme’s baseline situation                       

9 Signing of agreements with partner structures                     

10 Preparation of Annual Work Plan (AWP)                      

11 Construction of agro-park facilities                      

12 Recruitment of companies to construct facilities                      

13 Construction of internal agro-park facilities: BDs                      

14 Mobilisation of Private Sector/ Agro-Park Development Company                      

15 Recruitment of an international expert specialised in SAPZ                      

16 Land Zoning and Fertilisation                     

17 Validation of Priority Value Chains                     

18 Selection of Technology Packages (TAAT)                     

19 Construction of private sector facilities                      

20 Construction of production /processing facilities                     

21 Production, processing, transport and marketing activities                     

22 Monitoring and evaluation                     

23 Annual External Audit                     

24 Completion Report                     



 

1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION BY BANK GROUP MANAGEMENT TO THE 

BOARD OF DIRECTORS ON A DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME FOR SPECIAL 

AGRO-INDUSTRIAL PROCESSING ZONES IN BOKE AND KANKAN 

 
Management submits this report and its recommendation concerning a proposal for an ADF 

Grant of UA 1.42 million, a TSF Grant of UA 2.262 million (including an additional 

contribution of the Republic of Italy to  TSF Pillar I of EUR 1.38 million, i.e. UA 1.102 

million), and a TSF Loan of UA 10.50 million, from the ADF and TSF country allocation, to 

the Government of the Republic of Mali to finance the activities of PDZSTA-KB, which is the 

Pilot Phase of Mali’s Agropoles Development Programme. 

I. STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE 

Programme Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives 

1.1.1. The programme is consistent with three (3) of the five (5) strategic pillars of the 

Strategic Framework for Economic Recovery and Sustainable Development (CREDD) 2019-

2023, namely: (i) Inclusive growth and structural transformation of the economy (Pillar 3); (ii) 

Environmental protection and building resilience to climate change; and (iii) Human capital 

development. CREDD serves as a framework for intervention by Mali's various Technical and 

Financial Partners. It is aligned with the MDGs and the objectives of the African Union's 

Agenda 2063, and aims at "A well-governed Mali, where harmonious coexistence of the various 

components of the society is restored, peace consolidated and collective and individual security 

ensured in unity, cohesion and diversity, where the wealth creation process is inclusive and 

environment-friendly, and where human capital is developed for the benefit of the population, 

particularly young people and women".  

1.1.2 At sector level, CREDD is implemented under Mali's Agricultural Development 

Policy (PDA) and includes the Development Programme for the Special Agro-Industrial 

Processing Zones of Koulikoro and Semi-urban Bamako (PDZSTA-KB). It is also implemented 

through its priority activities of developing agricultural products, protecting livelihoods and 

resilience to climate change, and enhancing human capital. The activities will, as a result of 

improved living conditions, promote sedentary lifestyles and reduce migration among the 

population. Therefore, PDZSTA-KB is a PDA operational programme which guides efforts 

towards achieving 6% growth in agricultural added value and allocating 15% of the State budget 

to the agricultural sector (10% in Maputo Commitment). Indeed, PDZSTA-KB is fully 

consistent with the country's strategic objectives. 

Programme Alignment with Bank Policy 

1.2.1 The Bank's intervention, through PDZSTA-KB which is the pilot phase of a 

programme for twelve (12) agropoles, is considered a priority by the Bank. Consequently, the 

Bank has made the strategic choice of transforming Malian agriculture, as reflected in Pillar II 

of CSP 2015-2019: "Infrastructure development to support economic recovery". The 

programme is also consistent with three (3) of the High 5s, namely: (i) Feed Africa (Strategy 

for Agricultural Transformation in Africa 2016-2025); (iii) Industrialise Africa; (iv) Integrate 

Africa; and (v) Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa. The programme’s alignment 

with Bank policy is further underscored by the fact that it will also help to enhance the 

transformation of Malian agriculture, boost industrialisation, and increase Mali's energy 

capacity. Specifically, it will help to promote smart agriculture, with product processing on all 

links of the priority value chains fostered under this programme. 

 

 



 

2 

 

Rationale for Bank Intervention 

1.3.1 The rural sector is the mainspring of Mali's development. It accounts for 45% of GDP, 

employs 80% of the total population, and generates more than 75% of export earnings. 

Therefore, agriculture is the main source of income for the rural population. However, 

agriculture is constantly subject to climatic hazards, degradation of natural resources 

(degradation of soil, water, air, vegetation, biodiversity, climate, etc.), and deterioration of 

terms of trade (steady drop in the prices of agricultural export products), which limit the 

incomes of the rural population. Indeed, the degradation of natural resources stems from 

inappropriate agricultural practices, and is the main cause of recurrent drought, leading to rapid 

destruction of livelihoods and threatening Mali's future, with negative effects on the country's 

food and nutrition security. All the environmental degradation-related factors (soil erosion, 

deforestation, air, quality of life, water and solid waste, wildlife heritage, mineral resources, 

etc.) have contributed to GDP decline from 26.5% to 20.9%. 

1.3.2 The deterioration of terms of trade is due to the low level of transformation of Mali's 

agriculture, and therefore of Mali’s economy. The value-added created by the agro-industry 

sector (biscuits, pasta, confectionery, canning industry, brewery, bakery, oil works, sugar 

refinery, dairy products, textile and tobacco) fell by 46.61% from XOF 1,465.64 billion in 2013 

to XOF 782.48 billion in 2014. This trend is continuing, and Mali is forced to import the 

equivalent of about EUR 597 million worth of agro-food products each year to fill the gap. The 

foreign exchange losses are enormous, and high enough to develop the entire programme of the 

country's twelve (12) agropoles. 

1.3.3 PDZSTA-KB is a proposal to reverse the downward trend in agro-industry value-

added in Mali and disseminate agricultural development technologies that can slow down the 

degradation of natural resources, thereby creating conditions for sustainable agriculture. The 

first principle of the programme is to group all the companies within an agro-industrial park 

(AIP) serviced to the required standards so as to avoid disorganised installations that breach 

environmental protection requirements. The second principle of PDZSTA-KB is that the AIP 

will be supplied with inputs from land developed in accordance with practices that include 

sustainable land management (SLM) at each stage of the proposed technical itineraries, within 

and outside irrigation areas, unlike the current inadequate agricultural practices in the area. The 

third principle is to upgrade the skills of young people and women in growth agricultural value 

chains and enable them to effectively benefit from future jobs that will be created within the 

AIPs. In the process, the programme will create conditions that promote sedentary lifestyles 

and reduce migration from the programme area to other countries or to hazardous gold panning 

activities. 

1.3.4 Since the programme incorporates the Bank's relevant strategies, it will effectively 

boost economic development by consolidating the role of the private sector and communities 

in rural development to ensure inclusiveness in Africa and in Mali, in particular. Furthermore, 

its design is based on complementarities with operations underway and/or being developed, 

particularly operations relating to women’s economic empowerment in the shea sector 

(PAEFEK). It also seeks to strengthen food and nutrition security in Koulikoro region 

(PRESAN-KL), as well as enhance food security by developing irrigated crops (PRESA-DCI). 

Such complementarity will contribute to the search for synergies in interventions. Therefore, 

this programme will strive to benefit from ongoing activities in Koulikoro and semi-urban 

Bamako regions, particularly the operations of the World Bank (PATAM, etc.) and IsDB, so as 

to ensure its relevance and effectiveness on the ground. 

 



 

3 

 

Aid Coordination 

1.4.1 Development assistance is coordinated by the Government of Mali, through the 

following three (3) consultation and coordination mechanisms: (i) At the general and policy 

level, a Troika; (ii) at the sector and thematic level, and (iii) at the sub-sector level. All TFPs 

align their interventions with the priorities of the Malian Government. In the rural development 

sector, the TFPs are organised around the Agricultural and Rural Economy Thematic Group 

(ARETG), which coordinates activities related to the sector. The group has two subgroups: 

"Livestock and Fisheries" and "Food and Nutrition Security ", as well as an "Irrigation" Focal 

Point replacing the Irrigation Sub-Group, which has been abolished. The AfDB, WB, IFAD, 

IsDB, GIZ, AFD, Netherlands and FAO are the main financial partners in the rural sector. As 

regards Mali’s external financing, the Bank comes second to the World Bank, with 13% of the 

financing. 

1.4.2 The Bank, through COML, is an active member of the CCC and some Thematic 

Groups (TG), particularly the Environment and Climate Change TG comprising UNDP, 

Sweden, Belgium, Norway, European Union, Canada, World Bank, UNCDF, France, Spain 

and Netherlands. The Bank works closely with the TFPs in this group in GEF activities. Such 

collaboration facilitates the exchange of best practice. 

SECTOR OR SUBSECTOR 
IMPORTANCE 

GDP Exports Labour  

[Rural Sector] [23%] 5% (2015) 80% 

STAKEHOLDERS – ANNUAL PUBLIC EXPENDITURE 

(average PTIP 2010-2012 in UA million)  

Government Donors 

 Description Amounts Period 

 Germany 90.2 2013-2023 

 AfDB 247.55 2018-2022 

UA 51 million World Bank 308.2 2013-2023 

(22%) IsDB 29.40 2018-2025 

 Canada 52.00 2017-2021 

 USAID 115.00 2017-2022 

 EU / Netherlands / Sweden 141.80 2013-2024 

 UNICEF / UNESCO 44.00 2017-2021 

 UNWOMEN / UNFPA 45.93 2017-2022 

Aid Coordination Level 

Existence of thematic working groups Yes 

Existence of a comprehensive sector programme No 

AfDB’s role in aid coordination Enhanced with COML 

II. PROGRAMME DESCRIPTION 

Programme Components 

2.1.1 The Development Programme for the Special Agro-Industrial Processing Zone in 

Koulikoro and Semi-Urban Bamako Regions (PDZSTA-KB) is the Pilot Phase of a 

development programme for twelve (12) agro-industrial processing zones. It is intended to help 

reduce agro-food imports and improve food and nutrition security in Mali by establishing 

private sector-led agro-industrial development poles. The poles will address migration-related 

fragility factors in Koulikoro area by promoting sedentary lifestyles among the population, 

especially young people, who suffer from problems of deterioration of livelihoods (natural 

resources), climate change, "sahelisation" and extremely rapid desert encroachment. The 

programme will be implemented through the following four (4) components: (i) Establishment 

of Governance in the Special Agro-Industrial Processing Zones (SAPZs); (ii) Development of 



 

4 

 

Transformation and Access Infrastructure; (iii) Capacity Building for Key Stakeholders of 

Growth Sectors; and (iv) Programme Coordination and Management.  

2.1.2 The programme will be based on production activities, as well as the construction of 

access and marketing infrastructure for ongoing operations or operations under appraisal for 

2019, upstream Bancoumana agro-industrial park, for the supply of inputs for the pilot phase. 

The operations are the Bank's PRESAN-KL (UA 36.06 million), the Bank's Programme for 

Enhancing Food Security through Irrigated Crop Development (PRESA-DCI) (UA 36.00 

million), and the Bank's Women’s Economic Empowerment Project in the Shea Sector 

(PAEFFK (UA 5.63 million). This requires supplementary financing amounting to the 

equivalent of EUR 97.27 million. In addition to these Bank portfolio operations, other donors 

are very active in the programme area, particularly the World Bank, IsDB, European Union, 

etc. Under these conditions, the pilot phase of the programme will not be exposed to the risk of 

lack of input production and supplies to Bancoumana agro-park, if the activities are properly 

coordinated between the various operations mentioned above.  

2.1.3 The key activities of the components can be summarised as in Table 2.1 below: 
Table 2.1   

SUMMARY OF PROGRAMME COMPONENTS 

No. COMPONENT 

TOTAL 

COST 

ESTIMATE 

DESCRIPTION OF THE COMPONENTS 

A. 

Support for 

Governance and 

Incentive 

Measures for 

Agro-Park 

Management 

UA 2.63 

million 

(16.19%) 

A1. Establishment of a Governance System for SAPZ Management 

• Support for establishment of the agro-industrial platform (Agro-
Park) 

• Support for preparation of agro-industrial park specifications 

• Feasibility study on new SAPZs in Mali 

A2. Support for a Governance System for SAPZ Management 

• Support for preparation of implementing texts for the land law and 
operationalisation of the land single window 

• Support for monitoring and implementing environmental and social 
measures  

• Support for structures in charge of quality standards and norms and 
micronutrient fortification of food products  

• Technical assistance for implementation of measures to promote 
private investment in agro-parks (instruments, incentives, etc.) 

• Holding of SAPZ investment promotion forums  

• Promotion of domestic and local businesses in agro-industrial parks 

• Regular and systematic consultations between the Government and 
private stakeholders. 

B. 

Development of 

Agricultural 

Transformation 

Support 

Infrastructure 

UA 8.99 

million 

(55.28%) 

Construction of infrastructure for development of 

Bancoumana Agro-Park: 

• Site development works and RUS (roads, DWS, sanitation, 
electricity, telecommunications, fence, etc.), DWS station, STEP, 

etc. 

• Construction of buildings: (i) Administrative and residential block; 
(ii) Service block (training centre, conference centre, laboratories, 

etc.); (iii) Socio-collective infrastructure block (school, health 

centre, guest house, etc.); 

• Works for LV and MV power line and telecommunications fibre 

• Assistance for establishing a business incubator (service provider) 

• Digitalisation of information and transactions 

• Coordination with the private sector to establish a corridor for 
developing Agricultural Technical Centres between dry ports and 

the agro-industrial park 

• Works execution, control and monitoring studies 

• Establishment of a Single Business Window in Bancoumana 

• Promotion of employment for young people and women through 
business incubators for young people (youth employability 

programme) and women (AFAWA)  



 

5 

 

No. COMPONENT 

TOTAL 

COST 

ESTIMATE 

DESCRIPTION OF THE COMPONENTS 

C. 

Support for Key 

Stakeholders of 

Growth Sectors 

(Additional 

contribution of the 

Republic of Italy 

to TSF Pilar I) 

UA 1.43 

million 

(8.79%) 

Migration-related Fragility Management Measures in the Project 

Area: 

• Capacity building for young people and women in processing (in 
coordination with TAAT programme) and nutrition education  

• Support for implementation of priority micro-projects developed by 
young people and women  

• Line of credit for financing youth initiatives to promote local 
employment 

• Preparation of immigration and gender-sensitive Integrated 
Districts Management Plans (3 Districts: Kanganda, Kati and 

Koulikoro, as well as Bamako District) ; 

• Conduct of a study on structural causes of migration and proposal 
of solutions suitable for the project area; 

• Consolidation and dissemination of key factors of integrated 
districts management, best practices of sustainable land, water and 

vegetation management, including conflict management; 

• Restoration and protection natural habitat around development 
works and other infrastructure; 

• Extension of 6,500 improved stoves (deforestation control) 

• Facilitation of access to civil status documents (especially for 
women and young people). 

D. 
Programme 

Management and 

Coordination 

UA 3.21 

million 

(19.74 %) 

(i) Coordination of programme activities, (ii) administrative, accounting 

and financial management, (iii) procurement of goods, works and 

services, (iv) establishment of a communication plan, and 

(v) monitoring and evaluation of programme implementation. 

Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Considered 

2.2.1 PDZSTA-KB seeks to address the central issue of the transformation of Malian 

agriculture in a way that puts the private sector in a leading role, while the public sector 

strives to create incentive conditions that will attract private investors to developed and 

serviced agro-industrial parks. It is an agricultural development approach that creates 

Special Agro-Industrial Processing Zones (SAPZs). The SAPZs are spatial development 

initiatives based on agriculture and designed to concentrate agricultural transformation 

activities in areas with high agricultural potential so as to boost productivity and integrate 

the production, processing and marketing of a number of agricultural inputs. The initiatives 

may or may not have Special Economic Zone status. They are, in some cases, also known 

as Agro-Industial Parks, Agribusiness Parks, Mega Food Parks, Agropoles, Agro-Clusters, 

etc. 

2.2.2 It is an integrated and pragmatic approach that has innovations, is inclusive on all 

links of agricultural value chains (AVCs) and creates wealth through the jobs it generates. 

It also creates wealth by reducing foreign exchange outflows as a result of cuts in agro-food 

imports. The approach also reduces emigration by promoting sedentary lifestyles among the 

population who now find huge employment opportunities and wealth creation at their 

doorstep. In addition, it pools the efforts of all other sectors that contribute to the success 

of agricultural development, particularly industry, transport, energy, water and NICT, even 

within the Bank. It also includes interventions by other development partners in the 

systematic search for complementarity to generate synergy. In the case of PDZSTA-KB, 

the development partners are the World Bank, IFAD, European Union, BCEAO, IsDB, etc. 

2.2.5 Therefore, SAPZ technical solutions break with the traditional approach of 

improving productivity, production and sales, without specifying their content .  



 

6 

 

Table 2.2   

ALTERNATIVES CONSIDERED AND REASONS FOR REJECTION  

ALTERNATIVES BRIEF DESCRIPTION CAUSES FOR REJECTION 

Traditional approach of 

agricultural programmes 

Approach of improving productivity, 

production and sales 

This approach has no AVC content, and has 

therefore stumbled against field realities on 

key issues such as processing, markets and 

opportunities. 

Single-sector approach, 

based on agriculture 

Sector approach based exclusively on 

agricultural activities 

It does not include other development 

sectors that have an impact on agricultural 

development and therefore constitute 

success factors for this sector. 

Use of the Bank's public 

resources mainly 

The programmes are financed mainly from 

the resources of the Bank's public window and 

those of the Government 

AVC financing needs to go beyond the 

Bank's public resources, as they include 

private sector financing, co-financing from 

development partners, and non-sovereign 

operations. 

Dissemination of 

technological innovations 

according to the 

conventional method of 

training and visit to 

producers 

Approach based on regular visits to producers, 

according to a specific schedule and based on 

a control framework with tools such as 

contact group (CG), observation point (OP), 

and system study point (SSP) 

In addition to being cumbersome and costly, 

this method has shown its limitations in the 

past and is less effective than the client-

supplier system, which focuses on 

developing skills in all relevant fields of 

activity. 

Programme Type 

The Development Programme for Special Agro-industrial Processing Zones (PDZSTA-BK) is 

a programme that is facilitated by the public sector through major public investments to 

stimulate private sector interest in investing in growth by providing leadership to the 

programme, particularly in the processing of agricultural products, the supply of agricultural 

inputs and services, and marketing. It is a programme that will be implemented in several 

phases, depending on successive ADF allocations and mobilisation of additional resources from 

development partners. 

Programme Cost and Financing Arrangements  

2.1.1 Programme Cost: The overall cost of the twelve (12) agropoles programme is estimated 
at UA 660 million (about EUR 826.32 million), with the first phase estimated at UA 55.00 million 

(XOF 45.17 billion) which will start with a pilot operation estimated at UA 16.26 million (XOF 

13.36 billion), exclusive of tax and customs duty. This cost comprises UA 8.83 million (XOF 7.25 

billion) in foreign exchange and UA 7.44 million (XOF 6.11 billion) in local currency. It also 

includes provisions for physical contingencies and price escalation, which are estimated at an 

average of 3% and 4% respectively. The provision for price escalation was estimated on the basis 

of current and programmed levels of cost inflation rates in local and foreign currencies of 2.5% and 

1.8% respectively per year on average. The provision for physical contingencies is estimated at 

between 0 and 7%. A summary of the programme cost estimate by component and expenditure 

category is presented in the tables below. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

7 

 

Table 2.3  

Summary Cost Estimates by Component 

COMPONENTS 
XOF Million UA Thousand % 

FE 

% 

BC LC FE Total LC FE Total 

A. ESTABLISHMENT OF GOVERNANCE IN SAPZs 1 445.25 689.75 2 135.00 1 759.80 839.87 2 599.67 32 17 

 Improvement of APZ Operational Framework 71.25 223.75 295.00 86.76 272.45 359.20 76 2 
 APZ Governance System 288.00 412.00 700.00 350.68 501.67 852.35 59 5 

 Strengthening of State and Non-State Institutions 1 086.00 54.00 1 140.00 1 322.36 65.75 1 388.11 5 9 
B. DEV. TRANSF. & ACCESS INFRASTRUCTURE 2 150.81 4 896.06 7 046.87 2 618.92 5 961.66 8 580.58 69 55 

 Agro-Park infrastructure 2 150.81 4 896.06 7 046.87 2 618.92 5 961.66 8 580.58 69 55 

C. STAKEHOLDER CAPACITY BUILDING 745.29 403.60 1 148.89 907.50 491.44 1 398.94 35 9 
 Decentralised and Devolved Services 133.95 127.05 261.00 163.10 154.70 317.81 49 2 

 App. of Migration-related Fragility Management 611.34 276.55 887.89 744.39 336.74 1 081.14 31 7 
D. PROGRAMME MANAGEMENT & COORDINATION 1 594.53 976.19 2 570.72 1 941.57 1 188.65 3 130.22 38 20 

TOTAL BASE COST 5 935.88 6 965.60 12 901.48 7 227.79 8 481.62 15 709.41 54 100 

 Physical Contingencies 65.55 123.78 189.33 79.82 150.72 230.54 65 1 

 Financial Contingencies 105.97 160.00 265.97 129.03 194.82 323.85 60 2 

TOTAL COST PILOT PHASE 6 107.41 7 249.38 13 356.78 7 436.64 8 827.16 16 263.81 54 104 

 

Table 2.4  

Summary Programme Costs by Expenditure Category 

COMPONENTS 
XOF Million UA Thousand 

% FE % CB LC FE Total LC FE Total 

I. INVESTMENT COSTS 4 814.34 6 837.67 11 652.01 5 862.15 8 325.85 14 188.00 59 90 

 A. WORKS 2 121.40 4 868.36 6 989.76 2 583.11 5 927.93 8 511.04 70 54 

  Construction and rehabilitation 150.00 350.00 500.00 182.65 426.18 608.82 70 4 

  Infrastructure 1 917.56 4 474.31 6 391.87 2 334.91 5 448.12 7 783.02 70 50 

  Field works 53.84 44.05 97.89 65.56 53.64 119.20 45 1 

 B. GOODS 75.64 179.61 255.25 92.10 218.70 310.80 70 2 

  Vehicles 34.25 102.75 137.00 41.70 125.11 166.82 75 1 

  Equipment 41.39 76.86 118.25 50.40 93.59 143.99 65 1 

 C. SERVICES 1 167.30 1 789.70 2 957.00 1 421.36 2 179.22 3 600.57 61 23 

  Training 264.60 176.40 441.00 322.19 214.79 536.98 40 3 

  Technical Assistance 174.00 986.00 1 160.00 211.87 1 200.60 1 412.47 85 9 

  Studies 416.70 509.30 926.00 507.39 620.15 1 127.54 55 7 

  Contractual services 296.25 98.75 395.00 360.73 120.24 480.97 25 3 

  Audit 15.75 19.25 35.00 19.18 23.44 42.62 55 - 

 D. MISCELLANEOUS 1 450.00 - 1 450.00 1 765.58 - 1 765.58 - 11 

II. RECURRENT COSTS 1 121.54 127.93 1 249.47 1 365.64 155.77 1 521.41 10 10 

 A. STAFF 724.50 - 724.50 882.18 - 882.18 - 6 

 B. TRAVEL ALLOWANCES 210.53 - 210.53 256.34 - 256.34 - 2 

 C. MAINTENANCE, OPERATING AND REPAIR COSTS 48.14 81.80 129.95 58.62 99.61 158.23 63 1 

  Vehicles 37.04 68.79 105.83 45.10 83.76 128.86 65 1 

  Equipment 10.40 12.72 23.12 12.67 15.48 28.15 55 - 

  Infrastructure 0.70 0.30 1.00 0.85 0.37 1.22 30 - 

 D. OVERHEAD COSTS 138.38 46.13 184.50 168.49 56.16 224.66 25 1 

TOTAL BASE COST 5 935.88 6 965.60 12 901.48 7 227.79 8 481.62 15 709.41 54 100 

 Physical Contingencies 65.55 123.78 189.33 79.82 150.72 230.54 65 1 

 Financial Contingencies 105.97 160.00 265.97 129.03 194.82 323.85 60 2 

TOTAL COST PILOT PHASE 6 107.41 7 249.38 13 356.78 7 436.64 8 827.16 16 263.81 54 104 

 

 

Table 2.5  

Expenditure Schedule by Component (in UA Thousand) 

COMPONENTS 
PROGRAMME YEARS 

TOTAL 
2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 

A. ESTABLISHMENT OF GOVERNANCE IN SAPZs 1 202.66 949.93 479.76 - - 2 632.36 

 Improvement of APZ Operational Framework 194.73 143.26 30.54 - - 368.53 

 APZ Governance System 604.18 233.85 34.35 - - 872.39 

 Strengthening of State and non-State Institutions 403.75 572.81 414.87 - - 1 391,43 

B. DEV. TRANSF. & ACCESS INFRASTRUCTURE 452.19 3 301.82 4 593.47 643.79 - 8 991.27 

 Agro-Park infrastructure 452.19 3 301.82 4 593.47 643.79 - 8 991.27 

B. STAKEHOLDER CAPACITY BUILDING  926.18 238.27 212.86 38.62 13.14 1 429.08 

 Central and Decentralised Services 204.69 52.88 43.42 12.95 13.14 327.08 

 App. Migration-related Fragility Management 721.49 185.40 169.44 25.67 - 1 102.00 
D. MANAGEMENT AND COORDINATION 1 608.01 461.15 435.49 351.97 354.48 3 211.10 

TOTAL COST PILOT PHASE 4 189.04 4 951.17 5 721.59 1 034.38 367.63 16 263.81 

2.4.2 Financing Arrangements: The programme’s pilot phase will be financed by an ADF 

Grant of UA 1.42 million (8.70%), a TSF Grant of UA 2.262 million (15.80% - including an 

additional contribution of the Republic of Italy to TSF Pilar I, as a Grant of EUR 1.38 million), 



 

8 

 

a TSF Loan of UA 10.50 million (64.60%), and the Government of Mali’s counterpart 

contribution of UA 2.08 million. The breakdown of expenditure financing by source of 

financing and by list of goods and services is presented in Table 2.6 below. 

Table 2.6   

Programme Financing Plan  

SOURCES OF  
FINANCING 

(XOF Million) (UA Thousand) 
% 

LC FE Total LC FE Total 

ADF Grant 1 473.89 644.96 2 118.85 1 794.67 785.33 2 580.00 8.7 

TSF Grant 951.51 1.15 952.66 1 158.60 1.40 1 160.00 7,1 

TSF (Pillar I) Grant1 619.73 285.30 905.03 754.61 347.39 1 102.00 6.8 

TSF Loan 2 702.15 5 921.06 8 623.21 3 290.26 7 209.74 10 500.00 64.6 

Gvt of Mali 1 311.64 398.06 1 709.70 1 597.11 484.70 2 081.81 12.8 

TOTAL 6 107.41 7 249.38 13 356.78 7 436.64 8 827.16 16 263.81 100.0 

Programme Area and Beneficiaries 

2.5.1 The programme area covers three districts, namely Kangaba, Kati and Koulikoro, in 

addition to Bamako District, with a population of 1.6 million inhabitants, of whom at least 79% 

are employed in agriculture. The site identified for the agro-industrial park is located in Kati 

District, Siby District, and Bancoumana rural municipality, 50 km from Bamako District. The 

area has Mali's most vulnerable communities due mainly to the alarming degradation of natural 

resources, climate change and the misperception of gold panning and migration as lucrative 

ventures. The entire programme area will cover 60,000 ha and will directly affect at least one-

third of the agricultural population, or about 421,000 people, and indirectly affect at least 1.2 

million people. The area is economically very dynamic, with the exploitation of precious 

minerals. Therefore, the programme area will include development works already financed by 

the Bank covering an area of about 2,921 ha, an agro-park of about 200 ha in Bancoumana, as 

well as areas outside the scope of this programme, i.e. more than 60,000 ha. 

2.5.2 The programme area’s population is young, with an average age of about 20 years. 

The population under 15 years of age accounts for 50.8% of the total population. On the other 

hand, the 15-59 age group accounts for 45.1% of the total population. Specifically, Bancoumana 

rural municipality has a population of 23,577 inhabitants (GPHC 2009), with 10,456 men and 

11,635 women, and 48 and 52% respectively of the population.  The young people tend to 

migrate to other economic sectors such as gold panning or very often to other countries in the 

sub-region and the West because of natural challenges and economic realities with very few 

alternatives. 

Participatory Approach to Programme Identification, Design and  Implementation  

2.6.1 The participatory approach, based on consultation, was the guiding principle for the 

programme design. The approach was adopted for discussions and consultations with officials 

of the relevant ministries (Agriculture, Industry, Transport, Energy, Trade, etc.), public 

administrations, the private sector, local authorities (Bancoumana, Kangaba and Kati), farmer 

organisations, civil society and TFPs (IsDB, BOAD, BCEAO, World Bank, European Union, 

and bilateral cooperation agencies). It was implemented in the following stages: (i) the country 

team prepared and proposed the terms of reference for the environmental and social 

assessments; (ii) the Bank team drafted a programme preparation report; (iii) the programme 

document was reviewed for approval by the Board of Directors; (iv) there were broad 

stakeholder consultations during the programme preparation in Bamako and Bancoumana, 

particularly in the assessment of environmental safeguard measures required for environmental 

categorisation and publication of the summary Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment 

                                                 
1 Additional contribution of the Republic of Italy to TSF Pilar I  



 

9 

 

(SESA) report; (v) the consultations continued during the appraisal mission, field visits to 

Bancoumana, meetings with all stakeholders and key actors (civil society, public 

administration, private sector, and technical and financial partners) in Bamako. 

2.6.2 This proposal is also a response to strong demand from grassroots communities 

because despite the huge potential of the regions concerned, there was inadequate agricultural 

development in the areas. The participatory approach will continue during the programme 

implementation through: (i) a steering structure with representatives of all the parties; (ii) 

capacity building in participatory approach for the institutions and communities; and (iii) 

community involvement in the implementation of activities; and (iv) implementation of a 

monitoring and evaluation system focused on programme outcomes.  In addition, the Bank's 

Country Office in Mali will, on a permanent basis, ensure that the consultation platform is 

operational throughout the programme implementation. 

Bank Group Experience and Lessons reflected in Programme Design 

2.7.1 PDZSTA formulation incorporates lessons learned from the Bank's past and ongoing 

operations in Mali and across regional member countries, taking into account portfolio 

performance issues and the country's fragility. The lessons were included in the last review. 

The Bank's active portfolio in Mali has twenty-three (23) operations (with 3 regional and 3 

private sector) for an approved amount of UA 430.3 million. The gross disbursement rate for 

operations that have already started their activities is 35%. At the end of the review, the 

performance of the Bank's national public portfolio in Mali in 2018 was deemed satisfactory 

with a rating of 3 out of 4.  However, it noted that more efforts were needed to focus more on 

the following aspects: (i) the need for the baseline situation and measurable performance 

indicators; (ii) the importance of effective supervision and regular meetings with stakeholders; 

(iii) the need for an integrated approach that involves key stakeholders of the sector; (iv) the 

utility of a good communication plan; (v) the need for a good selection mechanism for 

contractors eligible for projects; (vi) the need to strengthen the technical and managerial 

capacities of social groups, particularly young people and women entrepreneurs, in addition to 

access to financing; and (vii) initiatives should not be limited to a percentage of women (30%). 

2.7.2 The Portfolio Performance Improvement Plan (PPIP 2018) also recommended specific 

measures to accelerate programme implementation. Incorporating the recommendations in this 

proposal has resulted in: (i) maintaining dialogue with stakeholders, and ensuring close 

monitoring by the Bank's Country Office (COML) to reduce risks of delays in timeframes and 

processes for PDZSTA-KB implementation and management in general, and for fulfilling the 

effectiveness conditions; (ii) improving the quality of projects at entry by resorting to advance 

contracting for the preparation of bidding documents and management tools (Accounting and 

Financial Procedures Manual, Computerised Accounting and Financial Management System, 

and monitoring and evaluation before programme start-up; and (iii) capacity building for project 

management teams in procurement and financial management. It should also be noted that the 

age of the current portfolio operations has significantly reduced over the past few years, with 

the average age reducing from 5.5 years in 2011 to 2.7 years in 2017, and there were no problem 

(PP) or potentially problematic (PPP) operations in 2017.  

2.7.3 Therefore, the PDZSTA design has reflected the lessons learned from previous 

operations by drawing on PPIP 2018 to meet design and implementation criteria as specified in 

the Bank’s Presidential Directive No. 002/2015. 

 

 

 



 

10 

 

Table 2.7  

BANK EXPERIENCE AND LESSONS REFLECTED IN THE PROGRAMME DESIGN 

Lessons Learned Actions reflected in the Design  

Need to reduce risks of delays in timeframes and 

processes for PDZSTA-BK implementation and 

management in general, and to fulfil 

effectiveness conditions   

Maintain dialogue with stakeholders and ensure close monitoring by 

the Bank's Country Office (COML) 

Need to mobilise programme management teams 

at programme start-up 

It will be required, as part of the other conditions of the programme 

Need to reduce procurement times considered 

long 

This has been extensively discussed with the Malian Authorities, 

who have given appropriate guarantees 

Need for regular mobilisation of counterpart 

funds 

Same as the previous point 

The performance evaluation system for the 

programme staff through systematic 

establishment of performance contracts and 

renewal of staff contracts based on the results of 

annual staff evaluations. 

This provision will be systematically applied during the 

programme implementation. 

The deadline for updating the baseline situation 

and establishing the monitoring and evaluation 

mechanism 

The programme's baseline situation will be updated during the 

first quarter of the first year of programme implementation. 

Key Performance Indicators 

The programme performance indicators are listed below. 

Table 2.8  

KEY PERFORMANCE INDICATORS OF THE PROGRAMME 

LIST OF INDICATORS 

Impact Indicators 

Value of agro-food imports 

Prevalence of severe/moderate insecurity 

Prevalence of chronic malnutrition (6-59 months) 

Incidence of poverty in the programme area 

Outcome Indicators 

Average processing rate for agricultural products 

Number of private small and medium-sized agricultural enterprises operating 

Number of direct and indirect jobs created for men/women (M/W)  

Output Indicators 

Number of texts and codes prepared 

Kilometres of highways and roads constructed/rehabilitated 

Number of agricultural transformation centres (ATCs) constructed and equipped 

Area (ha) of serviced agro-park for M/W 

Number of hydraulic structures constructed 

kW of transformers installed 

Number of SMEs/APOs receiving programme support services 

Number of farmers with agricultural insurance 

Number of stakeholders using alternative energy sources 

Number of women/young people receiving support for food processing and nutrition education activities 

Physical programme implementation rate  

Number of supervision missions undertaken by the Bank   

Midterm report is approved 

III. PROGRAMME FEASIBILITY 

Economic and Financial Performance 

3.1.1 The programme is designed to mainly generate direct benefits in terms of the 

processing of crops promoted and developed through private investments to establish agro-

industries, i.e. about 35 units on Bancoumana agro-industrial park, for the programme period. 

In addition to the impact on private companies located in Bancoumana agro-industrial park, 

significant incomes will be generated by the beneficiaries of the agricultural sites also 

developed, from which companies will be supplied with the inputs already mentioned in Section 

2.2, namely: maize, shea butter, sesame, milk, rice, mango, groundnuts, livestock/meat, 



 

11 

 

tomatoes, poultry, and non-wood forest products such as honey, leaves, wild seeds and fruits, 

oils and resins, herbal tea, etc.). 

3.1.2 In addition to these benefits, the programme is designed to generate other benefits such 

as: (i) climate regulation functions by setting up a forest cover of 8.00 ha, thus creating the 

conditions for intelligent, and therefore sustainable agriculture; (ii) improving the well-being 

of populations by preventing drought and famine, improving food security, reducing the 

medical bill with the regulation of climatic conditions, reducing the hardship of women and 

vulnerable groups, improving people's life expectancy, better incomes to access health and 

education, etc.; (iii) improving all livestock and livestock production, due to the quality and 

abundance of pasture and water; (iv) improving the effects of carbon sequestration (carbon 

credit); and (v) the creation of temporary and permanent jobs, resulting from the programme's 

gains, resulting from the programme's estimated gains of 50 to 500 per processing unit (i.e. 

5,250, at the level of agribusiness units alone, for an average of 150 jobs per industrial unit) 

3.1.3 Financial Analysis: Many of the above impacts are not commercially tradable, or even 

tangible, and therefore do not lend themselves to financial performance analysis based on 

existing markets. In these circumstances, it was not considered appropriate to include them in 

a quantitative analysis based on production models or profit-making activities.  However, it was 

possible to carry out a benefit/cost analysis of agro-industrial business models and various 

agricultural production models (FARMOD). 

3.1.4 As regards agro-industrial enterprises, an assumption is proposed on the basis of three 

(3) types of processing units, namely small, medium and large enterprises with investments of 

USD 2 million, USD 5 million, and USD 11 million each respectively, in accordance with the 

average investment profile in such models.  Under these conditions, the annual turnover for 

each company will be USD 640,000, USD 1.6 million, and USD 3.52 million for the small, 

medium and large units respectively, as from the 5th year, over an operating period of about 20 

years. 

3.1.5 With respect to agricultural products of farmers who supply inputs to agro-industrial 

enterprises in the parks, FARMOD-type production models and benefit/cost models 

(Input/Output, With and Without Programme, over a 20-year operating period) have been used. 

3.1.6 Thus, the financial analysis gave: (i) a financial impact of more than XOF 53 billion 

per year from the 7th year of operation over 20 years, in line with operations of the same type, 

depending on the life of the investments. This implies that the financial impact of the 

programme over the operating period exceeds the cost of investments required to finance it; (ii) 

a benefit/cost ratio of 1.49, with the benefits higher than the investment costs; (iii) an internal 

rate of return of 25.21%, which is higher than the opportunity cost of the capital (cost of capital 

investments under the programme) estimated at 12%. In light of these results, it could be 

concluded that the programme has a profitability profile that financially justifies the cost of the 

programme's investments. 

3.1.7 Economic Analysis: The economic analysis was conducted using the benchmark price 

method, i.e. prices under conditions of economic efficiency, in accordance with the "Pareto" 

optimum. It was also based on a comparison between the "no programme" and "programme" 

situations of the production models presented in the financial analysis. In this model, tradable 

goods are goods that are likely to be commercially traded beyond the country (FOB in port and 

CIF in Marseille Port). Under these conditions, the benchmark prices of the products (economic 

prices) are evaluated on the basis of ex-ante equilibrium of the products, making it possible to 

obtain export parity prices at the borders of the programme (Export-parity price at Farmgate). 



 

12 

 

Labour was economically valued at 65% of its financial value of USD 3 per day, to take into 

account the inelasticity of labour demand in the country in general, and in the programme area 

in particular. 

3.1.8 On the basis of realistically defined assumptions, the programme's economic rate of 

return (ERR) was estimated at 26.07%, with a C/B ratio of 1.58. Consequently, the 

programme’s overall rate of return could be deemed satisfactory in light of the results. 

IRR (baseline scenario) : 25.21% Amount NPV:  XOF 201.572 billion 

ERR (baseline scenario) : 26.07% Amount NPV:  XOF 219.03 billion 

3.1.9 Sensitivity Analysis: Sensitivity tests conducted on the basis of production price 

reductions helped to measure the stability of financial and economic performance indicators. The 

tests show that prices need to be reduced to 39.17% (break-even point or "switching value") to 

cancel the additional benefits generated at the financial and economic levels, with IRRs and ERRs 

equivalent to the opportunity cost of capital, i.e. 12%. The tests also show that the programme’s 

cost-effectiveness profile is robust, although it was not conducted on all endogenous values of the 

model. However, the price variable is very important; it is the only factor that eludes programme 

management and therefore operation of the programme. The summary of the sensitivity analysis 

is presented in the Technical Annexes on page 72 of Volume II of this report. 

Environmental and Social Impact 

3.2.1 Categorisation: In accordance with the Bank's environmental and social safeguards 

policies and procedures, the Development Programme for the Special Agro-Industrial 

Processing Zone in Koulikoro and Semi-Urban Bamako (PDZSTA-KB) was classified in 

Category 2 on 22 August 2019, since the potential negative environmental and social impacts, 

as well as the related risks, are of low to medium level, and existing technologies for their 

management are easily accessible to the country. Indeed, the studies show that the type of agro-

industrial units that will be operated on the IAP are not likely to generate very heavy, toxic and 

dangerous polluting substances that are difficult to manage and may have irreversible effects. 

Furthermore, heavy industry farms will be excluded from the site. In addition, the 

characteristics of the site do not allow for fear of significant loss of biodiversity (savannah 

vegetation, very poor in wildlife, and no watercourses nearby); there will be no physical 

resettlement (the site is in an industrial zone according to the master plan of the host 

municipality), but very few economic displacements, according to the feasibility study. At this 

stage of the appraisal process, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) 

was prepared for the programme and posted on the link: 

https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/mali-projet-de-renforcement-de-la-securite-alimentaire-

et-nutritionnelle-de-la-region-koulikoro-p-ml-aag-004-rapport-cges on Monday, 28 October 

2019. 

 

3.2.2 Required environmental and social assessments: The programme will be 

implemented on a site that is certainly known, but whose exact boundaries have not yet been 

determined. Therefore, in accordance with Mali's national legislation, an Environmental and 

Social Management Framework (ESMF/ESMFP) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) 

are required. Of course, the ESMF, which will be used for the environmental and social review 

of the various sub-projects to be implemented under this operation, will provide the specific 

ESIAs/ESMPs required for the implementation of sub-projects, such as site development and 

establishment of agro-food processing infrastructure. It provides guidelines for the preparation 

of specific ESIAs/ESMPs. Similarly, the RPF, which defines guidelines for formulating a 

Substances Restoration and Improvement Programme, provides for a specific RAP for the 

https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/


 

13 

 

development works. In addition, it should be noted that the requirement for ESIAs and RAPs 

should be included in the contractors’ bidding documents. 

 

3.2.3 Programme Impacts: Potential Negative Impacts : During the works, the 

development activities of the agro-industrial park will mainly result in: (i) deforestation with 

the cutting of sparse woods such as néré (Parkia biglobosa), shea (Vitellaria paradoxa), zaban 

(Saba senegalensis), tamarin (Tamarindus indica), and (Cola cordifolia); (ii) disruption of 

economic activities with the destruction of farms, settlement on private land, incursion into 

private plots for quarries and borrowing pits; (ii) social tensions due to land problems with 

landowners and underutilisation of local labour; and (iii) involuntary economic resettlement. 

 

3.2.4 During the operational phase of the agro-industrial park (AIP), the operation of the 

agro-industrial units may generate fear of: (i) pollution of watercourses by direct discharges of 

liquid waste containing pollutant loads or scouring of rainwater causing pollutants to enter 

watercourses; (ii) air pollution by dust and odour discharges; (iii) reduction of soil fertility due 

to discharges containing chemicals and harmful substances; and (iv) accumulation of solid 

waste in the natural environment as a result of agricultural and industrial activity. 

 

3.2.5 Finally, the potential negative impacts will be as follows: (i) discharge of untreated 

and stagnant wastewater into the vicinity of the AIP may cause diseases such as malaria and 

bilharzia; (ii) the presence of foreign labourers may increase the risk of the spread of 

STI/HIV/AIDS; and (iii) the risk of uncontrolled influx of people seeking employment in the 

AIP, which may increase the risk of insecurity in the area. 

3.2.6 Potential Positive Impacts: The positive impacts of this agropole programme mainly 

concern the human and socio-economic environments. The major positive impacts of the 

agropole lie in the programme objectives, which consist in promoting the agricultural sector in 

semi-urban Bamako and developing the region's agricultural production to contribute to food 

and nutrition security and combat poverty and vulnerability. The positive impacts include: (i) 

reinforcement of transformative structures to bring water over long distances and thereby 

increase the value of land not yet used, given the scarcity of land. This will generate new 

activities and contribute to job creation; (ii) modernisation of family farms for market-oriented 

production; (iii) intensification, diversification and creation of inter-sector synergies in 

agricultural production basins for the promotion of agricultural enterprises to develop an 

agropole connected to sub-regional, regional, national and international markets; (iv) broader 

access to agricultural investment opportunities; (v) increased wealth for all stakeholders and 

links in the value chain (farmers, processors, etc.); (vi) reduction in post-harvest losses; (vii) 

reduced production shortfalls; (viii) broadening of the range of products; (ix) improved 

marketing conditions; (x) value-added for products through processing; (xi) significant 

contribution to restoration of optimal conditions to boost agricultural production (plant and 

animal) in semi-urban Bamako, as well as increase it on a sustainable basis; and (xii) efficient 

management of plant and animal production in the various production areas in semi-urban 

Bamako. 

3.2.1 Mitigation Measures: Measures that could be recommended by the ESMFP to mitigate, 

minimise or eliminate the negative impacts include: 

At environmental level: 

(i) Compensatory reforestation will be undertaken under the supervision of forestry 

services during the deforestation works, with particularly the same wood species, 

some of which have been obtained through scientific research that has had 



 

14 

 

spectacular results in reducing the adolescent age of the species (e.g. shea tree 

which can now start producing as from the 7th year). The reforestation will take 

place in the agropole, borrowing pits, quarries and village forests bordering on 

the agropole. 

(ii)  The AIP will have a wastewater treatment plant for all processing units before 

discharge into a developed site for its reuse. In addition, each processing unit 

will have a mini individual wastewater treatment plant before transfer to the site's 

large wastewater treatment plant. Since the groundwater in the area is of 

particularly high quality, measures will also be taken to protect it through proper 

management of AIP industrial wastewater, as well as prohibition of any activity 

that causes pollution around boreholes intended for human consumption. 

(iii)  With regard to solid waste, the AIP will have a transit dump for solid waste, 

which will subsequently be transferred to a final landfill site provided for in the 

development plan of Bancoumana municipality in which the AIP is located. In 

addition, efforts will be made to establish units for processing by-products of 

slaughtered cattle, sheep and poultry so as to reduce solid waste and landfill only 

the final waste. Furthermore, industrial units that cause heavy pollution will not 

be allowed in the AIP. All selected companies will also be required to undergo 

ESIA/ESMP assessments prior to establishment. 

(iv)  At the social level, economic assets and potentially affected persons will be 

identified and assessed in a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and the persons 

concerned will be compensated.  

3.2.8 ESMF Cost: The ESMFP cost is estimated at XOF 650 million and comprises: (i) 

preparation and implementation of specific ESIA/ESMPs; (ii) preparation and implementation 

of RAPs; (iii) capacity building; (iv) training of all key stakeholders of the programme's major 

sectors; (v) information and sensitisation of the local population and associations; (vi) 

environmental and social surveillance; (vii) environmental and social monitoring; (viii) mid-

term assessment of environmental and social performance; and (ix) pre-closing audit of 

environmental and social performance. 

3.2.9 Climate Change: Located at the gateway to the Sahel, Mali is highly exposed to 

climate change. According to climate projections for the Sahel zone, temperatures will continue 

to increase throughout the country as in other Sahel countries. The rise in temperature will be 

accompanied by changes in the distribution and amount of rainfall. Forest resources are among 

the most vulnerable to climate change due to the impacts of human activities on forest 

ecosystems (carbonisation, excessive logging, transhumant stockbreeding, land clearing 

for agriculture, mining, uncontrolled harvesting, etc.). 

3.2.10 As regards greenhouse gas emissions, Mali remains a very low-emitting country, with 

per capita GHG emissions of 2.1 tCO2 per capita in 1994 and a share in global emissions of 

less than 0.1%. However, the emissions have been increasing quite rapidly. Between 1994 and 

2015, they increased by a factor of 21.5, representing an average annual growth rate of nearly 

10%, or doubling every 7.2 years or so. Mali's objective is to reduce its greenhouse gas 

emissions by 13% by 2030, compared to the 1994 levels. In the forestry sector, this commitment 

focuses on stabilising mangrove surface area by 2030, reforesting 10,000 ha per year, and 

preserving classified forests and protected areas. 

3.2.11 Gender: The project targets women as a priority beneficiary group. Several project 

activities will have a positive impact on women in terms of: (i) reducing labour hardship and 



 

15 

 

wasted time, with the availability of nearby fuelwood and introduction of improved stoves; (ii) 

management capacity building through training, sensitisation and education of women; and (iii) 

improving health status through community health centres and other basic services (schools, 

primary health centres, and rural roads). In addition, the promotion of agricultural value chains 

will offer new opportunities, particularly in market gardening and non-timber forest products 

(shea, néré, honey and many other wild fruits and vegetables) that women can process, and 

thereby increase their incomes and improve their living conditions. 

3.2.12 Women play a key role in the agricultural economy and are found throughout the entire 

agricultural value chain: production, processing and marketing. However, despite women’s 

impact in the agricultural production chain, they still face many challenges, namely: 

• Access to resources and factors of production, particularly land, inputs, and 
fertilisers: due to customs and traditions, women generally do not own the land they 

cultivate;  

• Decision-making: Women are less influential in decision-making and conflict 

management in the agricultural sector; 

• Financial resources: Lack of resources is a serious problem in the agricultural 

and other sectors (education, health, etc.); 

• Training needs: Training remains a cause for concern, particularly as regards 

capacity building, entrepreneurship, management, etc. Here too, some women's 

literacy levels constitute a barrier. 

3.2.13 To meet these challenges, the Development Programme for Special Agro-industrial 

Processing Zones proposes activities to promote gender and empower women during its 

implementation, namely: (i) Entrepreneurship, job creation for women and young people, and 

access to markets through business incubators for young people (youth employability 

programme) and women (AFAWA); (ii) Increasing agricultural production and strengthening 

market access capacity through digitalisation of agriculture; (iii) regular and systematic 

consultations between the Government and private sector actors; (iv) promotion of domestic 

and local enterprises in agro-industrial parks; (v) support for SME financing through levies on 

other sectors, including mining; and (vi) sensitisation on behaviour change in family planning 

and reproductive health, balanced nutrition, gender and prevention of gender-based violence, 

prevention of early marriage, HIV/AIDS control, healthy living, and environmental sanitation.  

3.2.14 The programme is classified in Category 2, in accordance with the Gender 

Categorisation System. The detailed gender analysis and gender action plan are provided in the 

Technical Annex on gender. The budget allocated to gender promotion and women's 

empowerment activities stands at UA 0.88 million.  

Involuntary Resettlement 

3.3.1 Operational Safeguard 2 (OS 2): Involuntary resettlement: land acquisition, 

population displacement and compensation: The risk of physical displacement or resettlement 

of the population, as well as loss of major assets during programme implementation are 

minimal. However, land tenure and transhumance are major issues that need to be taken into 

account. In the event of physical displacement or resettlement of the population, Resettlement 

Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared and implemented in accordance with Bank OS2 

procedures. 



 

16 

 

IV. IMPLEMENTATION  

Implementation Arrangements 

4.1.1 The programme will be managed by the Ministry of Agriculture (Project Owner), 

which will have a Project Management Unit (PMU) for the programme implementation. The 

PMU will be mainly responsible for coordination, infrastructure development, partnership with 

the private sector, financial management, procurement, and monitoring and evaluation of 

programme activities. It will comprise: (i) a Programme Coordinator; (ii) an Infrastructure 

Specialist; (iii) a Private Sector Specialist; (iv) a Procurement Specialist; (vi) a Monitoring and 

Evaluation Specialist; (vii) an Administrative and Financial Officer; (ix) an Accountant; and 

(x) support staff (drivers, secretaries, cashiers, and messengers). 

4.1.2 The PMU will also be supported by technical assistance (international and national 

consultants) on an ad hoc basis. It will also be supported in the field by partner organisations, 

particularly structures of the Administration, the Rural Economy Institute (IER), the Private 

Investment Promotion Agency (API Mali), Industrial Zone Planning and Management Agency 

(AZI-SA), National Directorate of Forestry and Water Resources (DNEF), Centre for The 

Development of the Food Sector (CDA-EPA), and Ministries and Technical Agencies to be 

involved in the programme. The signing of agreements with these partner structures, including 

IRD, will be part of the loan and grant conditions, under other conditions. Documents of these 

agreements should be prepared before programme implementation, to facilitate the “no-

objection opinion” process during implementation. 

 

4.1.3 A Programme Steering Committee (PSC) will also be established to provide strategic 

direction for the implementation of the program. It will be chaired by the Minister of 

Agriculture. The Committee will comprise the Ministers in charge of Economy and Finance, 

Agriculture, Industry and Trade, Investment and PPPs, as well as representatives of local 

authorities, the Chairperson of the Permanent Assembly of the Mali Chamber of Agriculture, the 

private sector, civil society, and the PMU. The PSC will meet at least twice every year to: (i) 

Review and approve the annual work programme and budget ((AWPB); (ii) validate the results 

of the program's performance, and (iii) frame innovations and ensure the relevance of the major 

choices to be made during implementation. The PMU will be secretariat of the PSC. 

4.1.4 It will be chaired by the Secretary General of the Ministry of Agriculture or his/her 

representative. In addition to the representatives of the ministries within the COS and the 

National Chamber of Agriculture, the PSC will include representatives of Local Authorities, 

the private sector, and civil society. PSC secretarial services will be provided by the 

representative of the Ministry of Industry and Trade. The PSC will be responsible for: (i) 

reviewing and approving the annual work programme (AWP) and budget, (ii) validating the 

results of the programme's performance, and (iii) monitoring innovations and ensuring the 

relevance of major choices to be made during programme implementation. It will meet at least 

twice every year. 

Procurement and Disbursement Arrangements 

 

4.2.1 Procurement Arrangements: Procurement of goods (including non-consultant 

services), work and procurement of Bank-funded consulting services will be carried out in 

accordance with the Bank procurement Policy for Bank Group-funded operations ("AfDB 

Procurement Policy"), October 2015 edition and in accordance with the provisions of the 

Financing Agreement. In line with the implementation of that policy, and as a outcome of 

various assessment conducted, it was agreed that: 



 

17 

 

 

(i) Procurement of Goods and Works listed in paragraph B.5.2.1(a) of Technical Annex 
B.5 will be acquired in accordance with the country's procurement system ("Country 

System"); 

 

(ii) All other procurement financed by the Bank's resources and not mentioned in point (a) 
above will be made in accordance with the Bank's procurement system ("AfDB 

System"). 

 

4.2.2 The use of the National System for a group of transactions was considered appropriate 

because of a level of risk assessed as low for their procurement through the so-called system. 

Such a proposal has the advantage of improving efficiency in the implementation of the project 

through the following factors: (i) better ownership of the contracting system to be used by the 

enforcement agency; (ii) a time saving with the absence of a second control (after that of 

national entities) represented by the Bank's prior review. However, the Bank reserves the option 

of asking the borrower to return to the Bank System for the transactions concerned if: (a) Mali's 

legal procurement framework was changing to a system that was unsatisfactory for the Bank; 

(b) the PMU did not comply with by the requirements; (c) the special safeguards related to the 

use of the national system and described in Paragraph B.5.7.1 of the Technical Appendix were 

not used. 

 

4.2.3. Organization of the implementation of Procurement: The Ministry of Agriculture 

(MA) will be the Project Implementing Agency. The project's contracting will be implemented 

through a project management unit (PMU) that will be created and attached to the MA Cabinet. 

The experts of this CGP, including the contracting specialist, will be recruited on a competitive 

basis. 

 

4.2.4 Procurement Risk and Capacity Assessment (ERCA): In order to take into account 

the specifics of the programme, the Bank assessed: (i) risks at the national, sectoral and project 

levels; and (ii) the capabilities of the enforcement agency. The results of these evaluations 

concluded that there was a "substantial" level of risk for contracting and was used to guide the 

decision on the choice of the contracting system (Borrower, Bank,) used for specific activities 

and identified appropriate mitigation measures proposed at the level of the action plan in 

paragraph B.5.9 of Appendix B5. The resources needed to carry out these measures are already 

available or have been secured at the loan level. 

 

4.2.5 The Bank's resources to finance the project's activities come from the TSF and the ADF. 

As a result, the eligibility rules specific to the ADF window are those that will apply. Following 

the assessment of contracting risks and capabilities, it was decided to use the National 

Contracting System for part of this project. As the rules for eligibility for public contracts under 

Malian law are not the same as those of the ADF window, any practical incompatibility should 

be prevented. It was observed that Decree No. 2015-0604/P-RM of 25 September 2015, bearing 

the Code of Public Procurement and Public Service Delegations and its amendment to Decree 

No. 2016-0920/P-RM of 6 December 2016 Code of Markets and its implementing texts do not 

provide for any specific restrictions on participation in a Tender, except for the qualification 

and absence of sanction from the Public Procurement and Public Service Delegations 

Regulatory Authority (ARMDS-DSP), as stipulated Article 18 of Act No.08-023/ of 23 July 

2008 relating to the Public Procurement and Public Service Delegations Regulatory Authority. 

 

4.2.6 Consequently, the eligibility rules applicable for all contracts concluded under this 

project under the Malian public procurement system will be the national eligibility rules. 

However, in the case of the use of the national system, if the borrower's decision leads to 



 

18 

 

awarding a contract to an entity under the Bank's sanction or under United Nations Chapter VII 

sanction, the Bank's loan resources could not be used to finance such a contract. The list of 

companies under sanctions is available at http://www.afdb.org/debarred. 

 

4.2.7  Disbursement: The Bank's resources will be disbursed in accordance with its rules and 

procedures, in particular the disbursement manual. These will be done through the following 

three methods: (i) the special account method; (ii) the direct payments method; and (iii) the 

repayment method. As for the resources of the national counterparty, they will be disbursed in 

accordance with the national procedures in force. 

Financial Management  

4.1.1 Responsibility for the administrative, financial and accounting management of the 
Project will fall to the Ministry of Agriculture (MA), which will set up a Project Management 

Unit (PGC) whose members will be recruited, by call for applications and following the Bank's 

rules and procedures in this area. The PMC, consisting of at least (i) a Coordinator; (ii) an 

Infrastructure specialist; (iii) a private sector specialist; (iv) an Procurement Specialist; (v) a 

follow-up-assessment specialist; (vi) an Administrative and Financial Officer (RAF); (vii) an 

accountant; and (viii) a support staff (drivers, secretaries, cashier, courier), will have the tools 

of accounting and financial management, including accounting and financial management 

software, adapted to development projects and a manual of procedures administrative, 

accounting and financial matters. 

 

4.1.2 As a general principle, accounts will be kept on the basis of private commitment 
accounting and integrated software adapted to the management of development 

projects/programs. The accounting plan will be developed on the basis of the accounting law 

standards of the Uniform Act of the Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law 

(OHADA) in Africa in Mali. In addition, PDZSTA-BK will produce an annual work program 

and budget (PTBA), as well as quarterly financial monitoring reports, based on the 

implementation of the PTBA, attached to the Bank's quarterly business reports, in which a clear 

analysis of the budget forecasts and the quarter's achievements must be clearly made. Any 

discrepancies will have to be analyzed and explained. 

 

4.1.3 Audit: Audit of project accounts will be carried out by an independent external audit 
firm. This firm must be recruited on the basis of terms of reference previously agreed with the 

Bank and according to its rules and procedures, no later than three months after the financing 

agreement comes into force. The audit contract will be three years non-renewable and the 

auditor will be required to file his report no later than six months after the end of the year 

audited. 

Monitoring 

Internal monitoring and evaluation will be conducted by the Programme's Monitoring-

Evaluation Unit, while external monitoring and evaluation will be conducted by the Ministry 

of Planning and the Ministry of Finance. External monitoring and evaluation aims to assess the 

effectiveness and efficiency of the programme's outputs and their contribution to the 

achievement of the programme's development outcomes, i.e. its effects and impacts. It will be 

conducted with the involvement of other stakeholders, in addition to the two annual supervision 

missions organised by the Bank. The mid-term review will be conducted in Year 3. At the end 

of the programme, the Bank and the Government will produce a completion report within the 

required timeframe. 

Governance  

4.5.1 The State Authorities’ efforts towards good governance over the past five years have 

been positive, particularly in procurement. However, the results of these efforts are not yet 



 

19 

 

visible, as Mali's Corruption Perception Index (CPI) still remains at an average of 32 out of 

100, compared to a regional average of 34, with a ranking of 182nd out of 188 countries in the 

2019 Human Development Index. Political, economic and social governance indicators for Mali 

are still a cause for concern, despite the progress made over the past few years. The indicators 

mainly concern poor performance in governance and the fight against corruption, as a result of 

repeated political crises that weaken State institutions responsible for regularly monitoring the 

governance system in Mali. 

4.5.2 In light of the foregoing, the PDZSTA-KB design provides for support for stakeholder 

capacity building at the institutional level, including reduction of governance risks through the 

programme implementation. The support includes the preparation and implementation of 

financial management and monitoring and evaluation tools, as well as the use of recognised 

transparency and competitive methods in the recruitment of PMU staff. Furthermore, support 

will also include the implementation of a system to reduce delays in the procurement process, 

which is one of the main reasons for shortcomings in the performance of the development 

programmes portfolio in Mali. Despite the alignment of the public procurement system with 

regional guidelines, support will also focus on operational procurement arrangements to address 

identified shortcomings. 

Sustainability 

4.6.1 The Development Programme for the Special Agro-Industrial Processing Zone 

(PDZSTA-KB) was designed on the basis of a participatory approach, which was adopted 

following the SAPZ dialogue mission to Mali in March 2018 and used during all stages of the 

programme formulation, preparation and appraisal. The approach has made the population and 

Government aware of the economic importance of agricultural transformation through the 

processing of agricultural products (agro-industry) and technology innovations disseminated to 

farmers. In this regard, the capacity of key stakeholders in growth sectors will be adequately 

strengthened to guarantee regular supply of inputs based on a mechanism for long-term 

sustainability of jobs and incomes. The mechanism is expected to lead to the autonomy of this 

development model in which agro-industrial companies on the AIP operate with guaranteed 

supply of inputs and the Government is assured of revenue from corporate royalties and 

dividends generated by the Holding Company that will be established to manage the agro-

industrial park.  

4.6.2 The agro-industrial park management system will be formalised through a Holding 

Company with a clear legal status, including land ownership.  The agro-industrial park will be 

created and serviced, and subsequently placed under management in accordance with the 

current Investment Code and the special status of Special Agro-Industrial Processing Zones 

(SAPZs). 

Risk Management 

4.7.1 The achievement of PDZSTA outcomes carries a number of risks for which mitigation 

solutions are required to ensure the success of the programme. In addition to the risks already 

identified for the entire portfolio, specific risks have been identified and mitigation measures 

proposed:  

 

 



 

20 

 

No. POTENTIAL RISKS MITIGATION MEASURES 

1 Lack of commitment from the supervisory 

authorities to support the coordination team and 

prevent delays in programme implementation 

The programme is one of the Government’s 

priorities, and its design was based on regular 

consultations with stakeholders, including 

representatives of the administration and 

municipalities concerned. 

2 Risk of low private sector engagement The programme’s design is based on consultations 

with the private sector whose concerns are taken 

into account in the final programme formulation, 

thereby guaranteeing SME involvement and 

ownership of the operation. 

3 Delays in engagement by some stakeholders 

could lead to delays in the programme 

implementation  

The programme is based on sensitisation and 

regular consultations for its gradual ownership by 

all stakeholders 

4 The programme is not being implemented in 

accordance with the proposed implementation 

plan and schedule, with delays in procurement 

A Procurement Expert will be recruited to assist in 

effective conduct of the procurement process. 

Knowledge Building 
 

4.8.1 The Development Programme for the Special Agro-Industrial Processing Zone 

(PDZSTA-KB) is designed to reflect the approach and principles of the flagship programme 

for Special Agro-Industrial Processing Zones of the Bank's Feed Africa Strategy 2016-2022.  

This programme postulates that agricultural transformation will succeed if the private sector is 

involved in a leadership role, while the Government creates conditions for its implementation 

and success. To succeed, PDZSTA-KB was designed to develop knowledge on how to better 

work with the private sector, as a PPP, a non-sovereign operation (NSO), or a combination of 

both. Private sector involvement, along with public sector funding, is the primary knowledge 

that PDZSTA-KB will develop. 

4.8.2 The other knowledge generated by the programme implementation concerns: (i) the 

multi-sector approach, involving the intervention of sectors such as transport, energy, water and 

sanitation, agro-industry, agriculture, communication (NICT), education, health and nutrition, 

employment and trade.  In this regard, knowledge will be generated through pooling of efforts 

to rapidly produce agricultural transformation outcomes; (ii) the combination of: (a) two Bank 

Strategies, namely "Feed Africa" and “Skills Development”, especially for young people, and 

(b) at least four (4) flagship programmes, namely, Special Agro-Industrial Processing Zones 

(SAPZs), Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT), Agricultural Value 

Chains (AVC), and Post-Harvest Loss Reduction and Youth Employability (Enable Youth). 

The combination of strategies and programmes is the third level of knowledge generated by 

PDZSTA-KB; (iii) produce processing is a major development issue for which solutions will 

be sought in this programme; this is the fourth level of knowledge generated by this operation; 

(iv) employment in general, and in the agricultural sector in particular, as a solution proposed 

in the programme; this is the fifth level of knowledge likely to be generated by this proposal; 

and (v) contribution to reduction of massive agro-food imports from the continent and Mali, in 

particular; this is the sixth level of knowledge generated by PDZSTA-KB. 

4.8.3 Finally, the success of this programme will provide a body of knowledge that can be 

replicated in the development programme for all the country's twelve (12) agricultural 

development poles, including Koulikoro and semi-urban Bamako regions. 

 

 

 



 

21 

 

V. Legal Framework 

Legal Instrument  

The legal instrument of PDZSTA-BK will be one (1) Loan Agreement and two (2) Grant 

Agreements signed between the Republic of Mali and the African Development Bank and the 

African Development Fund (hereinafter collectively referred to as the "Fund"), acting as 

administrators of the Transition Support Facility (TSF).  

Conditions for Bank Intervention  

5.2.1 Conditions precedent to effectiveness: Effectiveness of the TSF Loan Agreement 

shall be subject to the Borrower fulfilling, to the satisfaction of the Fund, the conditions set forth 

in Section 12.01 of the General conditions applicable to loan agreements and guarantee 

agreements of the African Development Fund (sovereign entities) of February 2009. 

5.2.2 Conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan: In addition to 

effectiveness of the respective financing agreements, the first disbursement of the TSF loan and 

ADF and TSF (Pillar I) grants shall be subject to the Borrower/Donee fulfilling, to the Fund’s 

satisfaction, the following conditions: 

(i) Provide the Bank with evidence of the establishment of the Programme 
Management Unit (PMU) ;  

(ii) Provide the Bank with evidence of the recruitment of the Coordinator, the 
Administrative and Financial Officer, and the Procurement Specialist, through a 

request for applications from candidates whose qualifications shall be submitted 

to the Bank for prior approval. 

5.1.3 Institutional Provisions. The recipient commits to : 

(i) Maintain an operational PMB throughout the Program with satisfactory resources for 

the Fund; and 

(ii) Establish within three (3) months following entry to force of the current agreement, and 
maintain throughout the implementation of the Program, a Program Steering Committee 

(PSC), to provide strategic direction for the implementation of the Program and that will 

be in charge of (i) Reviewing and approving the annual work programme and budget; 

(ii) validating the outcomes of the Program's performance; and (iii) framing innovations 

and ensuring the relevance of the major choices to be made during implementation. The 

PSC will be chaired by the Minister of Agriculture and will be comprise representatives 

of the Ministers in charge of Economy and Finance, Agriculture, Industry and Trade, 

Investment and PPP’s, as well as representatives of the Local Authorities, the President 

of the Permanent Assembly of the Mali Chamber of Agriculture, the private sector and 

the Civil Society and the PMU. The CPC will meet at least twice a year. 

5.1.4 Other commitments: The recipient undertakes, to the satisfaction of the Fund and 
within six (6) months of entry into force of this Agreement: 

(i) To provide evidence of the establishment of a Programme Steering Committee, 
whose composition and operational arrangements have been submitted to the 

Bank for prior approval; 



 

22 

 

(ii) to submit the Agreements with Government Structures, the Institute of Rural 
Economics (IER), the Agency for the Promotion of Private Investments in Mali 

(API Mali), the Agency for the Development and Management of Industrial 

Zones (AZI-SA), the National Directorate of Waters and Forests (DNEF), the 

Centre for the Development of Agro-Industrial sector (CDA-EPA), and the 

Ministries and Technical Agencies that shall be involved in the programme; 

(iii) to complete the procurement, setting up and training of staff for the use of 
administrative, accounting and financial management software; and 

(iv) to submit to the Fund an administrative, accounting and financial procedures 
Manual. 

Compliance with Bank Policies 

This programme complies with all applicable Bank policies. It falls within the Bank’s 

intervention strategy in Mali as defined in CSP (2015-2019). 

VI. RECOMMENDATION 

Management recommends that the Boards of Directors approve the proposal of a TSF Loan of 

UA 10.50 million, a TSF Grant of UA 2.262 million (including the additional contribution 

the Italian Republic to TSF Pillar I of Euros 1.38 million, i.e. UA 1.102 million), and an 

ADF Grant of UA 1.42 million on the ADF and FAT country allocation to the Republic of 

Mali, for the purpose and under the conditions set forth in this report.  

 



 

I 

 

Mali 
COMPARATIVE SOCIOECONOMIC INDICATORS 

 

Year Mali Africa

Develo-    

ping         

Countries

Develo-       

   ped  

Countries

Basic Indicators

Area ( '000 Km²) 2018 1 240 30 067 92 017 40 008
Total Population (millions) 2018 19,1 1 286,2 6 432,7 1 197,2
Urban Population (% of Total) 2018 42,4 42,5 50,4 81,5
Population Density  (per Km²) 2018 15,8 43,8 71,9 31,6
GNI per Capita (US $) 2017  770 1 767 4 456 40 142
Labor Force Participation *- Total (%) 2018 66,6 65,9 62,1 60,1
Labor Force Participation **- Female (%) 2018 50,8 55,5 47,6 52,2
Sex  Ratio (per 100 female) 2018 100,3 99,8 102,3 99,3
Human Dev elop. Index  (Rank among 189 countries) 2017 182 ... … …
Popul. Liv ing Below  $ 1.90 a  Day  (% of Population) 2007-2017 49,7 ... 11,9 0,7

Dem ographic Indicators

Population Grow th Rate   - Total (%) 2018 3,1 2,5 1,2 0,5
Population Grow th Rate   - Urban (%) 2018 5,0 3,6 2,3 0,7
Population < 15 y ears  (%) 2018 47,5 40,6 27,5 16,5
Population 15-24 y ears (%) 2018 19,5 19,2 16,3 11,7
Population >= 65 y ears  (%) 2018 2,5 3,5 7,2 18,0
Dependency  Ratio (%) 2018 98,7 79,2 53,2 52,8
Female Population 15-49 y ears (% of total population) 2018 22,2 24,1 25,4 22,2
Life Ex pectancy  at Birth - Total (y ears) 2018 58,9 63,1 67,1 81,3
Life Ex pectancy  at Birth - Female (y ears) 2018 59,7 64,9 69,2 83,8
Crude Birth Rate (per 1,000) 2018 41,5 33,4 26,4 10,9
Crude Death Rate (per 1,000) 2018 9,7 8,3 7,7 8,8
Infant Mortality  Rate (per 1,000) 2017 65,8 47,7 32,0 4,6
Child Mortality  Rate (per 1,000) 2017 106,0 68,6 42,8 5,4
Total Fertility  Rate (per w oman) 2018 5,9 4,4 3,5 1,7
Maternal Mortality  Rate (per 100,000) 2015 587,0 444,1 237,0 10,0
Women Using Contraception (%) 2018 15,0 38,3 61,8 …

Health & Nutrition Indicators

Phy sicians (per 100,000 people) 2010-2016 8,5 33,6 117,8 300,8
Nurses and midw iv es (per 100,000 people) 2010-2016 44,3 123,3 232,6 868,4
Births attended by  Trained Health Personnel (%) 2010-2017 43,7 61,7 78,3 99,0
Access to Safe Water (% of Population) 2015 77,0 71,6 89,4 99,5
Access to Sanitation (% of Population) 2015 24,7 39,4 61,5 99,4
Percent. of Adults (aged 15-49) Liv ing w ith HIV/AIDS 2017 1,2 3,4 1,1 …
Incidence of Tuberculosis (per 100,000) 2016 56,0 221,7 163,0 12,0
Child Immunization Against Tuberculosis (%) 2017 73,0 82,1 84,9 95,8
Child Immunization Against Measles (%) 2017 61,0 74,4 84,0 93,7
Underw eight Children (% of children under 5 y ears) 2010-2016 25,0 17,5 15,0 0,9
Prev alence of stunding 2010-2016 30,4 34,0 24,6 2,5
Prev alence of undernourishment (% of pop.) 2016 6, 18,5 12,4 2,7
Public Ex penditure on Health (as % of GDP) 2014 1,6 2,6 3,0 7,7

Education Indicators

 Gross Enrolment Ratio (%)

      Primary  School       -   Total 2010-2017 80,1 99,5 102,8 102,6
      Primary  School       -   Female 2010-2017 75,6 97,4 102,0 102,5
      Secondary  School  -   Total 2010-2017 41,5 51,9 59,5 108,5
      Secondary  School  -   Female 2010-2017 37,0 49,5 57,9 108,3
Primary  School Female Teaching Staff (% of Total) 2010-2017 30,4 48,7 53,0 81,5
Adult literacy  Rate - Total (%) 2010-2017 33,1 65,5 73,1 ...
Adult literacy  Rate - Male (%) 2010-2017 45,1 77,0 79,1 ...
Adult literacy  Rate - Female (%) 2010-2017 22,2 62,6 67,2 ...
Percentage of GDP Spent on Education 2010-2015 3,8 4,9 4,1 5,2

Environm ental  Indicators

Land Use (Arable Land as % of Total Land Area) 2016 5,3 8,0 11,3 10,4
Agricultural Land (as % of land area) 2016 33,8 38,2 37,8 36,5
Forest (As % of Land Area) 2016 3,8 22,0 32,6 27,6
Per Capita CO2 Emissions (metric tons) 2014 0,1 1,1 3,5 11,0

Sources  :  AfDB Statistics Department Databases;  World Bank: World Development Indicators; last update :

UNAIDS; UNSD; WHO, UNICEF, UNDP; Country Reports.

Note  :    n.a. : Not  Applicable ;  … : Data Not Available. * Labor force participation rate, total (%  of total population ages 15+)

** Labor force participation rate, female (%  of female population ages 15+) 

COMPARATIVE SOCIO-ECONOMIC INDICATORS

Mali

Febuary 2019

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
7

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

2
0

1
5

2
0

1
6

2
0

1
7

Infant Mortality Rate
( Per 1000 )

Mal i Af rica

0

500

1000

1500

2000

2500

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
7

2
0

1
1

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

2
0

1
5

2
0

1
6

2
0

1
7

GNI Per Capita US $

Mal i Af rica

0,0

0,5

1,0

1,5

2,0

2,5

3,0

3,5

4,0

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
7

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

2
0

1
5

2
0

1
6

2
0

1
7

2
0

1
8

Population Growth Rate (%)

Mali Afr ica

0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80

2
0

0
0

2
0

0
7

2
0

1
2

2
0

1
3

2
0

1
4

2
0

1
5

2
0

1
6

2
0

1
7

2
0

1
8

Life Expectancy at Birth 
(years)

Mal i Af rica



 

II 

 

TABLE OF THE BANK’S PORTFOLIO IN MALI 

(as at 31 March 2019) 

PROJECT NAME APPROVAL DATE  CLOSING DATE  

LOAN/GRANT 
AMOUNT 
COMMITTED 
(UA) 

DISBURSEMENT 
RATE 

AGRICULTURE   155 782 859  

Irrigation Development Programme in Bani and Sélingué Basins (PDI-BS) 27.05.2009 31.12.2018 44 000 000 92.07 
Programme for building resilience to food and nutrition insecurity in the Sahel  
(P2RS) 

15.10.2014 30.06.2020 36 390 000 18.88 

Project for strengthening food security through the development of irrigated 
crops (PRESA-DCI) 

27.05.2009 31.12.2019 36 000 000  36.05 

Food and Nutrition Security Enhancement Project for Koulikoro Region 
(PRESAN-KL) 

17.09.2014 31.12.2019 36 056 289 35.75 

Climdev Mali Météo Project  31.12.2019 782 705  

Study on integrated development and resilience of local communities to 
climate change in Delta 2 plains (PDIR-PD2) 

11.09.2017 31.03.2020 1 564 865 6.95 

PPF- Agricultural Transformation and Youth Employment Project 18.08.2017 31.12.2018 989 000    5.25 

INFRASTRUCTURE   104 520 000  

Transport Facilitation Project between Mali and Côte d'Ivoire 26.11.2015 30.06.2021 70 770 000 38.64 

Trans-Saharan Road Development Project between Kidal and Bourem 
(RTS2) 

11.12.2018 31.12.2024 33 750 000 0 

WATER AND SANITATION   80 000 000  

Drinking Water Supply Project for Bamako             09.10.2013 31.12.2018 50 000 000 45.24 

CLIMATE CHANGE   7 500 000  
Integrated Climate Change Development and Adaptation Programme in Niger 
Basin (PIDACC) 

7.11.2018 15.07.1905 7 500 000 0 

ENERGY   53 344 410     

Renewable Energy Promotion Support Project  22.10.2014 31.01.2019 965 860 46.34 

Mini Hydropower Plants Development Project 4.12.2017 31.12.2022 20 000 000 0.49 

225 kV Guinea-Mali Power Interconnection Project 13.12.2017 31.12.2021 32 378 550 0,6 

SOCIAL DEVELOPMENT   15 134 846     

Socio-economic Reintegration Support Project for the population of North Mali  30.11.2016 30/06/2021 10 000 000 1.1 

Women’s Economic Empowerment Project in the Shea Sector (PAEFFK) 03.12.2018 31/07/2023 5 000 000 0 

GOVERNANCE   19 970 000  
Economic Competitiveness Support Programme for Mali 15.12.2017 30/06/2018 9 000 000 0,88 

National Regional Development Plan 28.02.2017 31/12/2019 1 000 000 59,26 

Overall disbursement rate of the active public sector portfolio    33,8 

PRIVATE SECTOR    56 828 413  



 

III 

 

PROJECT NAME APPROVAL DATE  CLOSING DATE  

LOAN/GRANT 
AMOUNT 
COMMITTED 
(UA) 

DISBURSEMENT 
RATE 

Line of credit to “Banque Malienne de Solidarité”  06.07.2011 01/08/2019 4 510 896  

Trade finance line of credit to BSIC Mali 16.05.2018 31.10.2021 6 716 424  

Development Bank of Mali 18.10.2018 8.12.2028 24 974 817  

Moulin Moderne of Mali 17.09.2014 30.11.2021 13 778 736  

Mali Ségou Solar 31.10.2016 01.06.2033 6 847 540  

TOTAL PORTFOLIO PROJECTS   562 156 535  

 
 

PROJECTS FINANCED BY THE WORLD BANK GROUP 

No. Project Name 
Financing 
Reference 

TYPE Amount 
CURR
ENCY 

Amount in 
USD 

Approval 
Date 

Closing 
Date  

Amount 
disbursed in 
commitment 

currency 

% 
disbu
rsed 

Amount 
Disbursed 

in USD 

  National Projects 

1 PAPAM 
GEF/TF 97183 Grant 6 200 000 USD 6 200 000 03/06/2010 

31/07/2019 
/ 
31/07/2018 4 391 434.92 70.83 

4 391 
434.92 

IDA 4751-ML Credit 46 200 000 XDR 70 000 000 03/06/2010 

31/07/2019 
/ 
31/07/2018/
30/09/2016 

44 666 
222.01 96.68 

67 676 
093.95 

2 PACUM (Urban Municipalities Support Project) IDA 4966-ML 

Credit 43 200 000 XDR 70 000 000 07/06/2011 

31/12/2019 
(31/12/201
8[30/06/201
7 

42 692 
974.80 98.83 

69 178 
431.39 

3 
PROCEJ (Youth Skills and Employment 
Development Project) 

IDA H971-ML Grant 17 400 000 XDR 26 900 000 27/06/2014 30/06/2020 
16 827 
286.43 96.71 

26 014 
597.99 

IDA 5513 Credit 23 300 000 XDR 36 100 000 27/06/2014 30/06/2020 
15 929 
233.26 68.37 

24 680 
056.68 

4 PUFS (Social Safety Net Emergency Project) 

IDA H835-ML Grant 46 300 000 XDR 70 000 000 30/04/2013 31/12/2019 
46 224 
885.77 99.84 

69 886 
436.37 

TF A2384 Grant 10 000 000 USD 10 000 000 01/09/2016 
30/09/2019 
[30/06/2018 6 742 323.10 67.42 

6 742 
323.10 

TF0A7655 Grant 2 400 000 USD 2 400 000 05/07/2018 30/09/2019 0.00 0.00 0.00 

IDA D348-ML  Grant 36 200 000 XDR 52 000 000 05/07/2018 30/12/2022 3 195 654.44 8.83 
4 590 

442.84 

5 
Kabala /Drinking Water Supply Project for Bamako 
from Kabala (PAEP-Kabala) IDA 5317-ML Credit 52 200 000 XDR 80 000 000 21/11/2013 31/12/2018 

36 303 
300.83 69.55 

55 637 
242.65 



 

IV 

 

No. Project Name 
Financing 
Reference 

TYPE Amount 
CURR
ENCY 

Amount in 
USD 

Approval 
Date 

Closing 
Date  

Amount 
disbursed in 
commitment 

currency 

% 
disbu
rsed 

Amount 
Disbursed 

in USD 

IDA D1270 Grant 14 200 000 XDR 20 000 000 28/06/2016 31/12/2021 2 399 423.18 16.90 
3 379 

469.27 

IDA 5880 Credit 21 200 000 XDR 30 000 000 28/06/2016 31/12/2021 3 603 743.32 17.00 
5 099 

636.77 

6 
PRRE (Reconstruction and Economic Recovery 
Project) 

IDA H901-ML Grant 65 200 000 XDR 100 000 000 06/12/2013 
01/12/2020; 
01/12/2018 

60 486 
656.26 92.77 

92 770 
945.18 

D373 Grant 21 600 000 XDR 30 000 000 30/10/2018 01/12/2020 2 461 524.97 11.40 
3 418 

784.68 

7 SHER (Hybrid Systems for Rural Electrification) 
IDA 5356 ML  Credit 16 300 000 XDR 25 000 000 11/12/2013 15/09/2020 9 722 405.89 59.65 

14 911 
665.48 

TF 18873 001 ML Grant 14 900 000 USD 14 900 000 11/12/2013 30/09/2020 7 843 179.61 52.64 
7 843 

179.61 

8 
PGRNCC (Natural Resource Management and 
Climate Change Project) 

GEF/TF 016288 Grant 6 574 074 USD 6 574 074 06/12/2013 30/09/2019 5 883 585.76 89.50 
5 883 

585.76 

LDCF/TF 016307 Grant 1 851 851 USD 1 851 851 06/12/2013 30/09/2019 1 667 711.83 90.06 
1 667 

711.83 

H890-ML Grant 7 900 000 XDR 12 000 000 06/12/2013 31/03/2019 7 315 549.59 92.60 
11 112 
227.23 

9 
PADES (Higher Education Development Support 
Project) 

IDA 5606 Credit 10 000 000 XDR 14 000 000 07/05/2015 31/12/2020 5 987 447.53 59.87 
8 382 

426.54 

D043 Grant 13 500 000 XDR 19 000 000 07/05/2015 31/12/2020 
11 171 
772.49 82.75 

15 723 
235.36 

10 
PEPPO (Obsolete Pesticides Elimination and 
Prevention Project) 

TF0A0665/GEF Grant 3 190 000 USD 3 190 000 24/07/2015 31/01/2020 3 184 911.96 99.84 
3 184 

911.96 

TF0A0686 Grant 950 000 USD 950 000 24/07/2015 31/01/2020 939 495.62 98.89 939 495.62 

11 
PACAM (Agro-industrial Competitiveness Support 
Project) IDA 5919 Credit 21 500 000 XDR 30 000 000 22/11/2016 31/07/2022 9 575 216.90 44.54 

13 360 
767.77 

12 PREC (Ex-Combatants Reintegration Project) 
IDA D1680 Grant 11 200 000 XDR 15 000 000 28/02/2017 30/11/2020 1 284 752.61 11.47 

1 720 
650.82 

13 PAAR (Rural Accessibility Improvement Project) 
IDA 6124 Credit 64 000 000 EUR 70 000 000 17/07/2017 30/12/2022 

26 772 
274.83 41.83 

29 282 
175.60 

14 
PASSNM (National Statistics System Improvement 
Project) IDA D2210-GRTD Grant 14 600 000 XDR 20 000 000 06/07/2017 31/05/2022 3 617 613.74 24.78 

4 955 
635.26 

15 
PREEFN (River Niger Economic and Environmental 
Rehabilitation Project) 

IDA D2810-GRTD Grant 9 600 000 XDR 13 900 000 16/03/2018 15/09/2023 1 178 029.69 12.27 
1 705 

688.82 

IDA 6204 Credit 11 200 000 EUR 13 900 000 16/03/2018 15/09/2023 1 425 078.38 12.72 
1 768 

624.06 

16 PADELM (Livestock Development Support Project) 
IDA 6188 Credit 25 100 000 EUR 30 000 000 28/02/2018 28/06/2024 0.00 0.00 0.00 

IDA D2740-GRTD Grant 21 100 000 XDR 30 000 000 28/02/2018 28/06/2024 3 507 438.42 16.62 
4 986 

879.27 

17 IDA 6283 ML Credit 24 900 000 EUR 30 000 000 05/07/2018 30/09/2023 762 245.09 3.06 918 367.58 



 

V 

 

No. Project Name 
Financing 
Reference 

TYPE Amount 
CURR
ENCY 

Amount in 
USD 

Approval 
Date 

Closing 
Date  

Amount 
disbursed in 
commitment 

currency 

% 
disbu
rsed 

Amount 
Disbursed 

in USD 

PDAZAM (Agricultural Productivity and 
Diversification Development Project for arid areas of 
Mali) IDA D340 ML Grant 20 900 000 XDR 30 000 000 05/07/2018 30/09/2023 1 242 640.35 5.95 

1 783 
694.28 

  Regional Projects 

1 
PRAPS (Regional Pastoralism Support Project in 
the Sahel) IDA 5650 Credit 32 700 000 XDR 45 000 000 26/05/2015 31/12/2021 

21 732 
955.60 66.46 

29 907 
737.06 

2 
PAFDD (Women’s Empowerment and Demographic 
Dividend Project in the Sahel)  IDA 5570-ML Credit 27 100 000 XDR 40 000 000 18/12/2014 

30/06/2019 
[31/12/2018 

19 254 
537.10 71.05 

28 419 
980.96 

3 
PMTNS (Malaria and Neglected Tropical Diseases 
in the Sahel) 

IDA 56670 Credit 26 400 000 XDR 37 000 000 11/06/2015 31/12/2019 
18 288 
814.75 69.28 

25 632 
050.98 

4 
PGIRE2 (Integrated Water Resources Management 
and Multiple Uses Development Project in the River 
Senegal Basin)  IDA 5322-ML Credit 35 600 000 XDR 54 500 000 05/12/2013 30/06/2021 

20 120 
520.54 56.52 

30 802 
482.29 

5 
PARIIS (Regional Support Project for the Irrigation 
Initiative in the Sahel) 

IDA 6161 Credit 14 200 000 EUR 16 670 000 05/12/2017 31/03/2024 1 124 316.52 7.92 1 319 884.25 

IDA D2530-GRTD Grant 5 900 000 XDR 8 330 000 05/12/2017 31/03/2024 782 789.59 13.27 1 105 192.76 

6 
REDISSE III (Regional Diseases Surveillance 
Systems Improvement Project) 

IDA6235 Credit 12 300 000 EUR 15 000 000 07/05/2018 31/03/2024 876 581.85 7.13 1 069 002.26 

D3130 GRTD Grant 10 400 000 XDR 15 000 000 07/05/2018 31/03/2024 713 457.35 6.86 1 029 025.02 

7 
PIEGM (Guinea-Mali 225 KV Electricity 
Interconnection Project) 

IDA 6262 Credit 3 800 000 EUR 4 500 000 13/07/2018 30/06/2024 0.00 0.00 0.00 

D337 Grant 3 200 000 XDR 4 500 000 13/07/2018 30/06/2024 0.00 0.00 0.00 

8 ECOWAS Regional Electricity Access Project 
IDA 5363 Credit 51 900 000 EUR 60 000 000 13/12/2018 31/12/2025 0.00 0.00 0.00 

D409 Grant 21 600 000 XDR 30 000 000 13/12/2018 31/12/2025 0.00 0.00 0.00 

TOTAL    1 314 365 925   51.96 
682 882 
174.21 

 



 

VI 

 

 

MAP OF THE PROGRAMME AREA 

 

 

 

 

This map has been drawn by the staff of the African Development Bank exclusively for use by readers of the report to 

which it is attached. The names used and the borders shown do not imply on the part of the Bank Group and its members 

any judgement concerning the legal status of a territory or any approval or acceptance of its borders. 



 

VII 

 

REPUBLIC OF MALI 

SUMMARY OF THE FINANCIAL AND ECONOMIC ANALYSIS 

 
Summary of Scenarios           
    Current values: Fall in prices -2.5% Fall in prices -5% Fall in prices -27.5% Fall in prices -32.5% Fall in prices -35% 

Variable cells:             

Price Variation 0.00% 2.50% 5.00% 27.50% 32.50% 35.00% 

Resulting cells:             

NPV   254 418 788.01  253 656 357.23  252 893 926.44  246 032 049.36  244 507 187.79  243 744 757.00  
IRR   25.22% 25.17% 25.13% 24.71% 24.62% 24.57% 
C/B RATIO   1.59  1.58  1.58  1.57  1.56  1.56  

The current values column shows the variable cell values    
during preparation of the summary report. The variable cells    
of each scenario are in the grey columns.     

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

25,22%
25,17%

25,13%
25,08%

25,03%
24,99%

24,94%
24,90%

24,85%
24,81%

24,76%
24,71%

24,67%
24,62%

24,57%

24,50%

24,60%

24,70%

24,80%

24,90%

25,00%

25,10%

25,20%

25,30%

0 , 0 0 % 5 , 0 0 % 1 0 , 0 0 % 1 5 , 0 0 % 2 0 , 0 0 % 2 5 , 0 0 % 3 0 , 0 0 % 3 5 , 0 0 % 4 0 , 0 0 %

IR
R

Price Reduction (%)

242 000 000,00

244 000 000,00

246 000 000,00

248 000 000,00

250 000 000,00

252 000 000,00

254 000 000,00

256 000 000,00

0,00% 5,00% 10,00% 15,00% 20,00% 25,00% 30,00% 35,00% 40,00%

N
P

V

Price Reduction (%)



 

VIII 

 

 

 

 

 

1,56

1,57

1,57

1,58

1,58

1,59

1,59

0 , 0 0 % 5 , 0 0 % 1 0 , 0 0 % 1 5 , 0 0 % 2 0 , 0 0 % 2 5 , 0 0 % 3 0 , 0 0 % 3 5 , 0 0 % 4 0 , 0 0 %

C
/B

 R
A

T
IO

PRICE REDUCTION (%)



 

IX 

   

 

COUNTRY FRAGILITY SITUATION  
 

REPUBLIC OF MALI 

DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME FOR THE SPECIAL AGRO-INDUSTRIAL PROCESSING ZONES (PDZSTA-KB)   

Fragility Factors Mainstreaming Matrix 
 

Fragility Factors Situation, challenges and resilience measures supported by the General State Policy with the support of Technical 

and Financial Partners (TFPs) 

Measures supported by AfDB intervention 

under PDZSTA-KB (2020-2025) 

Political inclusion Since independence, Mali has experienced four major rebellions. The rebellions have left Mali in perpetual political, 

humanitarian and social conflict. The most recent conflict, which occurred in 2012, is continuing today although the 

international community is continuously striving to find solutions to problems preventing Mali from achieving lasting 

peace. Indeed, Mali became a democratic country in 1990, but the democratic transition seemed to be just a sham 

because, after two decades of peaceful elections, the democratic process was no longer justified given that it was 

marred by corruption and political influence instead of engaging in organising really democratic elections. Such a 

turn eventually created a sense of unfair political representation for Malians. In addition, the laws passed on 

electoral districts portray the political leaders’ intention to exclude some minority groups from political influence. 

PDZSTA-KB activities will not have a direct 

impact on political inclusion, but community 

resilience created by the programme will 

bring a new perspective on representation 

and participation in the political process.  

Security Despite hopes for security, it must be said that complete elimination of insecurity remains illusory. While the 

Government, UNMISMA and the signatory parties have made efforts to stop the fighting for several months, jihadist 

fighters have become stronger, with more capacity for nuisance. Following a series of attacks, ambushes, mines, 

mortar fire and other attacks, they have made their way right to the capital. Even heavily armed foreign and Malian 

camps are attacked by the raging terrorists. Inter-community tensions with land disputes, cattle rustling and clashes 

have also resulted in several deaths and injuries, and demonstrate the fragility of the social fabric. It should be noted 

that delays in implementing the Algiers Agreement justify the reluctance of the population of some localities to 

reject jihadist rhetoric and continue refraining from cooperating in efforts to eliminate them. All these actions by 

Malian stakeholders and the international community do not augur well for the restoration and consolidation of 

peace and security throughout Mali. Security standards assess peace-building success by determining whether 

violence in total armed conflict has persisted in a country; they also consider the chances of a country with a history 

of intra-State conflict will experience it again. The standards give priority to the maintenance of internal peace and 

order, as well as prevention of civil conflict. With the long and frequent history of violence in Mali, it is likely that in 

its current stage the country will return to full armed conflict. 

PDZSTA-KB does not contribute directly to 

the security factor, but it does have activities 

for food security while mitigating some risks 

that could worsen the security situation. 

Justice Mali has a relatively structured judicial system with 1 Supreme Court, 3 Courts of Appeal, 16 Courts of First Instance, 

3 Commercial Courts, 3 Administrative Courts, 42 Extended Courts of Justice, 11 Labour Courts, 8 Juvenile Courts, 

and 3 Military Courts. However, despite this organisational structure, some of the courts are not operational, or 

when they are operational, they do not have adequate human resources in quantity and quality to meet the 

expectations of Malian citizens. Furthermore, despite efforts by public authorities to reform and increase the 

number of judges, the judge-to-inhabitant ratio remains well below international standards, with Mali having only 

PDZSTA-KB does not contribute directly to 

the justice system but addresses the issue of 

social and spatial inclusion, which is a source 

of social injustice, taking into account the 

vulnerable groups, particularly women and 

young people, in the project activities. 



 

X 

   

one judge per 7,000 inhabitants. Such shortage of staff, combined with their precarious working conditions, 

significantly help to make procedures more cumbersome and lengthy and, as a result, create mistrust among the 

population towards the institution. Malians' lack of trust and the judicial system’s restrictive access make it one of 

the institutions to which people resort as little as possible in the event of conflict. 

Economic and social 

inclusiveness 

Although the country has recovered, economic activity and natural resources are largely concentrated in the south 

of the country. Therefore, it is possible that the projected growth path may have only a minimal impact on the 

particularly troubled northern regions. Agriculture and industry account for 36.8% and 23.4% respectively in Mali's 

GDP. The main agricultural crops are cotton, millet and rice. Industrial production consists mainly of gold as a raw 

material. The growth of agriculture and gold mining industry sectors can only benefit the North if the Government 

reinvests its increasing revenue in these regions. The North should also benefit from the return of aid flows and the 

activities of international, humanitarian and non-governmental organisations. However, these two sources of 

secondary benefits do not directly address the main grievances of the northern populations: the lack of economic 

opportunities and the high unemployment rate. 

The various sectors selected for PDZSTA-KB, 

such as infrastructure development, youth 

employment and food security, have far-

reaching activities that are economically and 

socially inclusive.  

 Social Cohesion In addition to the issue of equity in access to economic resources and opportunities, the poor quality of public goods 

and services, particularly in justice, education, health and security, has been widely cited as one of the obstacles to 

peace in Mali. Indeed, structural deficiencies in health, education, security and justice services, which should be 

accessible to all and of acceptable quality throughout Mali, fuel people's deep feelings of inequality, particularly 

between the northern and southern regions, and between the regions and the capital, Bamako. Indeed, each of the 

regions feels that the others are more privileged in development financing by the Government and Technical and 

Financial Partners (TFPs), construction of infrastructure and, more generally, consolidation of the Government’s 

presence. The delivery of public services remains highly unequal and in short supply despite efforts made by the 

public authorities. These structural shortages are both in quality and quantity, with significant imbalances between 

urban and rural areas, as well as between Bamako and the rest of the country. Poverty indicator trends vary 

considerably across the regions, with progress in the West and South regions against persistence or even 

deterioration in the North. These inequalities were exacerbated by the 2011 food crisis, which negatively and 

disproportionately affected households. In the North, for example, there was a 41% increase in the proportion of 

people living in food-poor households as a result of the 2011 price and production shocks. Even though budget 

spending in the education and health sectors is in line with the averages of other WAMU countries, it remains very 

uneven and unfair: it does not benefit the most disadvantaged segments of the population. In addition, public 

spending on social safety nets to support the poor remains very low and is not always well targeted (a significant 

proportion of the resources do not reach the poorest households). 

The geographical location of PDZSTA-KB is a 

first step towards addressing the imbalance 

in the delivery of services between urban 

and rural areas.  As regards the programme 

activities, a number of the proposed 

components will help to establish public 

servitude required to ensure the successful 

socioeconomic integration of communities. 

External effects / 

regional ripple effects 

With the political and military crisis, Mali's capacity to diversify its economy fell to its lowest level as its exports fell 

from 13.9% to 1.9% between 2009 and 2017. However, this shortcoming is offset by Mali's strong capacity for 

regional integration and economic cooperation. Given this imbalance in terms of capacity, Mali continues to face 

enormous pressure from its geographical position in the Sahel-Saharan region. Regional and international diplomatic 

interference in Sahel’s political transformation seeks to advance their agenda at the expense of their neighbours. In 

addition to this external interference, there is also interference by jihadists - originally external since AQIM 

historically originated in Algeria - who are combining with a purely Sahelian jihad. Another external factor concerns 

the influence of market economic resources (control of cross-border traffic) which has triggered and is perpetuating 

PDZSTA-KB's support has no direct impact on 

external effects, but various interventions by 

the Bank and other TFPs are aimed at 

creating an environment conducive to the 

diversification of the Malian economy, more 

than 45% of whose export earnings come 

from the agricultural sector alone. To 

mitigate the effect of exogenous shocks, 



 

XI 

   

the rebellion. Trafficking interests are the main source of rebel financing; they exacerbate inter-community relations 

and atomise armed groups. Far from being the preserve of the rebels alone, trafficking also causes competition with 

State actors. This makes the search for peace complicated.  

there are emergency social activities in areas 

with displaced people; this is a new 

opportunity to discourage young people 

from embarking on dangerous adventures 

such as terrorism and illegal immigration. 

Climatic/environmental 

impacts 

Although Mali has experienced accelerated deterioration of its environmental policy over two years (2015-2017) to 

the point where its score is below the African average, it has been able to strengthen its capacity in environmental 

protection to prepare for emergencies with Government resources allocated to natural disaster prevention and food 

price volatility. The humanitarian crisis has been a major challenge for peace-building in Mali because it is also 

environmental due to severe recurring drought that has made farming difficult and created a food crisis. The local 

economy, which is highly dependent on stockbreeding and agriculture, has forced Malian northerners to migrate to 

other countries where economic and living conditions could be better, but many of them have returned quickly due 

to the deteriorating situation in these other countries. In addition, UN reports in 2011 indicate that there are nearly 

200,000 displaced people in Mali, not to mention the more than 200,000 people who have fled Mali to countries 

such as Burkina Faso, Mauritania and Niger. Worse still, at least 4.6 million people in Mali have experienced severe 

food insecurity, which has prompted the UN to help mitigate the deterioration in living conditions. By 2013, the 

number of internally and externally displaced persons had increased significantly from about 410,000 to 475,000. 

PDZSTA-KB activities will implement the 

ESMFP measures recommended to avoid 

creating negative impacts on environmental 

protection.  

  

 



 

XII 

   

VII. MIGRATION DATA FOR MALI 
 

 
Fig.1: Main destination countries for migrants - February 2019  

 

 
Fig. 2: Number of migrants from Mali to Italy by sea per year and by nationality 

 

Source: IMO, Population flow monitoring points – Dashboard # 37 – February 2019. 






























































AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK


 

 

 

 

 

PROGRAMME: INCLUSIVE AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT 

PROGRAMME FOR AGRICULTURAL SECTORS (PADIDFA) 

COUNTRY: KINGDOM OF MOROCCO 

 

Appraisal Report 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

May 2018 

 

PROGRAMME INFORMATION  
 

INSTRUMENT:     Sector Budget Support 

PBO DESIGN MODEL:      Programme-Based Support Operations  

 

 

LOAN/ GRANT INFORMATION  

Client Information  

BORROWER:      Government of Morocco 
EXECUTING AGENCY:  Ministry of Economy and Finance 
 

Financing Plan 

 

Source Amount (EUR) Instrument 
 

AfDB 
 

200 million 
 

Loan 

 

Key AfDB Financing Information 
 

Loan currency Euro (EUR)  

Type of Loan Fully flexible loan 

Maturity To be determined (up to 25 years) 

Grace period To be determined (up to 8 years) 

Weighted average maturity  To be determined (depending on amortization profile, 

maturity and grace period) 
Reimbursement  Equal half-yearly instalments after the grace period or 

profile adapted to borrower's needs 
Interest rate  Base rate + Funding margin + Lending spread + Maturity 

premium (this interest rate must be greater than or equal to 

zero) 

Base rate Floating (EURIBOR 6 months revised every 1st February 

and 1st August) 
A free-floating option is available to set the base rate.  

Funding margin The Bank’s funding margin revised every 1st January and 

1st July and applied every 1st February and 1st August with 

the base rate 

Lending spread 80 basis points (8.8%) 

Maturity premium To be determined:  

-       0% if weighted average maturity <= 12.75 years  

-       0.10% if 12.75<weighted average maturity <= 15 years  

-       0.20% if weighted average maturity <= 15 years 

Front-end fees  0.25% of the loan amount, payable by the date of signature 

of the loan agreement  

Commitment fee  0.25% per year of the non-disbursed amount, starting to 

accrue 60 days after the date of signature of the loan 

agreement and payable on the set payment dates 

Base rate conversion option* Besides the free base rate fixing option, the borrower may 

revert to the floating rate or reset all or part of the disbursed 

loan amount. Transaction fees apply 

Rate cap or collar option* The borrower may cap or collar the base rate for all or part 

of the disbursed loan amount. Transaction fees apply 

Loan currency conversion 

option* 

The borrower may change the currency of all or part of its 

disbursed or undisbursed loan to another Bank loan 

currency. Transaction fees apply. 

 



 

v 

 

Implementation Schedule - Key Milestones (planned) 

Programme approval 15 May 2018 

Effectiveness 30 June 2018 

First disbursement 30 July 2018 

Second disbursement  30 July 2019 

Mid-term review 15 January 2019 

Programme closure 31 December 2019 

 

  



 

vi 

 

PROGRAMME EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  

Programme 

Overview 

Programme Name: Inclusive and Sustainable Development Support Programme for Agricultural 

Sectors in Morocco (PADIDFA).  

Scope and Sector: National Territory / Inter-sector.  

Overall Schedule: May 2018 – December 2019.  

Operational instrument /Financing: Sector Budget Support / EUR 200 million to be disbursed in two 

tranches (2018 and 2019). 

Programme 

Outcomes 

The objective of PADIDFA is to help boost agricultural sector competitiveness with a view to ensuring 

inclusive and sustainable economic growth by promoting value chains, employment creation, 

improvement of the business climate and sustainable natural resource management. It builds on two 

components: (1) “Support to job creation through the development of agricultural and agro-industrial 

sub-sectors” which will ensure: (i) skills development for access to employment in agricultural and agro-

industrial sectors; (ii) improvement of the investment climate and youth and female entrepreneurship in 

rural areas; and (iii) support for the structuring of agricultural sectors, processing of agricultural products, 

the development of agro-industry and exports; (2) “Support lasting rural employment through sustainable 

use of natural resources by the agricultural sector” which will ensure: (i) the strengthening of sustainable 

agricultural sector governance; (ii) improvement of water resource management to mitigate water stress 

and boost sustainability; and (iii) Support for energy transition in the agricultural sector.  

 

The implementation of these reforms will make it possible to support, by 2020, the following major 

outcomes: (i) Support to agricultural exports; (ii) Contribution to poverty reduction in rural areas; (iii) 

Mobilisation of additional private investments in the Sector Programme Contracts; (iv) Job creation for 

youth and women (nearly 3,000 jobs) ; (v) Irrigation Water Saving (a total of 990 million m3 in 2020) ; 

(vi) Extension of the use of renewable energies (solar pumping for 100,000 ha in 2020; (vii) Promotion 

of aggregation projects – PPP; (viii) Support for the establishment of four vocational guidance centres 

in rural areas; (ix) Formal recognition of all inter-professional associations in 2020 (21 inter-professional 

associations); (x) Validation of a Sustainable Development Action Plan for at least four key sectors 

(agriculture, water, energy, industry, etc.) by 2020; (xi) Annual training and qualification of nearly 300 

trainers, 2,600 graduates as young agricultural workers or technicians, and certification of approximately 

10,000 young daughters and sons of farmers benefiting from apprenticeship training. 

 

Alignment with 

Bank Priorities  

This sector budget support operation is fully aligned with the Bank's "High 5s", and directly contributes 

to creating an enabling environment for achieving the following three High 5s: "Feed Africa", "Integrate 

Africa" and "Improve the living conditions of the people of Africa". It also supports the green and 

inclusive growth objectives of the AfDB's Ten-Year Strategy for 2013-2022.  It is perfectly consistent 

with Morocco's Country Strategy Paper (CSP) for the period 2017-2021, more particularly its Pillar II to 

"Improve living conditions through jobs for youth, women and in rural areas". PADIDFA is aligned on 

the Bank's Agriculture and Agro-Industries Sector "Feed Africa" Strategy. In particular, it supports the 

inclusive development of value chains and the sustainable promotion of strategic value chains. Lastly, 

PADIDFA is in line with the Bank's Gender Strategy (2014-2018) "Investing in Gender Equality for 

Africa's Transformation", particularly on Pillar II "Economic Empowerment". PADIDFA would also 

support the thrusts of the new economic model and is fully in line with the process of establishing the 

advanced regionalization system launched by the Government. The approach emphasizes 

interdependence and complementarity between agriculture, the environment, employment, water and 

energy to promote harmonious and sustainable economic and social development.  

Needs 

Assessment and 

Rationale 

Since 2008, Morocco has undertaken structural reforms to support the Green Morocco Plan. The Bank 

contributed to the Green Morocco Plan through two budget support operations (PAMV 1 and PAPMV 

2) which generated positive results. Based on lessons learned, PADIDFA adopts a holistic approach 

aimed at stimulating intra- and inter-sector synergies and complementarities within the Green Morocco 

Plan Ecosystem (E-PMV) and between the upstream and downstream sectors of agricultural value 

chains. Emphasis is laid on interactions and complementary synergies between the Green Morocco Plan 

(PMV) and other sector strategies, with a view to achieving common and shared objectives. This 

approach involves inter-sector design and a quest for convergence and consistency between the policies 

of stakeholder ministries (agriculture, employment, environment, water, energy, industry, etc.). 

Accordingly, this operation is a truly inclusive and sustainable ecosystem for the Green Morocco 

Plan. Based on these considerations, the proposed support programme would represent a new generation 

of inter-sector budget support. Essentially, it will engage in selective and optimal targeting of the main 

components of E-PMV in a bid to support accelerated, inclusive and sustainable growth, amplify the 

dynamics driven by PAPMV 1 and 2, consolidate the achievements made and strengthen stakeholder 

mobilization to attain the appropriate objectives. It is not a mere counterpart to the implementation of a 

reform package. Rather, it fully fits into the national sustainable development policy and proposes to 



 

vii 

 

bring real value added to national policy implementation by systematically strengthening the 

convergence and overall consistency of sector policies relevant to the agricultural and rural sector.  

Harmonisation 

During the preparation of this budget support, the Bank's team met with major donors in order to promote 

potential synergies and complementarities within the framework of this operation. Thus, this programme 

is designed in coordination with other donors, more particularly the World Bank, which recently 

approved results-based financing in December 2017 (USD 200 million) aimed at promoting agricultural 

value chains. The same applies to the European Union Delegation (D-EU) in Morocco, which supports 

the VMP in addition to other bilateral financing (in particular KfW, AFD, JICA, BTC, etc.). Generally 

speaking, donor coordination in Morocco is very satisfactory and takes the form of formal dialogue and 

exchange frameworks, of which the Bank is an active member. In addition, thematic groups, led either 

by the partners or by the administration, meet regularly to coordinate activities related to sector 

operations. 

Bank’s Value 

Added 

The rationale for PADIDFA is the importance of agriculture in the Moroccan economy and its impact 

on employment, especially women’s and youth employment in rural areas, and its role in adaptation to 

climate change and water stress. It follows upon and consolidates the two phases of support to the Green 

Morocco Plan (PAPMV-1 & 2), implemented over the 2012-2017 period, and a welter of interventions 

contribute to the inclusion and sustainability of the Green Morocco Ecosystem Plan (E-PMV) which 

require synergies and complementarities with other sectors. The promotion of agricultural sectors will 

enable Moroccan agriculture to play a pivotal role in the country's economic and social development. 

The Bank is better placed to support Morocco in the reforms of this sector given the investments it has 

financed, the numerous technical assistance operations provided and the success of the two budget 

support operations (80% of the measures fully implemented for PAPMV-1 and 91% for PAPMV-2). The 

choice of this instrument will also provide the government with the necessary financial resources to 

implement its development policy and continue its reform efforts with the Bank's support and assistance. 

Contribution to 

Gender Equality 

and Women’s 

Empowerment   

The acceleration of the Green Morocco Plan and sustainability of its achievements will create lasting 

jobs, especially for youth and women, and build the institutional capacities of women's and youth 

organizations. This will have a positive impact on the standard of living of these target groups. Particular 

attention is paid in this programme to the capacity of agricultural sectors to generate additional 

employment, especially for rural women and youth. This requires a series of measures to improve the 

provision of training, adapt it to the needs of the rural world and promote entrepreneurship in rural areas. 

Policy Dialogue 

and Related 

Technical 

Assistance    

PADIDFA's preparation benefited from wide-ranging consultations, which enabled quality dialogue with 

all stakeholders, in particular the Moroccan authorities, trade associations, the private sector and civil 

society. These stakeholders were actively involved in the programme’s design by focusing on a 

participatory and inter-sector approach that allows the views of the sectors to be superimposed and 

potential convergences to be identified. The quest for ownership of the measures was at the heart of the 

design process. This process was reinforced during the preparation and appraisal by the organisation of 

consultation and validation workshops with all the actors concerned (seven administrative departments 

and representatives of the trade associations) to discuss the proposed measures, their relevance and the 

expected impact. This consultation will be continued during implementation through the inter-sector 

steering committee. 



   

viii 

PRELIMINARY RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 

Country and Programme Title: Morocco - Inclusive and Sustainable Development Support Programme for Agricultural Sectors (PADIDFA) 

Programme Goal: Help boost agricultural sector competitiveness to ensure inclusive and sustainable economic growth through the promotion of value chains, employment creation, improvement of the business climate and sustainable 
natural resource management. 

 

RESULTS CHAIN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS 

/MITIGATION MEASURES Indicators  Baseline Situation Targets 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Improvement of agricultural 
sector competitiveness 

Value of agricultural exports MAD 21.3 billion MAD 45 billion in 2030 MEF / Global 
Competitiveness Report 

 

Improvement of the living 

conditions of rural 

communities 

Rural poverty rate  9.5 % in 2014 5% in 2030 HCP/Human Development 

Report, UNDP 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

I. Jobs created through the 
development of supported 

agricultural sub-sectors 

(support for inclusive 
development) 

 

Contribute to jobs created for the youth and 
women in rural areas 

42000  
jobs, including 38,000 in 

rural areas in 2017 

62000 jobs including 55,800 
in rural areas in 2020 

Annual HCP Report on 
Employment 

Risks:  

External shocks and unfavourable international 

economic environment/fluctuation in the prices of 

hydrocarbons and commodities 
 

Climatic hazards and extreme weather events 
 

Mitigation Measure: 

Budget supervision committee established 
 

Targeted measures: management of shortages, 

promotion of localized irrigation, etc. 

Additional training for trainers, youth and 

girls 

- 400 trainers, 2600 youths and 

10000 girls trained in 2020 

Specific training report 

(Ministry of Agriculture, 
Vocational Training). 

Private investment in the agricultural sub-
sectors supported by the programme 

- At least MAD 1 billion by 
2020 

Report from the Ministry of 
Agriculture, COMADER and 

FENAGRI 

II. Sustainable management of 

agricultural sub-sectors 
improved, to ensure the 

sustainability of jobs created 

(sustainable development 
support).  

Amount of water saved in million cubic 

metres (mm3). 

880 mm3 (cumulative 

period 2008-17) 

990 million m3 in 2020 Report from the Ministry of 

Agriculture 

Utilization of renewable energies (solar 
pumping)  

10,000 farms in 2017, or 
nearly 30,000 ha 

30,000 farms in 2020, 
representing 100,000 ha.  

Ministry of Agriculture and 
AMEE 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

I. Support for job creation through the development of agricultural and agro-industrial sub-sectors Risks: 
- Insufficient inter-sector coordination capacity 

between the various government departments 

involved in implementing programme reforms 
 

- Divergent interests of stakeholders  

 

Mitigation Measures: 

- Institution of the Steering Committee in MEF 

and strengthening of Agriculture/PMV, Water and 

Employment thematic groups 

 
- Strengthening of inter and intra-ministerial 

consultation, and creation of focal points 

 
 

I.1.  Skills development to ensure access to employment in the agricultural and agro-industrial sub-sectors 

Improvement of training 

tailored to private sector needs 
in rural areas 

 

Operationalisation of the Centre for 

Pedagogical Engineering and Training of 

Trainers 

Centre for Training of 

Trainers is non-existent 

One (1) engineering centre 

functional before end-2019 

Note on the centre’s 

operationalization signed by 
DEFR. 

Production of a Job-Competency Framework 

(JCF) and a Directory of Jobs and Trades 

(DJT) for the agricultural sector  

Not available JCF and DJT produced for the 

agricultural sector in 2018 
Copy of JCF and DJT  

Increased employment 

opportunities in rural areas 

Creation and establishment of vocational 

guidance centres in rural areas 

0 in 2017 Four (4) centres established 

before end-2018 

Instruments creating the 

centres 

1.2.   Improvement of the investment climate and entrepreneurship among the youth and women in rural areas 

Acceleration of investment in 
the agricultural sector 

Transmission of the law governing the 

National Agricultural Registry (RNA) to 

the SGG 

Bill prepared Bill submitted to the SGG 
before end-2019 

Letter of transmission to the 
SGG 

Business creation support for 

the youth and women in rural 

areas 

Completion of a study on the preparation of a 

national plan for the creation of regional 

incubators and establishment of two 
incubators 

An incubator established 

in Larache 

Study conducted and less than 

two incubators established in 

2019. 

Summary report  

Improve support to sub-sector 

businesses  
Signature of a framework agreement 

between ONCA and COMADER on 

Not available Copy of the signed agreement.  



 

ix 

 

agricultural extension, training and 

support for farmers. 

Encouragement of women’s 
entrepreneurship in rural areas 

Conduct of a study on women’s 
entrepreneurship 

Not available Study and action plan 
available before end-2019 

Copy of an action plan for the 
guide 

Strengthening agricultural 

extension in the agri-food 

sectors 

Preparation and signature of a partnership 

agreement between the DIAEA and ONCA 

for the development of agricultural 

extension in irrigated areas. 

Not available Agreement signed by end-

2019 

Copy of the signed agreement 

I.3.    Support for structuring of agricultural sub-sectors, processing of agricultural products, and the development of agro-industry and exports 

Structuring of inter-
professional associations 

Continuation of the process of recognition of 
inter-professional associations  

14 out of 21 inter-
professional associations 

recognized 

21 inter-professional 
associations recognized in 

2019 

Instruments of recognition 

Establishment of Agri-food 

Processing Areas (ZTAA) for 

the development and processing 
of agricultural products 

Publication of the Order establishing the 
amounts, conditions and procedures for 

granting State financial assistance for units 
for the enhancement of fresh agricultural 

products and their by-products. 

Not available Order published before end-

2019. 

Summary note on support to 

CIAAs and copy of the signed 

Order 

Improvement of standards for 

the promotion of exports, 
particularly with African 

countries 

Order defining complementary and special 

measures to combat the Newcastle disease 

and avian influenza in order to support 

poultry exports  

Incomplete texts Draft decree transmitted to the 

SGG before end-2018 

Copy of the Letters of 

transmission to the SGG 

Transmission of the draft law on 

fertilizers, their adjuvants and crop 

supports to the SGG. 

Incomplete texts Draft law transmitted to the 

SGG before end-2019 

Copy of the Letter of 

Transmission to the SGG  

II. Support lasting rural employment through the sustainable use of natural resources  

II.1.     Reinforcement of Sustainable Agricultural Sector Governance 

Promotion of green governance Publication of the Decree setting up the 

sustainable development strategy committee 
before end-2018 

Not available Decree published in the OG 

before end-2018. 

Copy of the OG 

Validation of Sustainable Development 

Action Plans (PADD) in 2019  

Not available Four (4) PADD validated in 

2019 

Validation report 

II.2.   Improvement of water resource management to mitigate the water stress and boost sustainability 

Strengthening of the 

institutional framework for 

integrated water resource 
management   

Decree on the PNE, PDAIRE and Local 

Water Management Plans (2019) 

Not available Decree transmitted to the 

SGG before end-2018 

Letter of transmission to the 

SGG 

Decree governing the water resource 

information system 

Not available Decree prepared before end-

2019 

Letter of transmission to the 

SGG 

Improvement of adaptation to 

climate change 

Preparation of regional vulnerability indices 

and regional CC adaptation plans  

Not available Study launched in three pilot 

regions before end-2019 

Service order on the study 

II.3.   Support for energy transition in the agricultural sector 
Reduction of the carbon 

footprint and further 
empowerment of small farmers 

Presentation of the Energy Efficiency 

Strategy to the Governing Council (2030) 

Not available EE strategy presented to the 

government council before 
end-2018  

Minutes of the Government 

Council 

Strategic study on the promotion of 
renewable energy in agriculture (solar 

pumping) 

Tripartite Convention 
(MEF-AGRI-ENV) 

available 

Results of the study available 
before end-2019 

Consultation notice 
Signed agreement 

 

Key Activities:  

- Signature of loan agreements and fulfilment of effectiveness and disbursement conditions 
- Implementation of adopted reforms, Government’s half-yearly and annual reports, Bank supervision reports as well as the programme’s mid-

term review and completion reports. 

Financing:  

 ADB loan   EUR 200 million: Two disbursement tranches (2018 and 2019) 



   

x 

 

Schedule for Implementation of PADIDFA Programme Activities 

 

 

Description of Activities 
2018 2019 2020 

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 

1. Negotiations, Approval and Effectiveness 

Loan negotiations                                                                     

Loan approval by the Board                                                                     

Loan approval and effectiveness                                                                     

2. Programme Implementation 

Implementation of first tranche measures                                                                     

Mid-term review of the programme                                                                     

Implementation of second tranche measures                                                                     

Disbursement of the first tranche                                                                     

Disbursement of the second tranche                                                                     

Audit reports                                                                     

3. Programme Completion 

Submission of the PCR by the Government                                                                     

PCR completion mission by the Bank                                                                     

Validation of the PCR by the Bank                                                                     

 



   

1 
 

I. INTRODUCTION: PROPOSAL 

1.1. This is a proposal to grant a EUR 200 million loan to fund the Inclusive and Sustainable 

Development Support Programme for Agricultural Sectors (PADIDFA). It is a sector budget support 

operation in two tranches to be executed over the 2018-2019 period to help achieve the objectives of the 

Green Morocco Plan (PMV). The programme entails consolidation and deepening of reforms already 

implemented under PAPMV-1 & 2 between June 2012 and September 2017. Its design is informed by 

lessons from Phases I and II of PAPMV (cf. 4.4.3), the principles of the Paris Declaration as well as good 

practice principles for the application of conditionality. It will supplement other programmes financed by 

the World Bank, the European Union and bilateral funds (AFD, JICA, KfW, CTB, etc. see Annex 5).  

1.2.  The programme objective is to contribute to the creation of sustainable jobs in the rural 

areas of Morocco by boosting agricultural sector competitiveness through the promotion of value 

chains, improvement of the business climate and sustainable natural resource management. 
PADIDFA is based on Morocco’s various strategic orientations and is consistent with the second pillar of 

CSP 2017-2021 by supporting the improvement of living conditions through employment for youth, 

women and rural areas.  

1.3.  The programme is intended to sustain and consolidate the achievements of the Green 

Morocco Plan, and launch its acceleration phase (2017-2020). It helps the authorities with the 

formulation and implementation of inter-sector strategic reforms to strengthen the social and 

environmental dimensions of the PMV and promote inclusion, sustainability and competitiveness in 

Morocco’s agricultural sector.  

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT 

2.1. Political Situation and Governance Context 

2.1.1 Since adoption of its new Constitution in July 2011, Morocco has enjoyed outstanding 

stability while implementing reforms in tandem with multiparty politics. The September 2015 

regional and municipal elections were an important step towards implementing the decentralization 

process enshrined in the new Constitution. The October 2016 parliamentary elections resulted in the 

victory of the Justice and Development Party (PJD). In March 2017, Mr. El Othmani was appointed Head 

of Government by the King and a new Government was formed on 5 April 2017.  

2.1.2 In the last decade, Morocco recorded highly satisfactory results in good governance and 

corruption control. On 28 December 2015, it adopted the National Anti-Corruption Strategy that covers 

various aspects, including the improvement of institutional and legal measures, the implementation of 

preventive and enforcement measures, and the strengthening of community education and awareness-

raising. In November 2017, the decree to establish the Anti-Corruption Commission, placed under the 

authority of the Head of the Government, was published in the Official Gazette.  

2.2. Recent Economic Trends, Macroeconomic and Budgetary Analysis 

2.2.1 In 2017, the estimated real GDP growth rate of the Kingdom of Morocco was 4.1%. That 

year was characterized by an exceptionally good agricultural season. Hence, the Ministry of Agriculture 

announced in September that the overall cereal output reached 96 million quintals (compared to 33.5 

million in 2016), representing an increase of 187%. This was the fourth best cereal output in the country 

since the launch of the Green Morocco Plan in 2008 that has expanded the use of certified seeds and 

targeted areas best suited for cereal farming. Hence, real GDP growth in 2017 was largely driven by an 

increase in agricultural value added (+15.1%). The non-agricultural value added also grew, albeit at a 

slower pace (+3.1%) but at a higher rate relative to 2016 (+2.2%), driven mainly by the processing 

industries, mining and tourism. The manufacturing sector production index improved by 1.9%, the largest 

increase since 2012. This robust performance in the sector is consistent with the excellent sales trends 

abroad for all major export sectors, including aeronautics (+20%), the food industry (+8.8%), electronics 

(+7.6%), automobile (+7.3%), textiles and leather (+6.1%).  



 

2 
 

2.2.1 Domestic consumption continues to be supported by controlled inflation and improved 

revenue.  Household consumption increased in 2017, benefiting from the positive impact of a good 

agricultural season, an increase in remittances from Moroccans in the Diaspora (+4.5%) and the creation 

of 57,000 jobs (35,000 in rural areas). With regard to public consumption, the Government's investment 

efforts were sustained in 2017, and benefited from positive trends in outstanding equipment loans 

(+11.4%) and investment spending from the State budget (+5.1%). For 2018, the primary economic 

indicators point to the continuation of investments.  

Table 1: Key Macroeconomic Indicators - PEA, 2018 (% of GDP, unless otherwise stated) 

Indicators 2016 2017 (e) 2018 (p) 2019 (p) 

Real GDP growth 1.2 4.1 3.1 4.1 

Agricultural GDP growth -12.8 15.2 -1.0 - 

Non-agricultural GDP growth 3.1 3.0 3.6 - 

Inflation  1.6 0.9 1.8 1.9 

Budget balance (% of GDP) -4.1 -3.6 -3.0 -2.6 

Current account (% of GDP) -4.4 -4.0 -3.2 -2.9 

2.2.3 In 2017, Morocco continued its fiscal consolidation policy started in 2011. The budget deficit 

was expected to reach 3.6% of GDP in 2017 compared to 4.1% in 2016. External trade recovered in 2017 

compared to 2016, mainly due to the net decline in wheat imports (owing to increased production and a 

fiscal policy change limiting imports) and consolidation of the growth pace of exports through the 

development of the “new industries of Morocco” initiative (automobile, aeronautics and electronics). 

Despite the increase in the energy bill (+30%), imports rose at a lower rate (+5.7% compared to 7.2%) in 

2016, mainly due to the decline in grain imports (-22%). The current account deficit was estimated at 4% 

of GDP in 2017 compared to 4.4% in 2016. This improvement also stemmed from the increase in FDI 

and remittances from abroad, which rose in 2017 by +32% and +2% respectively, compared to 2016. 

Foreign exchange reserves remained at a reasonable level in 2017, i.e. approximately six months of 

import. 

2.2.4 The public debt was estimated at 64.3% of GDP in 2017 compared to 64.7% in 2016. The 

authorities have set a debt target of 60% of GDP by 2021, to be achieved through the stringent budgetary 

control policy initiated in 2013. Although the Treasury debt continued its upward trend from 2010 (its 

ratio to GDP was 63.2% in 2014 compared to 62.3% in 2013 and 49% in 2010), it started declining from 

2017. The debt ratio is expected to rise to 64% in 2018. It is worth noting that the increased debt since 

2010 stems from the recovery plan to combat the effects of the international financial crisis and the 

sluggish growth in Europe. Nevertheless, since 2013, the State has initiated a public expenditure control 

strategy to gradually reduce the budget deficit to 3% and ultimately reverse the upward trend in the debt 

volume (scenario validated by the IMF). According to the latest IMF mission (July 2017), the public debt 

will remain sustainable in the medium term mainly because its composition and structure are dominated 

by domestic debts, which account for 78% of the total debt. 

2.2.5 Morocco has an accommodating monetary policy and kept its interest rate unchanged in 

2017 (2.25%) after a decline of 0.25 point in 2016. It will be recalled that Morocco has kept its key 

interest rate low in order to stimulate its economy by encouraging credit to businesses. Inflation remained 

low at an average 0.9% in 2017, although it is expected to double to 1.8% in 2018. Furthermore, in January 

2018, Morocco announced the adoption of a new and more flexible exchange rate regime. 

2.2.6 In terms of the economic prospects for 2018, the real GDP growth rate should reach 3.1%. 

This prediction is based on an “average” agricultural season that yields a lower forecast (-0.8%) for 

agricultural value added.  Non-agricultural GDP will continue rising and is expected to reach 3.7%. The 

industrialists consulted during the economic situation survey conducted in the manufacturing sector by 

Bank Al-Maghrib expect an increased production and sales in 2018. Similarly, the forecasts for 2018 are 

also good for the tertiary sector, including tourism that grew by 32.3% in January 2018 compared to 

January 2017.  



 

3 
 

2.3. Public Finance Management 

Morocco has initiated several reforms to modernize its financial management system, as defined in 

the new Constitution adopted in 2011. In accordance with Article 75 of the Constitution, Parliament 

adopted the Organic Finance Law on 2 June 2015. This law, which went into force in 2016, has been 

gradually and progressively implemented over five years to enhance ownership of the new budgetary, 

accounting and financial rules that it advocates. The new Constitution guarantees the independence of the 

Court of Auditors and enshrines regionalization and administrative decentralization by strengthening 

control at the regional level. Accordingly, a Court of Auditors will be established in each region to carry 

out more exhaustive management control of public bodies and municipalities. 

2.4. Economic and Agricultural Sector Competitiveness 

2.4.1 According to the Davos Global Competitiveness Report, Morocco was the fifth most 

competitive economy in Africa and the first in North Africa in 2017. The Kingdom has maintained its 

ranking (71st out of 137 countries) and confirmed its significant advance made in: (i) improvement of the 

effectiveness and efficiency of institutions (49th/137); (ii) infrastructure development (54th/137); (iii) 

macroeconomic stability (55th/137) and (iv) improvement of the efficiency of goods markets, in particular 

the efficiency of the Agricultural Policy, which ranks Morocco 16th/137.   

2.4.2 This economic performance stems from considerable efforts made by the authorities to 

implement structural reforms that accelerate the transformation of the country’s economic model 

and industrialization. In 2016, manufacturing sector exports accounted for 70.1% of total exports, 

compared to 65.8% in 2005. In 2017, export from Morocco’s “global industries”, such as aeronautics 

(+20%), the food industry (+8.8%), electronics (+7.6%) and automobile (+7.3%) increased remarkably.  

2.4.3  Despite these economic diversification and sophistication efforts, the agricultural sector 

still accounts for a significant share of the Kingdom’s GDP (14%) and its performance, which is 

highly sensitive to climatic fluctuations, considerably affects the country’s economic growth (see §2.2.1). 

Nevertheless, the agricultural sector holds enormous potential in terms of development and job creation 

owing to its structuring of value chains and improvement of product quality (ADB, 2016).  

2.4.4 The agricultural sector has experienced sustained growth since implementation of the 

Green Morocco Plan in 2008 that has boosted sector competitiveness. Since 2008, the Plan has helped 

to increase: (i) the irrigated surface area by over 25% (137,000 ha); and (ii) the fruit and vegetable yield 

by 70%. Exports of agri-food products increased sharply to over USD 4.8 billion in 2016, representing a 

280% rise since 2001 (and more than 170% since 2008). Despite growing competition, especially from 

countries of the Mediterranean basin, Morocco is ranked among the five leading exporters of several 

products. Mindful of the importance of the sector and of the underlying issues, Morocco 

triggered the acceleration of the Green Morocco Plan (APMV) in 2016 as an instrument for 

implementing the agricultural strategy, with emphasis on the agricultural downstream, 

promotion of agricultural value chains and convergence with other complementary sectors. 

2.4.5 Besides, competitiveness gains are possible because agricultural value chains remain little 

developed and fragmented. Agricultural production is characterized by the coexistence of a large 

number of small-sized farms (70% of the 1.5 million farms have a surface area below 5 ha), the low 

quality of their output, little market integration and a limited number of large farms with high value added 

whose output is mainly exported. In fact, the 1.5 million farms only account for 4% of exports, while the 

agribusiness sector, which is less labour-intensive (60,000 workers), accounts for 2%. 

  



 

4 
 

2.5. Inclusive Growth, Poverty Situation and Social Context 

2.5.1 Efforts made to reduce social inequalities and poverty are beginning to bear fruit, with an 

estimated poverty rate of 4.2% in 2014. This result is the culmination of many reforms initiated in the 

1990s. Poverty is on the decline but remains rooted in rural areas. The constitutional reform of 2011 

promotes the universal character of the social safety nets. Since then, reforms are aimed at improving the 

coverage and efficiency of the social protection system, particularly regarding pensions, unemployment 

and health insurance. Nevertheless, this mechanism affects only a fraction of the population due to its 

fragmented targeting and the lack of an integrated strategy. In 2016, the authorities announced the 

establishment of a single identifier, coupled with the institution of a social identifier to improve targeting 

by 2021.  

2.5.2 Morocco has also made significant efforts to achieve the SDGs, especially SDG4, although 

major challenges remain in terms of the secondary education dropout rate and efficient support to 

out-of-school youth. The country has almost achieved universal primary education and significantly 

reduced the literacy rate for youth aged 15-24 by 10.8% (HCP, 2018). However, the school dropout 

phenomenon and its management by the authorities remains a concern particularly in secondary 

education. Although data from the Ministry of Education shows a decrease in the dropout rate, the number 

of dropouts remained significant at 279,177 compared to 329,618 in 2016.  

2.5.3 The persistent dropout rate and the poor diversification of the Moroccan economy tend to 

create structural unemployment for the youth and women, and increases underemployment in 

rural areas. In 2017, net job creation by the Moroccan economy was estimated at 86,000 jobs, comprising 

32,000 in urban areas and 54,000 in rural areas, relative to a loss of 37,000 in 2016 especially in the 

agricultural sector. This is far from the target of 200,000 annual jobs referred to in the National 

Employment Strategy. Hence, the unemployment rate rose from 9.9% in 2016 to 10.2% in 2017. In rural 

areas, underemployment affects 10.8% of rural workers. Young people aged 14-24 are still the most 

vulnerable to unemployment at a rate of 26.5%, followed by graduates at 17.9%, and women at 14.7%. 

The low level of qualification for the youth who are not in education, employment or training (NEET) 

confines them to precarious jobs with little pay and no future prospects (approximately two thirds of 

employees have no work contract and almost 78.4% have no health insurance). Similarly, the poor 

matching of training to employment is one of the causes of unemployment among graduates from non-

technical disciplines who predominantly come from the faculties of social sciences. Such graduates leave 

school with skills for which there is no demand in the domestic labour market and especially in the 

agricultural sector. Difficulties in ensuring the socio-professional integration of the youth prevent 

households from investing in education and fuel the school dropout rate.  

2.5.4  The agricultural sector employs 40% of the labour force and over 93.2% of the female 

labour force in rural areas, thus playing a major economic, social and environmental role.  The 

agricultural value added to the national economy increased by 13.5% in October 2017, thus by 3.9% year 

on year, compared to +1% during the same period in 2016 (HCP). In the third quarter of 2017, the 

agricultural sector (including fisheries and forestry) grew by 1.3%, creating a further 47,000 jobs 

nationally (40,000 in rural areas and 7,000 in urban areas), compared to losses of 75,000 jobs in 2014, 

27,000 in 2015 and 66,000 in 2016. The agro-industrial sector employed 143,000 people in 2016 with an 

output mainly destined for the domestic market. This sector has 2,050 industrial units composed largely 

of SMEs. Agricultural exports accounted for approximately 12% of all industrial goods exported in 2016. 

Hence, the sector accounted for 5% of national GDP in 2016, representing almost 27% of industrial GDP 

with a value added of approximately MAD 30 billion. 

2.5.5. Lastly, challenges in terms of gender inequality and the inclusion of small farmers in 

agricultural value chains persist. Women usually hold unskilled and non-permanent jobs with no 

social insurance. According to HCP data, over 93.2% of the rural female labour force is recruited by the 

agricultural sector, which often employs them as seasonal or occasional workers while men hold longer-

term jobs. Although the presence of women at decision-making levels is increasingly affirmed, women 

are still confined to labour-intensive manual tasks that require no special skills while men occupy the 

more skilled positions. These inequalities are also observed in income distribution because women earn 



 

5 
 

less than men and the number of women entrepreneurs in agricultural and agribusiness value chains 

remains insignificant. Unpaid employment is estimated to account for 40% of rural jobs (ILO 2014) and 

concerns 74% of the female labour force and 68% of young people aged below 25 years. These differences 

limit women's opportunities to access skills development and entrepreneurship, increase their 

vulnerability in the labour market and further relegate them to the informal sector. 

III. GOVERNMENT DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME 

3.1 Government’s Development Strategy and Medium-Term Reform Priorities 

3.1.1 Morocco has adopted a series of sector plans to accelerate growth, ensure sustainability 

and promote inclusion. The strategies marshalled are aimed at modernizing traditional sectors such as 

agriculture and fishing, and developing innovative sectors like renewable energy and services with high 

value added (industry, etc.). 

3.1.2 In 2008, the Government rolled out its 2030 Strategic Vision for the agricultural sector and 

initiated the Green Morocco Plan. The objective of the Plan is to boost agricultural productivity and 

increase exports and private investment in the sector. The Plan will help to combat poverty, ensure food 

security and equip the Kingdom with the skills needed to cope with vagaries of the weather and preserve 

its natural resources (water, soil and energy). 

3.1.3 The agricultural sector is also targeted by several other strategies. The National Industrial 

Acceleration Plan for 2014-2020 is aimed at integrating agricultural value chains to support the agri-food 

sector through the promotion and restructuring of strategic sectors (including staple food crops and export 

crops) by supporting the development of agropoles (integrated logistic platforms). Furthermore, the 

National Sustainable Development Strategy (SNDD) 2015-2030, the National Water Strategy 2009-2030 

and the National Energy Efficiency Strategy 2008-2030 focus on sustainable natural resource 

management and protection. Consequently, there is need for a systemic vision to support the 

sustainability and inclusion of the Green Morocco Plan Ecosystem. In this regard, PADIDFA, which 
is consistent with all the above strategies and with the Government Gender Equality Plan (GEP), 

advocates inter-sector coordination and is fully in line with the process of establishing the advanced 

regionalization system.  

3.2 Constraints to Implementation of the National/Sector Development Programme  

3.2.1 The growth diagnostic (conducted by the Bank in collaboration with the authorities and 

MCC) identifies poor coordination between economic stakeholders as one of the constraints to 

private investment. There are numerous public policies aimed at accelerating Morocco’s economic 

transformation and the development of value chains. However, the lack of coordination between public 

entities (agencies and ministries), private stakeholders (within value chains) and between the public and 

private sectors (promotion of trade agreements, for example) has a negative impact on the expected 

outcomes of public action. This problem is fundamental to agricultural development. The development of 

this sector requires support for concerted nationwide action at different levels, namely: (i) collaboration 

between the various departments of the Ministry of Agriculture; (ii) inter-ministerial coordination; and 

(iii) coordination between central and decentralized structures. For natural resources, such coordination 

involves the development of transversal governance and planning tools for the concerted monitoring of 

natural resource utilisation. 

3.2.2 The growth diagnostic identifies human capital as a major constraint to more inclusive and 

robust growth. The agricultural sector faces three major challenges: (1) the skills developed should be 

tailored to the needs of sector stakeholders - the involvement of inter-professional associations in the 

training cycle and the streamlining of higher education are essential in this case;  (2) research and 

development by public training-research structures must satisfy the needs of sector stakeholders; and (3) 

the adult population with a low human capital should not be excluded from value chain development. The 

development of human capital through agricultural vocational training in the regions is essential to 

improve the quality of the workforce, enhance salaried employment and promote self-employment. 



 

6 
 

Furthermore, there are other challenges to the encouragement of investment in agriculture, namely: (1) 

the low level of investment due to the fact that farm sizes in Morocco are limited by land tenure insecurity 

in rural areas as well as problems of joint ownership and fragmentation; (2) the lack of greater investor 

visibility in the agricultural sector; (3) the need for better promotion of recourse to PPPs; (4) the lack of 

dedicated logistics platforms that enable the private sector to develop synergies; (5) the lack of 

mechanisms that  enable small farmers to come together and offer a common service of sufficient 

magnitude to other stakeholders in the chain; and (6) the need to strengthen advisory services (with private 

initiatives) to support agricultural production (in terms of quality and quantity). 

3.2.3 Land tenure policy that facilitates investment in agriculture. Land tenure is one of the major 

obstacles that investors face. In particular, the growth diagnostic shows that the frequent lack of land titles 

in the agricultural sector limits investment by farmers and consequently undermines agricultural sector 

transformation.  Several projects have been initiated to address this constraint. One example is the public-

private partnership operation intended to make land of sufficient size available to private investors for a 

relatively long lease period. At the end of 2016, a surface area of 111,000 ha was made available to 

investors (particularly in the agropoles), who have ended up making actual investments of nearly MAD 

14 million on the ground; i.e. 95% of planned investments. Furthermore, to address the constraint of land 

fragmentation and improve the management of small farms, aggregation around private stakeholders or 

professional organizations with significant managerial capacity was adopted and implemented. This 

model yields a win-win partnership between the productive upstream and the commercial and industrial 

downstream.  

3.2.4 Resource overexploitation is a concern for Moroccan authorities. From an environmental 

standpoint, the agricultural sector is currently the bedrock of sustainable development in Morocco, given 

that it is the primary user of water and land resources, and one of the main users of energy resources 

directly (pumping, mechanical tools) or indirectly (fertilizers). In fact, agriculture uses 80 to 85% of the 

country's water resources. Another challenge for the sector is the achievement of sustainable growth 

through agriculture, considering the fragility of natural resources. This problem is even more acute as 

Morocco is encountering water stress. Rainfall is very low and the water is unevenly distributed among 

the various regions. The national water context is marked by increasingly growing scarcity, mainly due 

to climate change, irrational use and population growth. Morocco's natural water resources are among the 

lowest in the world.  This potential is estimated at the equivalent of 700 m3/inh./year and this quantity 

could drop to 520 m3, compared to the critical threshold of 1000 m3/inh./year. Therefore, it is necessary 

to manage water demand efficiently by planning investments, synchronizing with dam water resources, 

controlling water extraction and organizing stakeholders, while stimulating the search for new non-

conventional water resources. The issue of land and energy management, particularly the use of 

subsidized butane gas by this sector, is also the focus of attention. In this regard, there is a growing national 

advocacy for increased use of solar pumping. 

3.2.5 Finally, particular attention should be given to rural women, who hold 61% of jobs in the 

sector. The inclusive transformation of this sector is possible only if special attention is paid to rural 

women who are considered fragile stakeholders. 

3.3 Consultation and Participatory Process 

Stakeholders were actively involved in programme design through a participatory and inter-sector 

approach that allowed for consideration of views of various sectors and identification of potential 

convergences. The quest for ownership of measures informed programme design. Stakeholders 

concerned (various administrative entities, representatives of professionals, private operators, civil 

society, etc.) were involved throughout the process. This process was reinforced during the preparation 

phase through the organization of a consultation workshop with all stakeholders (seven administrative 

departments and representatives of inter-professional associations) to discuss the proposed measures, their 

relevance and impact. A workshop on the ownership of measures involving civil society and the private 

sector, organized during the appraisal, made it possible to agree on common ground, find a better basis 

for addressing the interests of stakeholders, and produce a validated matrix of measures and programme 

performance indicators. This consultation will be continued during implementation phase through the 

inter-sector steering committee. 



 

7 
 

IV. BANK SUPPORT FOR THE GOVERNMENT’S STRATEGY 

4.1. Linkage with the Bank Strategy  

4.1.1 This budget support programme falls under the second pillar of CSP 2017-2021 for 

Morocco, namely “improving living conditions through employment for the youth, women and 

rural areas”. It contributes to the achievement of three of the High 5s, namely: “Feed Africa”, “Integrate 

Africa” and "Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa". It pursues the green and inclusive 

growth objectives of the Bank's Ten-Year Strategy for 2013-2022 and is fully consistent with the 2016-

2025 Feed Africa Strategy (agricultural transformation through value chains development) as well as the 

Bank’s other sector strategies (including youth employment, the water and energy strategies, etc.). 

PADIDFA is also part of the Strategic Framework and Governance Action Plan 2014-2018 (GAP II). 

4.1.2  The Programme is justified by: (i) the importance of ensuring the sustainability of  

Morocco Green Plan (PMV) achievements and supporting its acceleration phase; (ii) the magnitude 

of the financial needs created by the reforms implemented by the PMV and associated sectors 

(environment, water, energy and employment); (iii) the urgency of instituting rational natural resource 

management (through operationalization of the National Sustainable Development Strategy (SNDD), the 

implementation of the Sustainable Development Action Plan (PADD) in the agricultural and associated 

sectors, management of the water stress and disruption of the water resources balance, and the insufficient 

development of agricultural products and clean energies); (iv) insufficient inclusive development (social 

inclusion based on age, gender and geography; insufficient creation of employment particularly in the 

agro-industry ecosystem, etc.); (v) poor promotion of value chains, limited empowerment of inter-

professional associations and low private sector involvement; and (vi) the urgency of addressing the 

demands of unemployed young graduates and marginalized rural women. The programme is also fully 

consistent with the advanced regionalization and inter-sector convergence process to sustain and support 

the impact of PMV and the PMV acceleration phase initiated in 2017. 

4.2. Compliance with Eligibility Criteria 

4.2.1  As presented in the previous chapters, Morocco enjoys a political and economic 

environment that is conducive to the use of the reform support instrument. The country has also 

demonstrated its commitment to the sector reform process, particularly in the agricultural sector (see 

Annexs 3 and 5). 

4.2.2  Furthermore, from the fiduciary standpoint, the country meets the eligibility criteria. The 

performance assessment results of Morocco’s PFM systems obtained in 2016 using the PEFA 

methodology (including public procurement) confirm that the country fiduciary risk level is moderate. 

According to the report, the main conditions for budgetary and financial discipline have been met, 

especially budget reliability and the achievement of set stability objectives. It specifies that more strategic 

public resource allocation remains a priority objective for the Government and that this objective is central 

to the reform programme currently being implemented. Lastly, it points out that the current public finance 

management system contributes only moderately to the improvement of public service quality, which is 

why the LOF introduces a performance-based approach and provides for objectives and indicators for 

measuring the quality of services. 

4.2.3 The public finance management and procurement framework has undergone significant 

reforms in recent years to attain international standards, as reflected in satisfactory fiduciary 

assessments conducted by the Bank and other partners. In particular, the Bank recently assessed 

Morocco's national public procurement system in November 2017 using the OECD/DAC methodology 

and the fiduciary risk for the procurement component at the national level was deemed moderate. The 

evaluation report of the national procurement system was validated with the participation of the major 

public procurement stakeholders and the key technical and financial partners. 

 

 



 

8 
 

4.3. Collaboration and Coordination with other Partners 

4.3.1 Since 2010, a donor coordination process has been conducted by the Ministry of 

Agriculture (Directorate for Strategy and Statistics-DSS) to coordinate PMV support. Regular 

meetings are held in the presence of technical and financial partners. The Bank plays an important role in 

this process through its country office (COMA). Hence, the design of PADIDFA was characterized by 

sustained consultation with the DSS and close coordination with partners, particularly the World Bank, 

the European Union, French Cooperation (AFD) and Belgian Cooperation (CTB). Considering the 

programming schedules, parallel financing was recommended. Furthermore, Moroccan authorities 

harmonize interventions through the MEF. The design of this programme took into consideration 

complementarity with the other TFPs, especially the World Bank, which operates in the same field. 

Additional measures were recommended, including processing zones, the establishment of an agricultural 

register and strengthening of agricultural extension (supported by the EU). 

4.3.2 In the water sector, coordination between the various donors is done through a thematic 

group established in 2011. This thematic group meets regularly to discuss sector trends, and to seek 

greater coordination and harmonization of sector interventions. The Bank has led this thematic group 

together with the AFD and the World Bank since 2016. 

4.3.3 In the areas of training and employment, the Working Group on Youth (2016) and donor 

coordination on education and training (initiated in 2008) are the discussion platforms for 

employment and training issues. The Bank actively participates in these working groups while 

harmonizing its interventions bilaterally with those of partners.  This coordination supplements the 

government’s consultative framework through annual consultation meetings and discussions on sector 

strategies that impact skills development and employment. 

4.4. Linkage with Other Bank Operations  

4.4.1 The Bank’s active portfolio in Morocco comprises 28 ongoing operations for a net 

commitment of UA 1.7 billion. The Bank’s overall portfolio performance remains satisfactory in 

general, with an average total score of 2.7 on 3 in 2017. The portfolio covers seven sectors: energy 

(35.4%), transport (23.5%), water and sanitation (16.7%), social (5.7%), agriculture (3.6%), and multi-

sector (15.1%). 

4.4.2 Promoting inclusive and green growth, and inclusive value chain development is a crucial 

issue of particular interest to the Bank. This programme is linked to the Bank's investment operations 

in Morocco, notably PAPNEEI, which supports the irrigation sector, as well as operations that promote 

renewable energies. The programme also consolidates budget support for reforms aimed at improving the 

business environment, boosting competitiveness (PACEM and PAAIM) and ensuring training-

employment matching (PAAFE). Furthermore, it supplements the two phases of the Green Morocco Plan 

Support Programme (PAPMV-1 & 2). The Bank also backs the establishment of a “Result Delivery Unit” 

within the Office of the Head of Government. Part of this support will be mobilized to monitor the results 

of SNDD implementation (see the measurement framework given as annex). 

Table 2 : Lessons learned from PAPMV-1 & 2 and previous Bank operations in Morocco 
Key lessons learned Measures taken to factor the lessons into the programme 

Adoption of an inter-sector approach to 

programme design that can generate institutional 

value added and rally stakeholders 

An inter-sector approach was adopted to promote additional synergies among 

the various departments and strategies. The programme identified areas of 

convergence and inter-sector interests. 

Importance of a collaborative approach and an 

inter-ministerial steering mechanism  

Programme design was conducted through grassroots consultation (organization 

of consultation workshop with stakeholders during the design phase) and the 

consolidation of the inter-ministerial steering committee was recommended. 

Ownership of measures guarantees 

sustainability 

Consideration was given to ownership of measures and provision made for the 

necessary support items (measurement forms, ownership workshop, 

consultative validation process, etc.).  

Enhance the management of preliminary 

dialogue to reduce the timeframe for adopting 

regulatory and legislative texts pertaining to 

stakeholder ownership 

Consideration was given to dialogue on ownership and measures were balanced, 

thus giving rise to texts containing direct action measures on the effective 

implementation of reforms. 

Need to sustain the PMV and strengthen water 

sector governance and regulation 

Provision was made for measures relating to the Supreme Council for Water and 

Climate (at the central level) and Water Basin Councils (at regional level). 



 

9 
 

4.4.3 Furthermore, the two PMV (PAPMV-I & 2) support phases generated conclusive results 

with highly satisfactory performance. The programme managed to satisfy virtually all the proposed 

measures through its two phases. Of the 56 measures planned under PAPMV-1, 45 were fully executed 

and 11 were partly implemented. At PAPMV-2 completion, a high implementation rate was recorded for 

the various measures (91%, or 30 out of the 33 scheduled measures plus two measures partly completed). 

For some measures, progress has been significant and achievements have exceeded set targets (national 

irrigation map, inter-sector coordination mechanism, institutional reform road map, measures to promote 

local products and organic production, agricultural insurance, support for the agricultural development 

fund, adoption of more than 10 laws, including those relating to aggregation, inter-professional 

associations, the private agricultural advisory services, water law, the law on organic production, the 

framework law on the environment and sustainable development, the law setting up ONCA, approval of 

the National Strategy for Sustainable Development by the Government Council, support for the 

establishment of four agropoles and one zoopole (livestock sub-sectors) development of the national agri-

food strategy and signing of framework programme contracts with inter-professional associations, etc.). 

The main lessons learned from PAPMV I and II were strategic and enhanced the design of PADIDFA 

(see Table 2 and more details in the technical annex). 

4.5. Analytical Work Underpinning the Budget Support 

Programme design was informed by the results of several analytical studies conducted by the Bank, 

the Government and technical and financial partners. The results of the Bank's 2014 growth 

diagnostic remain valid.  They highlight the economic and social role of the agricultural sector (almost 

40% of jobs, 61% of which are held by women). However, the report highlights several sector challenges, 

including: (a) human capital problems especially in rural areas; (b) microeconomic distortions and 

especially access to titled land; (c) lack of coordination among stakeholders, which impedes the promotion 

of value chains; and (d) the disturbing water resources situation. The approach advocated by the 

programme helps the authorities to resolve these challenges. Component I focuses on improving access 

to employment through value chain development (skills improvement, etc.), while Component II focuses 

on sustainable employment. Sector upgrade and stakeholder mobilization are crucial. Stakeholder 

coordination is central to this budget support, either to improve natural resource management (in particular 

water, soil and clean energy) or to structure and develop value chains. 

Table 3: List of AfDB Analytical Work (with partners) 
Studies Contribution to Programme Design 

Growth Diagnostic Identifies the major constraints to more robust and inclusive growth – 

particularly skills and land.  

Study on the development of Agri-food Processing 

Areas (ZTAA) 

Identifies opportunities for promoting various crop sectors and 

agricultural value chains. 

Strengthening agricultural value chains to feed Africa IDEV study recommends an appropriate scope and scale for DCVA 

interventions and profitability for all CV stakeholders.  

Agricultural production, food security and value added 

in North Africa 

Recommends an increase in the share of value added for farmers to 

strengthen food security, reduce poverty and create more jobs.  

Technical assistance on assessing the quality of 

vocational training centres  

Establishment of a reference framework for assessing quality and 

internal output of vocational training (delegated or through 

apprenticeship). 

Feasibility study on a centre of excellence for the 

promotion of entrepreneurship to support employability 

in North Africa 

Recommends the development of entrepreneurship through the 

generation/dissemination of knowledge and networking; support for 

resource mobilization and institutionalization of the platform. 

Technical assistance for development of the model in 

Morocco Attanmia Souk to boost youth and women’s 

entrepreneurship 

Recommends: (i) the improvement of access to funding and technical 

support for entrepreneurs; and (ii) strengthening of the ecosystem and of 

the entrepreneurial culture in Morocco with specific access for the youth 

and women. 

V.  PROPOSED PROGRAMME 

5.1. Programme Goal and Objective 

The programme objective is to help boost agricultural sector competitiveness to ensure inclusive 

and sustainable economic growth through the promotion of value chains, job creation, 

improvement of the business climate and sustainable natural resource management. The programme 

is intended to support the Green Morocco Plan 2008-2020, mainly in terms of the acceleration and 



 

10 
 

sustainability of achievements as well as the strategies of associated sectors (National Sustainable 

Development Strategy, National Water Strategy, Energy Strategy, National Employment Strategy and 

Industrial Acceleration Strategy). Hence, PADIDFA will help to: (i) support the PMV ecosystem and 

amplify its impact; (ii) promote the inclusion of vulnerable stakeholders (especially the youth and 

women); and (iii) build agricultural sector resilience. It is an important institutional lever for creating 

synergies between strategies governing agriculture, the environment, water, energy and employment. 

5.2. Programme Components 

5.2.1 The creation, sustainability and improvement of employment quality in agricultural sub-

sectors are essential to the reduction of multidimensional poverty in rural areas and thus remains 

the focus of national concerns. Based on data from the 2014 population census, the number of people 

living in multidimensional poverty rose from 80% in 2004 to 85.6%. Hence, among the 3.9 million poor 

Moroccans identified through the multidimensional poverty mapping exercise conducted in 2014, over 3 

million live in rural areas. Therefore, the development of agricultural value chains remains a major 

challenge for their socioeconomic integration. PADIDFA supports a series of medium- and short-term 

strategic reforms to improve the quality of life for the people through quality jobs and self-employment 

in rural areas, and the protection of such jobs through sustainable natural resource management.  

Component I: Support to Job Creation through the Development of Agricultural and Agro-Industrial 

Sub-sectors 

5.2.2 This component seeks to lay the institutional and operational foundations for the inclusive 

development of agricultural sub-sectors in Morocco, which create better quality jobs that particularly 

benefit women and the youth in rural areas. Job creation will be enhanced through: (i) skills development; 

(ii) improvement of the business climate and support to agricultural entrepreneurship; (ii) structuring of 

agricultural and agribusiness sub-sectors; and (iv) support for agricultural produce processing. 

Sub-Component I.1: Skills Development to Ensure Access to Employment in the Agricultural and 

Agro-Industrial Value Sub-sectors 

5.2.3 Problems and Constraints. Despite the considerable investments in human resource training 

under the PMV, the skills and qualifications deficit continues to limit access to employment.  This deficit 

also affects the productivity and competitiveness of agricultural enterprises, and reduces the potential of 

agro-industrial exports, de facto affecting job creation. Hence, the problem is twofold.  According to 

businesses, difficulties pertaining to unreliable access to quality raw materials, informal processing in 

production processes, product selection and packaging as well as poor traceability and certification partly 

stem from the lack of technical skills at the grassroots to ensure quality-at-entry, especially for products 

coming from cooperatives and small farmers. This situation further limits access to large markets and the 

creation of supplementary value added. Similarly, the limited access of agri-food VSEs and SMEs to 

business support services and highly-qualified personnel hampers quality improvement and an increase 

in product value added. The insufficient number of trainers, the quality of training programmes and the 

limited involvement of inter-professional associations are major challenges to be met in the medium term. 

5.2.4. Recent Action by the Government. Training and research are major levers of the Green 

Morocco Plan to: (i) support the development of agricultural value chains by providing a skilled workforce 

and anticipating skills needs in the medium term; and (ii) build the capacity of structures responsible for 

the national agricultural training and research system. The government has established an agricultural 

vocational training scheme with 52 schools covering all regions of the Kingdom to satisfy the demand for 

skilled labour in the various sub-sectors, boost their competitiveness and promote the socio-professional 

integration of rural youth. The new and current modes of work-related vocational training and 

apprenticeship partly meet the needs of the production sectors retained under the Green Morocco Plan but 

still fail to achieve the objectives of the Green Morocco Plan quantitatively and qualitatively, and meet 

the emerging rapidly evolving inter-professional needs. 



 

11 
 

5.2.5. Programme Activities and Expected Outcomes. To meet the demand for training skills in the 

medium and long term, the programme will support: (i) the extension of the agricultural apprenticeship 

training mechanism; and (ii) the strengthening of research and development in partnership with 

universities, inter-professional associations and the private sector. In this regard, the following measures 

will be taken: (1) the establishment and operationalization of the Centre for Pedagogical Engineering and 

Training of Trainers; (2) the opening of an additional centre for local agricultural vocational training; (3) 

signature of the amendment to the delegated management agreement on the livestock production zoopole; 

(4) signature of an implementation agreement between the Vocational Training Department and the 

Ministry of Agriculture to increase the number of apprentices in agricultural apprenticeship training 

programmes; (5) launching of a call for projects under the competitive fund to focus research more on the 

needs of inter-professional associations with the greater involvement of universities and the private sector; 

(5) production of JCF and DJT for the agricultural sector; and (6) creation and establishment of vocational 

guidance centres in rural areas. Yearly, these actions will lead to the training and qualification of nearly 

300 trainers and 2,600 young agricultural workers or technicians, and the certification of approximately 

10,000 farmers’ daughters and sons who would receive apprenticeship training. These are work-based 

short-term training courses (10 months) that yield a vocational qualification in about 30 professions 

leading to recruitment in agricultural enterprises or to self-employment (see Annex - Volume 2). 

Sub-component I.2: Improvement of the Investment Climate, Access to Employment and 

Entrepreneurship for Rural Youth and Women 

5.2.6. Problems and Constraints. As indicated in paragraph 3.2.3, the growth assessment shows that 

the frequent absence of land titles in the agricultural sector limits farmer investments and consequently 

agricultural sector transformation. In terms of financing, ignorance of the existing mechanisms and limited 

access to seed loans remain the major challenges for agricultural entrepreneurs. Despite their diversity, 

existing financing instruments are often unknown to rural youth and are intended more for project 

proponents who demonstrate maturity and experience in agricultural value chains and who present robust 

and bankable business plans. This raises the problem of a deficit in entrepreneurial culture and education 

as well as in long-term quality technical support. However, most young people embarking on agricultural 

entrepreneurship do not have the requisite technical skills to ensure the success of their businesses due to 

a lack of training, social capital and an entrepreneurial culture. The establishment of an environment 

conducive to dynamic, integrated and quality support for entrepreneurs as well as market access for young 

farmers remain a priority. 

5.2.7  Recent Measures Adopted by the Government. To overcome the major financing challenge, 

the Moroccan Government has developed a range of tools for start-ups through the establishment of 

competitive funds and guarantee mechanisms for independent entrepreneurs, start-ups and VSEs/SMEs. 

The State also supports several promising incubator/accelerator programmes including Réseau 

Entreprendre Network, Eirene 4 Impact, Espace Bidaya which target innovative start-ups with high 

potential, and Dare INC which supports social enterprises from ideation to growth and international 

markets. However, the pilot nature of these programmes and limited access opportunities for rural youth 

reduce their potential impact on self-employment, owing to the remote location of these youth and 

concentration of the programmes in large urban centres. The State has also undertaken to formulate a legal 

framework that grants access to work and income-generation opportunities to the most isolated rural 

communities.  

5.2.8  Programme Activities and Expected Outcomes. To facilitate investment, the programme will 

help to secure agricultural land mainly through: (1) transmission of the law on the National Agricultural 

Register (RNA) to the SGG; and (2) transmission to the SGG of the four decrees implementing Law No. 

113-13 on the management of pastoral and sylvo-pastoral areas. In particular, the programme supports 

the promotion and active participation of young people and women in the development of agricultural and 

agro-industrial sectors through reforms and affirmative employment initiatives that favour rural women 

and youth, including greater access to active employment programmes. Specifically, the programme will 

support the establishment of an entrepreneurial and employment support ecosystem to inform, guide and 

accompany young people and women wishing to invest in agricultural sub-sectors. It will also support 

businesses in the various sub-sectors in general. This entails: (3) implementing a national plan for the 



 

12 
 

establishment of regional agricultural incubators; (4) drafting and implementing a framework agreement 

with COMADER on agricultural advisory services, training and support for farmers; (5) transforming the 

framework agreement into specific agreements; (6) conducting a gender diagnostic in two vocational 

training establishments; (7) conducting a study on women’s entrepreneurship; and (8) drafting and 

signature of a partnership agreement between DIAEA and ONCA for the development of agricultural 

advisory services in irrigation areas. 

Sub-Component I.3: Support for Structuring of Agricultural Sub-sectors, Processing of 

Agricultural Products, and Development of Agro-Industry and Exports  

5.2.9. Problems and Constraints. The agricultural sector needs to develop its value chains and boost 

its competitiveness, sustainability and productivity to meet national and export needs for products with 

comparative advantages and to generate more jobs. Despite the economic performance of the sector, 

Moroccan agriculture still faces challenges in developing its agricultural products, especially on the 

international scene. Although commendable efforts have concentrated on upstream production 

(modernization and upgrading of facilities, improvement of production and productivity), focus should 

shift to the processing and enhancement of agricultural products (agribusiness, etc.). There is need to 

develop processing and logistics platforms to accommodate agro-industrial processing units. Similarly, 

agro-industry support structures for ensuring compliance with standards, particularly those responsible 

for the promotion of Moroccan agricultural and agri-food exports, such as ONSSA (National Authority 

for the Health Safety of Food Products), still face a legislative deficit in certain areas. Consequently, the 

regulations must be reviewed and/or enhanced to create a conducive framework for the upgrade of 

agricultural products in order to boost their marketing and export value and volume.  

5.2.10. Recent Measures Adopted by the Government. In a bid to consolidate the achievements of 

PMV 2 and promote the inclusive development of agricultural sectors, Morocco has embarked on a 

thorough effort to restructure inter-professional associations covering 21 sub-sectors and ensure the 

formal recognition of 14 inter-professional associations. To accelerate agro-industry development and 

boost exports, Morocco has embarked on the implementation of an Agro-food Sector Development 

Strategy covering promotion, export and distribution on the domestic market. A programme contract for 

the agri-food industry was signed for the period 2017-2021. This contract is intended to increase turnover, 

exports and value added in the sector. It specifically targets the promotion of certain agri-food sectors (the 

CP forecasts an investment volume of MAD 12 billion, including MAD 8 billion to be borne by the private 

sector). Similarly, the 2014-2020 Industrial Acceleration Plan was implemented in the Souss-Massa 

region in January 2018 and 8 agreements were signed on that occasion, thus creating a competitive 

economic hub. The Ministry of Agriculture, Maritime Fisheries, Rural Development, Water and Forestry 

is also planning to set up Agro-Food Innovation Centres (CIAA). Moreover, two of the seven agropoles 

scheduled under the Green Morocco Plan are already operational (Meknes and Berkane). These agropoles 

are expected to be a major lever for the agricultural sector. They seek to enhance the processing and 

marketing of agricultural products by providing a framework for the integration of all the segments of the 

value chain. Finally, ONSSA (National Office for the Health Safety of Food Products) set up in 2010 

under the PMV and under the supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture, is continuing its efforts to 

promote agri-food product exports.  

5.2.11 Programme Activities and Expected Outcomes. This sub-component is intended to develop 

Agro-food Processing Zones (ZTAA) while improving standards to boost exports especially to the rest of 

Africa. There is a dual social inclusion challenge at this level, namely: ensuring the transformation of very 

small agricultural enterprises and increasing the qualitative participation of small farmers in value chains. 

Therefore, the programme will support the development of inclusive mechanisms that ensure the 

participation and equitable remuneration of these vulnerable groups through a unified and more inclusive 

vision of value chains, including increased and improved access to production resources, markets and 

social coverage for agricultural workers. It provides for: (1) support for the creation and revitalization of 

agricultural cooperatives; (2) publication of the decree introducing the new FDA subsidy rates for 

agricultural processing units; (3) revision of legal instruments developing new legislation in the field of 

food safety – ONSSA’s legal arsenal (involvement of various structures in control activities; supervision 

of professionals; pesticides; exports; plant health; fertilizers); (5) drafting and transmission to the SGG of 



 

13 
 

new sanitary instruments governing the export of poultry products and preparation of terms of reference 

(CPS). These measures will support small producers, facilitate the processing of agricultural products and 

accelerate agricultural exports through the improvement of standards. 

Component II: Support Lasting Rural Employment through Sustainable Natural Resource 

Utilisation by the Sector 

5.2.12 This second component targets the long-term protection of jobs created in the agricultural sector 

through promotion of sustainable natural resource management (especially water) by the agricultural 

sector, and encouragement of renewable energy usage in rural areas.  

Sub-component II.1: Strengthen Sustainable Development Governance 

5.2.13 Problems and Constraints. As in other countries in the region, promoting green governance in 

Morocco is now an absolute priority for meeting the challenges posed by climate change in particular. 

Nevertheless, these challenges must be addressed as part of an inter-sector approach that includes the 

agricultural sector. Coordination around these objectives is crucial to the protection of created rural area 

jobs that are threatened by dwindling resource availability. 

5.2.14 Recent Measures Adopted by the Government. Morocco also played a major role on the 

international scene by undertaking to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions under COP 21 and organizing 

COP 22 in 2016, which included water resources on its agenda.  For COP 21, Morocco undertook to 

reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 13% before 2030. This target could be raised to 32% if international 

funds (estimated at USD 45 billion) are mobilized. As regards climate change mitigation, 50% of the 

projects focus on energy. They include: (i) the determination to increase the share of renewable energy in 

the installed electricity capacity from 34% in 2015 to 42% by 2020; and (ii) the improvement of energy 

efficiency. As regards adaptation, the programme includes: (i) the substitution of overexploited 

groundwater with surface water; and (ii) the acceleration of desalination programmes, construction of 

dams and recycling of wastewater by 2030. Water conservation is an essential pillar that can be developed 

through appropriate technologies and improved efficiency in usage. The National Sustainable 

Development Strategy (SNDD) was drawn up and presented to the Government Council on 1 June 2017, 

and adopted by the Council of Ministers of 25 June 2017. It received backing under the second phase of 

the Bank's support to the Green Morocco Plan (2015-2017). This strategy seeks to achieve Morocco's 

vision of a green and inclusive economy by 2030. In total, seven major challenges have been identified 

as pillars and have been broken down into 31 strategic sub-pillars and 137 objectives with precise 

indicators. This makes it a reference and convergence tool for various public policies aimed at ensuring 

Morocco's sustainable development. Thus, the Sector Sustainable Development Action Plans (PADD) 

specifying the contribution of each department to the implementation of this Strategy, as well as the 

Action Plan relating to State exemplariness have been drafted. To achieve these objectives, a governance 

framework is being established that comprises two committees: a Strategic Committee that has a policy 

and guidance role, and a Steering Committee that has an operational role. 

5.2.15 Programme Activities and Expected Outcomes: In a bid to support the operationalization of 

the SNDD, promote green governance and give impetus to a new inter-sector governance drive, the 

programme proposes the following measures: (1) Publication of the decree creating the Sustainable 

Development Strategy Committee in the Official Gazette; (2) Validation of at least four Sustainable 

Development Action Plans (PADD) in 2019; and (3) Design of a monitoring and evaluation system for 

the SNDD in 2019. The expected outcomes from implementing these measures are: (i) the scheduling of 

meetings of the strategic committee; (ii) the drafting and adoption of a ministerial order institutionalizing 

the steering committee mentioned in Article 6 of Decree No. 655 to create the strategic committee for 

implementing the SNDD; (iii) implementation of the PADDs of four sectors validated in 2019; (iv) 

strengthening of the steering and of the monitoring/evaluation strategy as well as improvement of 

decision-making.   



 

14 
 

Sub-Component II.2: Improvement of Water Resource Management to Mitigate the Water Stress 

and Boost Sustainability  

5.2.16 Problems and Constraints. The renewable water resource rate is less than 600 m3/person/year 

(the critical threshold being 1000 m3/person/year). Although drinking water production increased fivefold 

over the past three decades, the 145 dams have a storage capacity that is below the population's annual 

water consumption. Climate trends in the sub-region are disturbing due to declining rainfall estimated at 

30% by 2050. This pressure on water resources is compounded by the development of irrigation (1.5 

million hectares), although efforts are underway to convert large-scale conventional irrigation systems to 

drip irrigation.  In response, Morocco has initiated the development of non-conventional resources such 

as seawater or wastewater. The adoption of an integrated approach to ensure water resource sustainability 

is crucial to the development of sustainable and job-creating agriculture. 

5.2.17  Recent Measures Adopted by the Government. The National Water Sector Strategy 

formulated in 2009 is the strategic framework followed by: (i) the National Water Plan - PNE (focusing 

on demand management, especially demand for irrigation and water development); (ii) supply 

management and development (including non-conventional resources); and (iii) water resource 

conservation and adaptation to climate change. With the Bank's support, under PAPMV-2, the 

Government adopted a new Water Law in 2015 (Law No. 36-15), which introduced innovations in water 

planning, water governance and adaptation to climate change. 

5.2.18  Programme Activities and Expected Outcomes: The proposed measures are essentially aimed 

at implementing the new Water Law through promulgation of its main implementing instruments. These 

measures are: (1) transmission to the SGG of the decree governing the Supreme Council for Water 

Resources and Climate; (2) as regards water resource planning: transmission to the SGG of implementing 

decrees relating to: (i) planning documents (National Water Plan, Integrated Water Resource Management 

Master Plan, Local Water Management Plans); (ii) the water basin boards (including the publication of 

the decree governing water basin agencies in the Official Gazette) and (iii) Presentation of the PNE to the 

Interministerial Water Commission; (3) as regards the water information system: preparation of the decree 

relating to the Water Information System, preparation of the reference frameworks for agricultural water 

needs per region for rational use of irrigation water. To improve adaptation to climate change, regional 

vulnerability indices and Regional Climate Change Adaptation Plans for three pilot regions should be 

developed.  These actions will strengthen the legal framework for planning and governance for the 

concerted, territorialized and sustainable use of water resources. These actions will also help to build 

stakeholder resilience to climate change. 

Sub-component II.3: Support for Energy Transition in the Agricultural Sector 

5.2.19 Problems and Constraints. Faced with the challenges of climate change and the energy bill, a 

drive is already underway to use renewable energies, especially solar pumps, in agriculture. However, 

this drive remains essentially limited to large farmers. Small farmers are still difficult to reach, mainly 

because funding problems force them to rely on butane gas, which is still subsidized. Butane gas is 

frequently used to pump irrigation water and its consumption has even attained alarming proportions for 

some crops, thus putting pressure on the compensation fund (for 2017, a structural increase in butane gas 

compensation was noted, with a total subsidization cost of over MAD 9.9 billion in 2017 compared to 

MAD 6.7 billion in 2016). In the agri-food industry, additional efforts are also needed to reduce the energy 

bill of agri-food companies. Hence, public authorities should support increased energy development for 

agricultural holdings and agro-industrial units.  Furthermore, the development of agro-industry and 

irrigation systems generates a certain amount of waste (plastics, agricultural product processing by-

products, etc.) that is beginning to increase in volume and needs to be treated and recycled to avoid 

environmental pollution and contribute to job creation. 

5.2.20 Recent Measures Adopted by the Government. Morocco has a clear desire to optimize its 

economy through the adoption of energy efficiency in several sectors (with agriculture included among 

the five priority sectors). This drive is essentially based on the National Energy Efficiency Strategy for 

2030, which seeks to achieve a renewable energy share of 52% instead of 34% in 2015. This strategy 

provides for the adoption of a programme contract between the State, the Moroccan Energy Efficiency 



 

15 
 

Agency (AMEE) and priority sectors (industry, construction, agriculture, transport and public 

electrification). Crédit Agricole du Maroc (CAM) introduced a special financial product (called 

“EcoTaqa”) to finance initiatives that promote renewable energy. Through its Nationally Determined 

Contribution (NDC), Morocco has undertaken to cut its greenhouse gas emissions by 42% of projected 

emissions by 2030. The use of solar energy in the agricultural sector is a highly publicized strategy (solar 

pumping is part of the energy efficiency programme contract). In this regard and in partnership with 

GEF/UNDP, AMEE has launched the “Development of photovoltaic pumping systems for irrigation” 

project, which is part of implementation of Morocco’s commitments to develop renewable energy and 

combat climate change. For the climate change adaptation component, Morocco has adopted a National 

Climate Change Adaptation Plan and drawn up a green sectors promotion plan under the law on waste 

management (adopted in 2006).  

5.2.21 Programme Activities and Expected Outcomes. The programme provides for the following 

measures: (i) Presentation of the Energy Efficiency Strategy to the Government Council (by 2030); (ii) 

conduct of the strategic study and provision of mechanisms to support the promotion of solar pumping; 

and (iii) preparation of a skills directory for energy auditors to support the energy optimization for farms 

and agro-industrial units. These measures will promote renewable energy and energy efficiency, and 

facilitate butane substitution in the agricultural sector. 

5.3. Policy Dialogue 

The Government is moving towards the PMV acceleration phase by 2020 following the mid-term 

evaluation of the Plan. The major themes to be addressed in the policy dialogue during the programme 

implementation period are: (i) inter-sector coordination; (ii) sustainable natural resource management 

(reforms related to agricultural water use, agricultural land tenure, renewable energy support, energy 

efficiency and agricultural institutions); (iii) capacity-building (agricultural register, monitoring system, 

private agricultural advisory services, empowerment of inter-professional associations, competitive 

agricultural research mechanisms); (iv) development of green sectors and of the circular economy; and 

(v) the promotion of agro-industry and value chains. Furthermore, policy dialogue will be conducted in 

coordination with development partners, through the existing PMV thematic support group and under the 

G20 Compact with Africa programme.  

5.4. Loan Conditions  

Preliminary Measures - Triggers: Dialogue with the Government led to the identification of relevant 
measures that can support the programme and which the Government has undertaken to implement. These 

preliminary measures were selected based on their maturity status, relevance and significance. They are 

summed up in the table below: 

Table 4: Preliminary measures - Triggers 

Component Preliminary measures  

Measure 1 Publication in the OG of the Decree setting up the Sustainable Development Strategy Committee  

Evidence: Copy of decree published in the OG 

Measure 2 Draft decree on the composition and operation of the Higher Council for Water Resources and Climate 

Evidence: Copy of the letter of transmission to the SGG 

Measure 3 Start of construction work on a local agricultural vocational training centre 

Evidence: Copy of the service order launching the works 

5.5. Good Practice Principles for the Application of Conditionality  

The five good practice principles for the application of conditionality were factored into the 

programme design in accordance with the Bank's policy governing programme-based support 

operations (PBO), namely: (i) strengthening of national ownership by emphasizing on dialogue with the 

Government throughout the design and implementation of the Bank’s CSP 2017-2021 for Morocco in 

general, and the budget support programme in particular, due to the fact that PADIDFA was designed 

with the active collaboration of the authorities: (ii) the existence of a coordination drive initiated between 

TFPs; (iii) alignment of the Bank's support procedures on national priorities, including the priorities of 

the PMV acceleration phase 2017-2020 and the strategies of associated sectors; (iv) the targeting and 



 

16 
 

streamlining of disbursement measures and conditions resulting from the matrix developed in close 

coordination and cooperation with Moroccan authorities; and (v) alignment of Bank support with the 

country’s budget cycle, especially for FY 2018 and 2019 and the 2018 Budget Act. 

5.6. Financing Needs and Mechanisms  

5.6.1 The 2018 Budget Act provided for a budget of MAD 276.1 billion compared to MAD 285.6 

billion in 2017. This decrease stems from the reduction in operating expenses pursuant to the restrictive 

policy adopted by the Kingdom since 2012. Capital expenditure increased slightly by MAD 2.4 billion. 

According to the Budget Act, the overall financing requirement for 2018 is estimated at MAD 33.3 

billion or approximately EUR 3 billion. Nearly 57% of these needs will be covered by domestic loans 

and 43% by external loans, representing EUR 1.3 billion. The increased recourse to domestic borrowing 

is consistent with the Kingdom's prudent debt management policy. This debt allocation enables Morocco 

to hedge against exogenous shocks, especially against exchange rate risks. PADIDFA will be 
implemented in two tranches of EUR 100 million. In 2018 and 2019, the Bank's budget support will 

cover 3.4% of total budget financing needs (4.5% of the external financing need in 2018). AfDB financing 

will cover 3% of the current account financing requirement in 2018, helping to stabilize external debt by 

preserving foreign exchange reserves.  

Table 5: Projected Financing Needs and Sources in MAD/USD Million (Source: LOF 2018; IMF 2017) 

 

Items  

2018 

(MAD 

million) 

2018  

(EUR 

million) 

2019 

(MAD 

million) 

2019  

(EUR 

million) 

A Total revenue and grants  236 800 20 899 241 282 21 295 

  Including: non-tax revenue (excluding budget support) 22 000 1 942 14 700 1 297 

B Total expenditure and net loans  276 100 24 368 278 802 24 606 

  Including: public debt interest payments 27 100 2 392 29 036 2 563 

C including investment expenditure (*) 60 300 5 322 63 623 5 615 

D Special account 6 000 530 5 000 441 

E Net financing requirement (commitment basis) (A-B+D) -33 300 -2 939 -32 520 -2 870 

F Gross external funding 25 000 2 206 10 000 883 

M Including external AfDB funding 8 100 715 8227 726 

F Amortization 16 900 1 492 1 773 156 

I Net external financing (E-F) 1 133 100 1 133 100 

J Net domestic financing 16 400 1 447 30 747 2 714 

K Residual financing gap (E+I+J) 0 0 0 0 

VI. PROGRAMME IMPLEMENTATION 

6.1. Programme Beneficiaries  

PADIDFA will benefit the Moroccan population in general, and the youth and women in the rural areas 

in particular. It will specifically benefit: (i) local councils; (ii) inter-professional associations and 

professional organizations; (iii) agricultural VSMEs and organizations (crop sectors, waste management, 

etc.); (iii) the private sector (training, research, private agricultural councils, etc.); (iv) project proponents 

and young agricultural and rural entrepreneurs due to improvement of the business environment; and (v) 

women's associations and rural women (access to value chains, land tenure security, local services, etc.).  

6.2. Impact on the Environment and Climate Change  

6.2.1 Environmental Impact. The programme concerns the implementation of sector reforms and 

will not have any direct or indirect negative impact on the natural environment. Consequently, in 

accordance with Bank guidelines, it is classified in environmental and social category 3. It will enhance 

environmental protection through: (i) improvement of the environmental and social performance of 



 

17 
 

agricultural activities through the development and popularization of tools; (ii) promotion of resilient and 

sustainable agriculture through operationalization of the National Sustainable Development Strategy 

(2015-2030), particularly in the agricultural sector; and (iii) rational management and protection of water 

resources. 

6.2.2 Climate Change. The programme will have a positive impact by promoting the establishment 

of a legal, institutional and organizational framework that facilitates the development of climate change 

mitigation and adaptation measures. Accordingly, it will significantly contribute to the reduction of GHG 

emissions resulting from irrigation activities by replacing diesel and/or gas-powered pumps with solar 

pumps. It will also enable Morocco to play its role under the Paris Agreement and the Nagoya Protocol. 

6.2.3 Social and Gender Impact. Given the social objectives of the programme, social risks are 

virtually non-existent since the programme will ensure the social protection of rural communities and the 

promotion of Moroccan youth and women. In particular, it will focus on: (i) youth and women’s 

integration through the creation, preservation and quality improvement of employment in agricultural 

value chains; (ii) the definition of a framework for protecting and developing agricultural value chains; 

(iii) the inclusion and strengthening of the resilience of women small-scale farmers under the general 

drive to boost the productivity and competitiveness of agricultural businesses. In addition to the 21 inter-

professional associations identified, the programme will benefit young people, particularly women under 

35 who are likely to be absorbed into agricultural value chains as self-employed entrepreneurs, farm 

employees, members of cooperatives or farmer's daughters/sons wishing to perpetuate their family 

farming business. The programme targets 20,000 young people who will benefit from agricultural training 

or support services in rural entrepreneurship.  Besides, the economic empowerment activities of the inter-

professional associations and the signing of delegated training management agreements will improve the 

productivity of their members and develop their marketing and market integration skills at the national 

and international level. The programme will also facilitate the integration of out-of-school youth into rural 

family homes and agricultural apprenticeship training centres where they will be trained in various trades, 

including agricultural production, processing and marketing techniques.  Finally, the programme will 

support the development and implementation of an action plan for women's entrepreneurship that will 

help, in the medium term, to eliminate the major constraints that still hinder the full commitment and 

economic empowerment of women in promising agricultural sectors. 

6.3. Impact in Other Areas  

6.3.1 Apart from the major impacts cited, the programme will support South-South cooperation 

with other African countries. Strategic value chains are likely to initiate and consolidate this cooperation 

(e.g. poultry, olive, red meat, milk, etc.) as well as capacity-building activities on training by inter-

professional structures (e.g. the Casablanca zoopole which is a PPP success story).  

6.3.2 The programme can also generate an impact in other areas, such as regional integration 

(development of regional agricultural trade and exports), food security (increase in agricultural production 

and product development), skills development in the various value chains, agricultural entrepreneurship 

(PMV stakeholders) and the development of private initiatives (resulting from the initiatives of inter-

professional associations, promotion of the circular economy and waste management, etc.). It also targets 

synergy between PAIIM (general budget support) and PADIDFA (sector budget support). 

6.4. Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation  

6.4.1. As was the case for PAPMV-I & II, the programme executing agency will be the 

Directorate for Strategy and Statistics (DSS) in the Ministry of Agriculture. As far as inter-sector 

measures are concerned, the Budget Directorate will be charged with the strategic coordination of the 

programme.  Based on the results recorded, these directorates are qualified and have the required skills. 

The programme provides for the establishment of technical coordination within the Ministry of 

Agriculture and a strategic committee within MEF. The Bank adopts an approach that stimulates synergies 

between the various sector strategies, ensures stakeholder involvement and strengthens the 

complementarity of donor interventions. Special attention will be given to results-based management. 

This operation is of particular interest to seven ministries, namely: (i) MEF (DB); (ii) MA (DSS, DIAEA, 



 

18 
 

DF, DDFP, DEFR, ORMVA); (iii) the sector ministries in charge of water resources, the environment, 

energy and employment and vocational training; and (iv) the inter-professional associations concerned. 

Local involvement is reflected through local structures such as ORMVA, the WBAs and ONCA’s and 

DEFR’s decentralized agencies, etc. 

6.4.2. The matrix of measures agreed upon with the Government and the Performance Measurement 

Framework will serve as PADIDFA’s monitoring/evaluation tools (Annex 2). The MA will collect data, 

coordinate monitoring/evaluation and provide information to the Bank through MEF. In this regard, it 

will produce half-yearly reports providing necessary information on programme’s progress. Supervision 

missions are planned during the implementation phase to assess progress. The Bank's country office will 

continuously monitor the implementation of programme reforms. At programme completion, the 

Government will prepare and submit a completion report to the Bank. That report will serve as the basis 

for organizing the programme completion mission. 

6.5. Financial Management, Disbursements and Procurement 

6.5.1. The ERFP or CFRA was conducted by the Bank in September 2016 through a review of 
Morocco's public finance management. It concluded that the overall fiduciary country risk is moderate, 

thanks to the generally satisfactory public finance management processes. The September 2016 PEFA 

report confirms this finding because Morocco obtained the following 30 ratings out of 31 public finance 

management performance indicators: 5 As, 14 Bs and B+, 5 Cs, 6 Ds and D+.  

6.5.2  The outcomes of these assessments confirmed Morocco's implementation and execution of the 

reforms set out in LOLF No. 130-13 of 2 June 2015. These include strengthening public management 

performance through a programme budget; establishing principles and rules on the financial balance of 

the Budget Act; ensuring public finance transparency; and increasing the role of Parliament in budget 

discussions and public finance control. On this subject, Morocco has initiated a major reform 

implementation drive through a progressive and evolutionary approach. Some reforms have been 

implemented and others are underway. However, the challenge remains optimizing the functional 

organization of MEF to improve reform implementation, which has generated an ongoing study. Fiduciary 

risks relating to the management of programme fund flows are low at Bank-Al-Maghrib, which holds the 

Single Treasury Account.  Budget appropriations management mechanisms are in place in the sector 

ministries involved in the programme and remain under the supervision of the internal and external State 

control bodies. Although these ministries have sector strategies, the strategies are sometimes not fed with 

sufficient data. Due to the weaknesses noted, an LOF training plan is organized for the sectors by the 

Budget Sub-Directorate.  

6.5.3 Considering Morocco’s fiduciary country risk level, the vast public finance management 

reform drive and the fiduciary assessment of the sectors concerned, the programme’s overall fiduciary 

risk is also moderate.  Capacity-building needs were expressed in the areas of triennial budgetary 

programming, programme evaluation, performance measurement, risk mapping package, procedures 

manual and control system, etc.  

6.5.4. Financial Management and Disbursement Mechanisms. MEF will manage the fiduciary 

aspects of the operation.  By its very nature, the operation will help to cover the 2018 and 2019 budget 

deficits, subject to the Borrower meeting its general and specific conditions. Programme funds will be 

tracked through the budget revenue circuit on external funding and in accordance with national regulations 

governing public finance management. The accounting regarding the funds will be based on the budget 

revenue nomenclature. At the Borrower's request, the Bank will make disbursements in two tranches in 

accordance with principles of fungibility (single till) and the single treasury account. Each year, the 

Moroccan Government tables the Audited Budget (“Loi de Règlement”) (BRL) on the execution of the 

Budget Act (FL) before Parliament in the first quarter of year n+2. This BRL is accompanied by the report 

of the Court of Auditors on the implementation of the FL and the general statement of conformity. The 

IGF will carry out the specific audit of programme fund flows and performance audit because of its 

proven experience in auditing the Moroccan PBOs financed by the Bank. The ToRs for the specific audit 

of fund flows were be drawn up by the IGF and discussed with the Bank. The time limit for submission 

of the audit report to the Bank will be six months from closure of the programme. The programme could 

be subject to fiduciary supervision.  



 

19 
 

6.5.5 Public Procurement Trends and Reforms. The national public procurement system made 

remarkable progress with the installation in January 2018 of members of the National Public Procurement 

Commission (CNCP), which is responsible for investigating complaints from competitors concerning 

public procurement and issuing legal opinions on disputes between public procurement holders and the 

Administration concerning the application of the regulations governing public procurement. In a bid to 

further improve public procurement transparency, the following key actions will be implemented by the 

National Public Procurement Commission (CNCP): (i) creation and commencement of trials for the 

effective operationalization of the CNCP website; (ii) preparation of the Ethics Charter, the internal rules 

of the Commission (including for ad hoc experts), the procedures manual per mission (processing of 

complaints, request and analysis of opinions, standing committees); and (iii) preparation of the strategy 

document on a rolling three-year programme. With regard to reforms, the decree creating the CNCP will 

be reviewed with a view to including the essential function of data-collection and production of statistics, 

among others.  

6.5.6  Sector Context of Public Procurement. Sector analysis highlights the following findings:  (i) 

Social sector: the procurement timeframe (from publication of the bid invitation to contract signature) is 

three months on average; the definition of needs (to prepare a CPS for the construction of a building for 

example) can take up to one year.   The Ministry reported limited productivity among the staff who need 

training in public procurement. (ii) Agricultural sector: in the Ministry of Agriculture, the definition of 

needs takes three to six months. The General Inspectorate of Agriculture carries out audit missions for all 

eligible contracts in accordance with the public procurement decree. However, the summaries of the 

control and audit reports are not published in accordance with Article 165 of the said Decree.  (iii) 

Environment sector: on average, the Ministry of Environment launches a maximum of 15 bid invitations 

for rehabilitation of landfills and two to three for delegated management (design, construction, operation). 

The ministry has introduced terms of reference with ecological specifications (air, biogas) in compliance 

with environmental regulations.  (iv) Water sector: minor weaknesses were noted in the management of 

public contracts, for instance the accumulation of incompatible tasks at the internal control level (e.g. 

needs determination and participation in the bid opening).  

6.5.7  Procurement of goods and services. Being a multisector budget support operation (agriculture, 

water, environment, social), the resources provided by the Bank will be fungible with those of the 

Treasury and used for the country's current needs and procurements, in accordance with the national 

procurement system whose regulatory framework is governed by Decree No. 2-12-349 of 20 March 2013. 

The Bank conducted the latest review of this system in November 2017 through a country procurement 

system assessment using the OECD/MAPS methodology (BPAR), and concluded that the risk level was 

moderate. An assessment of procurement practices in the sectors concerned reveals that no significant 

procurement element would justify the application of a fiduciary risk assessment in identified sectors that 

is different from the situation at the national level. Consequently, usage of the national procurement 

system will guarantee the efficient use of resources to be allocated under this operation, thanks to 

acceptable procurement procedures and an effective and reassuring control mechanism. However, the 

assessment mission identified measures to enhance the transparency of the national procurement system 

and improve the effectiveness of control and audit mechanisms in the agricultural and water sectors (see 

Technical Annex, Volume 2, procurements). To reinforce these improvements in public procurement, the 

government is undertakes to: 

 Publish the opinions issued by the CNCP on its website. This site, currently being finalised, will 
be operational by 31 December 2018 at the latest; 

 Ensure latest 30/06/2018, the effective application of Article 165 of the Public Procurement 
Decree through publication by the Ministry of Agriculture and Maritime Fishing (MAPM) of the 

summaries of all control and audit reports for contracts exceeding MAD 5 million (OC) or for 

negotiated contracts exceeding MAD 1 million DH produced as of 31/12/2017 in the public 

procurement portal. In this regard, the General Inspectorate of the Ministry of Agriculture shall 

submit the verification report to the Bank latest 30 June 2018; 

 Ensure latest 30/06/2018, the effective application of Article 165 of the Public Procurement 
Decree through publication by the Ministry of Water Resources of the summaries of all control 



 

20 
 

and audit reports for contracts exceeding MAD 5 million (OC) or for negotiated contracts 

exceeding MAD 1 million DH produced as of 31/12/2017 in the public procurement portal. In this 

regard, the General Inspectorate of the Water Resources Secretariat shall submit the audit report 

to the Bank latest 30 June 2018. 

 

VII. LEGAL DOCUMENTATION AND AUTHORITY 

7.1. Legal Documentation  

7.1.1 The legal document to be used under this programme is the Loan Agreement. The parties 

to this Agreement are the African Development Bank and the Government of the Kingdom of 

Morocco. The Loan Agreement shall become effective subject to fulfilment of the conditions provided 

for in Section 12.01 of the General Conditions for Loan Agreements. 

7.2. Conditions Associated with the Bank’s Intervention  

7.2.1. Conditions precedent to presentation of the programme to the Board. Through dialogue 
with the Government, it was agreed that the Government will implement certain preliminary measures 

before the programme is presented to the Bank's Board of Directors. These conditions are outlined in 

Table 5 on preliminary conditions. 

7.2.2. Disbursement in two tranches. Disbursement of the loan shall be subject to fulfilment of the 
following preliminary conditions:  

First tranche (EUR 100 million in 2018): Provide the Bank with proof of: (i) the opening of a Treasury 

Account in Bank-al-Maghrib acceptable to the Bank and intended to receive loan resources; (ii) the 

establishment of an inter-sector coordination mechanism, including the creation of: (a) a Programme 

technical coordination team in the Ministry of Agriculture; and (b) a strategic coordination committee of 

the programme in the Ministry of Economy and Finance; (iii) signature of a framework agreement with 

COMADER on agricultural advisory services, training and support for farmers; and (iv) an Order defining 

additional and special measures to combat the Newcastle disease and avian influenza with a view to 

promoting poultry exports. 

Second tranche (EUR 100 million in 2019): Provide the Bank with proof of :(i) transmission of the bill 

on the National Agricultural Register (RNA) to the SGG; (ii) signature of a partnership agreement 

between the ONCA and DIAEA for the development of agricultural advisory services in irrigation areas; 

(iii) transmission of the draft law on fertilizers, their adjuvants and crop supports to the SGG; and (iv) 

proof of validation of four (4) Sustainable Development Action Plans (PADD).  

7.3. Compliance with Bank Group Policies  

PADIDFA complies with Bank Group policies and guidelines on programme-based support. It helps to 

create an environment conducive to the achievement of the High 5s and the operational priorities of the 

Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy 2013-2022 and the Country Strategy Paper 2017-2021 for Morocco. No 

exemption from Bank guidelines is requested under this operation. 

VIII. RISK MANAGEMENT 

8.1  Major risks could arise from external shocks caused by unfavourable international 

economic conditions and hydrocarbon price trends. These could be compounded by severe vagaries 

of the weather and extreme phenomena as well as weak inter-sector coordination capacity. With regard 

to components, the risks stem from the overexploitation of natural resources, the marginalization of 

certain groups of stakeholders, divergent interests of stakeholders, the limited capacity of users and 

stakeholders in the cooperative sector, and sociocultural resistance on gender issues.  



 

21 
 

8.2. Mitigating the anticipated risks depends on government's ability to rollover certain 

measures (especially insurance to mitigate climate risk); set up integrated flood forecast and warning 

systems (flood event management); and draft water shortage management plans (drought management). 

These plans should contain measures established in advance in accordance with the degree of scarcity and 

that include all user sectors for proactive water scarcity management. It would also require the 

strengthening of inter-sector coordination through high-level support from the country's 

authorities. At component level, provision is made for consultation committees (working groups) to 

facilitate the search for solutions, particularly on key issues (water, environment, energy and social), as 

well as institutional and legal measures to protect all stakeholders. Each reform is also accompanied by 

awareness-raising and communication actions, particularly on gender and youth issues. Follow-up 

workshops will be organized with the support of the Bank's Office (COMA) to strengthen inter-sector 

coordination. 

IX. RECOMMENDATION 

It is recommended that the Board of Directors approve an African Development Bank loan, not exceeding 

EUR 200 million, for the Kingdom of Morocco to fund the Inclusive and Sustainable Development 

Support Programme for Agricultural Sectors in accordance with the conditions set out in this report. 

 





The PPP irrigation programme concerns the following: 

 New hydro-agricultural development projects: extension of irrigation in 
Gharb (30 000 ha), development of new irrigated areas downstream of 
the Adossa dam (5 442 ha) and the Saiss plain (30 000 ha), located 
downstream of the Mdez Dam ,and extension of irrigation in the Dakhla 
irrigated area using desalinated water (5 000 ha); 

 Irrigation safeguard projects in areas with high agricultural production 
potential: the seawater desalination-based irrigation project in the 
Shtouka area in Souss-Massa (15 000 ha) and the Azemmour-Bir Jdid 
coastal area irrigation project (3 200 ha). 

5. Enhancement of agricultural production 

> Promotion of agricultural exports 

Enhancing agricultural and food exports has always been one of the fundamental 
objectives of Morocco's agricultural policy. The Green Morocco Plan attaches special 
importance to the development and diversification of agricultural exports. It plans to triple 
the export volumes for citrus fruit and vegetables and fruit by pursuing efforts to promote 
exports to new destinations and also to traditional markets such as the European Union. 

Also, in order to help strengthen the competitiveness of the agricultural sector and ensure 
its integration into the European market, financial and technical support was provided by 
the European counterpart under the advanced status arrangement. The support targets 
the modernization of the agricultural sector as a whole and provides for assistance in the 
process for aligning the Moroccan normative framework with the European normative 
framework on sanitary and phytosanitary matters, which would ultimately allow the 
elimination of non-tariff barriers limiting access to Moroccan products. 

Moreover, to enhance and promote production quality, Morocco and the European Union 
concluded, in accordance with the terms of the Agricultural Agreement, an agreement 
on the reciprocal protection of geographical indications (GIs) for agricultural products, 
including fisheries products. This GI protection agreement was initialled by both parties 
in January 2015 in Berlin. 

> Development of local products 
The Department of Agriculture designed a comprehensive strategy for increasing 
existing supply of local products and established a legal framework encouraging farmers 
to promote and market their produce.  

It thus triggered a momentum that motivated the collective upgrading of small-scale 
farming, particularly in mountain and oases areas, where agriculture is characterized by 
remarkable specificities and the products have specific qualities, often bearing witness 
to the time-honoured traditions and secular know-how of the local people.  

Thus, the implementation of Law No. 25-06 on the distinctive marks of origin and quality 
(SDOQ) for foodstuffs and agricultural and fisheries products created the necessary legal 
framework for the recognition and protection of products with a specific quality linked to 
the country. 

The Moroccan system of labelling, implemented since the entry into force of Law 25-06 
in 2009 and up to the end of 2017, has led to the recognition of 53 distinctive marks of 
origin and quality (SDOQ), including 43 marks for Protected Geographical Indication 
(PGI), 5 for Protected Designation of Origin (PDO) and 5 Agricultural Labels. 

> Agropoles for enhancing the value of agricultural products 

As part of the implementation of the Green Morocco Plan, the Department of Agriculture 



 

VIII 
 

established 7 agropoles at Meknès, Berkane, Tadla, Souss, Haouz, Gharb and Loukkos 
to enhance the value of agricultural products through agro-industry. 

Furthermore, in a bid to build the capacity of stakeholders and support the efforts of 
professionals to improve the productivity of competitive and high-potential sub-sectors 
and enhance the value of each region’s agricultural products, the Department of 
Agriculture set up in each Agropole a Food Qualipole comprising 3 groups of specific 
operational laboratories (ONSSA, INRA and EACCE) and common spaces (reception 
centre, conference centre, accommodation area and restaurant). 

III. PRESENTATION OF THE WATER SECTOR 

The water sector in Morocco has been of special interest to public authorities and a 
central concern of the economic policies because of its crucial role in ensuring the 
country's water security and supporting its development, especially in the area of 
irrigated agriculture. 

In this context, Morocco has for long been engaged in a dynamic policy to build major 
hydraulic infrastructure, in an effort to improve access to drinking water, meet the needs 
of industries and tourism, and develop large scale. irrigation. 

Indeed, Morocco has managed to build an efficient water management model specific to 
the country and cited as an example internationally. 

This undeniable success was based on: 

• The water resource control and mobilization policy involving  the construction of 
large reservoir dams (major hydraulic infrastructure comprising 140 major dams 
with a total capacity of nearly 17.6 billion m3), water transfer structures and several 
wells drilled for groundwater; 

• The development of technical skills and applied scientific research; 

• The launch of a long-term planning policy in  the early 1980s that allows decision-
makers to anticipate water scarcity by giving public authorities long-term visibility 
(20 to 30 years); and 

• Lastly, major advances in the regulatory and institutional spheres, such as Law No. 
10-95, which consolidated the integrated, participatory and decentralized 
management of water resources by establishing watershed agencies and 
introducing financial mechanisms for the protection and preservation of water 
resources. 

As part of the modernization of the arsenal of legal provisions on the water sector, the 
Government revised Law No.10-95 on water in order to have a comprehensive, clear, 
precise and applicable legal and institutional framework. Indeed, the new Law No. 36-15 
on water, published in August 2016, strengthened the achievements of the Law No.10-95 
and incorporated new aspects, including: 

• Consolidation and strengthening of management and decentralized, integrated and 
participatory planning of water resources; 

• Strengthening of consultation and coordination bodies and agencies by setting up 
the Basin Council, which is a regional forum for discussion of water management 
issues; 

• Establishment of legal bases for the diversification of supply through the use of 
unconventional water resources; 

• Strengthening of the institutional framework and mechanisms for the protection and 
preservation of water resources through participatory management contracts; and 

• .Integration of the management of extreme events related to climate change. 

Moreover, in order to consolidate the above-mentioned achievements and meet water-
related challenges, the Government drafted the National Water Plan (PNE), which is an 
extension of the guidelines of the National Water Strategy presented to His Majesty on 14 



 

IX 
 

April 2009 in Fez. 

The main principles considered in the development of the PNE action plans focus on: 

 Integrated and concerted management of water demand and water resources; 

 Strengthening of the country's water security and adaption to climate change; 

 Solidarity in its various dimensions; 

  Promotion of good governance in the water sector and the search for efficiency in 
the activities of stakeholders, the search for convergence and the alignment of 
sector programmes; and 

 Search for mechanisms and means of financing the water sector combining public 
subsidies and the direct recovery of costs through water rates. 

The PNE is based on three pillars, namely: 

•  Management of water demand and water valuation; 

•  Supply development; and 

•  Preservation of water resources, the natural environment and adaptation to climate 
change. 

Currently, and in accordance with of the new Law No. 36-15 on water, the National Water 
Plan (PNE) and the Water Resources Integrated Development Master Plans (PDAIRE) are 
being updated to cover the period up to 2050, taking into account impacts of climate 
change. 

IV. PRESENTATION OF THE NATIONAL ENERGY EFFICIENCY STRATEGY 

The 2030 National Energy Efficiency Strategy, which is part of His Majesty King 
Mohammed VI's far-sighted vision for energy transition and the reinforcement of 
renewable energies, aims to achieve a target of 52% of renewable energies in 
Morocco's energy mix. 

This strategy will be translated into a programme contract between the State and 
the Moroccan Energy Efficiency Agency (AMEE). It includes several measures 
planned for the period 2018-2021, affecting the most energy-intensive sectors, 
notably the Transport sector, the leading energy consumer sector with a 
consumption  rate of 38%, followed by the construction sector with 33%, and 
industry with a final energy consumption share of 21%. The agricultural sector 
and public lighting, with an energy consumption rate of 8%, are also targeted.  

Today, the energy bill remains high, given the Kingdom's energy dependence on 
outside sources. This bill is amounts to approximately DH 52.5 billion annually, 
of which 93.3%  is for imported energy, whereas Morocco has an institutional, 
legal and organizational environment that could enable it to guarantee the 
sustainability of this service and ro diversify its sources of energy. 

When this strategy was presented to the Government Council, the latter decided 
to further review the measures and commitments of the ministerial departments 
concerned by the strategy and to verify the indicators in an effort to enable 
collective participation and mobilization of the sectors concerned, and indicated 
that the National Energy Efficiency Strategy would be adopted by a Council of 
Ministers. 

V. AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK SUPPORT FOR THE GREEN MOROCCO PLAN 

The Moroccan Government uses the agricultural strategy of its Green Morocco 
Plan to capitalize on its experience and wishes to deepen its cooperation with 
the African Development Bank through a multi-sectoral support programme for 
the inclusive and sustainable development of agricultural sub-sectors, covering 
the following components: 

• Support for job creation through the development of agricultural and agro-industrial 
sectors, 

• Support for the sustainability of rural employment through the sustainable use of 



 

X 
 

natural resources by the agricultural sector. 

 

VI. MODALITIES FOR THE MONITORING AND IMPLEMENTATION OF THE 
PROGRAMME 

Based on the first two experiments with the Support Programme of the African 
Development Bank for the Green Morocco Plan, an institutional framework will be 
formalized, focusing on the technical responsibility of the relevant ministries and on 
the overall coordination of the Budget Directorate of the Ministry of Economy and 
Finance.  

  

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 





















































  

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND  
 
 

 
 
 

MOZAMBIQUE 
 
 
 

AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAIN AND YOUTH 
EMPOWERMENTPROJECT (AVACYEP) 

 
 

 

 
 
 

 

Grant Information 

Client’s information 
 
BORROWER:      Republic of Mozambique 
EXECUTING AGENCY:  Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security (MASA)  
Financing plan 
 

Source Amount (UA 
million) 

Instrument 

ADF  11.001 Grant 
GoM   0.74 Counterpart funds 
Beneficiaries    0.24 Beneficiaries in-kind 

contribution 
TAAT (AfDB)    0.26 Grant 
TOTAL COST   12.24  

 
Key financing information 
 

  
Grant currency ADF UA11.00 

million 
Interest type* NA 
Interest rate spread* NA 
Commitment fee* NA 
Other fees* NA 
Tenor NA 
Service Charge NA 
Grace period NA 
FIRR, NPV (base case)       24.81 % 
EIRR (base case)                21% 
 

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected) 
 
Concept Note approval  

 
February 2018 

Project approval July 2018 
Effectiveness September 2018 
Completion December 2023 
Last Disbursement December  2023 
Last repayment (month, year) 

 
  

                                                 
1 Resources coming from the cancelable amount from a closed Project 



 
 

iii 
 

I. Project Summary 
1.1. The Agriculture Value Chain and Youth Empowerment Project (AVACYEP) is an integrated 
project to strengthen the capacity of rural communities to address the inter-linked challenges of food 
production, rural poverty, food insecurity and access to markets through the provision of horticulture 
and livestock related infrastructure, and improving food production and marketing activities, as well as 
capacity building for the affected communities. The total project cost is 12.241 Units of Account (17.294 
million dollars) over 5 years (2018-2023) and will be implemented in the four districts of Moamba, 
Namaacha, Chókwé and Chonguene with estimated total direct beneficiaries of 20,000 and additional 
20,000 indirect beneficiaries. This project consists of three approaches for scaling up agriculture water 
infrastructure development through: (i) increased horticultural crop production through value chain 
improvement, (ii) contribute to the introduction of best practice agricultural technologies to improve 
productivity of the red meat (i.e. cattle and goats) value chains, (iii) establishment of incubation centers 
for youth and women in order to promote entrepreneurship and agribusiness in order to create an 
appropriate and conducive environment for business development through advisor services and transfer 
of technologies to the beneficiaries of the program; (iv) through the aforementioned activities enhance 
the resilience to climate change and climate variability and risk.   

1.2. Needs Assessment: The AVACYEP emerged from the need to promote a competitive and inclusive 
agribusiness in the Maputo and Gaza provinces through increasing agricultural productivity and animal 
production; providing rural infrastructure to support production (i.e. irrigation, storage facilities); use of 
improved agricultural inputs (i.e. certified seeds and fertilizers); practical and lower-cost breeding 
programs, such as Community-Based Breeding programs (CBBPs); vaccinations; agro-processing; 
access to market; and, promotion of value chain development. The project also emerged in order to 
tackle the Bank’s and Government investment made at the Massingir Dam to promote irrigation 
development for the production of food crops and livestock with the aim of improving food security, 
thereby contributing to the diversification of the agricultural economy in the region, and ensuring wealth 
creation for the rural population, including women and youth. It is expected that the private sector will 
fully participate in supporting the smallholders and the emerging farmers throughout-grower or contract 
farming approaches, supply of agricultural inputs, agro-processing, marketing the agricultural produce, 
and financing agricultural activities.   
 
1.3 Bank’s Added Value: The Project is also in line with the Bank’s High 5 Action Plan the Bank’s 
Ten Year Strategy (2013-2022), Agricultural Transformation in Africa Strategy (2016-2025) under the 
Bank’s High 52 including the Technologies for Africa Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) and Enable 
Youth Programs in order to transform the agriculture sector to enhance the country competitiveness and 
develop domestic clusters of agri-business and integrated value chains that can increase domestic value 
addition, generate jobs and attract FDI and know-how. The AVACYEP will also contribute to the second 
pillar of the new Country Strategy Paper 2018-2022, under preparation, through the envisaged increased 
agriculture productivity as a result of the improved water and land management activities and 
introduction of science based, proven and high impact technologies. The new CSP 2016-2021, currently 
under preparation, focuses on two strategic pillars that have been approved by CODE: Pillar I infrastructure 
development; and Pillar II Agriculture. 

                                                 
2 High 5 refers to the five priority areas that the Bank will be focus on in the next 10 years.   



 

 
 

 
 

iv 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
II. 

R
E

SU
L

T
S-B

A
SE

D
 L

O
G

IC
A

L
 F

R
A

M
E

W
O

R
K

 
 

C
ountry and P

roject N
am

e:    M
ozam

bique - A
gricultural V

alue C
hain and Y

outh E
m

pow
erm

ent Project (V
achangam

e). 
P

urpose of the P
roject:            T

o contribute to rural poverty reduction by ensuring food, incom
e, and nutrition security in a sustainable m

anner.  
 

R
E

SU
L

T
S C

H
A

IN
 

P
E

R
F

O
R

M
A

N
C

E
 IN

D
IC

A
T

O
R

S 
M

E
A

N
S O

F
 

V
E

R
IF

IC
A

T
IO

N
 

R
ISK

S/M
IT

IG
A

T
IO

N
 

M
E

A
SU

R
E

S 
IN

D
IC

A
T

O
R

  (IN
C

L
U

D
IN

G
 C

SI) 
B

A
SE

L
IN

E
 

T
A

R
G

E
T

  

IM
P

A
 

Poverty R
eduction and livelihood im

provem
ents 

for w
om

en and youth  
N

ational Poverty R
ate 

49%
 (2015) 

 
42%

 (2025)
 

M
E

F R
eports 

 

OUTCOMES 

1. Increased productivity and incom
e by w

om
en 

and youth in  the red m
eat  and horticulture 

value chains  
2. Increased youth em

ploym
ent and A

gribusiness 
ventures 

   

1. Increased annual yields and incom
e based for red m

eat and 
vegetables for youth and w

om
en (50%

); 
2. N

°. of skilled and unskilled jobs created (50 %
 Fem

ale) in 
the selected districts of G

aza and M
aputo provinces 

  

1. 1.5-2.0 ton/ha m
ajor 

vegetables,  159,274 
goats 
U

SD
250.00/year 

2. 6500 in the G
aza 

and 2300 in M
aputo 

districts 
   

1. 2.5-4.0 ton/ha of 
vegetables,  179274 
goats and 
U

SD
400.00/year 

2. 8000 in G
aza and 3000 

in M
aputo 

 

x 
M

E
F statistics 

x 
M

A
SA

 reports 
x 

IN
E

 statistics 
x 

W
FP reports 

labour m
arket 

observatory 
 

 

A
ssum

ptions 
1 

G
overnm

ent com
m

itm
ent, 

social and political consensus 
and m

acroeconom
ic stability 

2 
N

o restriction im
posed on 

w
ater extraction for irrigation. 

3 
N

o restrictions on private 
sector/ N

G
O

 participation in 
w

ater harvesting infrastructure 
and setting up of livestock 

OUTPUTS 

A
:  A

griculture V
alue C

hain D
evelopm

ent 
1. H

orticulture V
alue C

hain
 

(a) Irrigation schem
es using irrigation kits 

rehabilitated 
(b) A

griculture productivity im
proved 

(c) horticulture value addition services supported   
2. R

ed M
eat V

alue C
hain

 

(d)   livestock production practices im
proved  

(e) R
ed m

eat value addition services supported  
(f)  livestock infrastructures installed 

3. Y
outh and W

om
en E

m
pow

erm
ent 

(g) A
gribusiness incubation for w

om
en and youth 

entrepreneurs including investm
ent fund and 

finance m
echanism

 created 

 (a) 
A

rea developed w
ith irrigation kits 

(b) 
N

° of farm
ers, adopting new

 production technologies 
(including clim

ate com
patible technologies) 

(c) 
N

° of processing facilities and m
arketing service providers 

(d) 
livestock ow

ners adopting new
 production technologies  

(e) 
N

° of livestock processing facilities and m
arketing service 

providers 
(f) 

N
° of surface, w

ater troughs, m
ultifunctional boreholes 

slaughter-houses, disease control centers, processing 
facilities and feed stock sites 

(g) 
N

° of business plans and proposals approved for financing 
(50%

 of w
hich ow

ned by fem
ales) w

ithin the incubation 
program

 including accessing to financial m
echanism

. 

  (a) 530ha w
ith 

irrigation kits in 
2018 

(b) 8000 in 2018 
 (c)  3 and 4 in 2018 
(d)  2000 in 2018 
(e) 3 and 4 in 2018 
(f) 30, 48, 4, 2, 12, 5 in 

2018 
 (g) 560 in 2018 (122 

w
om

en) 
 

 (a) 880ha w
ith irrigation 

kits by year 2023 
(b) 

16000 by 2023 
(c) 3 and 4 in 2023 
(d) 

4000 in 2023 
(e)  3 and 4 in 2023 
(f)  45, 64, 6, 3, 15 and 

10 by 2023 
 (g) 

1500 in 2023 
(750 w

om
en) 

 

 
Project M

&
E

 
reports 

 
A

R
A

-Sul 
M

E
F  

M
A

SA
 

IN
G

C
 

C
E

R
N

A
C

A
R

T
A

 
SE

T
SA

N
 

D
irectorates of 
Livestock 

D
am

 operation 
records 

 R
isk: Lim

ited business and 
technical skills of targeted youth 
and w

om
en and M

SM
E

s in value 
chain m

anagem
ent 

M
itigation m

easure: Project 
includes business and technical 
skills training for targeted 
beneficiaries. 
R

isk: F
arm

ers w
ith no interest to 

adopt new
 technologies: 

M
itigation m

easure:  
Prom

oting stakeholder 
participation, engagem

ent and 
integration.  

B
: P

roject M
anagem

ent  
i   E

nhanced capacity of PIU
  

ii. M
&

E
 system

 established 
  iii. C

apacity building conducted 

(a) 
N

° of PM
U

 staff including those from
 the districts 

coordinating the project recruited 
(b) 

M
&

E
 system

 in place 
(c) 

B
aseline survey 

(d) 
T

raining project staff in M
&

E
, D

am
 Safety, A

griculture 
Financial Services and m

anaging clim
ate risk &

 
im

plem
enting adaptation  

(e) 
G

A
PI, FD

A
, ID

E
 and IPE

M
E

 supported 
(f) 

N
° of studies on environm

ent, social and clim
ate issues 

(a) 
0 staff in 2018 

(b) 
0 system

s 
(c) 

0 
(d) 

5 staff 
(e) 

0 institutions 
(f) 

6 studies 

(a) 1 staff  
(b) 1 M

&
E

 
(c) 1 
(d) 11 staff 
(e) 3 institutions 
(f) 12 

R
isk: A

daptability of selected 
seeds 
M

itigation m
easure:  R

esearch 
and dem

onstrative activities, 
extension and capacity 
building 

KEY 
ACTIVITIES 

C
om

ponents 
Inputs 

 C
om

ponent 1 - A
griculture V

alue C
hain D

evelopm
ent - Sub-com

ponent 1.1 horticulture value chain; 1.2 red m
eat value chain and 1.3 youth and w

om
en em

pow
erm

ent. 
C

om
ponent 1 cost: U

A
 9806,0 m

illion (77.96%
). 

C
om

ponent 2: Institutional Support and P
roject M

anagem
ent - Sub-com

ponent 3.1 Project C
oordination; 3.2 M

onitoring and E
valuation and 3.3 C

apacity B
uilding. 

C
om

ponent 2 cost: U
A

 2435,0 m
illion (22.04%

). 
 

 P
roject C

ost: U
A

 12.241m
illion. 

A
D

F
 G

rant: U
A

11.00.00 m
illion (90%

). 
G

overnm
ent: U

A
 0, 730. m

illion (6.0%
).  

B
eneficiaries: U

A
 0,240 m

illion (1.9%
). 

T
A

A
T

 (A
fD

B
): U

A
 0,260.0 m

illion (2.1) 



 

 
 

 
 

v 

 

                                           III. P
roject T

im
efram

e 
 

A
ctivity D

escription 
2018 

2019 
2020 

2020 
2021 

2022 
2023 

Q
1 

Q
2 

Q
3 

Q
4 

Q
1 

Q
2 

Q
3 

Q
4 

Q
1 

Q
2 

Q
3 

Q
4 

Q
1 

Q
2 

Q
3 

Q
4 

Q
1 

Q
2 

Q
3 

Q
4 

Q
1 

Q
2 

Q
3 

Q
4 

Q
1 

Q
2 

Q
3 

Q
4 

1. 
A

ppraisal M
ission 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

2. 
G

rant N
egotiation 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

3. 
B

oard A
pproval 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

4. 
Signature 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

5. 
Fulfilm

ent of 
C

onditions for 
E

ffectiveness 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

6. 
Project L

aunch /Start 
O

ff 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

7. 
C

onstruction of 
Infrastructures 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

8. 
T

ransfer of 
technologies to 
farm

ers and livestock 
ow

ners 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

9. 
Im

prove V
alue chain 

production  
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

10. M
arketing and A

gro-
processing Facilities  

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

11. R
ehabilitation of 

youth incubation  
centers 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

12. Project 
im

plem
entation  

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

13. N
° of business plans 

and proposals 
approved for financing  

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

14. Supervision and 
M

onitoring 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

15. B
ank PC

R
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

16. A
udit 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 



 

1 
 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE MANAGEMENT TO THE 
BOARD OF DIRECTORS ON A PROPOSED GRANT/ TO MOZAMBIQUE FOR 

THE AGRICULTURE VALUE CHAIN AND YOUTH EMPOWERMENT 
PROJECT (AVACYEP) 

 
Management submits the following Report and Recommendation on a proposed grant of UA 11.00 million 
from the ADF and UA 0.73 million from the Republic of  Mozambique for the financing requirement of 
the Agriculture Value Chain and Youth Empowerment Project (AVACYEP) in Mozambique. 

I. – Strategic Thrust & Rationale  
 

1.1.  PRSP and CSP priorities, Key Development Issue(s) project  
 
1.1 The Mozambican Government has been making efforts to transform the agriculture sector which 
culminated in the preparation of the National Investment Plan for the Agrarian Sector (PNISA -2014 to 
2018, currently under review to extend it up to 2022). Through PNISA, the Government identified 6 
Agricultural Growth Corridors to promote agricultural development, namely: (i) Pemba-Lichinga corridor 
that is suitable for the production of potatoes, wheat, beans, maize, soybeans, cotton, tobacco and poultry; 
(ii) Nacala corridor with potential to grow cassava, maize, cotton, fruits, poultry and peanuts; (iii) Zambezi 
Valley corridor that can produce rice, maize, potatoes, livestock, poultry and cotton; (iv) Beira corridor for 
maize, wheat, vegetables, soybeans, rice, livestock and poultry; (v) Limpopo corridor for rice, vegetables, 
livestock and poultry; and (vi) Maputo corridor that would focus on rice, vegetables, livestock (red meat) 
and poultry. While these corridors are not necessarily aligned to the transport corridors, some have achieved 
a degree of development in terms of infrastructure, institutions and agricultural development, while others 
have not commenced any form of development. 
 
1.2 Under the effort of contributing to the Bank’s Feed Africa Strategy and also supporting the 
implementation of the Government’s 5-Year-Investment Plan, the Maputo and Limpopo corridors have 
been selected for the implementation of this project considering their high potential for unlocking the 
development of approximately 450,000 ha of arable land, out of which 110,000 ha are suitable for irrigation 
development. The target staple commodities include horticulture and livestock (red meat), and are 
considered as priority commodities in both the Maputo and Limpopo Development Corridors, especially in 
the large irrigation schemes of Baixo Limpopo and Chókwé (Gaza Province) and the Sabié-Incomati 
(Maputo Province). The main constraints the horticulture value chain faces are related to the availability of 
appropriate seeds, pest control and processing; while for livestock the challenges are related to health 
(disease control), nutrition (feed stock production) and markets (value addition and processing).  If these 
limiting factors are addressed, both value chains can contribute to the improvement of the quality of life, 
nutrition and income of the local people, in particular youth and women, through the creation of business 
opportunities and decent employment for both groups along the priority agricultural value chains.  
 
1.3 The investments will also complement previous Bank financed projects such as the Massingir Dam 
Agriculture Rehabilitation and Emergency Projects, Baixo Limpopo and climate Resilience project 
(BLICRP), Sustainable Land and Water Management Project (SLWMP) and Drought Recovery and 
Agriculture Resilient Project (DRARP), all of which have invested in irrigation and livestock infrastructures 
and processing facilities for horticulture. The project also incorporates the Technologies for African 



 

2 
 

Agricultural Transformation (TAAT), an initiative to help African countries significantly increase 
agricultural and livestock productivity and production rapidly and at scale by adopting existing 
technologies, including high yielding and climate resilient seed varieties. The project is also well in line 
with the Government’s poverty reduction efforts looking to support increased agricultural production and 
employment promotion (on a national scale) with particular attention given to youth and women. The 
project is furthermore aligned with the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (2013-22), particularly in its operational 
focus areas (private sector infrastructure) and areas of special emphasis (agriculture and food security). The 
project also aligns with the Banks Climate Change Plan (CCAP 2, 2016-2020) which promotes the 
implementation of climate smart agriculture. Furthermore, the project is therefore expected to provide an 
enabling economic environment for private sector development and participation. 

1.2.  Rationale for Bank’s involvement  
 
1.2.1 The project will be implemented in two provinces of Maputo and Gaza, which have potential for 
horticulture and livestock (red meat) production. These provinces are covered by three of the largest 
irrigation schemes in the country, namely Chókwé, Baixo Limpopo and Sabie, and also accounts for the 
largest number of livestock heads in Mozambique. The interventions under the High 5 are aligned with the 
Government 5-year Plan of promoting agriculture production and productivity, that will increase 
employment as well as improving competitiveness of the national economy. The AVACYEP is in line with 
the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (2013-2022), Agricultural Transformation in Africa Strategy (2016-2025) 
under the Bank’s High 5, including TAAT and Enable Youth Action Plans in order to transform the 
agriculture sector to enhance the country competitiveness and develop domestic clusters of agri-business 
and integrated value chains that can increase domestic value addition, generate jobs and attract FDI and 
know-how. The AVACYEP will also contribute to the second pillar of the new Country Strategy Paper 
2018-2022, under preparation, through the envisaged increased agriculture productivity as a result of the 
improved water and land management activities. The new CSP 2018-2022, currently under preparation, 
focuses on two strategic pillars that have been approved by CODE: Pillar I infrastructure development; and 
Pillar II Agriculture.  
1.3.  Donor Coordination 

 
  

Sector Size 
GDP Export Labor 

[Agriculture/CC] 26% 20% 80% 

Players - Public Annual Expenditure (average)**  

Organization % contribution out of  a total of Total 250.4 million UA/ Year 
       2016-2017    2014-2015 2012-2013  

WB 53% 45% 24%  
USAID 7% 9% 25%  

EC 10% 13% 13.4%  
AfDB 14% 18% 8.4%  
JICA 10% 7% 7.2%  

Others 6% 8% 22%  
     

Existence of Thematic Working Groups [Y] 

Existence of SWAPs or Integrated Sector Approaches [N] 

ADB's Involvement in donors coordination*** [M] 
* as most appropriate ** Years [yy1 to yy2] *** for this sector or sub-sector   
**** L: leader, M: member but not leader, none: no involvement    



 

3 
 

1.4. Comments on Donor Coordination  
 
1.4.1 An active thematic donors’ group for the Agriculture sector named the Agriculture and Rural 
Economic Development Group (led by the World Bank), in which the AfDB is member meets on a regular 
basis.  Other members of the group are: IFAD, USAID, Canada, Sweden, Switzerland/SDC, JICA, Ireland, 
Austria, Italy, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Netherlands, UK/DFID, Norway, European 
Commission, FAO, UNDP, DFID, and Belgian.  Most of these are providing support to the agriculture 
development through the Development Strategy of the Agrarian Sector (PEDSA) 2011-2020, the National 
Investment Plan for the Agriculture Sector (PNISA) and the Integrated Plan for Agriculture 
Commercialization (PICA).  Related to climate change and environment issues, the Bank regularly 
participates in the meetings of the Environment Group, led by the UN.   

II. –  Project Description  

2.1.  Project Components 
 
2.1.1 The overall objective of the proposed Project is to contribute to rural poverty reduction by ensuring 
food, income, and nutrition security in a sustainable manner. The specific objectives are to (i) increase 
horticultural crop production through value chain improvement, (ii) contribute to the introduction of best 
practice technologies to improve productivity in the red meat (cattle and goats) value chain, (iii) establish 
incubation centers for youth and women in order to promote entrepreneurship and agribusiness with the 
goal of creating an appropriate and conducive environment for business development through advisor 
services and transfer of technologies to the beneficiaries of the program; (iv) through the aforementioned 
activities, enhance resilience to climate change and climate variability and risks. 

Table 2.1 Project Components 

nr. Agriculture Value 
Chain  Development  

Est. cost 
(USD 

million) 

Component Description 
 

1 Sub-component 1.1:  
Horticulture Value 
Chain Development   

5,100.00 1.1.1 Improve Horticulture infrastructure: Install 30 irrigation kits (5ha 
each) and 20 irrigation kits (10ha each). Provide assorted horticultural 
inputs (improved seeds, fertilizers and agro-chemicals) and farm tools 
including shade nets for crop production.1.1.2 Facilitate value addition 
through agro-processing of vegetables.  Facilitate horticulture products 
packaging and labelling and Facilitate marketing linkages using 1.1.3 MIC. 
Training: Facilitate training of trainers and farmers; and value addition 
through agro-processing of vegetables, horticulture products packaging, 
labelling and marketing  

1 Sub-component 1.2: 
Red Meat Value 
Chain: Technologies 
for African 
Agricultural 
Transformation  

5,100.00 1.2.1: Improved Animal Health: through renovation and construction of 
vaccination infrastructure; establishment of veterinary checkpoints and; 
provision of vaccines for tick-borne disease and parasites.1.2.2 Increased 
Animal Production: by promoting practical and lower-cost breeding 
programs, such as Community-Based Breeding programs (CBBPs); 
selection of goat genetic material within current flocks; introduction of 
improved breeds for specific markets; introduction of private sector driven 
business model for fattening and animal processing. The project will also 
promote animal asset management by establishing protocols for 
traceability (for disease and control of theft), branding and veterinary 
control points (for disease and theft monitoring). 
1.2.3.Production and conservation of Nutritious Feed and Forage: to 
improve the production and accessibility of quality feed and forage, by 



 

4 
 

establishing planned use of natural resources (including grazing and 
browsing resources); integrated production of feed and forage in 
conventional food crop production, through the use of irrigation schemes 
where available for cultivation of high quality forage (brachiaria, mucuna 
and other highly nutritious varieties of forages); implementation of FEAST 
for monitoring inventory and uptake of feed resources; promotion of forage 
production and support to National Research Institute (IIAM) for effective 
seed distribution system for forage seeds; introduction of hay bale making 
and ration formulation to young entrepreneurs; construction of 
multipurpose boreholes for water provision.  
1.2.4 Private sector led Value Addition and Marketing:  Construction of 
marketing facilities closer to high goat volume areas or areas with high 
demand; rehabilitation and construction where needed of livestock hub 
(abattoirs, dip tank, vet clinic, and market centre), and; rehabilitation of 
slaughter slabs and mini abattoirs; support to establish private sector 
management of marketing infrastructure. 
2.5 Enhanced Capacity Building: of animal health worker, para-veterinary 
agents, laboratory officers, and relevant government technicians. This will 
include: training and equipping 20 – 30 para-vets; training 5 agro-dealers 
to stock vet medicines, and provision of starter kits; organize and train 
farmers on high quality forage production (in the irrigation schemes); ILRI 
facilitated-technology transfer to IIAM on forage seed production and 
multiplication (seeds and training); training and equipping youth and 
community on mechanization hay bale making; build capacity 
of  extension workers to use Feed Assessment Tool (FEAST); capacity 
building feed formulation; capacity building of lab staff for use of nitrogen, 
and; establishment of ICT-driven platform to improve knowledge and 
skills on livestock value chain. 

… Sub-Component 1.3: 
Youth and Women 
Empowerment:  

4159.00 1.3.1 Capacity Development: Implement a comprehensive capacity 
development for about 2000 youths and women in agriculture production, 
agribusiness, post-harvest loss reduction, animal health services, and 
entrepreneurial skills across the red meat and horticulture value chains.  
1.3.2 Promote innovation accelerations of agriculture production through 
the introduction of new technologies using the existing youth incubation 
centres.  1.3.3 Establish a youth investment fund or financing mechanism 
(grant, soft loans, and risk Guarantee Fund) for financing youth led 
agribusinesses.  Partner with public and private stakeholders involved in 
youth employment promotion for effective transition, market access and 
other financing servicing and business to business networking.  1.3.4 
Provision of  production starter kits (goats, and infrastructure for red meat 
value chains, seeds, fertilizer and appropriate irrigation and land 
preparation  equipment for the horticulture value chain):   

2 Project Coordination 
and Monitoring and 
Evaluation 

2900.00  

2 Sub-component 2.1: 
Project Coordination 

2.1.1 Establish and support the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) including 
recruitment of PCU staff, procure vehicles and office equipment for PCU 
and facilitate annual financial and procurement audit. 

 Sub-component 2.2: 
Monitoring and 
Evaluation: 

2.2.1Prepare and operationalize the Project Implementation Manual and 
the Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system; prepare project annual 
work plans and budgets; progress review meetings; baseline survey and 
beneficiary impact assessment. 

 Sub-component 2.3  
Capacity Building 

2.3.1 Facilitate community/famer sensitization and mobilization into 
groups (associations/cooperatives); support to GAPI, FDA, and IPEME 
and Produce brochures with best practices. 

 
  



 

5 
 

2.2.  Technical solution retained and other alternatives explored  
 

Table 2.2:  Project Alternatives Considered and Reasons for Rejection 
Alternative name Brief description Reasons for rejection 

Focus on cattle value 
chain 

There is a long-standing history of 
research on cattle while small 
ruminants have been relatively 
neglected by international and local 
research  

� There is growing demand for small ruminant meat 
production, especially goats. Meat consumption in 
Mozambique, as in many other parts of Africa, are met by 
imports. The urban population can benefit from local small 
ruminant production, whilst increasing incomes of various 
actors across the meat value chain. Hence this project’s 
focus on small ruminants. 

 A non-integrated 
value chain solution 
for enhancing 
productivity for the 
small ruminants 
sector.   

The challenges of smallholder 
livestock producers in Mozambique 
spans across the spectrum, from 
health, breeding and production, 
feed and forage to value addition 
and marketing 

� Focusing on only one segment of the value chain will be 
insufficient to increase productivity and production 
volumes.  In order to increase productivity, it is key to 
address both supply and demand constraints of the small 
ruminants’ value chain.  

Construction of Agro-
Processing Center 

Government or community 
management of the Agro-
Processing Center 

x Lack of flexible and market oriented management. 
x Lack of private sector linkage 

Providing finance 
services through local  

Use the existing financial services 
to provide financial resources to 
youth and women 

� Bank guarantees are the limiting factor for women and 
youth access to financial services. 

� The Banks do not offer any capacity building on financial 
managements services  

2.3.  Project Type   
 
2.3.1  The project is a stand-alone investment operation with a source of funding mainly coming from 
the African Development Fund blended with Government financing. The Project is one of the three 
selected interventions planned for 2018 under the new CSP for Mozambique 2017-2022.  

2.4.  Project Cost and Financing Arrangements  
 
2.4.1  Project Cost and Financing Arrangement  
 
The Project cost, including physical and price contingencies, is UA 12.24 million, which will be financed 
by (i) ADF Grant of UA 11.0 million (89.6%%) covering all major Project activities, and also taxes and 
duties; (ii) the Government contribution of UA 0.73 million (6.0%) through in-kind (monetary value) for 
existing Government staff salaries participating in Project activities, office space, and office utilities;(iii) 
beneficiaries in-kind contribution of UA 0.24 million (2.0%) through specific labour during installation of 
the irrigation systems, agricultural production activities and also valuable time for attending training 
sessions; and (iv) AfDB TAAT contribution (Grant) of UA 0.3 million (2.4%). The price contingencies 
were based on projected local and foreign inflation rates of 5% and 2% per annum, respectively. The 
physical contingencies ranged from 0% to 8% (works) based on (i) common technical practices, and (ii) 
available Engineer’s cost estimates. Taxes and duties cover the total amount of UA 740.500,00 
corresponding to 6% of the total project costs. This is motivated by the need to ensure seamless project 
implementation in an environment of tight budgetary space for the Government, a full case for the ADF to 
cover duty and taxes, in line with the Policy on Expenditure Eligible for Bank Financing is formulated in 
Appendix IV. Summary of the Project costs by components, sources of financing, expenditure categories 
and schedule by component are presented in Tables 2.3 to 2.6 and the details are in PAR Volume II 
Technical Annex B.2.  



 

6 
 

Table 2.3:       Summary Project Cost Estimates by Component 
Component Name 

(MZN '000) (UA '000) % Foreign % Total Base 
Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total Exchange Costs 

1. Agriculture Value Chain 
Development 284,615.9 520,787.1 805,403.0 3,177.0 5,612.4 8,789.4 64 78 
2. Institutional Support and 
Project Management 183,070.1 35,057.9 218,128.0 2,043.5 391.3 2,434.8 16 22 
Total BASELINE COSTS 467,686.0 555,845.0 1,023,531.0 5,220.5 6,003.7 11,224.2 53 100 
Physical Contingencies 11,552.0 25,809.0 37,361.0 128.6 288.1 416.7 69 4 
Price Contingencies 38,940.8 14,813.9 53,754.7 434.7 165.4 600.1 28 5 
Total PROJECT COSTS 518,178.8 596,467.9 1,114,646.7 5,783.8 6,457.2 12,241.0 53 109 

 
Table 2.4: Sources of Finance 

Source of Financing 
Total Amount (UA '000) and Percentage Contribution (%) 

Foreign Local Taxes & Duties Total 
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % 

ADF Grant 6,162.3 95.4 4,072.0 80.7 740.5 100.0 10,974.8 89.6 
Government - - 730.8 14.5 - - 730.8 6.0 
Beneficiaries - - 240.5 4.8 - - 240.5 2.0 
TAAT/ILRI Grant 294.9 4.6 - - - - 294.9 2.4 
Total 6,457.2 100.0 5,043.3 100.0 740.5 100.0 12,241.0 100.0 

 
Table 2.5: Project cost by category of expenditure [amounts in million UA equivalents] 

Category of Expenditure 
Amount (MZN '000) Amount (UA '000) 

% 
For’gn 
Exch 

Foreign Local Total Foreign Local Total  

 A. Investment Costs               
1. GOODS               
Vehicle 30,212.0 -0.0 30,212.0 337.2 -0.0 337.2 100 
Equipment 17,547.9 5,174.2 22,722.1 195.9 57.8 253.6 77 
Subtotal 47,759.9 5,174.2 52,934.1 533.1 57.8 590.9 90 
2. WORKS               
Horticulture-Related Infrastructure 208,302.0 19,500.0 227,802.0 2,325.2 217.7 2,542.9 91 
Livestock Infrastructure 131,930.2 23,568.4 155,498.6 1,472.7 263.1 1,853.3 85 
Youth and Women Empowerment 46,600.0 81,810.8 128,410.8 520.2 913.2 1,433.4 36 
Subtotal 386,832.2 124,879.2 511,711.4 4,318.0 1,394.0 5,712.0 76 
3. SERVICES               
Training - 59,882.1 59,882.1 - 668.4 668.4 - 
TAAT-Related Technical Support 21,944.4 1,368.0 23,312.4 245.0 15.3 260.2 94 
ILRI TAAT Grant-Contribution 23,938.0 - 23,938.0 267.2 - 267.2 100 
Survey and Studies 9,387.9 5,130.0 14,517.9 104.8 57.3 162.1 65 
Institutional Support - 47,300.0 47,300.0 - 528.0 528.0 - 
Financial Audit 6,258.6 - 6,258.6 69.9 - 69.9 100 
Consultancy 41,724.0 - 41,724.0 465.7 - 465.7 100 
Subtotal 103,252.9 113,680.1 216,933.0 1,152.6 1,269.0 2,421.5 48 
4. Duties & Taxes - 61,044.5 61,044.5 - 681.4 681.4 - 
Total Investment Costs 537,845.0 304,778.0 842,623.0 6,003.7 3,402.1 9,405.8 64 
B. Recurrent Costs               
1. OPERATING COST               
Personnel_Govt Staff/NBF - 16,050.0 16,050.0 - 179.2 179.2 - 
Personnel_PCU Staff - 58,608.0 58,608.0 - 654.2 654.2 - 
Daily Subsistence Allowance - 11,250.0 11,250.0 - 125.6 125.6 - 
Operation and Maintenance - 76,612.4 76,612.4 - 855.2 855.2 - 
Subtotal - 162,520.4 162,520.4 - 1,814.1 1,814.1 - 
2. Duties & Taxes - 387.6 387.6 - 4.3 4.3 - 
Total Recurrent Costs - 162,908.0 162,908.0 - 1,818.5 1,818.5 - 



 

7 
 

Category of Expenditure 
Amount (MZN '000) Amount (UA '000) 

% 
For’gn 
Exch 

Foreign Local Total Foreign Local Total  

Total BASELINE COSTS 537,845.0 467,686.0 1,005,531.0 6,003.7 5,220.6 11,224.3 53 
Physical Contingencies 25,809.0 11,522.0 37,331.0 288.1 128.6 416.7 69 
Price Contingencies 14,814.0 38,940.8 53,754.7 165.4 434.7 600.0 28 
Total PROJECT COSTS 578,467.9 518,148.8 1,096,616.7 6,457.2 5,783.9 12,241.1 53 

 
Table 2.6: Expenditure schedule by component [amounts in million UA equivalents] 

 
Item Description 

Amount (UA '000) 

PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 Total 
1. Agriculture Value Chain Development 3,399.3 3,333.8 1,395.3 330.5 330.5 8,789.4 
2. Institutional Support and Project Management 727.4 428.9 440.5 379.8 458.4 2,435.0 
Total BASELINE COSTS 4,126.7 3,762.7 1,835.8 710.3 788.9 11,224.4 
Physical Contingencies 154.9 147.3 80.0 15.5 19.1 416.8 
Price Contingencies 54.7 158.6 148.1 99.4 139.1 599.9 
Total PROJECT COSTS 4,336.3 4,068.6 2,063.9 825.2 947.1 12,241.1 
Amount for Taxes and Duties (already included) 337.2 247.6 111.4 16.2 28.1 740.5 

2.5.  Project’s Target area and population  
 
2.5.1  The activities of the project will be undertaken in two provinces, Gaza and Maputo. In each of the 
provinces two districts are selected to participate in the project. In Maputo, the project will be implemented 
in the districts of Moamba and Namaacha, while in Gaza the selected districts are Chókwè and Chonguene. 
The selected communities are those that are cultivating horticulture and livestock owners. They will be the 
direct beneficiaries of the activities under the project. The total direct beneficiaries of the project will be 
circa 20,000 individuals, of which about 60% will be women. The project will target 4000 households to 
increase the production of an additional 20,000 small ruminants in four districts in two provinces - Moamba 
and Namaacha districts (Maputo Province), and Chonguene, Massingir and Chókwè districts (Gaza 
Province). The indirect beneficiaries will be in the range of 20,000 people. With an average of 5 persons 
per household this would result in improved livelihoods for approximately 100,000 rural dwellers.   
 
2.5.2 Public institutions such as the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security (MASA), the Provincial and 
District directorates of Agriculture and Food Security, Veterinary Services, IIAM, the Agriculture 
Development Fund (FDA), the National Institute for Small and Medium Enterprises (IPEME) and the 
Office for Supporting Economic Production (GAPI) will benefit from the project interventions in terms of 
capacity building. Other indirect beneficiaries are agro processors, traders, entrepreneur, various service 
providers, NGOs, etc. In addition to infrastructure and improved agricultural practices, innovative 
techniques needed for quality maintenance of infrastructure, and conservation and processing of food 
products, will be developed.  

2.6.  Participatory Process for Project Identification, Design and Implementation  

2.6.1   Project Identification  
 
The investment in integrated agricultural development in the Lower Limpopo and Sábiè-Incomati regions 
within the Limpopo and Maputo Corridors, will respectively have a component for leveraging the existing 
infrastructure to increase agricultural productivity and producers’ access to markets. Increasing agricultural 
productivity, strengthening its resilience to climate shocks and building agriculture value chains, are all 
areas where the Government of Mozambique is looking forward to working with the AfDB.  



 

8 
 

The Value Chains and Youth Empowerment Project emerged from the need to promote a more competitive 
and inclusive agribusiness in the Maputo and Gaza provinces through increasing agricultural productivity 
and animal production, by providing rural infrastructure to support production (irrigation, storage facilities), 
use of improved agricultural inputs (certified seeds and fertilizers), practical and lower-cost breeding 
programs, such as Community-Based Breeding programs (CBBPs), vaccinations, agro-processing, access 
to market and promotion of the value chain development. The project also emerged in order to tackle the 
investment made at the Massingir Dam to promote irrigation development for the production of food crops 
with the aim of improving food security, contributing to the diversification of the agricultural economy in 
the region, and wealth creation for the rural population including women and youth. It is expected that the 
private sector will fully participate in supporting the smallholders and the emerging farmers throughout-
grower or contract farming approaches, supply of agricultural inputs, agro-processing, marketing the 
agricultural produce, and financing agricultural activities.   

2.6.2   Project Preparation and Appraisal  
The project design was prepared following constant consultations with beneficiaries, government 
authorities, NGOs and development partners in Maputo and Gaza provinces.  While in the field, numerous 
interactions/consultations were conducted at the provincial and district levels; site visits to the selected 
districts and mini-workshops were held; and consultations with government, non -government and 
private organizations as well as community representatives near and within  some of the targeted 
communities were carried out to modify and fine-tune the project proposal. The Bank also deployed 
designed resources to fine-tune into AVACYEP, existing designs from the most recently implemented 
projects, i.e. Sustainable Land and Water Management Project and Baixo Limpopo Irrigation and Climate 
Resilience Project, in order to adjust proposed infrastructures to the implementation sites. The consultation 
also involved the provision of agricultural inputs to match farmers’ needs and their financial limitations to 
ensure sustainability of activities and meet the outcomes. Consultations were also carried out with a number 
of Government authorities and other development partners that participate in different development donor 
programmes.   

2.6.3    Project Implementation  
 
2.6.3.1  The proposed AVACYEP is based o n  a  fully participatory approach involving capacity training 
of members of the community and substantial training through demonstrative processes. The Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU) at the project headquarters and the provincial technical staff will be responsible 
for the monitoring of project results including output and outcome indicators on a participatory fashion. 
Data collection and evaluation tasks would be performed by all the institutions involved in the project or in 
partnership with other relevant institutions under close supervision of the Monitoring and Evaluation expert 
of the project.  The community members will thus develop the capacity to maintain the community 
infrastructure, to be installed with support from the Agriculture Departments. 

2.7.  Bank Group Experience, Lessons Reflected in Project Design  

The overall performance assessment of the Bank’s portfolio in Mozambique conducted in 2017 is 3.30 on 
a scale of 1-4. The portfolio is comprised of 19 projects (17 public projects, 2 private sector projects and 1 
multinational project). There are no projects at risk. Learning from recent Project Completion Reports 
(PCR’s) and the ongoing Bank Projects in Mozambique which have informed the design features of the 
AVACYEP include the need to: a) improve the project design process with consideration to existing 
capacity within the country so as to ensure timely implementation; b) project readiness and quality at entry 
for both regional and national operations; c) Rationalize the number of conditions necessary to declare the 



 

9 
 

Grant effective in order to reduce implementation delays; d) increase capacity of implementing agencies 
especially in the project management); e) enhance the supervision of projects, particularly monitoring and 
evaluation to minimize delays in completion; and, f) delays in provision of counterpart funds, partly owing 
to late approval and release of funds by Government. For the closed Projects in the last 5 years, the PCRs 
are up to date with all the reports prepared and posted on the Bank website.  

2.8. Key Performance Indicators  
The key performance indicators for the project have been outlined in the Result Based Logical Framework.  
Special emphasis in order to assess the changes in the livelihood and nutrition levels within the household 
will be placed on the targeting indicators that should be monitored and those related specifically to women 
as they carry the majority of agriculture activities in the project area. Regular implementation progress will 
be measured through bi-annual Bank supervision missions led by Mozambique Country Office, Quarterly 
Progress Reports, and annual technical and financial audits.  The M&E of the PIU will collect and analyze 
project data to monitor performance. The main performance indicators disaggregated by gender will be 
monitored from the baseline scenario of the log frame include among others: (i) Area developed with 
irrigation kits; (ii) N° of farmers and livestock owners adopting new production technologies (including 
climate compatible technologies); (iii) N° of processing facilities and marketing service providers; (iv) N° 
of surface and subsurface reservoirs, water troughs, multifunctional boreholes slaughter-houses, disease 
control centers, processing facilities and feed stock sites; (v) N° of business plans and proposals approved 
for financing (50% of which owned by females) within the incubation program, including access to financial 
mechanisms; and (vi) number of women & men trained with basic agriculture and livestock skills. All 
indicators selected for the project will help to enhance agricultural performance in the Maputo and Gaza 
Provinces in particular, and in Mozambique in general. The Bank’s various supervision missions and 
periodic activity reports will reflect the level of achievement of the indicators.  

III – PROJECT FEASIBILITY  

3.1 .  Economic and Financial Analysis  
 
The DCF analysis carried out on the net cash-flow gave an Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 
28% and the Economic Net Present Value is estimated at USD 220 million at an opportunity cost of 10%. 
The economic values for the production inputs and equipment were developed using a standard conversion 
factor of 0.95, taking into account the taxes in the country. The economic prices used for the horticultural 
and red meat products were the prevailing market prices in the country.  
 
Sensitivity analysis using economic prices showed that a 5% decrease in capital costs marginally increased 
the ENPV to USD 222 million while maintaining the EIRR at 28%. On the other hand, a fall in the product 
prices by 3% reduced the ENPV to USD 93 million and EIRR to 16%.  Refer to Annex 3 on details on 
sensitivity analysis.  
 

FIRR, FNPV (base case) 24.81 % : USD 141 million  
EIRR, ENPV (base case) 28 % : USD 220 million  

 

Note: detailed calculations are available in Appendix in the Volume II, Technical Annex ….. 
 

The financial analysis has been carried out at the farm household level as well as the entire project level. 
This has been done by comparing the benefits accruing to the individual beneficiaries, and aggregated for 
the project as a whole, on a with – and - without project basis. The analysis was carried out for on the 



 

10 
 

horticulture value chains focusing on five priority horticultural crops namely tomatoes, cabbages, 
cucumber, onion and pepper and red meat value chains, the latter focusing on beef and goat meat. The 
analysis is based on the assumption that the participating households will be producing horticultural crops 
under irrigation system and rearing of beef animals and goats under improved management systems. The 
project is expected to increase agricultural productivity through the provision of inputs and irrigation 
facilities, multipurpose boreholes, agro-processing and packaging equipment, livestock equipment and 
infrastructures for disease control and improved sanitation, extension services and institutional 
strengthening and capacity building. The analysis takes into account the current and incremental production 
under the improved management and assumes full production levels from year 3. The analysis shows that 
an average net income (gross margin) per farming household participating in the project will increase from 
USD 22.182 under the existing situation (without project) to USD 31,966 under project situation. The 
discounted cash flow (DCF) analysis carried out on the net cash-flow gave a Financial Internal Rate of 
Return (FIRR) of 24.81%, and a Financial Net Present Value (NPV) of USD 141 million at an opportunity 
costs of 12%.  
 
Sensitivity analysis was conducted on the price changes on for the horticultural and red meat products and 
capital investments in the project. The results showed that a decrease in the prices of produce by 3% resulted 
into a reduction of the FIRR to 14.17% with FNPV of USD 28.30 million. This shows that the revenue is 
very sensitive to changes in the prices. It was also noted that a decrease in the capital cost by 5% resulted 
into an increase in the FIRR to 25.02% and FNPV increased to USD 142.50 million.  

3.2.  Environmental and Social Impacts  
 
3.2.1  Based on the proposed project scope the environmental and social (E&S) classification was 
validated as a Category 2 according to the African Development Bank’s Environmental and Social 
Assessment Procedures (ESAP). Hence an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) was 
prepared and disclosed on the Bank’s website before 20th of June 2018.  This classification and attendant 
requirement is commensurate with the project classification stipulated by the country’s Regulamento Sobre 
Processo de Avaliação do Impacto Ambiental – Decreto No.54/2015. The principal objectives of conducting 
this environmental and social assessment and planning was to ensure that the project integrates mechanisms 
to reduce environmental impacts along the entire value chain, from production, marketing to product value 
addition/manufacture, usage and disposal. 

3.2.2  Environmental and Social Assessments indicate that although the project will have some site 
specific negative impacts, it is also posed to have numerous positive impacts among them: (i) improved 
production and competitiveness of selected agriculture commodities that will contribute to increased 
income opportunities for value chain actors, and support the local economy of the Gaza and Maputo 
Province; (ii) improved access to irrigation kits that will foster water management and reduce the 
vulnerability of farmers to precarious weather conditions, ensuring all year round agricultural activities; 
(iii) improved agronomic practices and technologies for selected crops and improved varieties that are 
adapted to different climatic conditions; and (iv) improved agricultural production, productivity and market 
linkages that will foster job creation along the value chains. 
 
3.2.3 The negative impacts will stem from a number of activities in the infrastructure development and 
value chain components of the project. The potential negative impacts of the project include those 
associated with the construction of the infrastructure development, and agriculture production and value 
chain activities. Construction activities may result in (i) losses of vegetation cover due to site clearing, soil 
erosion, landscape degradation; (ii) noise, vibration and emissions from operation of machinery that may 
impair air quality and induce health implications: (iii) generation of wastes (including construction wastes); 



 

11 
 

(iv) disruption of water flows and hydrologic cycle which may impact activities of other water users. During 
operation phase, agriculture activities of value chain actors may lead to (i) increased use of agrochemicals 
including pesticides and fertilizers, which may contribute to soil and water (surface and groundwater) 
contamination, and increase health-risks of people exposed to pesticides, and (ii) waste and effluents from 
processing and marketing facilities.  These impacts are site specific and can be readily managed with the 
application of well-defined measures elaborated in the ESMP. Some of the mitigation measures to be 
implemented include (i) refilling the exposed or excavated soil soon after completion of works and avoiding 
or minimizing compaction of soils, (ii) establishing sustainable water management systems, and (iii) 
capacity building of value chain actors to promote good agriculture practices, improved agriculture 
technologies such as integrated soil fertility management (ISFM), integrated pest management (IPM), 
Waste-to-Energy techniques, and other sustainable land and water management practices.  

3.3.  Climate Change  
 
3.3.1  Agriculture production in Mozambique is vulnerable to the impacts of climate variability and 
change.  Drought, floods and storms are increasing in frequency and intensity, while average temperatures 
during the growing season are rising. Crop failure, loss of livestock, reduction in productivity of pastures 
and outbreaks of pest and diseases are exacerbated by extreme climatic events.  Furthermore, severe floods 
and storms damage infrastructure (road, market and storage infrastructure) that support agriculture value 
chain development).  
 
Cognizant of the national commitment to combat climate change, the projects is being prepared taking into 
consideration the various National Strategies, Plans and Institutions relevant to Climate Change among 
them; (i) the Nationally Determined Contribution (2015)   which articulate the actions to be undertaken to 
adapt  to the inevitable impacts of climate change and to contribute to the global mitigation agenda . (ii) the 
National Climate Change Adaptation and Mitigation strategy 2013-2030 (2012)  which identifies adaptation 
and climate risk reduction  and low carbon development as national priorities (iii) National Adaptation 
Programme of Action (NAPA) (2007) and the Strategic Program for Climate Resilience (SPCR), aim to 
coordinate the elaboration and implementation of an action plan for adaptation to climate change for various 
economic and social development sectors, with an emphasis on disaster risk reduction, early warning 
systems, agriculture, fisheries, energy, water  resources, ecosystems, and coastal zones.  
 
In relation to the climate risk screening the project is category 2, it is potentially vulnerable to the impacts 
of climate change and requires the identification and integration of practical climate risk management 
measures in project design. In this regards, the proposed AVACYEP will address critical climate adaptation 
needs of the smallholder farmers and other value chain actors in the project area. Some of the priority areas 
of action include (i) increase access to seeds adapted to local conditions (ii) promote good agriculture 
practices such as sustainable land management for increased agricultural yields; (iii) facilitate climate 
proofing of infrastructure, (iv) build capacity for agricultural planning and extension services to facilitate 
dissemination of climate information to farmers, and (iv) promote livelihood diversification.  Overall, the 
project will facilitate climate resilience along the selected value chains by promoting climate smart 
agriculture and improved agriculture technologies. 
  



 

12 
 

3.4.  Gender  
 
3.4.1 Agriculture is the most important economic sector for the wellbeing of rural households in 
Mozambique. As such, agriculture is linked to the income and consumption levels of rural households, and 
influences their food security, poverty, and malnutrition status, among other characteristics. Smallholders 
continue to dominate the agrarian sector, with 3.86 million households engaged in small-scale agriculture, 
out of a total of 4.268.585 farms, predominantly farmed by women. Gender mainstreaming in agriculture 
is guided by the Agriculture Gender Strategy. The strategy seeks to guarantee access and control of the 
resources, benefits, rights and equal opportunities, between women and men, and to increase food security 
and household revenue of men and women, with the ultimate goal of contributing to reduction of poverty 
and sustainable development.    

3.4.2 Key gender equality challenges in rural agriculture include i) Access to land- The Mozambican Land 
Law (Lei de Terra) provides for equal access to land for men and women but majority of women still do 
not have security of tenure for the land they work on.  Many are unaware of the registration process and 
access to land is still based on gender structures where women’s claims are usually socially embedded in 
their relations to their male relatives the project will therefore support land registration for women. ii) 
Access to affordable financial solutions- whilst women are the main household financial managers, they 
are often an overlooked target client for financial services providers. Although un- and underserved by 
formal financial institutions, women in Mozambique save using informal methods such as xitique (group 
savings) making them viable customers for local financial services. The project will therefore support 
business coaching, incubation and linkages to financial services for youth and female agripreneurs. Building 
on existing savings groups the project will support the strengthening of community based financial schemes 
to promote financial inclusion in rural areas. iii) Limited production capacity and value addition- both 
women and men in Mozambique are involved in the horticulture and red meat value chains, albeit with 
different patterns between male- and female-headed households. While women generally participate at all 
levels of the chains they face production related challenges and are minimally involved in value addition. 
The project will therefore support increased productivity for women and youth through the provision of 
starter kits for horticulture and red meat value chains including training and coaching in agribusiness, 
animal health, and training of community based extension services workers and creating linkages to formal 
extension services. 

3.5. Involuntary Resettlement 
 
3.5.1  The project is not expected to trigger any form of involuntary resettlement. 

IV – IMPLEMENTATION  

4.1.  Implementation arrangements  
 
4.1.1   The Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security (MASA) will be the Executing Agency (EA) for the 
Project which will be implemented in Gaza and Maputo Provinces, through MASA’s Directorate of 
Planning and International Cooperation (DPCI). A Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will be set up at the 
MASA, for the day to day effective implementation of the Project activities over a period of five (5) years. 
The MASA institutions such as the National Irrigation Institute (Instituto Nacional de Irrigação/INIR), the 
National Directorate of Agriculture and Silviculture (Direccão Nacional de Agricultura e 
Silvicultura/DINAS), Fund for Agriculture Development (Fundo de Desenvolvimento Agrário/FDA), and 
National Directorate for Agricultural Extension (Direcção Nacional de Extensão Agraria/DNEA), National 



 

13 
 

Directorate of Veterinary (Direccão Nacional de Veterinária / DINAV) and National Institute for 
Agricultural Research of Mozambique (Instituto Nacional de Investigação Agrária de Moçambique / IIAM) 
will be responsible for technical implementation in the areas linked with their mandates. Some of the 
components, i.e. Youth and Women Empowerment will be outsourced. The PCU will be constituted of a 
Project Coordinator (PC), Project Accountant, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Specialist, Procurement 
Specialist and support staff. For effective implementation, the agriculture offices in Gaza and Maputo 
Provinces will be provided with logistical support. The PCU will also be responsible for the overall 
monitoring and supervision of ESMF/ESMP implementation. The Project activities will be supported by 
MASA Technical Council that will compose the Project Steering Committee (PSC) which will be set-up, 
by the Government, to provide oversight responsibility and oversee Project compliance with sector policies 
and strategies. The PSC will comprise MASA Permanent Secretary and senior officials from DPCI, FDA, 
DNEA, DNP, INIR, DNE, IPEME (Institute for Promotion of Small and Medium Enterprises), and GAPI 
(Small Scale Investment Support Office), DNS and IIAM. The PC will be secretary to the PSC. 
 
4.1.2  Financial Management, Disbursement and Auditing Arrangement: 
 
4.1.2.1  Financial Management: The overall conclusion of the FM Assessment is that MASA’s (through 
the Department of National Planning and Cooperation, DNPC) capacity to handle the FM aspects of the 
project satisfies the Bank’s minimum requirements as per the Bank FM guidelines. The Ministry has 
handled donor-funded (APSA- World Bank, PROSUL- FIDA, PASF- Austria, PSP- IFAD and PADR- 
Italy) projects. The DNPC is generally adequately staffed. The Ministry utilizes a functional computerized 
accounting system (e-SISTAFE) to record and process transactions, complemented by use of spread sheets 
for financial reporting purposes for projects. The control environment from budget preparation, execution, 
monitoring and reporting were found to be adequate. There is a functional internal audit unit which will 
further strengthen the internal controls within the ministry including the project. In that regard, the Bank 
will make use of the existing systems within MASA (while closely monitoring and providing assistance as 
required) under the overall responsibility of the Director, Department of Finance and Administration, to 
handle the project’s FM including accounting for the project resources and submitting the required financial 
reports to the Bank. In accordance with the Bank’s financial reporting and auditing requirements, the project 
will be required to prepare and submit to the Bank Interim Quarterly Progress Report (IQPR) no later than 
45 days after the end of each quarter. In addition, the project will be required to prepare separate project 
annual financial statements which will form the entry point for external audit due diligence. The overall FM 
residual risk for the project is assessed as Moderate. (The detailed FM assessment is attached as Annex B4).  
 
4.1.2.2  Auditing arrangement: The MASA has been audited by the Tribunal Administrativo (TA) bi-
annually. The TA is constitutionally mandated to audit all public institutions in Mozambique, however 
given the capacity constraints, some of the audits especially in Bank funded projects have been audited by 
private audit firms competitively recruited with the involvement of the TA. Specific for the project, a 
separate audit report will be prepared for the project annually with the audit carried out by an independent 
external auditor recruited in accordance with the Bank’s requirements. The audit will be conducted in 
accordance with a Bank approved audit Terms of Reference with the costs of the audit financed from the 
grant. The annual audited financial statements including the auditor’s opinion and management letter will 
be submitted to the Bank not later than six months after the end of each fiscal year. 
 
4.1.2.3 Disbursement Arrangements: Flow of funds to finance the institution follows the national treasury 
and appropriation procedures with controls over the use of funds generally adequate. The entity operates 3 
bank accounts with adequate controls over access to the funds and up to date recording of transactions. The 
review noted that donor-funded projects funds have been managed generally satisfactory. However, the 
institution lacks practical experience in managing Bank funds flow. Specific to this project, payments will 



 

14 
 

be primarily by direct payment method where the Bank will pay contractors/consultants and suppliers 
directly based on satisfactory performance in accordance with the Bank’s Disbursement Handbook. 
Disbursements would be made upon preparation and submission of all relevant documentations by DPCI 
to the Bank’s Disbursement Division, through the Bank’s Country Office in Mozambique. In addition, a 
Special Account denominated in USD and its associated MZN denominated project operating account shall 
be opened at the Central Bank, and will be limited for use in paying for the small operating project expenses 
that are recurring in nature. A Disbursement Letter will be issued by the Bank. 
 
4.1.3 Procurement Arrangements:  
 
4.1.3.1 Borrower Procurement System (BPS):  
 
Procurement of goods (including non-consultancy services), works and the acquisition of consulting 
services, financed by the Bank for the project, will be carried out in accordance with the “Procurement 
Policy and Methodology for Bank Group Funded Operations” (BPM), dated October 2015, and following 
the provisions stated in the Financing Agreement. Specifically, Procurement would be carried out 
following: 
 

x Borrower Procurement System (BPS): Specific Procurement Methods and Procedures (PMPs) 
under BPS comprising its Laws and Regulations, namely, Decreto 5/2016 de 8 de Março – 
Regulamento de Contratação de Empreitadas de Obras Públicas, Fornecimento de Bens, e Prestação 
de Serviços ao Estado (Regulations for Contracting of Public Works, Supply of Goods and 
Consultancy & Non-Consultancy Services to the State), using the national Standard Solicitation 
Documents (SSDs) as amended to be in consistent with the new law, using the national Standard 
Bidding Documents (SBDs) or other Solicitation Documents agreed during project negotiations” 
for various group of transactions to be entailed under the project. 

x Bank Procurement Methods and Procedures (PMPs): Bank standard PMPs, using the relevant 
Bank Standard Solicitation Documents SDDs, for contracts that are indicated in Annex B5, Para. B 
5.5, or (ii) in case BPS is not relied upon for a specific transaction or group of transactions; and (iii) 
in case BPM have been found to be the best fit for purpose for a specific transaction or group of 
transactions. 

Procurement Risks and Capacity Development: the assessment of procurement risks at the Country, 
Sector, and Project levels and of procurement capacity at the Executing Agency (EA), were undertaken3 
for the project and the output has informed the decisions on the procurement regimes (BPS, Bank or Third 
party) being used for specific transactions or groups of similar transactions under the project. The 
appropriate risks mitigation measures have been included in the procurement PRCA action plan proposed 
in Annex B5, Para. 5.2. 
 
4.1.3.2 Procurement Risks and Capacity Development:  
 
Procurement Risk Assessments were undertaken for this project by conducting an exhaustive assessment 
covering the risks associated with the country, sector and project environments as well as the Executing 
Agency responsible for the implementation of the Project’s procurement activities.  
  
Most of the issues/ risks associated with the procurement activities for implementation of the project have been 
identified and mitigated. The mitigation measures have been discussed and agreed with the Executing Agency 
                                                 
3 See Technical Annexes for details 



 

15 
 

MASA and included in the PRCA action plan proposed in above. The overall Project Procurement Risk Rating 
(PPRR) is at time of Appraisal is: 
 
Table 4.2 Overall Project Risk Rating at Appraisal 

Items  H  S  M  L  
Overall Project Procurement Risk  
Country Risks      
Sector Risks      
Project Specific risks      
Executing Agency Risks      

 
4.1.3.3. Summary of the Procurement Arrangements for the Project 

The procurement arrangements for the various components, elements, and items, under the different 
expenditure categories to be financed by the Grant and procured using BPS and BPM are summarized in 
Table 4.3 below. Large-value contracts, each group of similar transactions/contracts, the different 
procurement regimes, estimated costs, oversight requirements, and the timeframe as agreed between the 
Borrower and the Bank, are documented in the Procurement Plan. 
 
Table 4.3: Summary of Procurement Arrangements 

  BPS   
 Project Components/Categories  Shop  OCB 

(ICB)  
OCB 

(NCB) 
OCB 
(SL) 

Shop Total 

1 Goods  1,784,8 465.4  38.9 2289.1 
2 Civil Works  2,407.8 1,424.2   3832.0 
3 Consulting Services (Firms)  

 

   488.4  488.4 
4 Consulting Services (Individual)   

 

   1,961.8  1961.8 
5 Training 1,864.8     1864.8 
6 Operating Costs  

 

563.9     563.9 

 
 

4.2.  Governance  
 
GoM has been implementing a number of reforms to enhance governance, transparency and accountability. 
There have been major structural and functional reforms with emphasis on policy and institutional actions 
including public financial management system, decentralization and capacity building all in an effort to 
ensure accountability and transparency in Government operations. The Project will be utilizing qualified 
staff to ensure economy and efficiency of project procurement and financial management process. 
Furthermore, the governance structure of the project provides for a statutory body like the MASA Conselho 
Consultivo and Conselho Tecnico (Consultative Council and Technical Council) as the steering committee, 
which gives oversight policy direction for the implementation of the project. The Bank will follow up on 
governance through regular field supervision missions, audit reports, Annual WorkPlan and Budget 
(AWPB), progress reports and procurement plans. The Bank is effectively on the ground with the Country 
Office (COMZ) in Maputo and thus close interaction and follow up will be undertaken at the Country level to 
ensure that implementation of Project activities are on course. The COMZ Sector Experts and from RDGS 2 
will give a quarterly schedule of implementation progress to the Country Manager and the Manager of RDGS 2 
. 
  



 

16 
 

4.3.  Monitoring  
  
4.3.1 The monitoring and evaluation specialist will be responsible for the internal monitoring and 
evaluation of project activities and logical framework indicators, working in liaison with the technical 
experts on the project implementation team. The Project Implementation Unit at the project headquarters 
and the province levels will be responsible for the monitoring of project results including output and 
outcome indicators. Data collection and evaluation tasks will be performed by all the institutions involved 
in the project or in partnership with other relevant institutions.   

4.3.2 The PIU will work closely with relevant Ministries Directorates and Agencies of government and 
research institutes for the purposes of data collection, and monitoring and evaluation of the project. The 
PIU will be recruited and staffed with a qualified M&E Specialist, who will benefit from tailored capacity 
building programs to acquaint him/her very well with the scope and nature of the project, and the 
methodology to be followed. The project will support the deployment of an M&E and Management 
Information System (MIS) that will facilitate performance monitoring and impact evaluation against the 
specified indicators, including gender tracker and environmental safeguards related indicators. While the 
performance monitoring process facilitates informed decision-making, the outcome assessment will provide 
information on whether the project has achieved its development objectives. 

Table 4.4 Monitoring Milestones 

Timeframe Milestone Monitoring Process/feedback Loop 
07/2018 Grant Approval Board of Directors 
08/2018 Grant Signature Grant Agreement 
08/2018 Grant Effectiveness Bank/GoM – Bank letter to GoM 
09/2018 Project Launch Mission Bank/GoM 
09/2018 First Disbursement Bank/GoM: Open a Bank Account by GoM 
06/2020 Mid-Term Review Bank/GoM 
2018-2023 Supervision Missions Bank 
11/2023 Project Completion Report GoM/Bank 

4.4.  Sustainability  
  
Use of simple technologies that are appropriate for the rural farmers ensures that adoption and replicability 
is assured. The project design is based on feasibility studies as well as stakeholders consultations to ensure 
ownership and sustainability. Community participation and capacity building will further bolster the 
abilities of the various groups to continue project activities even after completion. The market activities 
offer additional sources of income and therefore greater capacity for the horticulture farmers and livestock 
owners to continue with the activities after conclusion of the project. The project will establish 
communities’ led-committees for overseeing infrastructure operation and maintenance as well as for 
enhancing community participation and ownership. The committees will be technically supported by the 
National water and agriculture agencies. The infrastructure to be installed for irrigation and water harvesting 
was selected based on the national plans from both MASA and Ministry of Public Works, Housing and 
Water Resources (MOPHRH). Therefore, the infrastructure will be owned both by the communities and the 
relevant Government agencies and token amounts paid for their day to day operations. 

4.5.  Risk management  
The Project assumes (i) that the Government will continue with its commitment to social and political 
consensus and macroeconomic stability; (ii) Mozambique will have no restriction on water extraction for 



 

17 
 

irrigation; (iii) no restriction on private sector/NGO participation in water harvesting infrastructures and 
setting up of livestock. The current risks include the following: 
 

Table 4.5 Risk and Mitigation 
 

N° Risk Level of 
Occurrence 

Mitigation 

1 Limited business and technical skills of 
targeted youth and women and MSMEs 
in value chain management 

M Project includes business and technical 
skills training for targeted beneficiaries  

2 Farmers with no interest to adopt new 
technologies  

M Promoting stakeholders participation, 
engagement and integration 

3 Adaptability of selected seeds L Research and demonstrative activities, 
extension and capacity building 

 

4.6.  Knowledge building  

The AVACYEP will allocate resources to systematically document and publicize new lessons, especially 
on the adoption technologies for small ruminants and Youth Empowerment components that are less 
documented. The outcome of this project will be carefully monitored and documented. Furthermore, the 
Project will be financing number of studies in particular related to build a knowledge implementation of 
FEAST for monitoring inventory and uptake of feed resources; promotion of forage production and support 
to IIAM for conducting research on effective seed distribution system for forage seeds; introduction of hay 
bale making and ration formulation to young entrepreneurs; construction of multipurpose boreholes for 
water provision. All project related studies and research would be made readily available on the AfDB 
websites for wider dissemination. Finally, the third approach is to bring agro-processing to the farm level 
by farmer and women/youth groups, all of which will also be documented. Contracted service providers 
will train beneficiaries, especially women, on value addition and post-harvest operations including cleaning, 
sorting, drying, cutting and packing produced vegetable. The successes of these practices will also be 
documented. 

V. – LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY  

5.1.  Legal instrument  
The project will be financed pursuant to: (i) an ADF grant agreement between the Borrower and the ADF;  

5.2.  Conditions associated with Bank’s intervention 
 
5.2.1 Condition Precedent to Entry into Force of the ADF: The grant agreement shall enter into force 
on the date of signature by the Recipient and by the Fund.  
 
5.2.2 Condition Precedent to First Disbursement: The obligations of the Bank to make the first 
disbursement of the Grant shall be conditional upon the entry into force of the Protocol of Agreement: 
 
The Borrower shall provide:  
 
(i) Evidence of the recruitment, designation or appointment of staff (Project Coordinator, Project Accountant, 
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Specialist, and Procurement Specialist) for the project implementation 
unit with qualifications and terms of reference acceptable to the Fund; 



 

18 
 

5.3.  Undertaking 
The Borrower undertakes to implement the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), and 
report to the Bank on a quarterly basis, as part of the quarterly progress report. 

5.4. Compliance with Bank Policies 
x This project complies with all applicable Bank policies. 
x Non-standard conditions (if applicable): N/A  

VI. – RECOMMENDATION  
Management recommends that the Board of Directors approve the proposed ADF Grant of Eleven Million 
Unit of Account (UA 11.00 million) to the Republic of Mozambique for the purpose of implementing the 
Agricultural Value Chain and Youth Empowerment Project and subject to the conditions stipulated in this 
report. 



























































AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 

 

 

 

 

 

MULTINATIONAL (SOMALIA /SUDAN) 

RURAL LIVELIHOODS’ ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE IN 

THE HORN OF AFRICA II (RLACC II) 

 

 

 

 

November 2017 

 

 

 

 
Grant Information 

Client’s Information 

GRANT RECIPIENT Republic of Sudan and Federal Republic of Somalia 

EXECUTING AGENGIES 

Sudan Project:  Higher Council for Environment and Natural Resources 

(HCENR) - Ministry of Environment 

Somalia Project: Intergovernmental Authority on Development 

 

Financing Plan 

Source Amount (USD) Amount (UA) Percentage Instrument 

GEF Focal Area: 

Climate Change 

Adaptation 

17,067,592 12,042,073 100%  

Sudan 7,082,407 4,997,006 41% GEF Grant 

Somalia 9,985,185 7,045,067 59% GEF Grant 

Total Cost 17,067,592 12,042,073 100%  

 

Important Financial Information 

Grant Currency USD 

Type of Interest N/A 

Interest Rate Margin N/A 

Commitment Charge/Fee N/A 

Service Charge N.A 

Tenor N/A 

Grace Period N/A 

FIRR, NPV (base case) 17%, NPV value at 12% is USD 1.71 millions 

EIRR, NPV (base case) 20%, NPV value at 12% is USD 2.19 millions 

 

 

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected) 

CEO Approval by the GEF 
Somalia: December, 2016 

Sudan: March 2017 

Project Approval by ADB November, 2017 

Effectiveness January 2018 

Completion January 2021 

Last Disbursement April 2021 

Closing date June 2021 

  



 

iii 
 

Program summary 

Overview. The Rural Livelihood’s Adaptation to Climate Change in the Horn of Africa – Phase II 

(RLACC II) project is a multinational program that covers Somalia and Sudan. The program activities 

are country-driven and will be implemented through two Projects respectively in Sudan and Somalia. 

- The Sudan component targets the States of White Nile, Gedaref and Kassala, for a total cost of 

USD 7,082,407; 

- The Somalia component targets Somaliland (Awal region, villages of Quljeed, Ton and 

Salawley-Cheikh Hared), Puntland (Bari and Nugaal region), and South Central Somalia 

(Galguduud and Hiraan States), for a total of USD 9,985,185. 

Project Outcomes. The project is expected to improve the resilience of pastoral and agro-pastoral 

communities to climate change in the two countries  through: (i) introducing adaptation strategies to 

reduce the negative impacts of climate change and strengthen the capacity of pastoral/agro-pastoral 

households to cope with climatic hazards, (ii) enhancing the capacity of communities to not only absorb 

shocks, but to also effectively adapt their livelihoods to harsher climatic conditions, (iii) helping pastoral 

and agro-pastoral households manage drought risks, (iv) supporting community-led initiatives to protect, 

conserve and restore natural resources in a sustainable and climate-resilient manner, (v) strengthening 

the participation of pastoral communities in planning and implementing activities pertaining to their 

development. 

Although the RLACC II program targets specific villages or regions, an important criterion for the 

selection of targeted sites was their position in the target countries’ migration flows. Due to the seasonal 

migratory nature of pastoralists, the project’s benefits will not be limited to the project sites and their 

surroundings.  

Needs Assessment. Vulnerabilities and risks for the HoA have been assessed with the AR-5 (IPCC) and 

through Bank commissioned regional studies (Sustainable livestock Development in the HoA, 

Assessment and Management of Transboundary Water Resources in the IGAD, etc.). Various needs 

have also been identified through meeting and workshops with government officials and various 

stakeholders. 

Based on these assessments, the AfDB set in place a regional program called “Drought Resilience and 

Sustainable Livelihood Program” (DRSLP) which is currently being implemented to address drought 

and livelihood issues in the rural areas of the HoA. The proposed RLACC (II) program will be 

implemented to compliment the DRSLP.  

Bank’s Added Value. The Bank has significant experience in implementing multinational and regional 

operations, and is already implementing a set of programs covering various countries of greater Horn of 

Africa (Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, Djibouti, South-Sudan and Sudan) and addressing issues 

with significant trans-boundary implications, notably, the DRSLP which is being implemented in 

successional phases 1, 2, 3, and 4). Furthermore, the Bank is experienced in implementing GEF projects 

in general and GEF climate change adaptation operations in particular. 

Lessons learnt from the Bank’s involvement in these countries were incorporated in the design of the 

current program. The Bank also brings into the programming a fragility lens approach, which makes the 

design, implementation and review of projects more sensitive to the drivers of fragility with the goal of 

building resilience in countries and communities.  



 

iv 
 

Knowledge Management. Knowledge management approach for the project focuses on learning from 

other relevant projects / programs and initiatives, and planning for the project to assess, document and 

share these experiences and expertise with relevant stakeholders. Different knowledge management 

activities will thus be implemented through the RLACC II projects  

The program will also work in close collaboration, and share its best practices and lessons learned, with 

all co-financing projects, as well as other GEF financed initiatives and other projects implemented by 

the Bank and in the region. 

At the regional level, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) will be in charge of 

sharing knowledge product elaborated by the RLACC II and RLACC I at the regional level to foster 

knowledge sharing and utilization. PIUs, which carry out the day-to-day implementation of the project’s 

activities, will be responsible for the mainstreaming of relevant information at the countries levels 

through the IGAD platform. At the regional level, this should result in dynamic and structured flows of 

information and knowledge between projects and within the RLACC programs in the HoA. 

  



 

v 
 

Results-based logical framework 

Program name:  Rural Livelihoods’ Adaptation to Climate Change in the Horn of 
Africa II (RLACC II) 

Purpose of the program: Enhance pastoralists livelihoods through climate change resilient 
and communities 

Result chain 

Performance Indicator 

Means of 

Verification 

Risks/ 

Mitigation 

Measures 

Indicator 

(including 

CSI) 

Baseline 

(2016) 

Target 

(2020) 

Im
p

a
c
t 

Contribute to the 

reduction of drought 
induced food 

insecurity through the 
implementation of 

adaptive measures to 

climate change in of 
the  targeted rural 

pastoral and agro-

pastoral communities  

Number of food 

insecure households 
and malnutrition 

rates 

Around 9 

million people 
are food 

insecure and 
the 

malnutrition 

rate is over 
25 % in both 

countries 

Reduce by at 

least 20% the 
number of food 

insecure 
households by 

at least 5% 

malnutrition 
rates. 

National survey 

and  reports 

 

 

Assumption: 
Governments 
continuous 

commitment to 

managing drought 

and building 

resilience 

 

O
u

tc
o

m
e
s 

1.1. Climate change-

related adaptation 

measures are 
integrated into 

development plans of 

targeted local 
communities 

 

Number of 
development plan 

that has at least one 

climate-change 
adaptation measures 

integrated and an 

indicative budget 
for its 

implementation by 

the end of the 
project.  

 

 

1.1.3. None of 
the 

development 

plans at the 
country level 

include at least 

one explicit 
adaptation 

measure and an 

indicative 
budget for its 

implementation 

 

1.1.3. At least 3 
pilot 

development 

plans in each 
country include 

at least one 

adaptation 
measure and an 

indicative 

provision for its 
implementation 

 

 

Government and 

community  

planning 
documents 

 

Risk: Lack or 
insufficient 

ownership of the 

project activities by 
the communities 

 

Mitigation: Early 
and sustained 

sensitization on the 

need for 
communities to 

engage in building 

resilience. 
 

 

 
Risk: Insufficient 

human and 
institutional 

capacities  

 
Mitigation: The 

programme will 

have capacity 
building activities 

in both countries 

 
 

 

Risk: A series of 
years without major 

climate events 

could weaken the 
interest of decision-

makers to address 

climate-sensitive 
initiative and 

investments 

 
Mitigation: 

Training and 

sensitization of 
national and local 

decision-makers to 

the impact of CC 
and measures to 

increase the 

resilience at the 
local level with a 

long-term vision. 

 
 

2.1. Adaptation 

practices are 
developed and 

implemented to 

respond to specific 
climate-change 

induced stress in the 

livestock sector in 
ASALs ecosystems.  

 

Number of 

people/households 

adopting newly 
introduced 

adaptation practices 

that build their 
resilience in the 

face of  CC like 

strengthen women’s 
access to resources 

for sustainable food 

production, 
renewable energy, 

and clean water 

sources 

integration of 

livestock 
agriculture is 

the major 

adaptation 
practice  

 

≥ 4,000 

households 
(≥50% are 

women led) 

project survey, 

Assessment 
Report 

 

2.2. Vulnerabilities to 

climate change 
hazards are reduced 

for targeted pastoral 

and agro-pastoral 
communities 

 

Sources of income 

through 

diversification with 
number and 

percentage of jobs 

(person-days) 
generated by the 

project for women 

and men 

One major 

source of 
income 

 

At least 50% of 

people 

diversified their 
incomes with at 

least two major 

sources of 
income 

≥ 4,000 

households 

Field visit reports 
and project report 

3.1. Project 
coordination, 

Knowledge 

management and 
M&E are well 

implemented and 
coordinated  

Degree of execution 
of the project M&E 

Plan by the 

project’s end 

N/A 

The M&E plan 

is fully 

developed and 
executed in a 

timely manner 

M&E documents, 

PIRs, APRs, 
AWPs 

 O
u

tp
u

ts
 

1.1.1. Sensitization, 

awareness and 

information on climate 
change increased 

among local 

stakeholders 
 

1.1.1. % of men and 

women in project 

sites declaring to 
know what CC is 

and how it affects 

them in project sites. 
 

1.1.1. Lack of 

awareness on 

climate change 
adaptation 

techniques in 

the rural sector 
 

1.1.1. ≥ 60% of 

the people in 

project zones 
(≥40% are 

women)  

declare to know 
what climate 

1.1.1. project 

surveys 

 
 

 

 
 



 

vi 
 

Program name:  Rural Livelihoods’ Adaptation to Climate Change in the Horn of 
Africa II (RLACC II) 

Purpose of the program: Enhance pastoralists livelihoods through climate change resilient 
and communities 

Result chain 

Performance Indicator 

Means of 

Verification 

Risks/ 

Mitigation 

Measures 

Indicator 

(including 

CSI) 

Baseline 

(2016) 

Target 

(2020) 

 

 
 

 
 

1.1.2. National sub-

national, and local 
government officials 

are trained on climate 

change resilience and 
their operational 

capacities are 

strengthened 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

1.1.3. Workshops are 
organized at national, 

state and local levels 

to draw lessons from 
project activities and 

mainstream them into 

development policies 
and strategic 

framework that 

increase adaptive 
capacity.  

 

 
 

 
 

1.1.2 Number of 

decision makers and 
planners (men and 

women) trained on 

the integration of 
climate change 

adaptation tools and 

methods (water 
harvesting 

technologies, water 

resources 
management, 

farming methods 

and drought 
resistant varieties, 

alternative income 

generating 
activities) in their 

plans by the end of 

the project 
 

1.1.2. Availability 

of tools and 
methods for the 

integration of CC  

into local 
development plans 

by the end of the 

project, and the 
number of people 

using them 

(disaggregated by 
gender) 

 

1.1.3. Number of 
workshops, study 

tours and meetings 

held where lesson 
from the project 

were discussed by 

the end of the 
project (with 30% 

of women 

benefiting) 
 

1.1.3. Number of 

community-based 
agreements and 

adaptation plans 

that have input from 
both women and 

men, engaging in 
national debate and 

analysis of 

environmental 
impacts, and 

climate change 

policy, regulatory 
frameworks, and 

programs, 

 

 
 

 
 

0 person trained 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

1.1.2. Tools and 

methods are not 
available 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

1.1.3. N/A 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

1.1.3. N/A 

change is and 

how it affects 
them in project 

sites  
 

At least 2,440 

people trained 
(≥40% women) 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

1.1.2. ≥ 3 tools 

or methods, 
used by ≥ 1,500 

people (≥40% 

are women) in 
the two 

councils. 

 
 

 

 
 

 

1.1.3.  ≥ 8 
workshops, 

study tours and 

meetings 
organized to 

discuss project 

lessons in the 
project areas 

 

 
 

 

1.1.3. At least 5 
community-

based 

agreements and 
adaptation 

plans by project 
site, with a 

women 

participation of 
about 40 % 

 

 
 

 
 

1.1.2. training 

reports, project 
reports 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
Project 

implementation 

progress reports 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

1.1.3. 
Development 

framework, 

policies, plans and 
programs.  

 

 
Risk: Livestock-

related investments 
cost may become 

high given the low 

population density 
and the pastoral 

seasonal mobility 

 
Mitigation: The 

siting of 

infrastructure will 
be planned along 

the corridors so that 

it also caters for the 
needs of the 

transhumant 

pastoralists. 
 

 

 
Risk: Poor 

coordination and 

cooperation among 
key national 

institutions dealing 

with pastoralist 
issues 

 

Mitigation: 
Training and 

coordination of 

stakeholders on this 
issue 

 

 
 

 

Risk: inadequate 
acknowledgement 

of the role of civil 

society and CBOs 
by national and 

local governments. 

 
Mitigation: 

Training and 

sensitization of 
officials on the 

importance of non-

governmental 
organizations 

during the project 

implementation and 
ultimately in the 

resilience-building 
process. 

 

 
 

 

Risk: conflicts 

between pastoralists 

and sedentary 



 

vii 
 

Program name:  Rural Livelihoods’ Adaptation to Climate Change in the Horn of 
Africa II (RLACC II) 

Purpose of the program: Enhance pastoralists livelihoods through climate change resilient 
and communities 

Result chain 

Performance Indicator 

Means of 

Verification 

Risks/ 

Mitigation 

Measures 

Indicator 

(including 

CSI) 

Baseline 

(2016) 

Target 

(2020) 

disaggregated by 

gender 
farmers as well as 

between different 
pastoral groups 

 
Mitigation: 

promotion of 

dialogue and 
conflict resolution 

mechanisms at 

various levels to 
broaden perspective 

and visions. 

2.1.1. Innovative 

adaptive techniques 

are implemented in 
order to ensure that 

pastoral infrastructure 

is climate resilient 

 

 

 
 

 

 
2.1.2. Specific 

adaptive activities and 

measures are adopted 
to ensure that pastoral 

and agro-pastoral 

communities are 
climate-resilient 

 

 
 

 

2.2.1. Diversification 

of income-generating 

adaptive activities in 

order to lessen 
targeted pastoral and 

agro-pastoral 
communities’ 

vulnerabilities. 

 
2.2.2. Development 

and strengthening of 

the supply chain for 
new income-

generating activities in 

target pastoral and 
agro-pastoral 

communities  

2.1.1. % of 

pastoralists 

benefiting from 
climate change 

compatible 

irrigation, water 

harvesting methods 

and agricultural 

practices 
(disaggregated by 

gender) 

 
2.1.2. % of people 

who have adopted 

community-based 
adaptive activities 

in the context of 

climate-change 
(disaggregated by 

gender) 

 
 

 

2.2.1. % of increase 

in household 

incomes as a result 

of project 
implemented 

adaptation measures 
disaggregated by 

gender 

 
2.2.2. Change in 

wellbeing of 

participating 
households in 

project activities 

(access to water, 
access to market, 

access to improved 

agro-pastoral 
technologies,…) 

  

2.2.2. Number of 
women with access 

to land and credit 

opportunities, smart 
seeds and crops as 

well as  

equipment 

2.1.1. N/A 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
2.1.2. Lack of 

community-

based adaptive 
activities 

tackling 

climate change 
 

 

 
 

 

2.2.1. N/A 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
2.2.2. N/A  

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

2.2.2.N/A 

2.1.1. At least 

50% of target 

areas supplied 
in drinkable 

water and 

irrigation 

agriculture (at 

least 30% 

benefiting are 
women) 

 

 
2.1.2. 50% of 

the pastoral and 

agro-pastoral 
communities 

adopting 

community-
based adaptive 

activities (at 

least 30% are 
women)   

 

2.2.1. 30% 

increase 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
2.2.2. ≥ 4,000 

households 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

2.2.2. At least 
40 % of 

beneficiaries 

are women  

2.1.1. Survey 

Reports, Project 

Reports 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
2.1.2. Project 

Reports and 

Meetings 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

2.2.1. Project 

progress reports 

and supervision 

missions reports  
 

 
 

 

 
2.2.2. Field Visit 

Reports and 

Project Reports 

3.1.1. Knowledge 
products generated at 

national and regional 
level are attained 

 

3.1.2. Timely efficient 
and cost-effective 

project 

implementation and 
M&E systems set up 

and implemented  

3.1.1. Number of 
knowledge products 

developed by the 
project 

 

3.1.2. 
Implementation 

progress of project 

activities and the 
M&E system  

 

 
 

3.1.1. N/A 
 

 
 

 

3.1.2. N/A 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

3.1.1. ≥ 5 
knowledge 

products are 
developed 

 

3.1.2. 4 annual 
PIRs and 12 

quarterly 

progress 
reports, 1 Mid-

Term Review, 

1 Completion 
report 

3.1.1. knowledge 
products 

 
 

 

3.1.2. Project 
progress reports 

and M&E 

documents  

  



 

viii 
 

Program name:  Rural Livelihoods’ Adaptation to Climate Change in the Horn of 
Africa II (RLACC II) 

Purpose of the program: Enhance pastoralists livelihoods through climate change resilient 
and communities 

Result chain 

Performance Indicator 

Means of 

Verification 

Risks/ 

Mitigation 

Measures 

Indicator 

(including 

CSI) 

Baseline 

(2016) 

Target 

(2020) 

3.1.2 The generated 

data from the 
RLACC II M&E 

system is fed into 
the overall Drought 

resilience M&E 

framework for the 
HoA 

3.1.2 N/A At least one 

annual update 
of the Drought 

resilience M&E 
system is sent 

by the RLACC 

II.  

 

Components Costs (USD) 

1. Improving pastoral and agro-pastoral communities’ adaptive capacity and the resilience of 

their livelihoods to climate change in target areas  
  1,859,515 

2. Improving the sustainability of pastoral and agro-pastoral livelihoods  11,269,034 

3. Project management knowledge and M&E activities    1,801,058 

 Contingencies   2,137,986 

 Total (GEF grant) 17,067,592 
  



 

ix 
 

RLACC II Program Time Frame 

Year 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 

Quarter 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 

INITIAL ACTIVITIES                      

Appraisal                      

Loan and Grant negociation and approval                     

Signature of loan agreement and fulfilment of first disbursement conditions                     

Publication of the General Procurement Notice                     

Recruitment of project staff                     

Project Launching                     

Participatory confirmation and prioritisation of activities with communities                       

Procurement of property goods works and services for the PIUs                     

Signature of agreements with partner entities                     

IMPROVIG ADAPTIVE CAPACITY AND THE RESILIENCE OF LIVELIHOODS TO CC                     

 Training of staff and stakeholders in the project’s various thematic areas                     

Workshops organized for mainstreaming of CC in policies and strategic frameworks at sub-national, national levels                     

IMPROVE THE SUSTAINABILITY OF PASTORAL AND AGRO-PASTORAL LIVELIHOODS                     

Meetings related to the adoption of adaptive activities and mesures to ensure targeted communities’ climate resilience                     

Infrastructure rehabilitation and construction                     

Diversification of communities’ economic activities and improvement of their access to markets                     

Introduction of SLM & other activities (pilot farms, distribution of drought-tolerant seeds, etc.) in agriculture & forestry 

sectors 

    
            

    

KNOWLEDGE AND M&E ACTIVITIES                     

Listing of adopters and information during filed visit                     

Field Visit Report                     

Mid-Term Report                     

Project Completion Report                     



 

1 
 

I. STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 

1.1 Programme linkages with countries and Horn of Africa (HoA) strategies and objectives 
 

1.1.1 The program is consistent with the principles of key regional initiative, policies and projects adopted 

by the governments of the participating countries, namely: (i) The Inter-Governmental Authority on 

Development (IGAD) Drought Disaster Resilience and Sustainability Initiative (IDDRSI)”; (ii) Regional 

Programming Paper (RPP, 2013) “To End Drought emergencies in The Horn of Africa” (2012); (iii) the new 

Sendai Framework for DRM (2015–2030), which contains the collective commitment of governments and the 

United Nations to work towards reducing societal vulnerability to disasters generally and stop drought in 

particular. The program also fits in the Bank’s new Regional Integration Strategy and Policy Paper (2014-

2023), the Bank’s Ten year Strategy (2013-22), the Bank’s Strategy for Addressing Fragility and Building 

Resilience in Africa (2014-19), and the recent High 5s vision of the Bank. At the national level, the RLACC 

program is in line with the participating countries strategies and priorities. Additional details on the strategic 

fit of RLACC in each country are given in the individual countries’ PARs. 

 

1.1.2 The program is fully aligned with National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) for Sudan and 

Somalia respectively approved in 2007 and 2013. In Sudan, the NAPA emphasizes the rural dimension of 

poverty in Sudan and focuses on three sectors: agriculture, water resources, and public health. By focusing on 

a wide range of interdependent technologies and methods such as the introduction of solar energy for 

communal services, e.g. for water pumping purposes, new irrigation methods for agriculture, rangeland 

rehabilitation and the introduction of veterinary services, the program fully reflects the priorities laid out in 

Sudan’s 2007 NAPA and strategic frameworks included in the revised Sudan National Adaptation Plan (2014).  

 

1.1.3 In Somalia, the NAPA has identified the urgent and immediate activities to address potential negative 

impacts of climate variability and climate change on people and their livelihoods within the context of recurrent 

famine crises and the national priorities over peace-building and economic recovery. Thus, the NAPA 

identifies the following sectors as vulnerable to climate change: water resources, agriculture and food security, 

animal husbandry, grazing and range-lands, health, marine and coastal resources, biodiversity and natural 

disasters. In that framework, the activities in Somalia within this program will focus on supporting pastoralist 

livelihoods and will therefore have a specific emphasis on livestock management, water and land resources 

management. 

 

1.1.4 In addition, both countries Intended National Determined Contribution (INDC) to the 21st Conference 

of Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), published in 

November 2015, acknowledges that climatic as well as non-climatic factors such as ecosystems degradation, 

complex disasters and conflicts, limited access to capital, market infrastructure and technology, unsustainable 

management of natural resources, and socio-economic factors such as poverty, lack of income diversity, 

unequal distribution of income, urbanization, population growth, have all weakened people’s ability to adapt 

to changes in climate. These factors are well taken into account by the proposed activities under this program 

in order to build resilience to climate change in Somalia and Sudan.  

 

1.2 Rationale for Bank’s Involvement 
 

1.2.1 Incidences of climate change (CC) in the Horn of Africa (HoA), as assessed in the AR-5 published by 

the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC, 2014) are: rising temperatures, rainfall 

variability, drought, desertification, deforestation and land degradation, floods and other extreme weather 

events (extreme precipitations, stronger El Niño, etc.)  Additionally, pastoral livelihoods in the ASALs of the 

HoA have been negatively affected by political marginalization, social exclusion, lack of good governance at 

all institutional levels, imbalanced power relations between the state and civil society, and gender inequality. 

These phenomena are the cradle for increasing vulnerability of rural pastoral and agro-pastoral communities 

in the region that rely the most on the environment for their livelihood. The resulting environmental migration 

is in turn causing, among others, competition for natural resources, ethnic tensions, and distrust between the 

original area of migration and the receiving areas. As both Somalia’s and Sudan’s resources are scarce, both 



 

2 
 

countries are prone to such kinds of conflicts. Consequently, taking into account the weight of the pastoralist 

activities and populations, increasing their resilience to climate change represents a vital issue for the HoA 

countries’ stability, economic recovery and future prospects.  

 

1.2.2 The proposed GEF funded project’s focus on climate change adaptation in the rural sector in Somalia 

and Sudan fills a vital missing gap in the pastoralist and agro-pastoralist sub-sectors in both countries which is 

not fully covered by DRSSLP and other partners and is urgently needed to support economic diversification 

in the context of climate change. Multiple feedback loops between severe drought occurrence and vulnerable 

livelihoods due to water scarcity and grasslands farming have led to competition over natural resources access 

between drought displaced households and transhumant pastoralists.  

 

1.2.3 As one of the most important multilateral institutions acting in Africa, the AfDB has an extensive 

experience in supporting and financing community based initiatives and projects in the continent. Investing in 

areas like agriculture, natural resources management and improving livelihoods are crucial for reducing 

poverty and vulnerability to climate change. The Strengthening of Climate Resilience in the Kafue Sub-Basin, 

in Zambia, or the Carla Climate Adaptation for Rural Livelihoods and Agriculture in Malawi are two of the 

many examples of projects financed by the Bank and designed to respond to the climate change effects, reduce 

poverty and enhance food security in some of the most vulnerable communities in the continent. The success 

of these projects shows the Bank’s competency and commitment to implementing climate change adaptation 

measures in the region, including the respective INDCs from the Paris agreement. Therefore, the Bank will 

continue playing a lead role in supporting the governments of both countries in achieving their objectives and 

implementing important measures to fight climate change effects and reduce poverty in Sudan and Somalia. 

 

1.2.4 The Multinational (Sudan and Somalia) rural livelihoods’ adaptation to climate change in the Horn of 

Africa – Phase II (RLACC II) is in alignment with the Bank’s priorities and strategies, which includes bringing 

growth that is not only environmentally sustainable, but also empowering. Indeed, the Bank’s Climate Change 

Action Plan to assist RMCs in implementing their NDCs and build mitigation and adaptation in Africa is one 

of the actions aligned with the project.  

 

1.2.5  The Project is fully aligned to one of the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (TYS: 2013-2022) core areas of 

infrastructure and also to one area of special emphasis namely agriculture. The project also contributes to the 

High-5 priorities (2016-2025), namely the Feed Africa and Improve the Lives of Africans priorities. It will 

introduce climate-resilient water harvesting technologies, promote conservative agriculture practices, provide 

capacity building and training on sustainable resources management, and reduce food insecurity risk by 

diversifying the pastoral and agro-pastoral livelihood base of target communities. Moreover, the Project will 

improve rural people participation along the livestock value chain starting from production and processing to 

marketing. The project will thus promote both immediate and longer-term climate-resilient initiatives into 

pastoral livelihoods in arid and semi-arid areas (ASALs) of Sudan and Somalia while ensuring inclusiveness 

of rural men, women and youth as direct beneficiaries. The RLACC I and II activities complement those of 

the recently approved ‘Short Term Regional Emergency Response Project’ (STRERP). 

 

1.2.6 Given its focus on climate change adaptation, the project is fully aligned with the Bank’s Climate 

Change Action Plan 2 (CCAP2) and in particular with its pillar 1 “Boosting Adaptation and Climate-resilient 

Development in Africa”. As highlighted in the CCAP2, this project by focusing on resilient infrastructures and 

climate adaptation measures, demonstrates the Bank’s effort to leverage its internal resources to strengthen the 

adaptive capacities of countries by supporting the diversification of local economies. Indeed, building on the 

AfDB funded DSRLP, the GEF funding is mobilized by the Bank to build resilience in both countries in the 

agricultural and pastoral sub-sectors. 

  

1.2.7 Finally, the project addresses the programs identified under the Bank’s Somalia Country Brief (CB) 

(2017-2020) and well aligned with its objective to “Build longer term resilience in Somalia, through targeted 

support to the development of relevant infrastructure, institutional capacity, and skills”. Consequently, by 

enhancing pastoralist livelihoods, the project fits well with the CB pillar 1 which seeks to rebuild key 

infrastructure to enhance resilience and diversify livelihoods. The CB highlighted the importance of the 

agricultural sector in Somalia and in particular the livestock sector which contributes to more than 40% of 

national GDP. By tackling the issues related to climate change adaptation in this sector, this project will help 

build resilience with the adoption of adaptive measures combined with resilient infrastructures. 



 

3 
 

 

Baseline Project 
 

1.2.8 The baseline project for the proposed project is the Drought Resilience and Sustainable Livelihood 

Program (DRSLP), a multi-phased program running over 15 to 20 years. It targets the root causes of drought 

crises in the countries of the HoA, and its first phase was implemented in Djibouti, Ethiopia, and Kenya. 

Somalia and Sudan are both included in the second phase (DRSLP II). The baseline project was approved by 

the Bank’s Board of Directors in November 2014; and the project started in August 2015. Meanwhile, Sudan 

is covered through the third phase (DRSLP III) in June 2015. Following the same concept and using FEG 

Grant resources, RLACC I was approved in December 2016 covering Djibouti and Kenya to the tone of USD 

5.484 million for Djibouti and USD 2.784 million for Kenya. 

  

1.2.9 DRSLP focuses its intervention on building the necessary infrastructure for mobilizing and managing 

surface and ground water in the context of pastoral and agro-pastoral production systems. This consists of 

rangeland development and rehabilitation works, land development for crop production, and small water 

mobilization and supply infrastructure for crop and livestock production. In addition, the capacity building 

element of the DRSLP will focus its intervention on providing local communities and authorities with 

investments in infrastructure development and capacity strengthening.  

 

1.2.10 On the long run, the DRSLP is a response to the devastating climate change evidenced drought, 

environmental degradation, and poverty in the HoA’s vulnerable communities. However, the baseline alone 

does not sufficiently tackle certain issues related to climate change resilience and the sustainability of pastoral 

and agro-pastoral livelihoods. For instance, stakeholders are not fully involved in planning and decision-

making processes. Existing and planned activities under DRSLP II (in Somalia and Sudan) and DRSLP III (in 

Sudan) do not lead to the full integration of CC considerations in community development plans and sectoral 

policies, and climate hazards still need strengthened mitigation. Consequently, the RLACC II project aims at 

completing the activities of the baseline program on these key issues, and is in line with the ongoing RLACC 

I project in Djibouti and Kenya. 

 

1.2.11 Over decades, most interventions to address climate change issues (and especially drought) in the HoA 

have been of emergency humanitarian relief nature. Like the DRSLP (Baseline project), the RLACC II project 

seeks to be innovative as it proposes solutions to tackle this issue in a medium and long-term perspective, 

through an integrated approach that aims at improving water resource mobilization, rangeland management, 

livelihoods diversification, infrastructure for market access and building human and institutional capacity 

within a framework that is sensitive to conflict resolution and management.  

 

1.3 Aid coordination 
 

1.3.1 Regional and International organizations (Swiss Development Cooperation Agency, African Water 

Facility, etc.) are engaged in addressing climate change and livelihoods challenges in the region. However, it 

is noteworthy to mention that, in general, most Development Partners’ (DPs) interventions in CC are mainly 

short-term responses and humanitarian relief-focused.  

 

1.3.2 The Bank discussed with several Partners and donors to garner support for the program. In particular, 

the Bank is supporting the countries of the HoA to access GEF funds from the Least Developed Countries' 

Fund (LDCF) and the Special Climate Change Fund (SCCF) in order to finance the RLACC activities to 

complement the baseline program (DRSLP). During the appraisal mission, consultations were made with many 

relevant DPs including FAO, USAID, IFAD, UNDP and EU to ensure close coordination and harmonization 

of activities towards common goals and objectives of the RLACC. Generally speaking, the consultations 

helped avoiding overlaps and redundancies among the different interventions while funding by the different 

partners was done on an individual basis. 

 

 

 

 



 

4 
 

 

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

Program development goal: Enhance pastoralists livelihoods through climate change resilient 

communities 

 

2.1 Project components 

 

The activities listed in the table below are indicative. More specific activities for each country 

are contained in their respective PARs. Furthermore the activities in each countries will be confirmed 

and prioritized with the target communities in participatory workshops.  

 
  Table 1: Project components 
 

Component name Cost (USD) Component description 

Improving pastoral 

and agro-pastoral 

communities’ adaptive 

capacity and the 

resilience of their 

livelihoods to climate 

change in target areas 

1,859,515 Trainings in (i) water harvesting technologies, (ii) water resources 

management, (iii) farming methods and drought resistant varieties, 

(iv) management and maintenance of irrigation infrastructure, and 

(v) climate resilient rangeland management options.  

 

Women are an important focus of the project, and numerous 

activities will improve their participation and decision-making 

skills in various sectors that will be crucial for the development of 

the communities and its adaptation to climate change 

Improve the 

sustainability of 

pastoral and agro-

pastoral livelihoods 

11,269,034 Water infrastructure: water harvesting infrastructure (hafirs, 

boreholes), and supply network (irrigation, etc.) are constructed or 

rehabilitated, with a focus on community-based implementation 

and capacity building 

 

Rangeland rehabilitation: the project is in line and supports the 

baseline project in the targeted communities through (i) reseeding 

and re-plantation activities, and (ii) training 

 

Improvement of access to market for (i) livestock, and crops 

value chains and (ii) diversification of livelihoods  

 

Developing veterinary and health services, with a focus on cattle-

diseases related to climate change.  

 

Drought tolerant seeds: (i) provide trainings through 

establishment of nurseries to produce and distribute drought 

tolerant seeds for agriculture, but also for pastures and community 

forestry; (ii) training women in agricultural techniques tailored to 

local conditions (iii) establish Pilot Farms to demonstrate / train on 

the efficiency of drought tolerant seeds for agriculture; (iv) training 

on water management and adaptive agricultural techniques.  

 

Diversification of livelihoods: (i) the development of income-

generating activities (handcraft, processing of livestock products, 

the growing of fruit trees, honey and leaf-growing), (ii) give an 

important role to women through trainings and the activities 

organized with women associations, and (iii) is linked as stated 

above, with the improvement of access to market 

 

Soil conservation through: (i) land degradation and desertification 

control measures, and (ii) the various awareness-raising campaigns 

and workshops listed in component 1. 

Project management, 

Knowledge and M&E 

activities 

1,801,058 Annual and quarterly progress reports 

 

Gender sensitive knowledge indicators are expected in order to 

measure the activities related to women empowerment 

 



 

5 
 

Component name Cost (USD) Component description 

The project will also develop targeted villages’ climate change 

vulnerability profiles, and share these profiles with relevant 

stakeholders.  

Physical and price 

contingencies 

       2,137,986  

Total      17,067,592 

 

2.2 Project type 

 
RLACC – phase II is a multinational operation using the GEF-managed trust funds ‘Least Developing 

Countries Fund (LDCF)’. Both Sudan and Somalia are benefitting from LDCF resources through the GEF 

Focal Area 1 (Climate Change Adaptation) as grants. The GEF approved the Somalia project in December 13, 

20161 and the Sudan project in March, 2017)2.  As both Somalia and Sudan are under sanctions, the project 

interventions will be limited to technical assistance activities.  

 

2.3 Project cost and financing arrangements 

 
2.3.1 The total RLACC II cost is estimated at USD 17,067,592 (exclusive of tax and customs duty); entirely 

proposed for financing by the GEF from the Least Developed Country Fund (LDCF) to contribute to the 

implementation of the GEF climate change adaptation strategy (GEF focal area Climate Change Adaptation - 

CCA).  The grant amounts to USD 9,985,185 for Somalia and USD 7,082,407 for Sudan.  

 

Table 2: Project cost estimates by components 

 

Components 

  

  

  

US$ 
% 

Foreign Local Foreign Total 

Improving pastoral and agro-pastoral 

communities’ adaptive capacity and the 

resilience of their livelihoods to climate 

change in target areas 

Sudan 265,088 323,997 589,085 55 

Somalia 482,763 787,667 1,270,430 62 

Improve the sustainability of pastoral 

and agro-pastoral livelihoods 

Sudan 2,261,700 2,450,175 4,711,875 52 

Somalia 2,950,722 3,606,437 6,557,159 55 

Project management knowledge and 

M&E activities 

Sudan 230,059 359,837 589,896 61 

Somalia 229,142 238,494 467,636 51 

Project management costs 
Sudan 128,625 177,625 306,250 58 

Somalia 183,656 253,620 437,276 58 

Total base costs 
Sudan 2,885,472 3,311,634 6,197,106 53 

Somalia 3,846,282 4,886,218 8,732,500 56 

Physical contingencies 
Sudan 216,750 293,250 510,000 58 

Somalia 297,166 406,584 703,750 58 

Price contingencies 
Sudan 153,873 221,428 375,301 59 

Somalia 225,063 323,872 548,935 59 

Total project costs 
Sudan 3,256,095 3,826,312 7,082,407 54 

Somalia 4,368,511 5,616,674 9,985,185 56 

Total 7,624,606 9,442,986 17,067,592 55 

 

 

 

 
                                                      
1 https://www.thegef.org/project/rural-livelihoods-adaptation-climate-change-horn-africa-phase-ii-rlacc-ii 
2 https://www.thegef.org/project/rural-livelihoods-adaptation-climate-change-horn-africa-phase-ii-rlacc-ii-0 



 

6 
 

 

  Table 3: Project cost estimates by category of expenditure 

  

Expenditures 

USD 

Local Foreign Total 
% 

Foreign 

1. Works 

Sudan 1,040,267 1,140,588 2,180,855 52.3 

Somalia 1,320,638 1,750,613 3,071,251 57 

2. Goods  

Sudan 252,000 273,000 525,000 52 

Somalia 342,125 401,625 743,750 54 

3. Services  

Sudan 893,813 1,092,437 1,986,250 55 

Somalia 1,228,150 1,563,100 2,791,250 56 

4. Operating costs  

Sudan 690,795 814,205 1,505,000 54.1 

Somalia 924,920 1,201,330 2,126,250 56.5 

Total Base Cost         

Sudan 2,876,875 3,320,230 6,197,105 53.6 

Somalia 3,815,833 4,916,668 8,732,501 56.3 

Physical Contingencies  

Sudan 216,750 293,250 510,000 57.5 

Somalia 297,166 406,584 703,750 57.5 

Price Contingencies 

Sudan 153,873 221,428 375,301 59 

Somalia 225,063 323,872 548,935 59 

Total project cost  

Sudan 3,247,498 3,834,908 7,082,407 54.1 

Somalia 4,338,062 5,647,124 9,985,185 56.5 

Total 7,585,560 9,482,032 17,067,592 55.5 

  



 

7 
 

Table 4: Expenditure schedule by component 
        

Components  

Costs (US$) 

Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 

Improving pastoral and agro-pastoral 

communities’ adaptive capacity and the resilience 

of their livelihoods to climate change in target 

areas 

        

Sudan 190,564 381,129 508,172 190,565 

Somalia 88,363 176,726 235,634 88,362 

Improve the sustainability of pastoral and agro-

pastoral livelihoods 
       

Sudan 983,574 1,967,148 2,622,863 983,574 

Somalia 706,781 1,413,563 1,884,750 706,781 

Project management knowledge and M&E 

activities 
       

Sudan 70,146 140,291 187,054 70,145 

Somalia 88,484 176,969 235,958 88,485 

Project management costs   
     

Sudan 65,591 131,183 174,910 65,591 

Somalia 45,937 91,875 122,500 45,938 

Total base costs         

Sudan 1,309,875 2,619,751 3,492,999 1,309,875 

Somalia 929,565 1,859,133 2,478,842 929,566 

Physical contingencies   
     

Sudan 57,579 162,461 232,382 57,579 

Somalia 123,803 200,303 255,840 123,803 

Price contingencies   
     

Sudan 82,340 164,681 219,574 82,340 

Somalia 56,295 112,591 150,120 56,295 

Total project costs   
     

Sudan 1,449,794 2,946,893 3,944,955 1,449,794 

Somalia 1,109,663 2,172,027 2,884,802 1,109,664 

Total 2,559,457 5,118,920 6,829,757 2,559,458 

 

2.4 Project’s target area and population 

 
2.4.1 The project will cover two countries of the HoA, namely Sudan and Somalia, targeting rural pastoral 

and agro-pastoral communities highly vulnerable to climate change and affected by factors such as domestic 

and regional migration (transhumance practices, displacements due to conflicts or food insecurity) – all of 

which are drivers and consequences of environmental fragility. 

 

2.4.2 In Sudan, the project will be implemented in the project will be implemented in three States, 

respectively the White Nile State, the Gedaref State and the Kassala State. Targeted areas in the States are 

respectively: (i) White Nile State, Dueim Locality, Al Baja Reserve Pasture Area, (ii) Gedaref State, 

Gadambalia Locality, (iii) Kassala State, Aroma Locality, Togaly villages and Um Safari village. 

 

2.4.3 In Somalia, the project will intervene in localities selected in South Central Somalia, Somaliland and 

Puntland States. The targeted localities are: (i) South Central Somalia: Hiiraan and Galguduud States, 



 

8 
 

Localities of Beledweyn and Guriceel, (ii) Somaliland: Awdal region, villages of Quljeed, Ton and Salawley-

Cheikh Hared, (iii) Puntland: Bari and Nugaal regions,  

 

2.4.4 More details on the targeted area and communities are provided in the annexed specific countries’ 

reports. 

 

2.4.5 The RLACC II program is expected to increase targeted communities’ adaptive capacity and the 

resilience of their livelihoods to climate change through capacity building and the introduction of adaptation 

technologies, improved access to natural resources (especially water), and diversification of livelihoods. 

 

2.5 Participatory process for project identification, design and implementation 

 

2.5.1 The RLACC II program is intended to address the adaptation of rural pastoral and agro-pastoral 

communities to Climate Change (CC) and to reduce their vulnerabilities to CC induced hazards. During the 

project formulation, discussions and surveys were conducted with key stakeholders and beneficiaries, 

revealing the numerous constraints communities have faced, and their very diverse nature. Most of them are 

directly linked with CC and its various effects. Overseeing these various effects, CC hazards constitutes the 

common challenge for the HoA, as its devastating impacts on agriculture, livestock production, reduced terms 

of trade, household incomes, economic stability and governance. The many conflicts of political nature or over 

natural resources characterizing the regions were also identified as a driver of fragility. Specific country 

participatory processes conducted during project identification are provided in the countries’ PARs. The 

engagement of Community Based Organizations, Civil Society and other forms of collective initiatives are big 

success factors the implementation of the project. Sensitization and training sessions will be extensively 

conducted to make sure that the beneficiaries and their organizations are very well aware of their essential role 

as recipients and as participants of/in the project activities. Sensitization will target crucial topics such as 

management of pasture and water resources in a conflict free environment. In Sudan, a validation workshop 

with the stakeholders was organized to discuss the content of the project and to secure buy-in. I Somalia, due 

to the political Situation in the country, consultations were done in Hargeisa (Somaliland) and remotely with 

Puntland and Mogadishu. In addition, draft project documentation was also shared with the Governments of 

the two countries for their final review and comments. More consultations with relevant stakeholders will be 

conducted to confirm and prioritize activities prior to the onset of implementation.   

 

2.6 Bank Group experience, lessons reflected in project design 

 
2.6.1 The Bank’s long standing experience in the design and implementation of Climate Change (especially 

drought resilience and water infrastructure development) was capitalized and mainstreamed in the design of 

this project. The Bank experience lies on previous similar multinational project addressing specific climate 

change issues in the HoA, such as the DRSLP program, and collaboration with other institutions and regional 

initiatives (IGAD, COMESA, NEPAD, CAADP, etc.)  

 

2.6.2 The Bank’s strategy on ending fragility and building resilience stresses the importance of better design 

of projects in countries facing fragility, to build resilience, through more inclusive growth and development. 

To this end, the Bank now requires a fragility lens application in each project, which has been undertaken in 

annex 5 attached. 

 

2.6.3 While the experience of the Bank in the area of Drought Resilience is not a long one, the team was 

able to tap into whatever the available information in terms of implementation challenges and ways to address 

them. The RLACC II is building on the achievements, successes and lessons of former and current initiatives 

such as the DRSLP. The aim is to enhance the effectiveness of RLAC II by resorting to swifter and closer to 



 

9 
 

the ground operational units in comparison to IGAD implementation model with a Fund Management Unit 

hosted in IGAD Secretariat in the case of DRSLP.  The DRSLP has established mechanisms to enhance the 

availability of infrastructure for natural resources management (water and pastures) at the regional level (given 

the mobility of pastoralists across borders) and ensuring stability of the environment as well as the harmonious 

sharing of the resources in a sustainable manner. The current project was inspired by the first countries 

benefiting from the project such as Djibouti and Kenya. The key activities included developing water storage 

and other related infrastructures, development of market infrastructure and communication and information 

systems in pastoral rural areas; optimizing potential value chains and strengthen regional trade and; enhancing 

community participation in the management of water, pasture and livestock marketing. The project will also 

build on existing initiatives and policies to develop better collaboration and information exchange, rather than 

creating new costly systems. A brief description of the ongoing portfolio in Somalia and Sudan is given 

respectively in annexe 3 and annexe 4 at the end of this report.   

2.7 Key performance indicators 
 

2.7.1 The project aims at enhancing pastoralists, livelihoods through climate change resilient infrastructures. 

The progress toward achieving this objective will be measured through different key performance indicators 

at the impact, outcomes and output levels. At the impact level, the indicators used will be based on the increase 

of agricultural production in the target areas, resulting in the reduction of food insecurity, measured by national 

surveys and reports. 

 

2.7.2 For the outcome, the measure will be made through: (i) the development/use of methods, policies and 

frameworks mainstreaming Climate Change issues, (ii) number of communities adopting the adaptive 

measures (iii) the percentage of women participating in specific activities. In terms of outputs, the indicators 

will include: (i) number of people trained, (ii) the number of study tours and workshops, (iii) the number of 

knowledge products and the degree of execution of the project.  

 

2.7.3 While national data collection will be under the responsibility of the countries projects, a monitoring 

and evaluation expert at IGAD, working in close collaboration with the country level PIUs and other key 

partners, will be responsible for feeding the data provided to him into the existing Drought Resilience platform 

at the secretariat. The M&E specialist at IGAD will work with the country level M&E specialists to harmonize 

the data collection format. The information generated will be disseminated to other projects’ communities and 

potential users in the region.  

 

 

III.  PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1.  Economic and financial performance 

 
FIRR (base case) 17% NPV value at 12% is USD 1.71 million 

EIRR (base case) 23% NPV value at 12% is USD 2.19 million 

 

3.1.1 Somalia and Sudan are both included in the second phase of DRSLP II. The implementation of these 

projects will first enable a better carbon sequestration. The improving of water resource mobilization, through 

the building of boreholes, haffirs and other water infrastructures, and the introduction of new climate resilient 

practices, such as drought resilient seeds, will benefit communities in having better crop productivity, and thus, 

boost their economic growth. This process will enable a reduction of conflicts, especially about resources 

availability. Moreover, the introduction of sustainable land management with activities of reseeding and re-

plantation will also have an important impact on reducing natural resources scarcity and poverty, lessening 

soil erosion and increasing soil fertility. Providing veterinary services and training for communities about new 



 

10 
 

climate resilient practices will improve food security and benefit for the whole regions in reducing conflicts 

and migrations. 

 

3.1.2 The financial internal rate of return (FIRR) of the project is calculated at 21%, the net present value 

(VPV) is estimated at USD 1.71 million. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the project is estimated 

at 25% and the net present value (NPV) at 12% opportunity cost of capital is estimated at USD 2.19 million. 

 

3.1.3 The project will have both direct and indirect benefits. Improved livelihoods for the agro-pastoral 

communities will be the main direct benefit. The emphasis on a multi-level, integrated approach to pastoral 

development through support and funding for a range of initiatives will help pastoralist communities and 

households undertake livestock and non-livestock related income generating activities, accompanied by 

awareness raising, information and capacity building.  

 

3.1.4 A parallel dynamic of social inclusion and economic growth will help reintegrate the most vulnerable 

and marginalized population categories into the local economy and combat the social and economic 

marginalization in which many pastoral groups are trapped. For instance, the creation of new boreholes and 

water supply networks in villages will reduce periods of unemployment/inactivity due to lack of irrigation 

boosting economic growth at the village level and improving villagers’ livelihoods. Farmers’ income is 

expected to increase from better crop productivity as a result of sustainable irrigation schemes and the 

introduction of new adaptive practices and appropriate technological package into crop production. 

 

3.1.5 Additional programme benefits include an increased value of livestock through the setting up of 

veterinarian services, thus further improving food security, and reducing vulnerability to external shocks such 

as animal disease outbreaks. The efforts of the project to provide micro financing will benefit to pastoralists 

and agro-pastoralists to diversify their sources of livelihoods.   

 

3.1.6 National economies and regional integration will also benefit from the program. Effective cooperation 

in the management of water resources and improved rangeland management would reduce conflicts and 

promote social stability and strengthen regional integration. The development of market infrastructures and 

the improvement of the delivery of animal health related services, mainly the prevention and control of TADs 

will contribute to an increase of intra- and extra-regional safe trade in livestock products. 

 

3.1.7 The methodology used to estimate these project benefits is based on a costs benefits analysis. Indeed, 

assessing the costs and benefits of a program is of essential importance to meaningfully quantify its impacts. 

Following the GEF approach, a baseline model is required, in this case the DRSLP II and III project. The 

global environmental benefits and the incremental costs, and besides, the project impacts, are compared to the 

baseline project without the support of the GEF. This implies in concrete terms an analysis of the situation 

with and without the additional GEF funded project. This analysis was conducted for each country, Somalia 

and Sudan, in order to assess the economic and financial performances of the country projects. 

 
  



 

11 
 

3.2 Environmental and social aspects 

Environmental aspects 

 
3.2.1 The project focuses on building capacity on a country (ies) – wide adaptation intervention to climate 

change aimed at improving the resilience of communities and agro-pastoral communities, their livelihoods and 

their production systems. The project will have major positive impacts on the environment: (i) improved 

management of natural resources (water and land) at local, State, national and regional level, (ii) improved 

resilience of the ecosystems with the introduction of drought-resistant plants for shelterbelt around villages or 

for agriculture and (iii) rehabilitation of rangelands. In light of these benefits, the project is proposed for 

category 3. 

 

3.2.2 An environmental and social review has been made, based on the potential environmental and social 

effects of the project, and prior to the undertaking of any formal, activity-related and/or site-specific 

Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs). As the project will be funded by the GEF through the 

AfDB, all works must comply with the due environmental and social assessment process, when required either 

by regulation or AfDB, as well as with the recommendations of the upcoming ESIAs (in case further 

environmental and social studies are performed), including compliance with the appropriate avoidance, 

management and mitigation measures. The extent of activity- and site-specific ESIAs will be assessed by the 

AfDB and key national institutions/institutional partners when site location as well as activity parameters (size 

of infrastructures, characteristics of each resilient culture, etc.) are formalized. The review identifies minor 

risks to environment and social issues (referred to as “effects”) from activities in their general form and outlines 

strategies for managing those risks and minimizing undesirable environmental and social impacts. National 

institutions will be ultimately responsible for the supervision of the environmental and social matters, with the 

AfDB providing updates on the adequacy and respect of measures. The supervising entities and/or experts will 

ensure timely remedial actions are taken by the contractor where necessary. 

 

Climate change aspects 

 
3.2.3 As an adaptation programme, it will reduce pastoral and agro-pastoral communities’ vulnerability to 

CC induced hazards through campaigns, workshops and trainings aiming at raising stakeholders’ awareness 

on this issue. In addition, the project’s support to the diversification of the sources of income will provide the 

beneficiary communities with the necessary cushion for the shocks stemming from the CC. The 

implementation of diverse infrastructures solutions and the adoption of new techniques should also have a 

positive impact, increasing communities’ resilience. Furthermore, since the Bank’s Climate Change Action 

Plan is to assist RMCs in implementing their NDCs and build mitigation and adaptation in Africa, the funding 

for this project is totally in accordance with climate adaptation finance. 

Social aspects 

 
3.2.4 The RLACC II program will have a major positive impact on social aspect at community, regional and 

national level. Indeed, the program will (i) reduce the scarcity of natural resources and its related pretension 

to conflicts; (ii) the diversification of livelihoods – mostly at women’s benefit – will contribute to increase 

households’ incomes and wealth, (iv) the improvement of the population health, (v) the improvement of market 

access will strengthen inter-communities linkages and reduce conflict or distrust issues.  

 

Gender aspects 

 
3.2.5 The proposed project has an important focus on women and gender equality. Indeed, many activities 

focus on women empowerment and capacity-building, from awareness raising activities, to the introduction of 

adaptive techniques and training. The implementation of adaptive techniques (output 2.1.1.) is not gender-



 

12 
 

specific, but the objective is clearly to improve the climate resilience for communities for specific economic 

sectors (mainly agriculture and livestock husbandry), as climate change has a significant impact on 

communities, mostly women and children. Also, adaptive technologies will contribute to reducing workload 

experienced by women and children, who are often the groups charged with water collection for households 

and livestock.  

 

3.2.6 In addition, the output 2.1.2 is designed to train communities and targeted groups to the use of 

techniques and technologies introduced with output 2.1.1. Women are clearly the main focus of this output, as 

most of its activities are targeting women. In order to achieve target number of women, it is advised that women 

organizations in pastoral communities are targeted. Finally, the outcome 2.2 seeks to diversify income-

generating activities, which is expected to have a strong impact on women empowerment. Indeed, the activities 

suggested should reduce rural women’s domestic workload through labour-saving technologies. By reducing 

women’s workload, the project will empower the women beneficiaries in achieving a more equitable balance 

in workload and in the sharing of economic and social benefits.   

 

3.2.7 Furthermore, additional indicators not mentioned in the logical framework, such as the number of 

management committees, access to education for girls, access to land and credit opportunities, access to smart 

seeds and crops and access to equipment could be added or at least considered. 

 

Involuntary resettlement 

 
3.2.8 The implementation of this project does not imply any involuntary resettlement or limiting access to 

natural resources.  

 

IV. IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1 Implementation arrangements 

 

4.1.1 For Somalia, all fiduciary responsibilities will be handled by IGAD’s Fund Management Unit (FMU) 

that is implementing the DRSLP II in coordination with the Bank. To this end, a tri-partite Protocol of 

agreement will be signed between the Bank, IGAD and the Federal Government of Somalia (FGS) to describe 

in detail the implementing arrangements. IGAD’s capacity has been strengthened through the establishment 

of the FMU to implement the DRSLP II in Somalia and Sudan. The FMU is composed of a Coordinator, an 

Accountant, a Procurement Expert, and an Administrative assistant. The FMU has gained experience and 

knowledge through the management of the on-going DRSLP II and the coordination of the several 

interventions in the country. However, in order to match the anticipated additional workload (given that FMU 

is handling the DRLSP II – Somalia and Sudan projects and the recently approved STRERP) and also improve 

the quality of reporting within the FMU, a dedicated Project Technical Team (PTT) will be recruited 

competitively from the region composed of a Team Leader with expertise in Climate Change Adaptation and 

project management and four Experts (an expert in Adaptation to Climate Change, an expert in M&E and  

Community Mobilization, an Accountant and a procurement specialist). The PTT will be responsible for the 

day to day supervision of project activities in Somalia and will report to the FMU. On the ground activities 

will be implemented through focal points in the line Ministries (Ministry of Environment and Ministry of 

Agriculture / Livestock in South Central Somalia, Puntland and Somaliland). The IGAD will be responsible 

for the recruitment process of RLACC II PTT. The choice of the FMU-IGAD as a partner in managing the 

RLACC II, came from the fact that the IGAD through the FMU is coordinating the DRSLP in Somalia and for 

which RLACC II is a supplementary funding and therefore overall coordination and synergy will be ensured 

with the involvement of the FMU. The RLACC II will make the provisions needed for the key operating 

expenses at the IGAD Secretariat. Considering the multinational dimension of RLACC II, the FMU-IGAD 

will assist the implementation units in the sense of mobilizing and disseminate the M&E data through the 

regional platform already set up by the IGAD to make it accessible to the RLACC I and II participating 

countries, the Horn of Africa region and the Drought Resilience Knowledge Community at large. In each State, 

National Project Steering Committee will provide strategic direction (policy guidance and review of project 

progress) and approve annual work plans and budget of the project. It will also examine the various project 

activities, through inputs provided by the FMU/PTT. It is chaired by the Ministry of Environment, and consists 

of representatives of the Federal Government of Somalia and of the established autonomous States’ 



 

13 
 

Governments (including representatives from other ministries, etc.), the civil society and other relevant 

stakeholders. 

 

4.1.2 In Sudan, the Executing Agency is the Higher Council for Environment and Natural Resources 

(HCENR) - Ministry of Environment. In order to guarantee a successful implementation of the project, a 

Project Implementation Unit (PIU) for RLCC II should be established with key experts (an Expert in 

Adaptation to Climate Change – National Coordinator, an Expert in M&E, an Expert in mobilization for 

Community-based Adaptation, a procurement specialist and an accountant). These experts will be nationals 

recruited competitively creating a light PIU to be housed in the Higher Council for Environment and Natural 

Resources (HCENR) - Ministry of Environment that will be responsible for the day-to-day implementation of 

the project activities, including fiduciary affairs. Three State Coordinators will need to be seconded by State 

Governments from ministries relevant to environment to facilitate implementation at State levels. For 

coordination purposes RLACC II PIU should work in harmony with the DRSLP coordination unit at federal 

and state levels. A National Project Steering Committee (PSC) will be established to provide strategic direction 

(policy guidance and review of project progresses) and approve annual work plans and budget of the project. 

The PSC will be chaired by the Ministry of Environment at federal level, and consists of representatives of 

ministries of Finance, Electricity and Water (represented by Drinking Water and Sanitation Unit), Animal 

Wealth, Agriculture and Forestry and representative of the three States government (White Nile, Gedaref and 

Kassala). The Project Coordinator will serve as the rapporteur for the PSC, which will examine the various 

project activities and represent the organ of key project decisions. As part of regional coordination 

responsibility in the drought resilience projects and initiatives, RLACC II PIU should grant the flow of M&E 

information to IGAD Secretariat (through the FMU) to enable coordination of the overall tracking of the agreed 

performance indicators in the region.  

 

4.2 Procurement arrangements 
 

All procurement of goods and works and acquisition of consulting services financed by the Bank will 

be in accordance with the Bank’s Procurement Policy for Bank Group Funded Operations dated October 2015 

as revised from time to time, using the relevant Bank Standard Bidding and Request for Proposals Documents. 

The summary procurement arrangements for the two countries is provided the table below. The detailed 

procurement arrangements for each country are given in their respective PARs. 

 

 

 

  



 

14 
 

 

Table 5: Procurement Arrangements (USD million) 

 

Item Description 

Amount (USD million) 

NCB Shortlist Other * NBF Total 

A. GOODS  

Vehicles   0.33  0.33 

Equipment   0.94  0.94 

Total Goods   1.27  1.27 

B. WORKS      

Pilot Farms 0.70    0.70 

Hafirs and boreholes 2.29  0.45 0.002407 2.74 

Veterinary and health services 1.21  0.25  1.46 

Nurseries for seeds 0.25  0.10  0.35 

Total Works 4.45  0.80 0.002407 5.25 

C. SERVICES  

Training   2,66  2,66 

Technical Assistance  0.42   0.42 

Studies  0,27 0,06  0,33 

Audit  0,42   0,42 

Surveys  0,23   0,23 

Consultancy (Individual)  0,36 0,13  0,49 

Consultancy (Firm)  0,11 0,10  0,21 

Total Services  1.81 2.95  4.76 

D. OPERATIONAL COSTS   2.13 1.51 3.64 

Contingencies 0.75 0.39 0.70 0.30 2.14 

Total  5.20 2.20 7.85 1.81 17.06 

      

 * Includes Shopping, recruitment of individual consultant and use of approved Government procedures 
 

4.3 Financial Management Arrangements and Disbursement 

 

4.3.1 The financial management (FM) operations of the Sudan component of the Project will be 

carried out under the overall direction of the Accounting Officer of the Ministry of Environment, the 

Executing Agency (EA). The financial transactions of the project will be initiated, processed, 

recorded and reported in accordance with the country’s Financial and Accounting Act (2007), and the 

Financial and Accounting Regulations (2011) as well as the Bank’s FM Guidelines. To facilitate FM 

in the project, a local professional Accountant with relevant qualifications and level of experience 

acceptable to the Bank including proficiency in English, will be competitively recruited by the EA 

and will be part of the PIU that will be established prior to grant effectiveness. 
 

4.3.2 In regard to the Somalia Component, the FM system (including budgeting, accounting, funds 

flow, internal controls, financial reporting and audit arrangements) that is being followed under 

DRLSP II will apply to the Project. The IGAD Secretariat, through the existing Fund Management 

Unit (FMU) will be responsible for the FM and will be carried out in accordance with the recently 

developed DRLSP FM Manual and the Bank’s FM Guidelines. The FM capacity within the FMU 

will benefit from the recruitment of a project dedicated accountant in the RLACC II PTT, with 

qualifications and experience acceptable to the Bank.  

 

4.3.3 The PIU (for the Sudan) and the FMU (for the Somalia component) will be responsible for 

accounting, reporting, funds flow, banking arrangements, internal controls and audit arrangements 

and reporting for the activities carried out at both the federal and state levels. The PIU and FMU will 

be required to produce quarterly interim financial reports (IFRs) for the project, which will be 

submitted to the Bank no later than forty-five days after the end of each quarter. Annual Project 

specific financial statements (PFSs) will be prepared in accordance with the Generally Accepted 



 

15 
 

Accounting Principles (GAAP) in the Sudan and the IFRS (for the Somalia component) which will 

be submitted to the auditors within three (3) months following the closure of every financial year. 

The project audits for the Sudan component will be conducted by the National Audit Chamber (NAC), 

or a competitively recruited private audit firm to be appointed by NAC based on the Bank’s Standard 

Audit Terms of Reference. In the case of the Somalia component, the audits will be carried out by 

private audit firm to be appointed by IGAD, based on the Bank’s Standard Audit Terms of Reference. 

The audit reports, complete with a Management Letters, will be submitted to the Bank not later than 

six months after the end of the financial year.  The cost of the audits will be paid from the respective 

grants, if carried out by private audit firms. 

 

4.3.4 In regard to disbursements under the Somalia Grant, resources will be disbursed through the 

Intergovernmental Authority on Development Secretariat (IGAD).  To this end, IGAD will be 

responsible for preparing and submitting disbursement requests to the Bank for payment.  Transfer 

of funds the FGS and the participating States will follow the fund transfer system already in place 

under the DRLSP II and IGAD will retain the fiduciary responsibility for such transfer.  On the other 

hand, the disbursements under the Grant to the Republic of Sudan will be under the responsibility of 

the Higher Council for Environment and Natural Resources (HCENR), the Executing Agency. The 

project will use mainly the direct payment and the Special Account methods for disbursements. The 

Bank’s Disbursement Letter for each Grant shall be issued stipulating key disbursement procedures 

and practices. With regard to the SA method of disbursement, Government of Sudan and IGAD (as 

the Implementing Agency for Somalia) will each open a Project Special Account at the Central Bank 

(for the Sudan) or a commercial bank acceptable to the Bank (for IGAD) to receive funds. The 

opening of the Project Special Accounts will be a condition for the first disbursement of the Grants 

to the respective Recipients. 

 

4.4 Governance 

 
4.4.1 Somalia and Sudan, and at a wider level the HoA, have been affected by a chronic cycle of poverty, 

instability and conflict over natural resources. Challenges commonly faced by all the countries of the region 

are weak governance, conflict prevention, nomadic pastoralists, food security and resource sharing.  

 

4.4.2 IGAD has become a central part of the political and security architecture of the HoA. It focuses 

particularly on regional governance and integration, through the promotion of responsible leadership at local, 

national and regional levels, and the introduction of anti-corruption measures; also on the efficient management 

of the natural resources, food security, border control and non-proliferation of small arms. The project 

integrates specific measures to mitigate governance risk to ensure that resources are used judiciously and for 

the purposes for which they are intended. In this regard, the project will provide assistance in procurement and 

financial management to the various executing agencies and Implementing Units. The project will coordinate 

its efforts with Bank and non-Bank ongoing interventions in the region dealing with capacity building of public 

institutions, CBOs, NGOs and IGAD, as well as recipient communities on which the project implementation 

depends. Indeed, the recipient communities’ appropriation of the project are essential to its implementation 

and its dynamic in time. It is also considered that the project will evolve throughout time by being in contact 

with communities. Their solicitation, mobilization and engagement is therefore essential right from the start 

of the project. 

 

4.5 Sustainability 

 
4.5.1 During the project preparatory stages, the choice of rangeland rehabilitation, veterinary, and water 

infrastructures and capacity building were the results of a consensus over technical discussions held during the 

project identification, preparation and appraisal stages. The project activities are community-driven and 

government facilitated. The beneficiaries, men and women, have been consulted all along the design process 



 

16 
 

of the project. Their continued involvement at implementation and monitoring of project progress and 

achievements will increase the sense of ownership and responsibility, and will lead to the sustainability of the 

investments. Cost sharing and cost recovery mechanisms will be taught to the target communities and used 

whenever possible to further promote investment sustainability. Communities will also be responsible for the 

management and maintenance of the constructed/rehabilitated infrastructure. To this end, communities’ 

sensitization and mobilization campaigns will be conducted from the onset of the project implementation.

  

4.5.2 The investments made by the Program in the area of trade, value addition of existing activities and 

diversification of income will promote the linkage between production and the market and facilitates access to 

production inputs and related services while improving the livelihoods of men and women headed households. 

This will be a major contribution to enhancing the interest and commitment of the different actors and 

stakeholders of the project. 

 

4.5.3 The LDCF program will be complementary to the DRSLP by mainstreaming climate change 

adaptation into its capacity-building component. In order to achieve this, the LDCF program will mobilize 

communities and strengthen their capacity to ensure sustainable implementation and management of 

infrastructure. This complementarity between the DRSLP and the LDCF programs where the former will focus 

on primary infrastructure and the latter on its sustainable operation and management with a focus on integrating 

climate change will ensure the sustainability of the overall intervention. 

 

4.5.4  Lastly, as the project’s implementation is based on numerous preparatory stages and lessons learned 

from other programs or projects done in both countries, the project deliverables should outlive the initial phase 

due to the engaged mobilization efforts at grass root level (communities) and the sustained commitment of the 

trained policy makers to project objectives and approaches. Given, the limited opportunities for work in the 

country, it is expected that the trained personnel and staff in the government will remain even after the project 

is completed. This provides an additional comfort to the sustainability concerns.  

 

4.6 Risk Management 

 
Table 6: Project Risks and Mitigation Measures 

 

Risks Mitigation measures 

Sectoral development policies and programs 

promote the settlement of migratory pastoralist, 

affecting negatively pastoralist adaptation 

strategies 

Training and policy development will have an 

integrated approach, highlighting the interaction of 

multiple dimensions, and emphasizing the migratory 

issue. Diversification of livelihoods of pastoralist and 

agro-pastoralists communities must be promoted as a 

coping measure.  

The cost of livestock-related infrastructure 

investment may become very high in relation to 

the very low sedentary livestock inventory due to 

high seasonal mobility of pastoral groups. 

The siting of infrastructure will be planned along the 

corridors so that it also caters for the needs of the 

transhumant pastoralists.  

 

Investments will have long-term positive impacts on 

sedentary and transhumant pastoralists. Both groups 

will be sensitized to share the maintenance load of 

infrastructure as they also share their benefits.  

 

The design of the infrastructure will be made simple so 

that the maintenance cost will be kept at a reasonable 

level.  

Poor coordination and cooperation among key 

national institutions dealing with pastoralists and 

agro-pastoralists issues 

Training and coordination of stakeholders on this issue 

in order to foster coordination and cooperation  



 

17 
 

Risks Mitigation measures 

Conflict between pastoralists and sedentary 

farmers as well as among different pastoral 

groups 

Promotion of dialogue and conflict resolution 

mechanisms with a community, regional or national-

level approach, in order to broaden perspective and 

visions. 

Inadequate acknowledgement of the role of the 

civil society and CBOs by national and local 

governments 

Training and sensitization of officials on the importance 

of civil society and CBOs during the resilience-building 

process. 

 

 

4.7. Knowledge building 

 
Working with the Executing Agencies and the Implementation Units, IGAD will be in charge of mobilizing 

and sharing knowledge product elaborated across countries to foster efficiency and improve implementation. 

The Project Implementation Unit, which carries out the day-to-day implementation of the project’s activities, 

will be responsible for the mainstreaming of relevant information provided through the IGAD and providing 

the coordination agency with knowledge products. At the wider level, this should result in dynamic and 

structured flows of information and knowledge between projects and within the RLACC program in the Horn 

of Africa. 

 

 

V. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

 

5.1 Legal Instruments  

 

The legal instruments governing this Project will be: (a) a Tripartite Protocol of Agreement between 

the Federal Republic of Somalia, the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD) and the 

Bank and the Fund, in their capacities as an administrator of the GEF; and a Protocol of Agreement 

between the Republic of The Sudan and the Bank and the Fund, in their capacities as an administrator 

of the GEF. 

 

5.2 Conditions associated with the Fund and the Bank’s Intervention  

 

5.2.1 Entry into Force: Conditions Precedent to Entry into Force of the Grant: The respective 

Protocols of Agreement shall enter into force on the date of their signature.  

 

5.2.2 Disbursement: The obligation of the Bank and Fund to make the first disbursement of the 

Grants to the respective Recipients shall be conditional upon the entry into force of the 

respective Protocols of Agreement. 

 

5.2.3 Undertakings: The Recipients of the Grants shall undertake to respectively open a Special 
Account denominated in foreign currency and a local currency account at a bank acceptable 

to the Fund and Bank to receive the respective Grants. 
 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

 
This project complies with all applicable Bank policies. 

 



 

18 
 

VI. RECOMMENDATION 

Management recommends that the Boards of Directors approve the implementation, of the proposed 

GEF supplementary grant financing of USD 7,082,407 to the Republic of Sudan and USD 9,985,185 to the 

Federal Republic of Somalia for the purposes and subject to the conditions stipulated in this report. 
 

 

 





























































AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
MULTINATIONAL 

 

 

 

 

 

TECHNOLOGIES FOR AFRICAN AGRICULTURAL TRANSFORMATION: 

FRAMEWORK PROGRAM IN SUPPORT OF “FEED AFRICA” 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Program Overview 

1.1 More than 160 million Africans (about one in four Africans) are food insecure and 

malnourished, making Africa the most food-insecure region in the world. More than 32 million African 

children under five are underweight, of which nearly 10 million are severely underweight, and 14.3 

million are wasted, with low weight for their height. Africa’s recent economic gains are at risk if this is 

allowed to continue.  Low agricultural productivity and value addition are at the heart of the 

malnutrition, employment and income challenges on the continent. The agricultural sector accounts for 

between 50 and 70% of employment in African countries, but produces only 25% of Africa’s Gross 

Domestic Product (GDP). 

1.2  Asia was in a similar position in the 1960s but 20th century scientific advances in agriculture 

developed by a number of International Agricultural Research Centers (IARCs) in Latin America and 

Asia were applied, leading to the Asian “green revolution”. These centers became the Consultative 

Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) and together with countries in Asia they 

catalyzed one of the greatest increases in food production and improved nutritional well-being such as 

the world has ever known. Today, the technologies exist to feed Africa, if widely deployed. They include 

high yielding crop varieties and livestock breeds, bio-fortified crops such as pro-vitamin A rich cassava, 

high iron and zinc rice, and high zinc sorghum, which if scaled up can help address the problems of 

malnutrition and stunting of African bodies and minds. Africa has more food production technologies 

available today than Asia had at the time of its green revolution. What is missing is taking these 

technologies to farmers at scale. Also missing has been a well-coordinated food production technology 

delivery platform to help address all of the related issues of extension (training), policy, market, 

institutional, R&D, and regulatory issues hindering the widespread use of technologies. 

1.3  The Bank seeks to focus the technically excellent but hitherto uncoordinated efforts of CGIAR 

and their work with National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES), in particular as 

represented by their continental umbrella, the Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA) and 

Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs). The result will be a Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure 

(RTDI), with emphasis on agro-ecological zones and their priority commodities that will reach 40-50% 

of all African farmers with the most relevant food production technologies by 2025. The overall goal of 

TAAT is to radically improve agriculture as a business across Africa by deploying agricultural 

productivity-increasing technologies within eight Priority Intervention Areas (PIAs): i) Self-sufficiency 

in Rice Production, ii) Cassava Intensification, iii) Food and Nutrition Security in the Sahel, iv) 

Transforming African Savannahs into Breadbaskets, v) Revitalizing Tree Plantations, vi) Expanding 

Horticulture, vii) Increasing Africa’s Wheat Production, and viii) Achieving Self-sufficiency in Inland 

Fish Production. Within these PIAs, nine (9) agricultural commodities are prioritized. TAAT is designed 

as a Framework Program that allows partners (the World Bank, AGRA, BMGF, IFAD, etc.) to 

contribute resources and to expand country coverage over time. The Bank’s PY1 funding will be UA 

29 MILLION (US$ 40 MILLION) in grants to finance the centrally managed activities (for ADF-only 

countries while partner resources will initially target ADB countries). Similar amounts will be sought 

for PY2 and PY3. Further, the Bank is expected to provide close to US$350 million through its normal 

country lending programs, beyond the central activities, towards areas that will support development of 

agricultural value chains, market and infrastructure and access to finance, all of which will bolster the 

success of agricultural transformations at the country level. 

1.4 And while TAAT is a key platform for driving the Feed Africa strategy of the Bank, the 

resources needed to achieve the objectives of Feed Africa are huge and well beyond what could be 

achieved alone. So the Bank is developing strategic alliances and partnerships to help mobilize resources 

to achieve the objectives. TAAT is planned as a multi-donor financing platform to help take proven 

agricultural technologies to scale across Africa. The fundamental guiding principles of TAAT are: 

technology matters; scale matters; the policy and regulatory environment matters; and partnerships 

matter. 



 

iv 

1.5 A successful green revolution in Africa must be inclusive and based on a recognition that 

agricultural transformation and women’s empowerment are inextricably linked.  Addressing the gender 

disparities that persist in African agriculture presents a tremendous opportunity to unlock the potential 

of African agriculture. The agricultural sector in Africa is the largest employer of women; 62% of 

economically active women are working in the sector, while in countries such as Rwanda, Malawi and 

Burkina Faso, over 90% of economically active women are involved in agricultural activities. Yet 

depending on the country, the rural wage gap between men and women in Africa is estimated at between 

15-60%.  Research also indicates that women farmers are just as efficient as male farmers when granted 

equal access to inputs and skills.  TAATwill systematically incorporate consideration for gender 

equality and ensure women’s equal access to agricultural technologies..  For TAAT will prioritize the 

needs of women to level the playing field and increase agricultural productivity to achieve impact.  

1.6 TAAT is a strategic alliance with the goal of mobilizing $1 billion towards its goal of scaling 

up agricultural technologies. The Bank and the World Bank have been working actively together on 

conceptualizing TAAT for the past close to two years. The World Bank initially planned to put US$500 

million towards TAAT partnership in countries, an amount it announced would be increased to $700 

million during the multi donor discussion on the planned initiative during the World Food Prize events 

in Des Moines, Iowa in October 2017. The other members of the TAAT alliance will include the Bill 

and Melinda Gates Foundation, the Rockefeller Foundation and the Alliance for a Green Revolution in 

Africa (AGRA), all of whom have committed significant resources. Indeed, the Bill and Melinda Gates 

Foundation has already approved its financing support to the TAAT central coordinating platform 

housed at IITA, which will be described below. 

1.7 Other institutions have been actively participating in TAAT's conceptualization, including the 

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural 

Development, Agence Française de Development, DFID, USAID and other bilateral institutions and 

the private sector. Several of these institutions expect to collaborate on TAAT and also to co-finance 

national level interventions through parallel financing. It is worth noting that at the World Food Prize 

events in Iowa, which brought together the world's leading agriculture experts, TAAT was seen as 

potentially the "most significant effort to pull resources together to deliver technologies at scale across 

agroecological zones to farmers in Africa".  

1.8 TAAT aligns with the twin objectives of the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (TYS), inclusive growth 

and transition to green growth, with agriculture as one of the three areas of special emphasis. It also 

resonates with four of the Bank’s five corporate priorities (Feed Africa, Industrialize Africa, Integrate 

Africa and Improve the quality of lives of Africans), encapsulated in the High 5s. In addition, TAAT is 

strongly anchored on the Feed Africa agenda, endorsed by African leaders at the High-Level Conference 

held in Dakar in October 2015, which itself was anchored on the African Union’s Malabo Declaration, 

as well as Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 1 and 2 of eradicating extreme poverty and ending 

hunger and malnutrition. Given the agro-ecological perspective of the PIAs, TAAT contributes to the 

Regional Integration Policy and strategy (2014-2023) and is aligned with the transition states strategy 

in applicable RMCs of the Bank. TAAT is also anchored around previous projects supported by the 

Bank, namely: i) the “Support to Agricultural Research for Development of Strategic Crops in Africa” 

(SARD-SC), which funded research on four of the six strategic crops of the African Union (Cassava, 

Maize, Rice and Wheat), following a value chain approach; ii) the project to deploy the New Rice for 

Africa (NERICA) in seven African countries – a project that won the U.S. Treasury award in 2014; iii) 

the project on the Promotion of Science and Technology for Agricultural Development in Africa 

(PSTAD) implemented in 34 RMCs; and iv) various research-for-development projects (in Cameroon, 

Tanzania, and other countries) that contributed some of the proven agricultural development 

technologies selected for deployment in TAAT. 

1.9 Knowledge gained from implementation of prior agricultural research operations and other 

regional projects, particularly on the need to build country capacity for project implementation and 

delivery, has been taken into consideration in the design of TAAT. Similarly, the knowledge generated 



 

v 

from TAAT will be used to design, manage, and implement similar Bank-financed projects in the future. 

Through M&E, knowledge related data will be collected throughout implementation. Data will be 

analyzed and the results used to improve project implementation in real time. 

1.10 All African countries are eligible to participate in TAAT based upon a commitment to enact 

policies that facilitate the uptake of food production technologies, strengthen National Agriculture 

Research and Extension Systems (NARES), and participate in activities agreed upon with the CGIAR 

consortiums and Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs) under TAAT. They will be supported through 

centrally managed technology deployment compacts or country programs in which the Bank 

collaborates with partners (e.g., WB, AGRA, BMGF, and IFAD) to incorporate TAAT components into 

agricultural value chain development programs. The TAAT program consists of four major components 

namely: i) the creation of an enabling environment for deployment and adoption of food production 

technology by famers, in particular vibrant seed systems or artificial insemination programs, technology 

release and registration policies that are regionally harmonized, and regional programs to combat pest 

and disease threats; ii) a Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI)—a consortium of CGIAR 

centers, NARES, and SROs. These form the TAAT platform, which is able to provide and deploy 

needed food production technologies and any additional adaptive research required; iii) deployment of 

appropriate food production technologies, through crop/livestock campaigns in RMCs; and iv) project 

management. 

1.11 Operationally, TAAT will function as follows: The Regional Technology Delivery 

Infrastructure (RTDI) made up of CGIAR centers and other technology providers, will develop a menu 

of proven food production technologies in nine priority commodities. These include seed systems or 

artificial insemination programs for best bet crop varieties/livestock breeds for large scale deployment; 

protocols for disease control on a regional basis; farmer education in improved crop/animal production 

methods; aquaculture, etc.  RMCs, as represented by NARES, will work with the CGIAR centers to 

prepare proposals, based on the menu of food production technologies, for outreach campaigns;  the 

proposals will be submitted to the decision-making body of the RTDI, the Clearinghouse (details in 

Appendix 1).  Once proposals are approved, funds will be released for execution but the Clearing house 

will continue to provide oversight during execution. TAAT is not a research program but takes food 

production technologies that exist—the result of decades of research efforts—to millions of farmers via 

crop/livestock outreach campaigns and the creation of an enabling environment working with the 

researchers themselves. 

1.12 The food production technologies to be deployed under TAAT have the features of Regional 

Public Goods (RPGs) namely: (i) non-rivalry, (ii) non-exclusivity, (iii) broad public interest and benefit, 

(iv) strong alignment with the Bank’s strategic orientation and continental and regional objectives; (v) 

catalytic and upstream role, and (vi) higher developmental impact through cooperation. Food production 

technologies being deployed will be available to all stakeholders in the target agro-ecological zones or 

commodity belts for free. No country will be excluded. Key related lessons learned will include the 

stronger working relationships between the CGIAR centers and NARES, and the experience in working 

across multiple countries with similar agro-ecological zones, among others. 

1.13 TAAT will allow donors to work together through a well-coordinated regional technology 

delivery platform, for appropriate technologies to be deployed to millions of farmers across Agro-

ecological zones. It will bring to bear the joint collective effort of international, regional and national 

agricultural systems to improve connections between research and extension and reform regulatory 

systems that impede speedy transfer of technologies across borders..  

1.14 By going to scale on the Priority Intervention Areas (PIAs), TAAT’s key benefits include (i) 

increased agricultural productivity and diversification, leading to improved food and nutrition security, 

(ii) job creation through expanded commercialization and industrialization, (iii) improved 

socioeconomic status of farmers including women and youth due to higher incomes, (iv) reduced 

vulnerabilities to market price fluctuations due to reliable supply leading to better organized markets, 



 

vi 

(v) improved soil, land and water management practices due to Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs), 

and (vi) increased resilience to climate variability and stress through the deployment of Climate Smart 

Agriculture (CSA) technologies and innovations. TAAT will make a significant contribution to Feed 

Africa’s key agricultural development objectives, which are 1) eliminating extreme poverty, 2) ending 

hunger and malnutrition, and 3) achieving food self-sufficiency and turning Africa into a net food 

exporter. 

1.15 Projections based upon overall project design and assumptions developed for the larger Feed 

Africa strategy, as well as World Bank and AGRA programs, suggest that TAAT, by scaling up food 

production technologies, will result in 120 million tons of additional raw food production per year, will 

assist about 40 million beneficiaries (11.7 million households), and lead to increased food production 

valued at $1.7 to $2.8 billion resulting from an $850 million investment by the end of the program.. 

Investments in TAAT will be greatly compounded by larger loans/grants awarded to RMCs through 

Feed Africa.  

1.16 Management hereby seeks Board approval for the first year resources (PY1) from the Regional 

Public Good (RPG) window and will return in subsequent years (PY2 and PY3) with further requests and 
also for specific country programs.



 

vii 
 

Results Based Logical Framework 
Country and program name: Multinational – Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) 

 

Purpose: To "rapidly expand access of smallholder farmers, the majority of whom are women, in low-income RMCs to high yielding agricultural technologies to improve their food production, 
assure food security and raise rural incomes, and provide regional public goods by scaling up agricultural technologies across similar agro-ecological zones 

 

RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS/MITIGATION MEASURES 

Indicator (including CSI) Baseline (2017) Target (2020) 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Enhanced food and nutrition 

security, reduced poverty and 

improved livelihoods 

1. Population are more food secure 
(of which women will be 50%) 

2. Prevalence of stunting among 
children under 5 (disaggregated 

by gender) 

1. 20% of 
Africans are 

food insecure  

2. 31.2% for 
African region 

(ranges 31.7% 

to 42.6%  

1. 40% reduction  
2. 30% reduction 

1. Annual 
country food 

security status 

report. 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

Increased income (inclusively) 

 

 

Increased agriculture 

commodity productivity 

 Household income 
 

 

 Crop productivity 

 Livestock productivity 

 US$1,650 
 

  

 As in Appendix 
2 

 50% increase 
 

 

 30% - 50% increase  

1. Annual 

National Bureau 

of Statistics 

Reports. 

2. Annual Report 

of Ministry of 

Agriculture  

Risk: Lack of enabling environment (policy, 

market, etc.) 

Mitigation: Fact-based & targeted  advocacy 

Risk: Lack of commitments of stakeholders in 

implementation 

Mitigation: Active engagement of all 

stakeholders, with clear roles 

Increased employment 

(inclusively) 
 No. of jobs created (of which 

women & youth)  disaggregated 

by food commodity 

 0  450,000 (50% 
women) 

 

Increased food production 

 

Increased food and nutrition 

security 

 

Direct TAAT beneficiaries 

 

 

Value addition of TAAT 

 Tons of food (additional) 
disaggregated by food commodity 

 Household dietary diversity 
 

 

 No. of beneficiaries 
(disaggregated by age and sex) 

 

 Value of additional production 

 0 
 

 

 0 
 

 0 
 

 

 US$3.29 billion 

 17 Million MT 
 

 

 3 new food/hh 
 

 10.34 million hhs 
(2027) (50% women 

& 25% youth) 

 US$4.99 billion 

 

 Component 1: Creation of Enabling Environment (EE)     

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

Output 1.1: Policies for 

deployment and adoption of food 

production technology policies 

harmonized across  a region 

 No. of technology policies 
harmonized across countries and 

regions 

 0  7 (1/commodity) 1. Qtrly Program 
Monitoring 

Reports. 

2. Annual CG 

Center Reports. 

3. Annual NARES 

Reports 

4. Qtrly Market 

Reports 

Risk: Lack of commitment & logistical support 

to enable training. 

Mitigation: Sensitization & identification of 

strategic training partners 

Risk: Policy inconsistency on the part of 

governments & long process in changing 

policies 

Mitigation: Dialogue using fact-based 

rationale for losses due to policies status quo 

Output 1.2: Capacity of national  

seed systems built  
 No. of weak systems strengthened  0  7 (1/commodity) 

Output 1.3: Improved crop 

varieties and livestock breeds 

released in one country widely r 

 No. of improved crop varieties & 
livestock breeds widely applied in 

agro-ecological zones 

 0  14 (2/commodity) 



 

viii 
 

available for adoption in other 

countries within a region 

Risk: Lack of commitment by the youth 

involved in technology promotion 

Mitigation: Proper orientation on mindset 

change 

Risk: Lack of cooperation by government 

agencies 

Mitigation: Dialogue for buy-in 

Risk: Lack of enabling environment (policy, 

market, etc. 

Mitigation: Fact-based & targeted advocacy 

Risk:  Lack of commitment & logistical 

support to enable training 

Mitigation:  Sensitization & identification of 

strategic training partners 

Risk: Lack of availability of off-taker markets 

Mitigation: Facilitate linkages between 

producer groups and off-takers through 

commodity marketing agreements. 

Output 1.4: Constraints to 

technology adoption addressed 
 No. of technology adoption 

constraints removed 

 0  14 (2/commodity) 

Output 1.5: policies for release 

and registration of food 

production technologies 

harmonized 

 No. of technology policies 
harmonized across countries and 

regions 

 0  7 (1/commodity) 

Output 1.6: Technology 

promotional activities carried out 
 No. of promotional activities with a 

focus on technologies for safe and 

nutritious foods 

 0  3000  
 

  

Output 1.7: Activities carried out 

to promote the consumption of 

safe and nutritious foods 

 No. of promotional activities  0  40 

Output 1.8: Input & output 

markets accessed 
 No. of communities with better 

access to input & output markets 

 0  2,350  

Component 2: Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI) 

Output 2.1: Menu of Best-bet 

food production technologies 

generated 

 No of best-bet technologies scaled 
out. 

 0  21 (3/commodity)   

Output 2.2: Campaigns for 

transnational control of pests & 

diseases designed/implemented 

 No. of campaigns implemented   0  14 (2/commodity) 
 

 

 

 

Output 2.3: Crop/Livestock 

technology delivery compacts 

convened 

 No. of delivery platforms convened  0  14 (2/commodity)  

 

Output 2.4: Young class of 

‘Agripreneurs’ supported 

 

Output 2.5: M&E of the platform 

carried out 

 

 No. of Agripreneurs supported 
 

 No. of M&Es of the platform 
carried out 

 

 0 
 

 

 0 

 

 5000 
 

 

 7 (1/platform) 

  

Component 3: Deployment of Appropriate Technologies (DAT) 

Output 3.1: Trans-national 

control of pest/diseases facilitated 

Output 3.2: Appropriate 

technologies identified and 

deployed 

Output 3.3: crop and livestock 

outreach campaigns 

 

Output 3.4: Wide-scale farmer 

 No. of trans-national pest & 
diseases facilitated 

 

 No. of technologies identified and 
deployed 

 

 No. of successful crop/livestock 
outreach campaigns 

 0 
 

 

 0 
 

 

 

 0 

 7 (1/commodity) 
 

 

 14 (2/commodity) 
 

 

 

 7 (1/commodity) 

  



 

ix 
 

extension and innovative models 

designed and implemented  
 No. of wide-scale farmer 

extension models implemented 

 

 

 0 

 

 

 7 (1/commodity) 

Component 4: Project Management 

Output 4.1: Functional TAAT 

Program Management 
 No. of fiduciary activities handled 

effectively and efficiently under the 

TAAT program 

 0  20 1. Qtrly Program 
Monitoring. 

Risk: Lack of cooperation among Compacts 

Mitigation: Effective team building from the 

onset. 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

 

COMPONENTS INPUTS 

Component 1: Creation of Enabling Environment (EE)           UA 12.28 Million 

1.1: Harmonize and streamline technology release systems and registration as well as seed system policies across countries 

and regions (to ensure spillover effects) 

1:2: Capacity development of weak seed systems 

1:3: Ensure that improved crop varieties and livestock breeds for specific agro-ecological zones are widely applied and 

used 

1:4: Identify and remove constraints to agricultural technology adoption in Africa through appropriate policy audits 

TOTAL PROJECT COST: UA 40.00 MILLION 

 

ADF Grant:                             UA 29.00 million          (72.50%) 

AGRA:                                     UA 7.25 million            (18.10%) 

BMGF:                                     UA 0.85 million             (2.10%) 

Government of RMCs          UA 2.90 million             (7.30%) 

Component 2: Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI)                                                       UA 9.82 Million 

2.1: Identification & selection of best-bet technologies for uptake by RMCs 

2:2: Design & develop appropriate campaigns for transnational control of pests and diseases and its implementation 

2:3: Convene a Crop/Livestock technology delivery platform of all major actors for each of nine priority commodities 

2.4  Engage the CGIARs and other technology providers to develop a menu of proven food production technologies in the 

nine priority commodities 

2:5: Support the development of a young class of ‘agripreneurs’, through demonstration, training and financing in 

coordination with ENABLE Youth 

2.6: Carry out M&E of the platform 

Component 3: Deployment of Appropriate Technologies (DAT)Program   UA 16.01 Million 

3.1: Facilitation of trans-national control of pest and diseases through awareness raising campaigns (that pest and diseases 

do not respect political boundaries) and development of appropriate protocols  

3:2: Deployment of appropriate technologies through crop/livestock outreach campaigns in RMCs 
3.3 Design and implement wide-scale farmer extension and innovative models to organize and aggregate farmers 

 Component 4: Project Management (PM)                UA 1.89 Million 

 4.1: Management of TAAT fiduciary issues (Procurement, Disbursement, Financial Management)  



 

x 
 

Program timeframe 

Table 1: TAAT Program Timeframe  
Year 2017 2018 2019 2020 

Quarter 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 

Initial Activities                 

Internal Processing of Appraisal                 

Loan Negotiations                 

Board approval                 

Grant protocol signature                 

Recruitment of Program Staff (Clearinghouse, etc.)/Nomination of Program Steering Committee members                 

Satisfaction of conditions for effectiveness & first disbursement                 

Program launching/training of program teams in FM & Procurement                 

Preparation and validation of procedures manuals                 

Preparation & signing of MoUs with various implementing partners                 

Component 1: Creation of Enabling Environment (EE)                 

Design and monitoring of supporting policies                 

Technology survey and assessment                 

Assessment of Seed Systems and livestock breeds dissemination systems                 

Proposals on crop/livestock campaigns of proven agricultural technologies                 

National technology deployment and promotion                 

Component 2: Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI)                 

Farmers and input dealers registration                 

Design and implementation of trans-national campaigns for pests & disease control                 

Crop/Livestock technology delivery compact activities                 

Support to development of young class of ‘Agripreneurs’ & Promotion of technologies thru demonstration activities                 

Develop a menu of proven food production technologies in the nine priority commodities                 

Trainers training of others on the use of technologies & GAPs                 

Component 3: Deployment of Appropriate Technologies (DAT)                 

Facilitation of trans-national control of pest and diseases (through awareness raising, etc.)                 

Development of strategies for deployment of proven technologies                 

Design and implement wide-scale farmer and innovative extension models                 

Component 4: Program Management (PM)                 

Preparation, approval and floating of bidding docs & contract awards for goods, works & services                 

Contracts execution for goods, works and services                 

Quarterly reports submission                 

Annual reports submission                 

Program Work plans and Budgets                 

Steering committee meetings                 

Bank’s supervision missions                 

Audit                 

Mid-term review                 

Program Completion Report                 



 

1 

1. INTRODUCTION 

1.1 Africa’s Agricultural Sector is Underperforming 

1.1.1 The African continent has enormous potential for agricultural production. Yet more than 160 

million Africans are food insecure and malnourished. This is about one in four Africans, making Africa 

the most food-insecure region in the world. Every day over 100 million children in Africa go to bed 

hungry with devastating long-term consequences on their physical and mental development, hobbling 

their productivity as adults. Indeed, this has led to 58 million stunted African children—short in height 

for their age—representing an increase of 23% since 1990, despite worldwide declines of 37% over the 

same period. More than 32 million African children under five are underweight, of which nearly 10 

million are severely underweight, and 14.3 million are wasted, with low weight for their height. Simply 

put, more than a third of African children under five are either moderately or severely underweight. 

Africa’s recent economic gains are at risk if this is allowed to continue. 

1.1.2 Related to health and nutrition concerns, low agricultural productivity and value addition are 

very much at the heart of employment and income challenges on the continent. The agricultural sector 

accounts for between 50 and 70% of employment in African countries, but produces only 25%, of 

Africa’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Consequently, many people work in agriculture for their 

livelihoods and yet produce and earn very little for it. Furthermore, less than 30% of harvests are 

processed into value added products compared to 98% in developed countries. Only $40 of value is 

added to one ton of processed products in Africa compared to $180 in rich countries. These are missed 

opportunities to create wealth and employment, especially for women who predominate in the 

population of African farmers today (70–80% of African farmers are women). This places women and 

their families in precarious situations, exacerbating the health and nutrition challenges already 

described. To escape this negative feedback loop, increasing agricultural productivity and value addition 

is key. The interventions described here address productivity issues while other measures being rolled 

out within the Bank’s Feed Africa strategy work on improving value addition.   

1.1.3  Why is productivity so low in Africa? For a variety of reasons including poor soils and limited 

access by smallholder farmers to improved crop varieties and livestock breeds, fertilizer, soil 

correctives, and appropriate crop production packages. African staple crop yields have barely grown in 

the last 25 years, and remain the lowest of any region in the world. The productivity of five staple 

crops—rice, wheat, maize, potato, and cassava—is just over half of the international average. Annual 

growth of cereal yields was only 1.3% from 1990 to 2014, compared with 4.1% in Brazil during the 

same period. Strikingly, between 2001 and 2008, agricultural GDP in Africa grew at just 3.4% while 

overall GDP grew nearly twice as fast, at 6% annually.   

1.1.4  In sum, the underperformance of the African agriculture sector leads to low incomes and 

expensive and often poor quality food, which has a direct bearing on hunger, malnutrition, poverty, and 

human capital and which hinders economic opportunities in the farm and non-farm sectors alike.   

1.2 Asia’s Green Revolution was the result of Technological and Institutional  Innovations 

1.2.1 Asia’s experience illustrates how rapidly things can turn around with the right actions at a 

critical time. In the mid-1960s in Asia, rising populations, an underperforming agricultural sector, and 

consecutive droughts led to significant food shortages, widespread hunger, and malnutrition. However, 

through spectacular scientific advances in wheat and rice breeding and agronomy, the food crisis was 

rolled back and India became food secure within four years, by 1970; Pakistan, Thailand, the Philippines 

and Bangladesh followed soon after. The Asian agricultural phenomenon is estimated to have saved a 

billion lives and is now known as the ‘Green Revolution’. 

 



 

2 

1.2.2  The Asian experience was inspired by earlier successes in Latin America. The 20th century 

scientific advances in agriculture that were so successfully applied in Asia had been developed by the 

Mexican Agricultural Cooperation Program for wheat, established by the Rockefeller Foundation in 

Mexico City in the 1950s, and by the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) for rice, created by 

the Rockefeller and Ford Foundations in Los Banos, Philippines, in the 1960s. This was south-south 

learning at its best. 

1.2.3  And indeed this south-south learning was deliberately supported by global development 

partners at the time. The World Bank, from the late sixties to the early eighties, provided institutional 

innovations to deploy and adapt the wheat and rice agricultural technologies to millions of hectares of 

farmlands in Asia. The World Bank also facilitated the establishment of public institutions at global, 

regional and country levels combined with policy advice and support to Asian countries, to implement 

a far-sighted strategy of reaching resource-limited farmers with the best of modern agricultural 

technology. One of these is the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR), a 

global network of agricultural R&D institutions, established in 1972. The CGIAR centers were set up 

to be international centers of excellence in agricultural innovation, where cutting edge crop and 

livestock technologies were developed by the world’s best scientists and tested and adapted to individual 

country conditions, in collaboration with the National Agricultural Research and Extensions Systems 

(NARES). NARES are made up of national agricultural research institutes, universities, public and 

private extension (training) agencies, farmer organizations, etc., representing the national voices and 

approaches to agricultural technology development and deployment. It is safe to say that the Asian 

Green Revolution would not have happened without heavy investments by the World Bank, the 

Rockefeller and Ford Foundations, and Asian governments in agricultural research and development, 

credit, input distribution, extension, and rural infrastructure. On average, Asian governments doubled 

their own spending on agriculture between 1972 and 1985. 

1.2.4  The Rockefeller and Ford Foundations expanded International Agricultural Research Centers 

(IARCs) to Africa in the late 1960s—with the first center being the International Institute for Tropical 

Agriculture (IITA), established in Ibadan, Nigeria in 1967 to tackle technological barriers to raising 

food production. In the 1980s, two other centers were established in Kenya: the International Livestock 

Research Institute (ILRI) and the International Center Agroforestry Research (ICRAF, presently 

referred to as “World Agroforestry Center”); as well as a fourth center, the Africa Rice Center in Cote 

d’Ivoire. Of the 15 centers, four are based on the African continent. Centers in Asia and Latin America 

also opened research stations in Africa in the 1980s, including the Wheat and Maize Research Center 

in Mexico (CIMMYT) and the Tropical Crops Center (CIAT), demonstrating the increasing interest of 

international donors to bring the research and the technology for a green revolution to Africa.  

1.3 Why technologies have not moved to scale before in Africa 

1.3.1  But Africa missed the first green revolution for several reasons. Technologies have not moved 

to scale before in Africa due to: i) weak agricultural extension systems, ii) poor linkages between 

research and extension, iii) long technology verification and release systems, iv) a focus on national 

boundaries instead of across agro-ecological zones, v) insufficient attention to private sector value 

chains, vi) poor market linkages, vii) weak policy and regulatory environments, and viii) the absence  

of a regionally coordinated effort to deliver technologies across similar Agro-ecological zones 

(technologies without borders). 

1.3.2  Africa’s internal borders pose a serious challenge to the spread of technology on the continent. 

New agricultural technologies spread slowly across Africa’s agro-ecological zones because they are 

partitioned into multiple countries with differing governments, languages, phytosanitary controls and 

seed-certification processes. At the same time, pests and diseases do not respect arbitrarily drawn 

political borders and easily spread across them. This creates a deadly mismatch between prevailing 

dangers and the ability to roll out technologies to stop them in their tracks. The Fall Armyworm is a 

good example of such a pest that travels quickly and wreaks destruction on entire crops in its path. The 



 

3 

Armyworm was spotted for the first time in northern Nigeria in 2016 and has already managed to spread 

to at least 40 African countries (see Appendix 3 for a description of the Fall Army Worm Problem and 

mitigation plan led by the Bank). Tragically this is a crisis with known scientific solutions in the US 

and Brazil to stop the pests in their path, but without mechanisms to rapidly deliver them to African 

fields. And this is but one example. 

1.3.3  Low public sector investment in agriculture, poor seed systems, weak public extension, and 

lack of a harmonized regional legal framework for registration of crop varieties, and animal breeders’ 

rights (intellectual property), have meant that even existing improved varieties and breeds do not get 

into the hands of most farmers within a country or across a region. The share of acreage planted using 

improved crop varieties is only 30% in Africa compared with more than 50% in Latin America and 

more than 80% in Asia. Improved livestock breeds are even less prevalent.  

1.3.4  Investment by governments in the agriculture sector has also been a key driver of Green 

Revolutions in other regions. Mindful of this, African governments came together in 2003 to agree on 

the Comprehensive African Agriculture Development Program (CAADP), which, among other things, 

called for African countries to spend 10% of their budgets on agriculture. Yet, to date, only a handful 

of countries have managed to meet this target, hindering the resources available to support the transfer 

of new agricultural technologies into and within Africa. 

1.4 Feed Africa: AfDB’s Initiative to Drive Africa’s Green Revolution 

Feed Africa is the Bank’s bold initiative to end hunger, malnutrition, extreme poverty, and food 

imports—currently estimated at US$35 billion and projected to rise to US$110 billion by 2025, if 

nothing is done. This is a massive challenge as well as a massive opportunity. Feed Africa takes a 

commodity value chain approach to developing agriculture in Africa. A guiding principle of the Feed 

Africa Initiative is treating agriculture as a business, rather than as a way of life, and ensuring the 

inclusivity of women and young people. The goal is to produce thriving small-, medium-, and large-

scale agribusinesses in every segment of commodity value chains on the continent. Therefore, for Feed 

Africa to succeed, it must do two things. First, it must significantly raise agricultural productivity. 

Second, it must move African production much higher on the value chain, with agribusinesses 

producing and selling processed goods, not simply basic commodities, while providing markets for 

African farmers. The TAAT initiative aims to achieve the first goal, while a number of other initiatives, 

notably the development of agropoles and well-functioning markets, focus on the second. TAAT is 

therefore the bedrock of Feed Africa.  

1.5 Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT)  

1.5.1  Similar to Asia, enhancing Africa’s productivity requires significantly increased investment 

from African governments, businesses and development institutions to deploy  proven 21st century food 

production technologies to tens of millions of African farmers where they will have the most impact. 

These food production technologies already exist and include new high yield crop and livestock 

varieties,  micro-nutrient dense crops – for example, pro-vitamin A rich orange-fleshed sweet potato 

and high iron beans, drought tolerant maize varieties, integrated pest and disease management (IPDM), 

and simple storage and post-harvest technologies to reduce crop losses.   

1.5.2  The potential of these food production  technologies to provide food and nutrition security has 

been demonstrated and needs to be taken to scale.  For example, DroughtTEGO® is a trademark for a 

high yielding drought-tolerant maize variety developed by the Water Efficient Maize for Africa 

(WEMA) Project to mitigate against drought stress. Experts predict that with global changes Sub Sharan 

Africa will be disproportionately affected by drought and suffer a 30% decrease in yields.  Kenyan 

farmers who grew the WEMA varieties during the drought of 2016 obtained 3.6MT/Ha of maize 

compared to 1.5MT/Ha in fields of farmers who grew other commercial hybrids. In addition, it has been 

demonstrated that 125g of orange fleshed sweet potatoes (OFSP) can provide the daily provitamin A 



 

4 

needs of a preschooler. Vitamin A Deficiency (VAD) is a significant health concern in Africa 

contributing to high rates of blindness, disease and premature death in children and pregnant women.  

An estimated 43 million children under 5 years are Vitamin A deficient and  between 50,000 and 

125,000 of those vitamin A-deficient children go blind every year, half of them dying within 12 months 

of losing their sight.   

1.5.3  A major target of TAAT is the control of the Fall Army Worm  (FAW), a recent pest problem 

on the continent that currently puts at risk an estimated 13.5 million tons of maize valued at US$ 3 

billion in the 2017/2018 season.  This assessment is from research funded by the Department for 

International Development (DFID) at the Center for Agriculture and Biosciences Intenational (CABI) 

that assessed current and potential damage of the Fall Army Worm  (FAW).    Based on the 

aforementioned research findings, DFID requested the leadership of the African Development Bank to 

contain the serious problem of Fall Army Worm (FAW). Following, the Bank hosted a meeting of 

experts at the recent World Food Prize symposium in Des Moines, Iowa; in attendance were Center for 

Agriculture and Biosciences Intenational (CABI), USAID, the International Center for Improvement of 

Wheat and Maize (CIMMYT, the Spanish acronym), the International Center for Insect Physiology and 

Ecology (ICIPE), and the private sector.   The meeting recommended a regional approach,  awareness 

raising campaigns, scouting and early detection, 1Integrated Pest and Disease Management (IPDM), and 

search for resistance in preferred varieties.  TAAT will tackle Fall Army Worm (FAW) based on these 

recommendations working with CABI, ICIPIE, CIMMYT, National Agriculture Research and 

Extension Systems (NARES) of RMCs, regional and Sub-Regional Organizations, and R&D Centers.  

1.5.4  Simple storage and post-harvest technologies being to reduce crop losses and help farmers 

manage the increased harvest under TAAT include: hermetic grain storage (Purdue Improved Crops 

Storage system) that prevent pest and mycotoxins infection of stored grains.  Other post-harvest 

technologies include affordable and efficient grain drying, and low cost extruders for production of 

simple processed food by small and medium scale agribusinesses.    

1.5.5  Crop campaigns to reach farmers with agricultural technologies of inputs and extension have 

occurred in Africa with significant success in the past.  Over a four-year period, 2011-2015, Nigeria, 

working closely with Africa Rice, the rice CGIAR center in Africa, combined innovative (ICT-based) 

ways to deploy improved rice production technology of seeds and fertilizer, a value chain approach, and 

supportive public policies to reach 6 million rice farmers. Average yields in the country doubled from 

2MT/Ha to over 4MT/Ha and national paddy rice production rose by an additional 7 million MT. 

1.5.6  Similarly, in Malawi, delivery of subsidized seeds of improved maize varieties and fertilizer to 

millions of farmers in 2004 made the country self-sufficient in maize production and a net exporter of 

maize in a single season. Ethiopia’s national extension system also deployed new crop technologies to 

over 4.4 million smallholder farmers from 2010 to 2015 on nearly 2.2 million hectares of land. Since 

then, Ethiopia’s agriculture sector has enjoyed an average growth rate of over 7% per year, which has 

contributed in no small way to the double digit annual growth rate of the economy overall. 

1.5.7  The approach to scaling technologies has been based on national boundaries, instead of agro-

ecological zones across multiple countries. The releases of crop varieties often go through four years of 

testing in national contexts, which has to be replicated across countries within the same agro-ecological 

zone in which the same technology can make a difference. Thus, a technology that is good fit for a given 

agro-ecological zone of ten countries could take 40 years to reach farmers if deployment from country 

to country spreads one after the other. What is needed is a new approach that will cut back on these 

unnecessary regulatory bottlenecks and fast track the release of technologies across similar agro-

ecological zones in one go. This is what TAAT will do. This will help open up the regional seed industry 

and markets and lead to faster uptake of technologies. 

                                                           
1 1  Integrated Pest and Disease Management (IPDM) optiones  include resistant germplasm, pesticides, biopesticides, botanicals, pheromones, 

biocontrol via natural enemies, etc. 



 

5 

1.5.8. TAAT will engage  Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI) - of CGIAR centers 

and other technology providers to develop a menu of proven food production technologies working with 

National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES), Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs) 

and the Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA), the umbrella body of NARES in Africa. 

Based on the menu of proven food production technologies, RMCs, as represented by NARES, will 

work with the CGIAR centers to prepare proposals for food technology outreach campaigns across 

similar agro-ecological zones that cut across multiple countries to the decision making body of the 

RTDI, the Clearinghouse (see details in Appendix 1). There are eight Priority Intervention Areas (PIA) 

of TAAT that are agro-ecology based and cover 18 priority commodities (see Appendix 2).  But for this 

phase, nine food production technologies have been prioritized because of potential impact to increase 

food security, combat malnutrition, reduce food imports, and improve livelihoods.  They include: Water 

Efficient Maize for Africa (WEMA), high yielding rice varieties adapted to Africa (the NERICA 

varieties), high-yielding and high-starch cassava varieties, high yielding sorghum and millet for the 

Sahel, orange fleshed sweet potatoes, high iron beans, small livestock (goat and sheep), aquaculture, 

and new wheat varieties.  Control of pests and diseases, for example the Fall Army Worm (FAW), is a 

cross cutting intervention across all nine technologies.  

1.5.9  While TAAT is not a research program to develop new technologies—for the most part the 

needed technologies already exist and in some cases are already in use—but rather a crop and livestock 

outreach campaign to disseminate best-bet crop varieties/livestock breeds and practices to the farmers, 

it requires a close partnership with National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES) 

and International R&D Centers to provide solutions that tend to arise as research is deployed over a 

wide range of similar but diverse agro-ecologies with unique micro-ecosystems. 

1.6 TAAT will carry out positive gender discrimination in favor of women 

1.6.1 A successful green revolution must be inclusive and based on a recognition that Africa’s 

agricultural transformation and women’s empowerment are inextricably linked. Addressing the gender 

disparities that persist in African agriculture presents a tremendous opportunity to unlock the potential 

of African agriculture with the World Bank cautioning that “failure to recognise the different roles of 

men and women in agriculture is costly, resulting in misguided projects and programmes, forgone 

agricultural output and incomes, and food and nutrition insecurity”.  Indeed incorporating consideration 

for gender issues systematically in agricultural research, development, and extension systems will 

contribute significantly to meeting the food needs of Africa’s growing population and ensure that 

productivity gains in food systems translate to improved welfare of the poor. 

1.6.2 Women are important to Africa’s agriculture and agriculture is important to African women’s 

lives. The agricultural sector is the largest employer of African women, with 62% of economically 

active women working in the sector.  In countries such as Rwanda, Malawi and Burkina Faso, over 90% 

of economically active women are involved in agricultural activities.  Despite being heavily engaged in 

agriculture, African women earn less than men from the sector with the rural wage gap between men 

and women estimated at between 15-60%. In the case of Ivorian cocoa and Ethiopian coffee, for 

example, women provide 68% and 75% of the labour, respectively, but earn only earn 21% and 34% of 

the income generated. 

1.6.3 Research indicates that, when granted equal access to inputs and skills, women farmers are just 

as efficient as male farmers. Hence the privileging of male farmers, for example in Ivorian rice projects, 

is based on erroneous assumptions not supported by data. As such, gender responsiveness in agricultural 

research and development is not about ‘fixing the women farmers’, but rather addressing the 

institutional structures and technological impediments that hamper their productivity. Ultimately, the 

empowerment of women farmers requires institutional transformation, with research institutions 

becoming more gender responsive and paying close attention and genuinely responding to the needs of 

women farmers 



 

6 

1.6.4 In partnership with African Women in Agricultural Research and Development (AWARD), 

the Bank will systematically incorporate consideration for gender equality and ensure women’s equal 

access to agricultural technologies. In this regard, AWARD will support TAAT by: (i) Convening and 

coordinating a network of technical gender experts that would be available to members of the TAAT 

consortium to address issues of gender in the selected value chains which will maximize the impact of 

TAAT by providing consolidated gender expertise and opportunity for shared learning; (ii) Identifying 

and prequalifying bankable and scalable agricultural research and development innovations that address 

the gender gap in African agriculture and build relationships with private sector and other uptakers of 

gender responsive agricultural technologies.  Expected outcomes will be demonstrated change in in 

gender awareness, attitudes and/or behaviours of TAAT partners, a measurable increase in TAAT 

partner institutions with gender responsive agricultural innovation policies and strategies, and TAAT 

outputs that are gender responsive across value chains. 

1.7 Expected Impact of TAAT 

1.7.1. TAAT interventions are projected to raise productivity and increase food production over the 

next 8-10 years (Table 2). TAAT will add an estimated 120 million MT of food to Africa’s food 

production valued at US$1.71 to US$2.8 billion (Table 2).  

Table 2: Impact on Productivity, Production, and Livelihood of TAAT 

Commodity Productivity 

baseline  (2016) (MT/Ha) 

Productivity 2025 

(MT/Ha) (mean) 
Production (MT) 

Maize  2 4 30 million 

Lowland Rice 2 4 15 million 

Wheat 1.5 3 25 million 

Sorghum 1 2 10 million 

Millet 1 2 5 million 

Cassava 12 20 20 million 

Small livestock (live 

weight at 12 months) 

25 Kg 50 Kg 10 million 

Fish (live weight at 6 

months) 

3 Kg 5 Kg 5 million 

 

1.7.2  TAAT will benefit, through improved food security and income, an estimated 11.7 million 

households (representing on average 40 million people) over ten years, reducing by as many as a third 

the total number of hungry people on the continent. The increased food production is also expected to 

have an effect on food prices, reducing the amount of food households spend on food, and further 

increasing access to more food. It is estimated that TAAT, including its Bank-financed Country 

programs, combined with the affiliated programs of the World Bank and AGRA, will contribute to 

lifting about 40 million people out of poverty. 

1.7.3  TAAT will help to create huge regional spill-over effects and Regional Public Goods (RPGs). 

Of particular importance are RPGs that target imminent “regional public threats” of destructive pests 

and diseases of crops/livestock that do not respect political borders and easily spread across them.  A 

good example is the recent invasion into Africa of the Fall Armyworm described above, which currently 

puts at risk an estimated 13.5 million tons of maize valued at US$ 3 billion in the 2017/2018 season.   

1.8 TAAT is a Regional Program Producing Regional Public Goods (RPGs) 

1.8.1  TAAT resources are targeted at facilitating effective functioning of the Regional Technology 

Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI), made up of International Agriculture Research Centers of the 

Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR), National Agricultural Research 

and Extension Systems (NARES), African Agricultural Technology Foundation (AATF), Sub-Regional 

Organizations, all  non-governmental organizations, that will ensure that proven agricultural 

development technologies are rapidly deployed to RMCs. 



 

7 

1.8.2  TAAT aims at producing Regional Public Goods (RPGs), including: i) harmonized regional 

and Transnational border protocols for introduction and release of improved varieties/breed and other 

agricultural technologies, ii) Synchronization of seed system protocols, especially those that deal with 

liberalization of foundation seed production (to include private sector seed companies), iii) combatting 

“regional public threats” of destructive pests and diseases of crops/livestock that do not respect political 

borders and easily spread across them.   

1.8.3  The requested grant from the RPG window of ADF 14 will support CGIAR and low-income 

RMCs to drive delivery of food productions technologies into hands of at least 60% of all farmers after 

eight to ten years. Twenty two of these RMCs, namely: Benin, Burkina-Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Congo 

DRC, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, 

Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia have written to the Bank to 

express interest in participating. Six of them (Chad, Congo DRC, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Sierra Leone, 

and Sudan) are in fragile situations as defined by the eligibility for the Transition Support Facility (TSF) 

support under ADF-14. However, it should be noted that TAAT will produce Regional Public Goods 

(RPGs) of public interest; no RMC can be excluded from it or from their spillover benefits, given their 

public goods characteristics (see section 4.2 and Appendix 4). TAAT is therefore not exclusive to low-

income ADF RMCs. Non-ADF countries interested in TAAT such as Egypt, Morocco, and Tunisia 

(ADB countries that have written to express interest in TAAT) are welcome to participate via  the ADB 

funding window of the Bank or other eligible partner funds (e.g., funds from BMGF and World Bank). 

Participation will simply depend on the ability of RMCs to meet requirements for technology 

deployment. For the 25 countries (22 ADF and 3 ADB) that have expressed interest in participating in 

TAAT, the country programs in the pipeline that are aligned to inserting a TAAT component are listed 

in Appendix 5. TAAT is therefore open to all RMCs, via their NARES, to make their best technologies 

accessible to farmers within countries working in close collaboration with regional and continental 

organizations. The new crop varieties and livestock breeds, cross-boundary crop and livestock diseases 

control (e.g., Fall Armyworm), crop management practices, knowledge and other products from the 

CGIAR’s research work are indeed RPGs made widely available to individuals and organizations 

working for sustainable agricultural development around the world. TAAT will be held to high 

standards of deployment and must meet clear key performance indicators or funding will be 

discontinued to erring institutions. 

1.9 TAAT will benefit from the lessons learned from previous Bank interventions  

1.9.1  The Bank’s earlier experience with the “Support to Agricultural Research for Development of 

Strategic Crops in Africa” (SARD-SC) program – which funded research on four of the six strategic 

crops of the African Union (Cassava, Maize, Rice and Wheat) – provides crucial lessons that TAAT 

will build upon.  They include: i) experience on how to work regionally with international centers of 

excellence (the CGIAR) to rapidly introduce and test technologies across a region for optimal yields 

and eventual deployment to farmers; ii) The SARD-SC program revealed the importance of going to 

scale to ramp up food production and reduce imports.  TheSARD-SC program led to a doubling of 

yields for wheat, rice, maize, cassava on experimental fields and in on-farm trials; if average wheat 

yields increases from 1.5 to 3MT/Ha and higher tons per hectare could be replicated across 9.8 million 

hectares grown in Africa, the continent could be on the path to self-sufficiency in wheat production; iii) 

SARD-SC also demonstrated the advantages of working across multiple countries with similar 

agriculture-ecological zones, simultaneously introducing, testing and releasing new crop varieties in 

several countries at the same time. Other lessons are have been learned from the development of the 

NERICA (New Rice for Africa) rice varieties by AfricaRice in the 1990s (Appendix 6). 

1.10 The Value-Added of TAAT 

1.10.1  The value-added of TAAT is that it can leverage crop and livestock technologies that have 

been developed and validated in one or a few countries across entire agro-ecological zones covering 

many countries. For example, maize yields can be doubled across East and Southern Africa via an 



 

8 

introduction, registration, and deployment of already available drought tolerant Water Efficient Maize 

for Africa (WEMA) varieties. And perhaps the best demonstration of the value added of TAAT is in 

tackling pests and diseases such as Fall Armyworm accross an entire region.   

1.10.2 TAAT will allow donors to work together through a well-coordinated regional technology 

delivery platform, for appropriate technologies to be deployed to millions of farmers across Agro-

ecological zones. It will bring to bear the joint collective effort of international, regional and national 

agricultural systems to improve connections between research and extension and reform regulatory 

systems that impede the speedy transfer of technologies across borders. 

2 PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

2.1 Objectives of TAAT 

The development objective of TAAT is to "rapidly expand access of smallholder farmers, majority 

women, to high yielding agricultural technologies to improve their food production, assure food security 

and raise rural incomes, and deliver regional public goods by scaling up agricultural technologies across 

similar agro-ecological zones". Overall TAAT has three main objectives:  

i) Creating an enabling environment for technology adoption by famers via policies for 
deployment and adoption of food production technologies that are regionally 

harmonized, food and nutrition conscious, and environmentally sustainable; 

ii) Facilitate effective delivery of technologies to farmers by working with existing Regional 
Technology Delivery Infrastructure in a compact with RMCs, represented by NARES, 

private sector actors, and an independent technology Clearinghouse; 

iii) Raising agricultural production and productivity through the identification and 
deployment of appropriate technologies, including nutrient dense crop varieties, and 

vigorous crop outreach campaigns, extension, and market linkage campaigns, in RMCs. 

2.2 Strategy of TAAT 

2.2.1  Feed Africa takes a value chain approach to raising crop/livestock productivity in Africa. 

Figure 1 shows where TAAT will intervene in the commodity value chains. A commodity value chain 

is described as a series of goods and services required for a commodity to be produced and then to move 

from the place of its primary production to the ultimate end-user (Figure 1). 

 



 

9 

Figure 1: Positioning of TAAT within agricultural commodity value chains  

 

2.2.2  Agricultural growth that has occurred in Africa reveals that productivity enhancement and 

market access development are prevalent factors. Productivity unaccompanied by strong growth in 

markets leads to a glut from over-production, while markets without increased productivity gives rise 

to food imports due to insufficient supply. Feed Africa will work to reinforce these productivity aspects 

of the value chain and agriculture markets through its various initiatives such as TAAT, Agropoles, 

post-harvest losses and agro processing. The role of TAAT in particular is to improve outcomes at the 

beginning of this chain by increasing productivity, as well as resilience to weather and disease-related 

risks, providing a much more solid basis from which to build strong production systems and markets 

that make African agribusinesses successful. TAAT will work in concert with the other initiatives to 

foster the deployment of commercially viable technologies with improved access to input and output 

markets, and other enablers such as innovative finance and soft/hard infrastructure.  

2.2.3 It is important for TAAT to generate ‘quick wins’ to create credibility and attract both 

additional public and private sector financing. An initial set of priority agricultural commodities are: 

i) Water Efficient Maize for Africa (WEMA), 

ii) Import-quality rice for the west African lowlands, 

iii) Cassava for industrial use, 

iv) Small livestock (goats and sheep), 

v) Sorghum/millet for the Sahel, 

vi) Aquaculture 

vii) High yielding wheat varieties 

viii) Orange fleshed Vitamin A rich sweet potato varieties 

ix) High iron beans varieties for Africa 



 

10 

Management of pests and disease is a cross cutting theme across all the nine technologies 

2.2.4 Clear metrics of target productivity, production, beneficiaries, agro-ecologies, and countries have 

been pre-determined for these nine priority food production technologies (See Appendix 7) 

2.3 TAAT Activities 

2.3.1  The TAAT program consists of four major components namely: 

i) Component #1: Creation of an enabling environment for technology adoption by famers 
via a seed system, technology release and registration policies that are regionally 

harmonized 

ii) Component #2: A Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI)—or TAAT 
platform—that is able to provide and deploy needed food production technologies and any 
additional adaptive research required 

iii) Component #3: Deployment of appropriate food production technologies, through 
crop/livestock campaigns in RMCs 

iv) Component #4: Project Management. 

2.3.2  Harmonization of technology release and registration, and seed system, policies 

 across regions 

The approach to scaling technologies based on national boundaries needs to be replaced by an approach 

that involves agro-ecological zones that spread across multiple countries. Policies and protocols for 

release and registration of crop varieties and animal breeds needs to be streamlined so that 

varieties/breeds released in one country can be utilized in other countries of the same region, same with 

seed system protocols that can replicated across countries within the same agro-ecological zone. TAAT, 

working with Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs) and CGIAR center responsible for policy work, 

IFPRI (and its key partners such as the Africa Technology Policy Studies ATPS Network), will review 

national and regional policies on variety release, registration, and the seed system with an aim of 

harmonizing them to fast track the release of technologies across similar agro-ecological zones. This 

will help open up the regional seed industry and markets and lead to faster uptake of technologies. 

2.3.3. The Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI)—or TAAT platform 

RTDI is a consortium of CGIAR centers, FARA, Africa Agricultural Technology Foundation (AATF) and 

SROs working on regional approaches to deployment of new crop and livestock technologies, and 

combatting pest and disease threats through a fair and transparent method in prioritizing technologies 

and allocating resources. The RTDI will develop a menu of food production technologies and work with 

RMCs, as represented by NARES and the private sector, to develop a proposal to take these technologies 

to scale.  Figure 2 schematically describes the RTDI processes. The RTDI is made up of four units, 

namely: 

1. A Project Steering Committee (PSC): the highest decision-making body composed of 
representatives of participating RMCs, the private sector, CGIAR centers. The 

committee provides oversight to Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI).  

2. Clearinghouse: the body of the consortium that decides on which technologies should 
be used. The Clearinghouse will be independent of the Project Management Unit (PMU);  

3. Commodity Technology Delivery Compact (CTDC): is at the core of TAAT and it is 
an agreement among the entire ecosystem of actors needed to deliver improved 



 

11 

technologies at scale for a specific crop or livestock value chain, for each of the priority 

commodities. They will be hosted the CGIAR center or institution with the particular 

mandate for each specific crop; 

4. A Project Management Unit: oversees day-to-day implementation of project fiduciary 
and administrative activities;  

2.3.4  Identification and deployment of appropriate technologies, through crop/livestock 

campaigns in RMCs 

TAAT will engage CGIAR and other technology providers to develop a menu of proven food production 

technologies, namely: seed system or artificial insemination guidelines (technical manuals) for large 

scale deployment of improved varieties/breeds, disease control, improved crop/animal production 

methods, aquaculture, etc.  RMCs, as represented by NARES, will prepare a proposed food technology 

outreach campaign covering one or more of the menu items, with support from the respective CTDC 

for submission to the Clearinghouse of the RTDI. The proposals will clearly state the target 

beneficiaries, location, development impact, and timelines within the RMCs. The Clearinghouse will 

review the proposals according to a set of agreed criteria and recommendations for funding. Oversight 

will also be provided for implementation by the Clearing house. 

 

Figure 2: Process of origination, review, decision making, and funding in the Regional Technology 

Delivery Infrastructure 

2.4 Expected Output and Outcomes 

2.4.1 Expected Outputs 

TAAT interventions are projected to raise productivity of target commodity up to 100% over the next 

8-10 years (Table 2). Other outputs include reduction of Vitamin A deficiency in children under five 

and pregnant women by 30% and reduction in post-harvest losses by 50% in target locations of TAAT 

over the next 8-10 years. 



 

12 

2.4.2 Provision of Regional Public Goods (RPG)  

Regional public goods will be provided via a number of vehicles including: 

i) Harmonization of regional and transnational border protocols for introduction and 
release of improved varieties/breed and other agricultural technologies 

ii) Synchronization of seed system protocols, especially those that deal with production of 
foundation seeds (inclusion of private sector seed companies) 

iii) Disease control – monitoring and IPDM methods 

iv) Extensive adaptation trials of crop varieties across the region, including nutrient dense 
varieties 

2.4.3 Crop Outreach Campaigns to reach millions of African Farmers 

i) Toolkits for the different priority commodities provided to the RMCs 

ii) Feedback on performance of technologies via the RTDIs 

iii) A doubling of acreage under improved crops and breeds, from the current 30% to 60%, 
by 2025 

iv) Availability of cheap and nutritious food 

2.4.4 Expected Outcomes 

TAAT will benefit via increased food security and income, raising farmer’s household incomes by an 

average of US$600 per annum, reaching an estimated 11.7 million households, representing on average 

40 million people, over ten years, and reducing by as much as a third the total number of hungry people 

on the continent. TAAT will add an estimated 120 million MT of food to Africa’s food production 

valued at US$1.71 to US$2.8 billion (Table 2).  The increased food production will also have an effect 

on food prices, reducing the amount households spend on food, and further increasing access to more 

food, in a positive feedback loop. TAAT is expected to add 3.15 million direct farm jobs over eight 

years. 

2.5 Costs and Financing Arrangements  

2.5.1 Program Cost  

TAAT is divided into centrally managed activities, designed to produce regional public goods, and 

funded by grants from the Bank and partners, and country program activities to be financed through 

sovereign loans from the Bank and partners. The UA 29 million from the ADF XIV Regional Public 

Goods (RPGs) window will solely finance regional public goods described in the TAAT Program 

Framework Document. BMGF has already approved $1.14 million and AGRA is processing a $10 

million grant for centrally managed activities of TAAT. The country programs will be financed via 

AfDB sovereign loans to RMCs, as well as World Bank loans to RMCs to the tune of USD 700 million. 

The Bank’s financing of the central programs will be for nine priority commodities using 

resources from ADF XIV RPG window. This first set of commodities will be implemented over three 

(3) years (2018 to 2020). Only activities of the first nine commodities have been described in more 

detail in the present report, with the costing information below.  

 



 

13 

2.5.2  The total cost of first phase of TAAT is estimated at UA 40.00 million (USD 56.532 

million) net of taxes and based on 2016 prices comprising UA 15.27 million or 38% in local costs 

and UA 24.73 million or 62% in foreign costs. This cost is inclusive of physical and price 

contingencies estimated at average rates of 3% and 5%, respectively. The physical contingencies are 

estimated from 0% (emolument) to 5% (works) based on common practices. The price contingencies 

were estimated on the basis of actual and projected levels of local inflation rates of about 2% per annum 

and foreign inflation rates. 

2.5.3  The summary of the first phase of nine commodities costs by component and by category 

of expenditure are presented respectively in Tables 3-4. 

Table 3: Summary of Program Cost by Components 

COMPONENTS 
(USD '000) (UA '000) % % 

Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total FE BC 

 

1. CREATION OF ENABLING 

ENVIRON. FOR TECHNOLOGY 

ADOPTION 

6 049.38 9 800.52 15 849.90 4 280.32 6 934.49 11 214.82 62 30 

 

2. REGIONAL TECHNOLOGY 

DELIVERY INFRASTRUCTURE 

(RTDI) 

4 900.26 8 043.82 12 944.09 3 467.25 5 691.52 9 158.77 62 25 

 

3. DEPLOYMENT OF APPROPRIATE 

TECHNOLOGY (DAT) 
7 528.70 13 604.50 21 133.20 5 327.04 9 626.05 14 953.09 64 40 

 4. PROGRAM MANAGEMENT 1 771.93 777.78 2 549.70 1 253.75 550.33 1 804.08 31 5 

Total BASELINE COSTS 20 250.27 32 226.62 52 476.89 14 328.36 22 802.39 37 130.75 61 100 

 Physical Contingencies 954.01 1 608.79 2 562.79 675.02 1 138.32 1 813.34 63 5 

 Price Contingencies 379.90 1 112.42 1 492.32 268.80 787.11 1 055.91 75 3 

Total PROJECT COSTS 21 584.17 34 947.83 56 532.00 15 272.18 24 727.82 40 000.00 62  
 

Table 4: Summary of Program Cost by Category of Expenditure  

EXPENDITURES CATEGORIES 
(USD '000) (UA '000) % % 

Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total FE BC 

 I. Investment Costs 18 834,77 32 027,12 50 861,89 13 326,80 22 661,23 35 988,03 63 97 

 A. GOODS 25,25 84,75 110,00 17,87 59,97 77,83 77 - 

  Vehicles 9,00 36,00 45,00 6,37 25,47 31,84 80 - 

  Equipment & Inputs 16,25 48,75 65,00 11,50 34,49 45,99 75 - 

 B. SERVICES 17 211,32 30 634,75 47 846,07 12 178,11 21 676,04 33 854,15 64 91 

  Training 5 138,97 6 280,96 11 419,93 3 636,15 4 444,18 8 080,33 55 22 

  Studies 1 861,58 5 584,74 7 446,32 1 317,19 3 951,56 5 268,75 75 14 

  Contractual Services 9 905,52 18 395,97 28 301,49 7 008,79 13 016,32 20 025,11 65 54 

  Audit 305,25 373,08 678,33 215,98 263,98 479,96 55 1 

 C. MISCELLANEOUS 1 598,20 1 307,62 2 905,82 1 130,83 925,22 2 056,05 45 6 

II. Recurrent Costs 1 415,50 199,50 1 615,00 1 001,56 141,16 1 142,72 12 3 

 A. PERSONEL 1 155,00 - 1 155,00 817,24 - 817,24 - 2 

 

B.DAILY SUBS. ALLOWANCES 

(DSA) 120,00 - 120,00 84,91 - 84,91 - - 

 

C. OPERATION AND 

MAINTENANCE 100,00 150,00 250,00 70,76 106,13 176,89 60 - 

  Vehicles 60,00 90,00 150,00 42,45 63,68 106,13 60 - 

  Equipment 40,00 60,00 100,00 28,30 42,45 70,76 60 - 

 

D. GENERAL OPERATING 

CHARGES 40,50 49,50 90,00 28,66 35,02 63,68 55 - 

Total BASELINE COSTS 20 250,27 32 226,62 52 476,89 14 328,36 22 802,39 37 130,75 61 100 

 Physical Contingencies 954,01 1 608,79 2 562,79 675,02 1 138,32 1 813,34 63 5 

 Price Contingencies 379,90 1 112,42 1 492,32 268,80 787,11 1 055,91 75 3 

Total PROJECT COSTS 21 584,17 34 947,83 56 532,00 15 272,18 24 727,82 40 000,00 62  
 

2.6 Program financing arrangements  

2.6.1  Of the total first phase Project cost of UA 40 million (USD 56.532 million), Bank Financing 

will be UA 29 million or USD 40 million (72.5%)  (See Tables 5 and 6). This will finance 100% of 

Goods; 100% of services for the Commodity Technology Delivery Compact (CTDC); 100% funding 



 

14 

for Enable Youth in TAAT (ENABLE-TAAT) and 100% operating costs. Bill and Melinda Gates 

Foundation (BMGF) will provide UA 0.83 million ((USD 1.138 million) or 2.1 %) to assist the 

establishment of the Clearing house. The funding from BMGF will cover recruitment of key staff and 

other operating expenses. The Clearinghouse will play a major role in the TAAT implementation. The 

Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA) will provide UA 7.25 million (or USD 10 million) 

to finance 100% services (across Components 1, 2, and 3). The participating RMCs will contribute 

UA2.90 million (7.3%) in local currency, 100% in-kind, by provision of farm land for extension training 

facilities, demonstration activities, and other critical RPGs-promoting activities. Project beneficiaries 

include a variety of stakeholders: agripreneurs, farmer based organizations and cooperatives, 

commodity processors, private sector operators, registered SMEs, seeds producers, agro-input dealers, 

service providers, millers, aggregator and market operators, and young graduates.   

2.6.2  While table 5 below indicates the financing arrangements by local and foreign currency 

distribution, table 6 indicates financing by year. Grants’ allocations by source and expenditure 

categories is presented in Appendix 8a and by components in Appendix 8b 

Table 5: Financing arrangements by Local & Foreign Distribution 

FINANCING 

SOURCES 

Financing (USD '000) Financing (UA '000) 

% Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total 

 ADF Grant 12 894,72 28 090,97 40 985,70 9 123,84 19 876,16 29 000,00 72,5 

 AGRA 4 058,45 6 187,97 10 246,43 2 871,61 4 378,39 7 250,00 18,1 

 BMGF 532,43 668,88 1 201,30 376,73 473,27 850,00 2,1 

 Government 4 098,57 0,00 4 098,57 2 900,00 0,00 2 900,00 7,3 

Total Financing 21 584,17 34 947,83 56 532,00 15 272,18 24 727,82 40 000,00 100,0 

NB: Government contribution is 7.3% and in-kind (national staff salaries, part of the operating cost, rental value of the office space offered, laboratory 

infrastructure and experimental land and the loss in fiscal receipts due to tax and custom duty exemption of different project procurement). It is less than 

10% required because six (6) of the target 22 low-income RMCs are countries are in fragile situations and conflict-affected (see related Annex in Vol. II 
of the Report, Technical Annex).. 

Table 6: Financing arrangements by Year 

FINANCING SOURCES 
Financing (USD '000) Financing (UA '000) 

2018 2019 2020 Total 2018 2019 2020 Total 

  ADF Grant 25 862,19 10 008,30 5 115,21 40 985,70 18 299,15 7 081,51 3 619,34 29 000,00 

  AGRA 5 059,20 3 435,51 1 751,71 10 246,43 3 579,71 2 430,84 1 239,45 7 250,00 

  BMGF - 593,01 608,29 1 201,30 - 419,59 430,41 850,00 

  Government 2 727,48 676,36 694,73 4 098,57 1 929,87 478,57 491,57 2 900,00 

Total Financing 33 648,88 14 713,18 8 169,94 56 532,00 23 808,73 10 410,51 5 780,76 40 000,00 

 

2.6.3 During the implementation period for each component, expenditures will be carried out 

according to the schedule in Table 7. The nine priority commodity value chain activities will be 

implemented during the first two years through a comprehensive deployment of new technologies in 

RMCs. Year 3 will be dedicated to the consolidation of the results through mainstreaming of the value 

chain development activities on a commercial basis 

  



 

15 

Table 7: Expenditure Schedule by Component (USD and UA Million)  

COMPONENTS 
(USD '000) (UA '000) 

2018 2019 2020 Total 2018 2019 2020 Total 

 

1. CREATION OF AN 

ENABLING 

ENVIRONMENT FOR 

TECHNOLOGY 

ADOPTION 

4 498,30 6 346,72 6 515,11 17 360,14 3 182,83 4 490,71 4 609,86 12 283,41 

 

2. REGIONAL 

TECHNOLOGY 

DELIVERY 

INFRASTRUCTURE 

(RTDI) 

10 679,31 2 313,01 889,80 13 882,13 7 556,30 1 636,60 629,59 9 822,49 

 

3. DEPLOYMENT OF 

APPROPRIATE 

TECHNOLOGY (DAT) 

17 430,36 5 194,06 - 22 624,42 12 333,09 3 675,13 - 16 008,22 

 

4. PROGRAM 

MANAGEMENT 
1 040,90 859,38 765,03 2 665,31 736,51 608,07 541,31 1 885,88 

Total PROJECT COSTS 33 648,88 14 713,18 8 169,94 56 532,00 23 808,73 10 410,51 5 780,76 40 000,00 
 

2.7 Key Performance Indicators 

The TAAT first phase commodities performance indicators are outlined in the Results Based Logical 

Framework at three levels: Impact, Outcome and Output. 

 The impact indicators relate to more food secure population and dealing with the 
prevalence of stunting among children under 5 years. 

 The outcome indicators are household income, agricultural productivity, job creation, 
tons of additional food commodity, household dietary diversity, value of additional foods 

produced, and number of beneficiaries. 

 The output indicators include: technology policies harmonized across regions/countries, 
weak systems strengthened, improved crop varieties and livestock breeds widely applied, 

technology adoption constraints removed, promotional activities with a focus on 

technologies for safe and nutritious foods, and communities with better access to inputs 

and output markets. Others are best-bet technologies scaled out, campaigns implemented, 

delivery platforms convened, agripreneurs supported, M&Es of platforms carried out, 

trans-national pests and diseases facilitated, technologies identified and deployed, menus 

of proven food production technologies developed, and wide-scale farm extension 

models implemented.  

 See the RBLF for complete list. 

3 FEASIBILITY OF TAAT 

3.1 Economic and Financial Performance 

3.1.1 It is anticipated that the Bank’s intervention will result in positive economic and financial 

impacts in RMCs from the nine priority technologies, especially given the public goods nature of the 

interventions. Economic and financial analyses were carried out using the economic surplus approach 

for the nine selected commodities. Improvements taken into account were streamlined and harmonized 

release of improved crop varieties and livestock breeds, strengthening of seed systems, use of improved 

varieties of crops across the applicable agro-ecological zones, design and implementation of appropriate 

campaigns for trans-national control of pest and diseases, good agricultural practices (GAPs), capacity 

building and outreach, policy support and advisory services, as well as demonstration and promotional 

activities. The benefits were measured based on increase in food supply as a result of improved access 

to proven technologies and other farm inputs. The annual flows of gross economic benefits from 



 

16 

increased crop and livestock productivity, production and value chains were estimated and aggregated. 

The aggregate benefits and costs (per commodity value chain) were then discounted to derive the 

estimated present value (in 2017 values) of total net benefits from the intervention. The benefits and 

costs were later aggregated across the nine priority commodities to calculate the aggregate financial and 

economic impacts.  

3.1.2 The consolidated Net Present Value (NPV) of the Financial Net Benefits was US$ 431.5 

million with an internal rate of return (FIRR) of 27%. Using World Prices (to correct for domestic 

distortions, taxes, and subsidies), the NPV of net economic benefits was calculated at US$ 280 million 

with an internal rate of return of 23%.  The result is quite robust and includes changes in productivity 

(crop and livestock), levels of adoption of proven agricultural technologies, and discount rates. For 

instance, a scenario of adoption by 10% of farmers, 10% productivity increase, and 10% discount rate 

across the nine priority commodities still gave an aggregate NPV of US$ 296 million with an internal 

rate of return of 18%. This supports the potential economic impact of the TAAT approach.  

3.2 Environmental and Social impacts and Gender 

3.2.1 TAAT has been classified as Category 2 operation, indicating that the program activities are 

expected to have limited adverse environmental and social impacts. An Environmental and Social 

Management Framework (ESMF) for the mitigation of adverse environment and social impacts of the 

program was posted on the Bank’s website on 4 July 2017. It provides the processes and methodologies 

to be implemented by the Clearinghouse/PMU to screen and manage potential environmental and social 

impacts and risks likely to result from the proposed agriculture technologies and demonstration 

activities. Because TAAT will be executed at RMCs, the ESMF draws on applicable national and 

regional regulatory frameworks as well as international good practice guiding environmental and social 

management.  

3.2.2  Women’s large overrepresentation in agricultural tasks in Africa, combined with the existence 

of a gender gap in agricultural productivity and the need to boost Africa’s agricultural output calls for 

increased attention to raising female agricultural productivity. The technologies it invests in must 

respond to the needs and priorities of women as well as men in order to level the playing field and 

increase agricultural productivity. Implementing partners must emphasize the deployment of gender-

responsive technologies. There is a strong case within TAAT for carrying out positive gender 

discrimination, since women form the majority of farmers as well as food processors in Africa. Studies 

have shown that women are as efficient as men, given access to same technologies. A World Bank 

publication (2008) clearly documents gender based differences in African agriculture and in terms of 

technology, land, extension, finance, time, mobility and education and training. 

3.2.3  TAAT will ensure the gender responsiveness of the technologies. Evidence shows that 

introducing new agricultural technologies can exacerbate already existing gender disparities and make 

life tougher for smallholder farmers, especially women and girls. However, with proper attention, 

agricultural technologies have the potential to bridge the gender gap and lead to inclusive, agriculture-

driven prosperity for all Africans. The African Women in Agricultural Research and Development 

(AWARD) will be one of the partners for the TAAT program to not only build the capacity of key Bank 

staff and TAAT implementers to be more gender responsive, it will help mitigate potential negative 

gender impacts while upscaling those technologies that bridge Africa’s gender gap in agriculture. The 

TAAT program recognizes that gender equality in agribusinesses is a priority. The mechanisms to 

ensure social inclusion and gender equality in this project include appropriate outreach strategy and 

gender sensitive training on good agricultural practises, as well as adequate provisions for both genders 

to access affordable and quality agricultural technologies and input and output markets. In addition, this 

project will prioritize the adoption of gender friendly technologies and support policies in the target 

countries. 

 



 

17 

4 IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1 Implementation Arrangements 

4.1.1 Structure and Activities of the RTDI (TAAT Platform) 

The structure of the Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI) consists of the Project 

Steering Committee (PSC), the Clearing House, the Commodity Technology Delivery Compact 

(CTDC), and the Project Management Unit (PMU).  These component are described in more details 

below. 

4.1.2  Project Steering Committee (PSC) 

The Project Steering Committee is the highest decision-making body composed of representatives of 

AfDB, African Ministers of Agriculture of participating RMCs, the various CG Centers, the Private 

sector, NARES and regional farmer organizations. The committee provides oversight functions to 

Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI).  All annual work programs will be cleared by the 

PSC prior to funding.  Membership of the Program Steering Committee (PSC) will be approved by the 

Bank.  

4.1.3 Clearinghouse 

The Clearinghouse is the main decision making body of the RDTI when it comes to selecting which 

technologies to disseminate and scale up. It will be substantially autonomous; its work plan and budget 

will be approved by the Program Steering Committee (PSC). The objective of the Clearinghouse is to 

decide which proven agricultural technologies proposed by each Crop/Livestock compact group can be 

rolled out and taken to scale. The activities of the Clearinghouse are indicated in Appendix 1. 

The activities of the Clearinghouse include:  

i) Evaluating requests from the compacts for technologies to be rolled out and scaled up. 
This will be akin to a peer review mechanism of the proposed technologies; 

ii) Validating the design and plan with stakeholders for a buy-in and commitment; 

iii) Identifying the optimal mix of partners that will accompany the implementation, 
backstopping and monitoring of the proposed plan;  

iv) In collaboration with the RMCs, conduct monitoring and assessment of milestones and 
Performance Indicators;  

v) In collaboration with the Bank, advising Governments and private actors on investment 
opportunities and financing mechanisms for going to scale. 

4.1.3.1. Although the Clearinghouse will be based at the IITA sub-station in Cotonou it will be fully 

independent of the IITA management. It is not a part of the PMU and will operate as an independent 

unit with its own competitively recruited Director, supported by technical and support staff.  The key 

skills assets required in the Clearinghouse include: i) technology transfer specialist; ii) an outreach 

expert; iii) a communication expert;  iv) a gender development specialist, and v) M&E Specialist in 

addition to other general services staff.  

4.1.4 Crop/Livestock Technology Delivery Compacts 

At the heart of TAAT’s technology deployment effort is the Crop/Livestock Technology Delivery 

Compact (CTDC).  CTDC is an agreement between the CGIAR center with mandate for the commodity 



 

18 

value chain, NARES, the RMCs and the entire ecosystem of value chain actors—from input supplier, 

processors, aggregators, equipment manufacturers, extension agencies, etc.  The CTDC drives the 

implementation of TAAT activities for each of the nine priority commodities. RMCs who indicate 

interest in accessing and deploying at scale technologies for the commodity in question, can become a 

part of the compact. Request from the CTDCs for deployment of a list of technologies and resources 

required will be submitted to the RTDI, specifically the Program Steering Committee (PSC), who will 

work in tandem with the clearing house to review and approve the appropriate technologies. Figure 4 

shows the structure of the Commodity Technology Delivery Compacts (CTDC). 

4.1.5  The structure of the Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI) can be observed in 

figure 4 and 5. 

The activities of the RTDI or TAAT platform include: 

i) Identification and selection of best-bet technologies for uptake by RMCs involved in 
crop/livestock compacts; the RMCs will be front and center of the compacts to ensure 

ownership and sustainability with attention to specific value chains); 

ii) Improvement of seed systems. Specific tasks are: evaluation of existing seed systems 
to identify strengths and weaknesses, identification of policy and capacity development 

needs to address the weaknesses and take advantage of the strengths, implementation of 

the identified policy and capacity development needs to strengthen the seed systems; 

iii) Harmonization of regional variety release systems to ensure regional spillover effects 
of technologies. Specific tasks are: identification of constraints to variety release and 

access to improved varieties of crops in Africa and why varieties suitable for specific 

agro-ecologies cannot be applied to the wider ecological reach because of country 

boundaries, identification of policy and capacity-building options to address this issue, 

implementation of the identified policy and capacity building options on the ground, 

monitoring the effects); 

iv) Facilitation of trans-national control of pest and diseases.  Specific tasks are: 
awareness raising that pest and diseases do not respect political boundaries with clear 

examples, design and development of appropriate campaigns for trans-national control 

of pest and diseases, implementation of the agreed on campaigns for trans-national 

control of pest and diseases; 

v) Support RMCs with policy audits and reviews to remove constraints to technology 
adoption and use; 

vi) Engage the Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs) on harmonization of agricultural 
technology release and synchronization of foundation seed protocols, disease control, 

monitoring and Integrated Pest Disease Management (IPDM) methods2, and adaptation 

trials of crop varieties across the region, including nutrient rich varieties; 

vii) Design and execute a comprehensive communication strategy to effectively 
communicate the goals, activities, and benefits of the Agricultural Transformation 

Agenda; 

 

                                                           
2  Integrated Pest and Disease Management (IPDM) is combining different methods of pest and disease control ranging from varietal resistance and 

tolerance, chemical control (pesticides, fungicides, bactericides, etc.), biocontrol (using natural enemies of the pests), cultural practices (crop rotation, 
mixed cropping, planting dates,, etc.), and  



 

19 

viii) Fiduciary responsibility for the centralized activities of TAAT. 

Figure 3:  Schematic of the Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Figure 4:  Schematic representation of the Commodity Technology Delivery Compact 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

20 

4.1.6  Two of such Compacts, CIPRISSA (for Rice) and TASI (for the African Savannahs) have 

already been set up by the Bank to coordinate activities for scaling up technologies to achieve self-

sufficiency in rice production and for transformation of the African Savannah into bread baskets. The 

CTDC will also engage Development Finance Institutions (DFIs) and Development Partners, namely 

the World Bank, JICA, IFAD, BMGF, Rockefeller Foundation, African Agriculture Fund (AAF), 

Agriculture Fast-Track Fund, Fund for African Private Sector Assistance (FAPA), Making Finance 

Work for Africa Partnership (MFW4A), Africa Climate Change Fund, Clim-Dev Fund, and Climate 

Investment Funds (CIF), and many others to secure co-financing for TAAT.   

4.1.6.1 The activities of the CTDC include: 

i) Convene a Crop/Livestock technology delivery platform of all major actors for each 
of nine priority commodities (e.g., rice, wheat, aquaculture, water efficient maize for 

Africa, cassava, sorghum/millet, livestock, orange fleshed sweet potato, and high iron 

beans).  Specific tasks are to consult, discuss, and prepare an agreement (the compact) of 

technologies, activities, and focus of the platform. The compact will discuss and agree 

on the technologies to be delivered, packaging, targets and timeline to cost-effectively 

deliver the technologies in a timely fashion; 

ii) Agree with NARES and Extension agencies on approaches to deploy technologies 
Specific tasks are to meet with key stakeholders (NARES, Extension agencies, NGOs, 

private sector, etc.) in RMCs to discuss best approaches to deploy technologies; prioritize 

the approaches in terms of effectiveness; deploy the preferred approaches with the 

country’s agencies leading; monitor progress, learn lessons and make immediate use of 

the lessons in improving delivery; 

iii) Define the target areas.  Specific tasks are to consult with the RMCs about which 
geographic areas to focus on during the different phases of technology deployment; 

discuss and agree with the RMCs on material and human resources required to cover the 

target area and how to sources these; implement the technology; 

iv) Mobilize all actors across the value chain. Specific tasks are to identify and register all 
the key actors across each target commodity’s value chain; call a meeting of the different 

actors across each target commodity value chain to ascertain constraints and how best to 

solve these; assign roles on technology delivery to different actors across the value chain; 

ensure that different actors across the value chain perform the assigned functions; 

monitor, learn lessons and make immediate use of the lessons in improving technology 

delivery; 

v) Design and implement wide-scale farmer extension models and innovative models to 
organize and aggregate farmers; 

vi) Work with FARA and others to build capacity in the NARES and public sector for 
program design, execution, and monitoring, and in the private sector for value chain 

organization and governance; 

vii) Support the development of a young class of ‘agripreneurs’, through demonstration, 
training and financing in coordination with ENABLE youth; 

viii) Promote climate-smart practices among farmers through funding and demonstration 
of the value of sustainable agriculture approaches;  

ix) Set targets and KPIs; monitor the achievement of the KPIs; distil lessons for 
improvements in future; .  Specific tasks are to discuss and identify key target areas; 



 

21 

formulate the targets that are achievable; mobilize those needed to achieve the targets; 

identify appropriate key performance indicators (KPIs) for different targets set 

x) M&E of the platform, using the outcome to improve the performance of the platform. 
Specific tasks are to design appropriate M&E data collection and analysis for the 

platform; discuss and ensure the leadership of RMCs in the M&E; implement the M&E. 

4.1.7. Project Management Unit (PMU) 

The Project Management Unit will: i) oversee day-to-day implementation of project fiduciary and 

administrative activities; ii) organize the transfer of project resources to the institutions leading the 

commodity value chains; iii) coordinate the compilation and review of reports from value chains and 

enablers for submission to the Bank; and iv) elaborate/implement administrative and financial 

management guidelines/template to be used across. 

4.1.8  The decision to pursue TAAT through a consortium of CGIAR Centers, the National 

Agricultural Research Systems (NARES), and their Umbrella body, FARA, donors, and development 

centers was decided at the High Level Conference on Feed Africa held in Dakar, Senegal, October 21-

23, 2015. At that meeting, the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA), being the oldest 

CGIAR center in Africa and the center with the most geographical spread – 20 sub-stations across the 

continent, was selected to coordinate the TAAT platform or the Regional Technology Delivery 

Infrastructure (RTDI).  IITA is therefore the Executing Agency (EA). IITA will set up a small Program 

Management Unit (PMU), headed by a competitively recruited Project Coordinator, to undertake 

fiduciary functions (procurement, disbursement, financial administration, reporting, audits, etc.). 

Specific MoUs and implementation agreements will be signed with each of the lead institutions of the 

target commodities and the other key Implementing Agencies (IAs). 

4.1.9  The day-to-day management of the CTDCs is left to the various Lead Centers. Each Lead 

Center, or expert CGIAR center, shall prepare an annual work plan and budget that will be submitted 

for the review and approval by the Clearinghouse based on clearly defined deliverables. African 

Agriculture Technology Foundation (AATF), IITA, and CIMMYT will lead the Water Efficient Maize 

Production; AfricaRice and IWMI shall lead the activities within the Rice Self-sufficiency; IITA leads 

Cassava Intensification; ICRISAT lead in Sahel Food Security; ILRI will lead on livestock; World Fish 

will lead on fish initiative; ICARDA and CIMMYT are responsible for Wheat Self-sufficiency. 

4.1.10  Policy support: International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) will support the various 

institutions on policy issues that enhance successful program implementation and the attainment of the 

expected widespread and transformational impact. IFPRI will also work with other institutions that 

contribute to agricultural development policy work, including ‘The African Seed Access Index 

(TASAI)’, and African Technology Policy Study Network Program (ATPS). It will undertake its 

activities in consultation with each IA, reporting to clearinghouse. 

4.1.11. Capacity development: Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA) shall undertake 

capacity building at all levels within partner institutions and within the Priority Intervention Areas 

(PIAs) and their value chains. They shall also sign a MoU with Regional Technology Delivery 

Infrastructure (RTDI), with indications of their expected role and terms of delivery as well as expected 

budget for the various activities. FARA will ensure that the thematic content of capacity development 

activities and modules are designed and administered in consultation with appropriate and qualified 

entities, including relevant and participating CGIAR Centers. FARA will also undertake its activities in 

consultation with each program initiative team and report to the Clearinghouse. An Activity Plan for 

each initiative will provide detailed work plans. 

 



 

22 

4.1.12  The National Agricultural Research and Extension Services (NARES) will be the primary 

delivery agent for the deployment of the selected technologies, in close consultation with the 

Government Ministries of Agriculture to ensure country buy-in. This will be supported by private sector 

entities and relevant donor/partner programs in the respective countries. These delivery channels include 

the AGRA supported input dealer network, the World Bank supported West African Agricultural 

Productivity Program (WAAPP) and similar programs in other regions. Support from CGIAR Centers 

Value Chain Leaders will be transactional, value for money and demonstrable benefits, supporting 

national institutions to roll out validated and branded technologies. 

4.1.13  Mechanisms for timely startup include the early appointment of the Head of the Clearinghouse 

and Program Coordination team, and execution of implementing MoUs between IITA (the EA) and the 

implementing partners. This team will oversee the project inception workshop to elucidate all the plans 

for a smooth program take-off.  

4.1.14  In the target RMCs, numerous donors are supporting overall agricultural development. Donor 

coordination occurs in different ways including through Thematic Working Groups, Sector Wide 

Approaches (SWAps), and Integrated Sector Approaches. For TAAT, the key donors that have indicated 

commitment so far include AfDB, World Bank, Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Rockefeller 

Foundation, and AGRA. These donors have been coordinating efforts through joint design workshops 

aimed at steering the development of TAAT for success and the achievement of the intended impact on 

the ground, and at ensuring that ongoing experiences are taken into account, and not duplicated (e.g., 

World Bank’s WAAPP, EAAPP, and APSA; AGRA’s work on input dealership; and BMGF’s work on 

technology development; etc.). Several of such meetings were attended by representatives of other 

prospective donors such as USAID. This coordination is also critical for effective monitoring of the 

program, and will continue during program implementation.   

4.1.15 Specific roles of each CGIAR center can be found in Table 8. 

4.2 Regional Public Goods (RPG) and Access to RPG Window of ADF 14:  

4.2.1  TAAT meets all features (Stages I and II) of RPGs, namely: (i) non-rival benefits (i.e., one 

country’s consumption does not subtract from the amount available to other countries), (ii) non-

excludable (no country in the region can be excluded from benefiting, except at a prohibitive cost), (iii) 

broad public interest and benefit (as demonstrated by letters of expression of interest from 22 low-

income ADF RMCs and three ADB RMCs and involvement of numerous NARES, FARA, SROs, and 

RECs in the formulation of TAAT); (iv) regional dimension or multi-country involvement (22 low-

income RMCs are targeted; Three ADB countries have expressed interest; TAAT adopts a regional, 

agro-ecological and commodity belt focus; TAAT will renew the drive to transform Agriculture in 

Africa by scaling up regional cooperation in combatting crop and livestock diseases, and accelerating 

delivery and development impact); (v) strong alignment with the Bank’s strategic orientation and 

continental and regional objectives (TAAT is aligned with the Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy and four of 

the five high priority goals - the “High 5s”- namely; Feed Africa, Industrialize Africa, Integrate Africa, 

and Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa; TAAT is one of the flagship initiatives identified 

in the Bank’s recently approved Feed Africa: Strategy for agriculture transformation in Africa: 2016–

2025); (vi) catalytic and upstream role (TAAT’s interventions will remove bottlenecks and 

disincentives that have forestalled uptake of agricultural technologies in Africa and upstream segments 

of commodity value chains, making it catalytic and upstream; Given that the commodities of focus in 

TAAT are strategic to the Bank’s RMCs, as underscored by CAADP, TAAT will clearly play a catalytic 

role to engender strong support for these commodities, and (vii) higher developmental impact in 

cooperating (given that crop and livestock diseases travel freely across national boundaries, making it 

impossible for individual countries to achieve anything better than in cooperation). The different 

products from the CGIAR’s research work (earlier indicated) are indeed RPGs made widely available 

to individuals and organizations working for sustainable agricultural development in the world. It is for 

these reasons of public interest, non-rivalry in partaking in the benefits from TAAT, multi-country 



 

23 

involvement, and non-excludability that TAAT was selected among programs seeking support under 

the RPGs window as part of the 2017 RO prioritization exercise of the ADF-14 (see 2017 Regional 

Operations Prioritization and Selection Report, Ref. MJ/ADC/07/17/02 dated 28 July, 2017). Details 

are presented in Appendix 4.  

Table 8: The roles of CGIAR and other R&D Centers, and key stakeholders in TAAT 

CGIAR Center/Collaborator Role in TAAT 

International Institute for Tropical 

Agriculture (IITA) 

Global yam and cowpea R&D center; African center for maize and cassava.  Will lead the work on 

cassava industrialization working with National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems 

(NARES) and collaborate with African Agricultural Technology Foundation (AATF) on Water 

Efficient Maize of Africa (WEMA).  Coordinating Agency for TAAT. 

International Food Policy Research 

Institute (IFPRI) 

Global food policy R&D center.  Will leads work on Policy Support Services, working with 

National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES) and Alliance for Green 

Revolution in Africa (AGRA) 

Africa Rice African rice R&D center.  Will lead work on rice working with National Agricultural Research and 

Extension Systems (NARES) and International Rice Research Institute (IRRI)  

International Center for Tropical 

Agriculture (CIAT, its Spanish acronym) 

Global beans, cassava, and tropical forages R&D center.  Will lead the high iron beans effort 

working with National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES)  

International Center for Agricultural 

Research in Dry Areas (ICARDA) 

Regional R&D center for dry areas. Will lead work on wheat working with National Agricultural 

Research and Extension Systems (NARES) and International Center for Wheat and Maize 

Improvement (CIMMYT, its Spanish acronym) 

International Livestock Research Institute 

(ILRI) 

Global livestock R&D center.  Will lead work on small ruminants working with National 

Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES)  

WorldFish Global fish R&D center.  Will lead work on aquaculture working with National Agricultural 

Research and Extension Systems (NARES) 

African Agricultural Technology 

Foundation (AATF) 

African center for the acquisition and licensing of agricultural technology from around the world.  

Will lead the Water Efficient Maize for Africa (WEMA) effort working with National Agricultural 

Research and Extension Systems (NARES), International Institute for Tropical Agriculture (IITA) 

and International Center for Wheat and Maize Improvement (CIMMYT, its Spanish acronym) 

International Center for Insect 

Physiology and Ecology (ICIPE) 

African R&D center for pest control.  Will work with the Center for Agricultural Biosciences 

International (CABI), CIMMYT, and National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems 

(NARES) on control of Fall Army Worm 

Center for Agricultural Biosciences 

International (CABI), 

Global R&D center for agriculture and biosciences.  Will work with the International Center for 

Insect Physiology and Ecology (ICIPE), CIMMYT, and National Agricultural Research and 

Extension Systems (NARES) on control of Fall Army Worm 

International Center for Wheat and Maize 

Improvement (CIMMYT, its Spanish 

acronym) 

Global R&D center for wheat and maize.  Will collaborate with African Agricultural Technology 

Foundation (AATF) on Water Efficient Maize for Africa (WEMA)   

International Potato Center (CIP, its 

Spanish acronym) 

Global potato R&D center; will lead the work on orange fleshed sweet potato working with 

National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES) 

International Rice Research Institute 

(IRRI) 

Global rice R&D center; will work with AfricaRice and the NARES on rice production and post-

harvest technologies. 

International Water Management Institute 

(IWMI) 

Global water management R&D center. Will work on irrigation with AfricaRice on rice and with 

International Center for Agricultural Research in Dry Areas (ICARDA) on wheat 

Alliance for Green Revolution in Africa 

(AGRA) 

AGRA will provide parallel financing, lead downstream delivery of TAAT technologies, help 

strengthen policy dialogue with national governments and the private sector to shape and ensure a 

shared commitment to improving delivery systems, working with IFPRI. AGRA will also be 

involved in Capacity Development and Outreach work led by FARA. 

Regional Member Countries (RMCs) RMCs via National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES) will work with the 

lead CGIAR centers, Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs) on agricultural commodity value chains 

carrying out policy reforms, crop outreach campaigns, regional disease and pest control initiative. 

RMCs will also organize producers into farmer organizations and link to existing market and 

financial support programs. RMCs will also leverage country investment programs to execute 

TAAT. 

National Agricultural Research and 

Extension Systems (NARES) 

National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES) will be involved in deploying the 

selected technologies at country level, among other things.  

Forum for Agricultural Research in 

Africa (FARA) 

FARA shall undertake capacity building at all levels within partner institutions and in the PIAs and 

their constituent value chains. 

Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs) Sub-Regional Umbrella bodies of NARS; will lead regional policy effort 

African Women in Agricultural Research 

and Development (AWARD) 

AWARD will collaborate to ensure that women are given priority attention in all cases. 

World Bank Major partner in financing TAAT at Country level. Expected financing at level of USD 700 million 

 

  



 

24 

4.3 Cost-sharing exemption 

4.3.1  The centrally managed activities planned to be funded with RPG resources in Phase I of TAAT 

do not have revenue generating capacity.  They are designed to target 22 low-income RMCs and set the 

stage for upcoming phases, which will require cost-sharing by participating countries, and country 

programs (funded through loans), both of which will benefit and deepen the application of science and 

technology to sustainable agricultural development in Africa. In addition, given TAAT’s regional, agro-

ecological and commodity belt focus, six of the targeted 22 low-income RMCs (Chad, Congo DRC, 

Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Sierra Leone, and Sudan) are loan ineligible and in fragile states. TAAT therefore 

meets the eligibility for cost-sharing exemption and qualifies for financing through grant resources 

outside the PBA allocation (i.e. exclusively from the RO envelope). In line with this policy, OpsCom 

has cleared the cost-sharing exemption for the initial phase of the program, and recommends that cost-

sharing should be explored in subsequent phases after the project is launched. Management considers 

that TAAT meets the eligibility for cost-sharing exemption and therefore seeks Board approval for 

financing of TAAT through grant resources outside the PBA allocation. Details on TAAT’s eligibility 

for the grant funding and cost-sharing exemption are presented in Appendix 9.  

4.4 Linking centrally managed programs to country programs 

4.4.1 TAAT has two planks: the centrally managed operations and the subsequent country programs. 

The benefits that the former will deliver are catalytic and upstream to the main country investment 

programs which will further be financed by the Bank and its partners (the WB, IFAD, AGRA, BMGF, 

etc.). Without TAAT and the support of the Bank, investments by the World Bank and development 

partners may not achieve as great a development impact. A good example is in the control of regional 

pest and disease threats to increased productivity. 

4.5 Private Sector Participation 

4.5.1 TAAT is developing a unique approach to working with the private sector via the Commodity 

Technology Delivery Compacts.  Over 40 private sector organizations ready to partner with TAAT were 

identified during the course of project development. These businesses operate in the areas of input 

manufacture and distribution, commercial seed and propagule production, bio-fertilizers, irrigation 

equipment and supplies, greenhouse construction and food processing. TAAT will create business 

opportunities for the private sector by building seed systems in the rural areas, including agro-dealer 

networks, thereby expanding demand for seeds and services (crop insurance). The Commodity 

Technology Delivery Compact will ensure that the private sector is at the table as opportunities are 

being discussed. 

4.6 Procurement Arrangements 

4.6.1 Procurement of goods, works and the acquisition of consulting services financed by the Bank 

for the program, will be carried out in accordance with the “Procurement Policy and Methodology for 

Bank Group Funded Operations” (BPM), dated October 2015 and following the provisions stated in the 

Financing Agreement. Donor partners (WB, AGRA, BMGF, etc.) may use their own procurement rules 

over the resources which they contribute and implement in a parallel arrangement. The Bank 

procurement rules will apply to Bank financed activities. Specifically, procurement and financial 

management would be carried out as described in Appendix 10 and Appendix 11.   

4.7 Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 

4.7.1 As part of the M&E System to be carried out by the Commodity Technology Delivery Compact 

(CTDC), advanced monitoring tools aligned with the Bank's Agricultural Transformation Agenda 

indicators will be used to ensure day-to-day effective performance measurement. This includes but is 

not limited to options available at IITA and across its CGIAR Centers including participatory field-level 



 

25 

assessments, remote sensing, GIS, Big Data operations that compile and analyze program and national 

statistics, and advanced statistical diagnoses. Monitoring functions will be accompanied by detailed 

training in the use of these tools; as such, reporting will stem from participatory monitoring methods 

and structured data collection instruments. The functions of Knowledge Management are central to the 

M&E Framework and will be designed as a continuous, dynamic, action-reflection-action process. An 

independent external review will be carried out for TAAT at the end of year 2 (2019). 

4.7.2  An inception report will be prepared by the implementing partners, including baseline status, 

detailed work plans and budgets, as well as communication and technology deployment plans. All 

implementing partners will provide quarterly updates and regular situation reports; a mid-term progress 

report by each IA; a midterm progress report by the Clearinghouse; annual audit reports by independent 

external auditors; regular supervision reports would be carried out jointly by AFDB Country Offices 

and the Clearinghouse for national level interventions. All reports would be shared among the partners 

in the TAAT Framework. 

4.8 Sustainability 

4.8.1 The sustainability of TAAT will be achieved through: i) stronger links between research and 

extension; ii) stronger linkages of farmers to markets; iii) focus on agricultural value chains to ensure 

that the demand and supply sides are integrated; iv) supportive policy and regulatory environments; and 

v) expected higher commitment of governments to agriculture in the focal countries.  

4.9 Potential Risks and Mitigation Measures 

4.9.1 Potential risks and measures to mitigate are shown in Table 9. 

Table 9:  Risks and Mitigation 

Potential Risks Mitigation Measures 

Lack of enabling environment (policy, market, etc.). Provide fact-based & targeted advocacy. 

Weak value chain linkages especially to off-takers and processors Build capacity of outgrowers around established commercial 

companies and processors 

Lack of commitments of stakeholders in implementation  Active engagement of all stakeholders, with clear roles 

Lack of commitment & logistical support to enable training  Sensitization & identification of strategic training partners. 

Policy inconsistency (on part of governments) & long process in 

changing policies. 

Dialogue using fact-based rationale for losses due to policies 

status quo 

Lack of commitment by the youth involved in technology promotion 

and demonstration. 

Proper orientation on mindset change through participatory 

approaches and incubation centers. 

Lack of cooperation by government agencies Dialogue for buy-in. 

Weak NARES capacity and resource base Be focused on important specific interventions. Capacity of 

NARES strengthened. 

Retaining earlier promising technologies that become obsolete along 

the way 

The Clearinghouse will institute a mechanism for identifying 

and decommissioning obsolete technologies  
 

5. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

5.1 Legal instrument 

5.1.1 The legal instrument to finance the centralized activities of the TAAT Framework Program is 

an ADF grant (from the Regional Public Goods window) for the eight CGIAR centers who will be 

involved in management of core TAAT activities. A Protocol of Agreement shall be entered into 

between by IITA on behalf of the CGIAR Centers and the Fund.  Conditions for Fund intervention and 

disbursement can be found in Appendix 12. 

5.2 Undertakings 

5.2.1 The Recipient (IITA) shall undertake to: i) Execute an Implementation Agreement with each 

of the implementing agencies; ii) Submit legal opinion(s), issued to the Fund by legal counsel acceptable 

to the Fund, in respect of each of the Implementation Agreement(s) submitted to the Fund, confirming 



 

26 

that the Implementation Agreements(s) between IITA and the relevant implementing agency has been 

duly authorized, ratified and executed on behalf of IITA and the relevant implementing agency, and 

constitutes a legal, valid and binding agreement on both parties; and iii) Not apply for withdrawal of the 

relevant portion of the proceeds of the Grant in respect of any implementing agency that has not 

executed an Implementation Agreement with the Recipient.  

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

This program complies with all applicable Bank policies. 

6 RECOMMENDATIONS 

The Boards of Directors are hereby requested to: 

(i) Approve TAAT as a Framework Program to be implemented in three (3) phases; 

(ii) Approve a Grant of Twenty Nine Million Units of Account (UA 29,000,000) from the 
regional public goods envelope of ADF-14, to IITA, for the purpose of implementation 

of centrally managed activities (for ADF-only countries while partner resources will 

support ADB countries) of the first phase and deployment of the first set of nine priority 

food production technologies, subject to the terms and conditions stipulated in this report; 

(iii) Approve an exemption from cost-sharing for phase 1; 

(iv) Take note that Management will submit to the Board(s); (a) on an annual basis, a status 
report on the implementation of the TAAT Framework Program; (b) separate specific 
proposals for the financing of the second and third phases subject to satisfactory 

implementation of the first phase, for consideration and decision in accordance with 

applicable Bank Group policies; and c) the requests for country program funding as these 

originate from specific RMCs. 









































 

  

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

 
 
 

NAMIBIA 

 

 AGRICULTURAL MECHANISATION AND SEED IMPROVEMENT 

PROJECT (NAMSIP)  

 

 

 

 

 
  
 

 
 
 

Loan Information 

Client’s information 

 

BORROWER:    Republic of Namibia 

 

EXECUTING AGENCY:  Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry (MAWF) 

 

IMPLEMENTING AGENCY: Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry 

 

Financing plan 
    

Source Amount (ZAR) %age Instrument 

AfDB Group   1.00 billion   70.5% ADB Loan  

Government   0.36 billion   25.5% N/A 

Beneficiaries   0.06 billion     4.0% N/A 

Total Cost   1.42 billion 100.0%  

 

Important Financial Information 

   

Loan Currency South African Rands (ZAR). 

Loan Type  Fully Flexible Loan. 

Tenor 13 years (inclusive of Grace Period). 

Grace period 3 years. 

Average Loan Maturity* 8.13 (function of the amortization profile). 

Repayments 28 consecutive quarterly payments after grace period 

Interest Rate 

Base Rate +Funding Cost Margin+ Lending Margin + 

Maturity Premium. 

This Interest Rate will be floored to zero. 

Base Rate 

Floating Base Rate (3-month JIBAR reset each 1st 

February, 1st May, 1st August and 1st November). 

A free option to fix the Base Rate is available. 

Funding Cost Margin 

The Bank funding cost margin as determined each 1st 

January and 1st July and applied to the Base Rate each 

1st February, 1st May, 1st August and 1st November. 

Lending Margin 80 basis points (0.8%). 

Maturity Premium Zero (0) % if Average Loan Maturity <= 12.75 years 

Front-end fees 
0.25% of the loan amount payable at signature of the 

loan agreement or latest 30 days from signature. 

Commitment fees 

0.25% of the undisbursed amount. Commitment fees 

start accruing 60 days after signature of the loan 

agreement and are payable on Payment dates. 

Option to convert the 

Base Rate** 

In addition to the free option to fix the floating Base 

Rate, the Borrower may reconvert the fix rate to floating 

or refix it on part or full disbursed amount. 

Transaction fees are payable. 

Option to cap or collar 

the Base Rate** 

The Borrower may cap or set both cap and floor on the 

Base Rate to be applied on part or full disbursed amount 

Transaction fees are payable. 



 

iii 

 

Option to convert loan 

currency** 

The Borrower may convert the loan currency for both 

undisbursed or disbursed amounts in full or part to 

another approved lending currency of the Bank 

Transaction fees are payable. 

  

FIRR, NPV (base case) 26.00%, NPV value at 12%  is ZAR 1.13 billion  

EIRR, NPV (base case) 23.74%, NPV value at 12%  is ZAR 1.03 billion  

 

 

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected) 

Concept Note Approval (OpsCom) 23rd March, 2017 

Board Approval 4th December, 2017 

Effectiveness February 2018 

Completion 31st December 2022 

Last Disbursement 30th June 2023 

Last Repayment December 2030 



 

iv 

 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

 

1.1  Project Overview: The Namibia Agricultural Mechanisation and Seed Improvement 
Project’s (NAMSIP) development goal is to improve household food security and reduce 

poverty. The Project’s objectives are to (i) enhance agricultural productivity in order to reduce 

annual importation of staple cereal crops/grains, (ii) facilitate job creation, and (iii) enhance 

household incomes, which will improve the lives of the rural people. The Project will be 

implemented nationwide by the Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry (MAWF) over a 

period of 5 years. NAMSIP has 2 components, namely: (a) Component 1 - Value Chain 

Improvement, with 2 sub-components, (i) Agricultural Mechanisation and (ii) Certified Seed 

Systems Improvement; and (b) Component 2 - Institutional Support, with 2 sub-components, 

(i) Capacity Building, and (ii) Project Management. Gender, environmental and social issues 

have been considered in Project activities. The total Project cost is ZAR 1.42 billion which will 

be financed by (i) ADB Loan of ZAR 1.00 billion (70.5%), (ii) Government contribution of 

ZAR 0.36 billion (25.5%), and (iii) beneficiaries contribution of ZAR 0.06 billion (4.0%).  

 

1.2  The Project will directly benefit 294,500 crop producers/farmers (157,558 female and 
136,942 male), and also 10,000 livestock farmers (including 2,500 women livestock farmers). 

In addition, 33 extension and veterinary staff will be trained in agricultural mechanisation 

inorder to ably transfer knowledge and skills to the beneficiaries. The Project will fully support 

111 farmer cooperatives. The Project will generate 111,240 jobs for men, women and youth in 

agricultural production and processing. The Project will also indirectly benefit about 800,000 

people along the cereal and livestock value chains. The FIRR is estimated at 26.00% and NPV 

of ZAR 1.13 billion, at 12% opportunity cost of capital. The EIRR is 23.74% and NPV of ZAR 

1.03 billion, at 12 % opportunity cost of capital. To promote inclusive growth, NAMSIP will 

facilitate equitable allocation of resources to participating rural men, women and youths, and 

also implement its activities in a sustainable manner. 

 

1.3  Needs Assessment: Agriculture is the biggest employer in Namibia but contributed 
3.4% share to GDP (2016) and has low wage rates. Consequently, transforming agriculture 

constitutes the biggest pathway for creating quality jobs and reducing inequality in Namibia. 

The Fifth National Development Plan (NDP5: 2017/2018-2021/2022), Harambee Prosperity 

Plan (HPP: 2016/2017-2019/2020) and Growth at Home Strategy for Industrialization identify 

agriculture as a priority area which has the potential to contribute to economic progression, 

social transformation and environmental sustainability. The HPP has set up an ambitious target 

with regard to hunger poverty under Pillar 3 (Social Progression) that “no Namibian should 

die of hunger during and after Harambee period”. The Government’s policy is to increase 

agricultural production by expanding the development of irrigation schemes and also 

promoting dryland crop production through agricultural mechanisation and seed systems 

improvement in order to boost cereal crops and livestock production which can be used as 

launch pads for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) driven industrialization. NAMSIP has 

been designed based on the Government’s Harambee Comprehensively Coordinated and 

Integrated Agricultural Development Programme (HACCIADEP: 2017). HACCIADEP was 

developed to stimulate high quality production and market access for crops and livestock 

products especially from small and medium scale agricultural producers and agro-processors. 

NAMSIP’s focus on agricultural mechanization, livestock and seed improvement directly 

responds to NDP5 and HPP which aim at structural transformation through increase in 

agricultural productivity and value addition as game changers. One of the key challenges 

affecting food security in Namibia is the inability of rural producers to timely access farm 

machinery and equipment necessary for effective land preparation, planting, weeding and 

harvesting which negatively affect agricultural production, post-harvest handling and 

marketing. Agricultural mechanisation will enable farmers to complete farming operations in 

a timely manner, especially in dry land farming system, and also help in increasing productivity 



 

v 

 

and reducing cost of cultivation. Introduction of farm mechanisation is being accentuated by 

shortage of agricultural labour in rural areas due to increased migration of youth to urban areas, 

since most farming activities are carried out on small land holdings which utilise manual labour 

and draught animal power. The modernization of agriculture, through mechanization, will 

contribute to overall increase in cereal crops production. This will result in 40% reduction of 

the country’s imports of grain/cereal crops needs which is estimated at 60% per annum 

(MAWF/FAO 2016 data). 

 

1.4  Bank’s Added Value: The proposed NAMSIP is responding to development challenges 
in agriculture sector and is in line with the Government’s development agenda. In view of the 

prevailing liquidity constraints in the domestic market, the long term tenure of the Bank’s 

lending in South African Rand (ZAR) will have softer impact on public debt than borrowing 

from international capital market. Through NAMSIP, the Bank will leverage its unique position 

as a reliable and trusted partner of choice to sustain and help implement development projects 

in Namibia. The NAMSIP design has been guided by the Bank’s past and on-going agriculture 

projects which focussed on improving crop and livestock value chains. Lessons learnt from the 

Bank’s involvement in agriculture sector include the need to involve beneficiaries, in a 

participatory manner, during project design and implementation in order to enhance ownership 

and ensure sustainability. The Bank’s Country Strategy Paper (CSP: 2014-2018) is anchored 

on two pillars: (i) Infrastructure – transport, energy and water; and (ii) Private Sector 

Development – skills development and improving the regulatory environment. NAMSIP is 

aligned to the second pillar of the CSP through enhancement of crop and livestock development 

with involvement of the private sector, especially in supply and major maintenance of 

agricultural machinery and equipment. The Project is aligned to the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy 

(TYS: 2013-2022) core operational areas of infrastructure and also areas of special emphasis 

namely agriculture and gender in that it will improve availability and access of agricultural 

mechanisation and certified seeds to enhance productivity, develop irrigation and civil 

infrastructure, enhance household income, food security and nutrition, create jobs and promote 

gender mainstreaming. Gender mainstreaming is also in line with Pillar II of the Gender 

Strategy (2014-2018). The Project is also in line with the TYS on inclusive growth by focussing 

on the smallholder farmers. NAMSIP is fully aligned to the Bank’s 2 priority-High-5 areas, 

namely, (i) Feed Africa, and (ii) Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa. Based on 

the Feed Africa Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa (2016-2025), NAMSIP 

design has adopted a value chain approach to address various challenges in a manner that 

increases crop and livestock productivity in order to create an enabling agribusiness 

environment. 

 

1.5  Knowledge Management: NAMSIP will contribute to the generation of knowledge 
throughout the implementation period which will be useful during design and implementation 

of future similar projects especially on how to (i) improve crop and livestock development, (ii) 

use smallholder farmers cooperatives to produce good quality certified seeds to improve 

productivity, (iii) raise household incomes of smallholder farmers, and (iv) broaden 

employment and job opportunities along cereal crops and livestock value chains. The focus on 

livestock disease control and management will also generate knowledge for future 

interventions to enhance livestock production which is in line with the development of 

knowledge-based economy. The generated knowledge will be documented through routine 

monitoring and shared with key stakeholders during Project implementation. The Project-

related online information shall be available, to the public, through the existing 

Government/MAWF website which will be updated regularly by the Project.  



 

vi 

 

RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK (PROJECT MATRIX) 

 
Country and Project Name:    Namibia – Agricultural Mechanisation and Seed Improvement Project (NAMSIP). 

Purpose of the Project:            To contribute to food security, poverty reduction and economic growth. 
 

 

RESULTS CHAIN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS1 

MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS/MITIGATION 

MEASURES INDICATOR  (INCLUDING CSI) BASELINE TARGET2  

IMPACT 

 

1. Contribute to improved food 

security. 

 

1. Percentage (%) decrease of food 

insecure people. 

2017 

1.   (25) 

 

By 2025 

1.   (12) 

 

Household Income 

and Expenditure 

Survey (NHIES). 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

 

2.1 Increased agricultural 

production for cereal crops. 

 

 

 

2.2 Improved rural 

employment. 

 

2.1.1 Nutrient-dense crop production 

(‘000 tonnes) increased. 
 

2.1.2 Annual import (%) of country’s 

grains/cereal crops. 
 

2.2 No of jobs created. 
 

2017 

2.1.1 (i) Maize (1.04); and 

(ii) Pearl Millet (4.23).   
 

2.1.2 (60%) 

 
 

2.2. (0) 

By 2023 

2.1.1 (i) Maize (47.0); and (ii) 

Pearl Millet (162.0). 
 

2.1.2 (20%) 

 

2.2. 111,240 (for men, women 

and youths)  

 

NSA report. 

Market survey 

reports. 

Project reports. 

Assumptions: 

 Favourable 
macroeconomic 

conditions. 

 

OUTPUTS 

 

3. Agricultural Mechanisation 

3.1 Provide assorted farm 
machinery and equipment to farmer 

cooperatives.  

 

3.2 Supply and install 

drip/sprinkler irrigation systems for 

crop production. 
 

 

3.3 Support to animal health and 
traceability equipment.  

 

 

4. Certified Seed Systems 

Improvement 

 

4.1 Establish 3 irrigation systems 

(standard pre-designed drip or 

sprinkler), 200 ha each, for 
foundation seed production. 

 
4.2 Facilitate production and 

distribution of certified seed. 

 
 

 

3.1.1 Set of tractors with accessories. 

3.1.2 Set of walking tractors with 
accessories. 

 

3.2 Set of standard (ready for installation) 

40 kW-powered drip/sprinkler irrigation 

systems (each covering max 10ha). 

 
 

 

3.3.1 No. of animal health equipment. 
3.3.2 No. of traceability equipment. 

 

 
 

 

 
4.1 Total area (ha) under drip/sprinkler 

irrigation. 

 
4.2.1 Quantity of certified seed produced 

(tonnes). 
4.2.2 No. of farmers involved in seed 

multiplication. 

4.2.3 No of farmers involved in certified 
seed marketing. 

(2017) 

3.1.1 (i) 80-90 KW (0); (ii) 60-

70 KW (0); and (iii) 40-50 
KW (0). 

3.1.2 (0) 

 

3.2  (0) 

 

3.3.1 (i) Veterinary cold 
chain/drug kits (0); (ii) 

automatic drug injection guns 

(0); (iii) deworming applicators 
(0); and (iv) castration 

burdizzos (0). 

3.3.2 (i) dehorning hot irons 
(0); (ii) hoof trimmers (0); (iii) 

ear tag applicator (0); and (iv) 

branding iron (0). 
 

4.1  (0) 

 
4.2.1  (i) maize (0); (ii) 

Sorghum (0); (iii) pearl millet 
(0); and (iv) cowpeas (0) 

4.2.2 (i) total (0); (ii) men (0); 

and (iii) female (0). 
4.2.3  (0) 

(2022) 

3.1.1 (i) 80-90 KW (150); (ii) 60-

70 KW (100); and (iii) 40-50 
KW (300). 

3.1.2 (700) 

 

3.2  (169) 
 

3.3.1 (i) Veterinary cold chain/drug 

kits (3,500); (ii) automatic drug 

injection guns (3,500); (iii) 
deworming applicators (3,500); 

and (iv) castration burdizzos 

(3,500). 
3.3.2 (i) dehorning hot irons 

(3,500); (ii) hoof trimmers (3,500); 

(iii) ear tag applicator (3,500); and 
(iv) branding iron (700). 

 

4.1  (600) 
 

4.2.1  (i) maize (2,100); (ii) 
Sorghum (900); (iii) pearl millet 

(600); and (iv) cowpeas (600) 

4.2.2 (i) Total (294,500); (ii) male 
(136,942); and (iii) female 

(157,558). 

4.2.3  (294,500) 
 

 

Project Progress 

Reports. 

 

Risk #1: Reduced 
sustainability of irrigation 

schemes and certified seeds 

processing plant. 
Mitigation #1: The Project, 

through cooperatives, will 

facilitate establishment of 
management entity. The 

certified seed processing 

plant will be managed by 
the cooperatives (Private 

Sector). 

 
Risk #2: Project 

implementation delays. 

Mitigation #2: Regular and 
close follow up by the 

PSC, HCT, and Bank 

supervision missions. 
 

Risk #3: Drastic weather 

variations/climatic 
conditions. 

Mitigation #3: Project 
activities will be 

implemented together with 

                                                 
1 Refer to Appendix 3, for the output indicators’ full list/description including target quantities per Region/geographical distribution. 
2 Unless stated, for the outcome and output indicators, the Project is targeting at least 50% of the beneficiaries to be women. 



 

vii 

 

 

RESULTS CHAIN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS1 MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS/MITIGATION 

MEASURES INDICATOR  (INCLUDING CSI) BASELINE TARGET2  

 

4.3 Facilitate procurement of seed 

pre-cleaning machines. 
 

4.4 Facilitate construction of full-
house seed processing plant, with 

associated equipment. 
 

4.5 Procure machinery for seed 

production and processing 
(supplied to cooperatives).  

 

 

 

 

5. Capacity Building 

 

5.1 Support to agricultural training 

institutions. 
 

 

 
 

 

 
5.2 Support to farmer cooperatives 

including community mobilisation. 

 
5.3 Support Gender mainstreaming 

activities. 

 
5.4 Improve food security and 

nutrition. 

 

 

6. Project Management 

 

6.1 Project management improved. 

 

6.2 M&E system established. 

 

4.3 No. of seed pre-cleaning machines. 

 
4.4 No. of seed processing plants 

constructed. 

 
4.5.1 Sets of tractors with matching trailer, 

plough, planter, disc harrow, ripper, 

weeding cultivator, fertilizer applicator, 
and herbicide boom sprayer. 

4.5.2 No of equipment and packaging 

material for seeds. 

4.5.3 No. of pearl millet (mahangu), 

cowpeas and maize prototype thresher 

plant supplied. 
 

5.1.1 No of MAWF agricultural training 

centers supported. 

5.1.2 No of farmers trained on the use of 
farm machinery & equipment. 

5.1.3 No of seed growers and seed 

inspectors trained. 

5.1.4 No of staff trained (Training of 

Trainers) 
 

5.2. No of cooperatives 

formed/strengthened supported. 
 

5.3. Percentage of various Gender-related 

activities supported. 
 

5.4.1 No of households trained in food 
security and nutrition. 

5.4.2 No of infants (6-24 months) 

undergoing feeding programme 
(Government support). 
 

6.1 No of key (i) PIU and (ii) PSC staff 

appointed. 
 

6.2.1 No of M&E system established (No). 

6.2.2 No of reports (i) baseline survey; (ii) 
QPR; (iii) MTR; and (iv) PCR. 

 

4.3  (0) 

 
4.4  (0) 

 

 
4.5.1 (i) 80-90 KWA (0), and 

(ii) 60-70 KWA (0). 

 
 

4.5.2 (0). 

 

4.5.3 (0). 

 

 
 

5.1.1  (0) 

 
5.1.2  (i) Total (0): (ii) male 

(0); and (iii) female (0) 

 
5.1.3  (0) 

5.1.4 (0) 

 
 

5.2  (51) 
 

 
 

5.3 (0) 
 

 

5.4.1 (0) 
 

5.4.2 (0) 

 
 

 

6.1. (i) 0; and (ii) 0 
 
 

6.2.1  (0) 
6.2.2  (i) 0; (ii) 0; (iii) 0; and 

(iv) 0 

 

4.3  (8) 

 
4.4  (5) 

 
 

4.5.1  (i) 80-90 KWA (5), and (ii) 

60-70 KWA (5) 
 

 

4.5.2  (4) 
 

4.5.3  (14) 

 
 
 

5.1.1  (3) 

 

5.1.2 (i) Total (294,500): (ii) male 
(136,942); and (iii) female 

(157,558) 
 

5.1.3  (3,000) 

5.1.4  (34) 
 

 
 

5.2.  (111 cooperatives, with total 

membership of 10,681, including 

6,912 women) 
 

5.3 (100%) 
 

5.4.1 (i) 100 FHH and (ii) 2,000 
(MHH). 
 

5.4.2 (2,600) 

 
 

 

 
 

6.1.  (i) 4; and (ii) 5 
 

 

6.2.1  (1) 

6.2.2  (i) 1; (ii) 20; (iii) 1; and (iv) 
1 

conservation agriculture 

based on the cropping 

schedule so that little 
amount of rainfall can fully 

be utilised by the crops. 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S
 Components Inputs 

 

Component 1 - Value Chain Improvement:  Sub-component 1.1 Agricultural Mechanisation (ZAR 0.78 billion); and Sub-component 1.2 

Certified Seed Systems Improvement (0.21 billion). Component 1 cost: ZAR 0.99 billion (69.8%). 

 

Component 2 - Institutional Support: Sub-component 2.1 Capacity Building (ZAR 0.07 billion); and Sub-component 2.2 Project 

Management (ZAR 0.36 billion). Component 2 cost: ZAR 0.43 billion (30.2%). 

 

Project Cost: ZAR 1.42 billion. 

 

ADB Loan: ZAR 1.00 billion (70.5%). 

Government: ZAR 0.36 billion (25.5%).  

Beneficiaries: ZAR 0.06 billion (4.0%). 
 



 

viii 

 

 

PROJECT TIME FRAME/GENERAL IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE3 

 

 
 

                                                 
3 This is a general Project implementation schedule. Consequently, the detailed annual work schedule will be developed before the beginning of each Project Year (PY). 



 

1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE MANAGEMENT TO THE BOARD OF 

DIRECTORS ON PROPOSED LOAN FOR THE NAMIBIA AGRICULTURAL 

MECHANISATION AND SEED IMPROVEMENT PROJECT 

 

Management submits the following Report and Recommendation of an ADB Loan proposal of ZAR 

1.00 billion from the Bank resources to finance the Namibia Agricultural Mechanisation and Seed 

Improvement Project (NAMSIP). 

 

I. STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE 
 

1.1.  Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives 

 

1.1.1. Namibia is a semi-arid country in south-western Africa with a total land area of 824,268 km2 
consisting of poorly vegetated semi desert-like areas, Namib Desert, Kalahari Desert, extensive 

savannah and woodlands, and subtropical forests. Namibia is one of the sunniest (300 days per year) 

and driest countries in the world. The climate is characterized by hot and dry conditions with mean 

temperature of 24°C in summer and 14°C in winter. About 92% of the land area is defined as hyper-

arid, arid or semi-arid. Rainfall patterns are characterized by their high temporal and spatial variability. 

Mean annual rainfall is about 285 mm, out of which 83% evaporates, 14% is used up by vegetation, 1% 

recharges groundwater and 2% becomes runoff. Low and variable rainfall and inherently poor soils are 

major obstacles to agriculture production. Five perennial rivers are found along the borders with 

neighbouring countries whilst other inland rivers are ephemeral. Despite this, Namibia is blessed with 

rich natural resources and also well-developed physical infrastructure. Namibia has enjoyed relative 

peace and political stability since independence in 1990 and has good track record of economic 

performance due to a stable political environment and prudent macroeconomic policies. With a median 

growth rate of 4.5% since independence, real gross domestic product (GDP) per capita was USD 

11,408.10 in 20154. However, Namibia has one of the most unequal income distributions in Africa, with 

a 2016 Gini coefficient of 0.57. According to Namibia Statistics Agency’s (NSA) Labour Force Survey 

(2016), the overall unemployment rate is 34% due to prolonged drought that has affected the agricultural 

sector. The Labour Force Survey (2016) results demonstrate the importance of the agricultural sector in 

Namibia economy and in the livelihoods of people. Unemployment (34%), poverty (18% of the 

population is below poverty line, that is, less than USD 39 per month) and household food insecurity 

are major challenges. According to the Fifth National Development Plan (NDP5: 2017/2018-

2021/2022), poverty is a major factor limiting access to food due to reliance on market purchases for 

food. 

 

1.1.2. In 2016, mining accounted for about 11.3% of GDP (Annual National Accounts/ANA 2016), 
but employed only 2% of the labour force. On the other hand, agriculture which is the biggest employer, 

contributed only 3.4% share to GDP (ANA 2016). Although adverse weather is partly responsible for 

agriculture’s relatively small contribution to Namibia’s GDP, lack of modernisation in farming 

techniques and lack of infrastructure in business development have made the agriculture sector less 

efficient and profitable than it might otherwise be. Agriculture sector remains a strategic sector for many 

Namibians. The low employment elasticity of key growth drivers and the low wage in the agriculture 

sector partly explains the failure by the economy to translate high growth rates into more jobs and greater 

income equality. Consequently, transforming agriculture constitutes the biggest pathway for creating 

jobs and reducing inequality. The Project is in line with the NDP5, Harambee Prosperity Plan (HPP: 

2016/2017-2019/2020) and Growth at Home Strategy for Industrialization which identify agriculture as 

a priority area that has potential to contribute to economic progression, social transformation, 

environmental sustainability and good governance. NDP5 is an instrument for Namibia’s Vision 2030 

on prosperity, harmony, peace and political stability. The HPP has set up a target with regard to hunger 

                                                 
4 World Bank Country Income Classification (December, 2016) categorizes Namibia is as an Upper Middle Income Country.  



 

2 

 

poverty, under Pillar 3 (Social Progression), that “no Namibian should die of hunger during and after 

Harambee period”. The Namibia’s comparative socio-economic indicators are reflected in Appendix 1. 

 

1.1.3. The agriculture sector remains central to the lives of majority of Namibians since it, directly or 
indirectly, supports over 70% of the country's population. The sector can be divided into two distinct 

sub-sectors (i) capital intensive, relatively well developed and export oriented commercial sub-sector 

which covers about 44% of the total arable land, though it accommodates only 10% of the population, 

and (ii) subsistence-based, high-labour, low-technology communal sub-sector which covers 41% of the 

total arable area and accommodates about 60% of the population. Agricultural production, and 

subsequently household income, is low in the subsistence sector due to chronic drought/water shortages 

resulting in death of animals and also crop failures. Other problems include frequent occurrence of 

animal diseases, widespread soil erosion and land degradation, inadequate agricultural land, high cost 

of agricultural inputs, lack of access to finances, poor farmer organisation, low farm-labour force, 

inability of rural farmers to timely access quality certified seeds, and also farm machinery/equipment. 

In Namibia, the major food crops are pearl millet (mahangu), maize, sorghum, and wheat. According to 

MAWF, in 2016, the Government imported about 60% of Namibia’s cereal needs.  

 

1.1.4. The Namibia Agricultural Mechanisation and Seed Improvement Project (NAMSIP) has been 
designed in line with MAWF’s Harambee Comprehensively Coordinated and Integrated Agricultural 

Development Programme (HACCIADEP: 2017). The HACCIADEP aims at stimulating high quality 

production and market access for crops and livestock products especially from small and medium scale 

farmers and agro-processors. The HACCIADEP has 10 schemes (total estimated cost of ZAR 13 billion) 

namely: (i) Flood water irrigation and infrastructure development scheme, (ii) Northern Communal 

Areas (NCA) Beef value chain development scheme, (iii) Small stock value chain development scheme 

for small and medium scale agricultural producers and agro-processors in the Southern Region of 

Namibia, (iv) Agricultural mechanization scheme, (v) Cereal value chain development scheme, (vi) 

Horticulture value chain development scheme, (vii) Poultry value chain development scheme, (viii) 

Milk value chain development, (ix) Seed System development, and (x) Debushing and bush value chain 

development scheme. At the request of the Government, NAMSIP will contribute to the attainment of 

HACCIADEP’s 2 schemes, namely (i) agricultural mechanization scheme, and (ii) seed systems 

development scheme, which are key for sustainable crop and livestock value chain improvement. One 

of the key challenges affecting food security in Namibia is the inability of rural producers to timely 

access farm machinery and equipment necessary for effective land preparation, planting, weeding and 

harvesting which negatively affect agricultural production, post-harvest preservation and marketing. 

Mechanisation will enable farmers to complete farming operations in a timely manner and also help in 

increasing productivity and reducing cost of cultivation, especially in rainfed farming systems, where 

the rainy season is short. Above that, introduction of farm mechanisation is being accentuated by 

shortage of agricultural labour in rural areas due to increased migration of youth to urban areas, since 

most farming activities are carried out on small land holdings which utilize mainly manual labour and 

draught animal power. The support to the certified seeds system development will help to address the 

challenges on availability of high quality seeds, especially under the dry land crop production 

programme, which will lead to increased nutrient dense crop productivity. Certified seed quality is the 

most important determinant of agricultural production potential on which the efficacy of other 

agricultural inputs depends. Seed of appropriate high value characteristics are required to meet the 

demand of diverse agro-climatic conditions and cropping system. 

 

1.1.5. NAMSIP will enhance dryland crop production, irrigated crop production, State Owned 
Enterprises (SOEs), and Private Sector operations through effective utilisation of agricultural machinery 

and equipment for livestock production, and processing which can be used as launch pads for SME-

driven industrialization. The Project will contribute to the Namibia’s Growth at Home Strategy which 

focuses on supporting value addition for sustainable growth and securing local and international market 

access. NAMSIP will significantly contribute to Government’s plans to (i) achieve “zero deaths” (HPP 

outcome # 7) as a result of hunger, (ii) improve food security and nutrition, and (iii) promote import 



 

3 

 

substitution of staple foods by focusing on cereal-crops and livestock value chains. NAMSIP will also 

contribute to the achievement of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) (i) SDG #1 (No Poverty) - 

growth in agriculture is effective at reducing poverty, (ii) SDG #2 (Zero Hunger) - efficient crop 

production improves food security and nutrition, and (iii) SDG #5 (Gender Equality) - provision of 

resources to women farmers enhance agricultural productivity.  

 

1.2.  Rationale for Bank’s Involvement 

 

1.2.1. In January/February 2017, the Government of Namibia and the Bank agreed on 2 interventions 
to meet both short term and long term financing needs comprising (i) a Programme Based Operation 

(PBO)/budget support (ZAR 6 billion, approved in May 2017) to support the Government’s bold reform 

programme and finance the fiscal deficit, and (ii) an investment programme (ZAR 4 billion) to fill the 

financing gaps created by fiscal consolidation measures in ‘ready to go’ HPP projects. The NAMSIP 

(ZAR 1 billion) is part of the ZAR 4 billion investment programme and complements the approved ZAR 

6 billion PBO by addressing agricultural mechanisation, certified seeds and infrastructure bottlenecks 

in the agriculture sector, as indicated in Appendix 2. The other 2 investment projects are under Transport 

Sector (ZAR 2 billion) and Education Sector (ZAR 1 billion), which are being processed concurrently.  

 

1.2.2. NAMSIP is aligned to one of the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (TYS: 2013-2022) core operational 
areas of infrastructure and also areas of special emphasis namely agriculture and gender in that it will 

improve availability and access of agricultural mechanisation and certified seeds, enhance household 

income, food security and nutrition, and gender mainstreaming. Gender mainstreaming is also in line 

with Pillar II of the Gender Strategy (2014-2018). The Project will ensure inclusiveness of rural farmers 

(men, women and youths) as direct beneficiaries. NAMSIP is fully aligned to the Bank’s 2 priority High-

5 areas, namely, (i) Feed Africa, and (ii) Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa. Based on 

the Feed Africa Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa (2016-2025), NAMSIP design has 

adopted a value chain approach to simultaneously address challenges in a manner that increases 

agricultural productivity and facilitates an enabling agribusiness environment. NAMSIP is aligned to 

Feed Africa Strategy’s Enabler #1–“Increase Productivity” through provision of agricultural 

mechanisation and improved certified seeds (pearl millet, maize, sorghum, and cowpeas) since these are 

the weakest links of the cereal crops value chain. The Bank’s Country Strategy Paper (CSP: 2014-2018) 

is anchored on two pillars: (i) Infrastructure – transport, energy and water; and (ii) Private Sector 

Development – skills development and improving the regulatory environment. NAMSIP is aligned to 

CSP’s second pillar through involvement of the private sector in supply and major maintenance of 

agricultural machinery and equipment.  

 

1.2.3. The Bank’s active portfolio in Namibia, as at July 2017, comprised 7 on-going projects with a 
total commitment of UA 577.3 million. The financial sector dominates the portfolio with 43.1%, 

followed by transport sector with 28.3%, social sector with 0.1%, and multi-sector with 28.5%. The 

Projects are mainly funded through the ADB public-sector window (99.83%) and MIC TAF Grant 

(0.17%). Multi-sector operations include a budget support operation, and MIC Grant technical 

assistance projects supporting Walvis Bay Corridor Group capacity building and studies, PPP 

institutional strengthening, statistical capacity building, and higher education quality assurance. 

Appendix 3 presents the Bank’s on-going portfolio in Namibia. According to the Bank’s July 2017 

Portfolio Flashlight, 71.4% of Namibia’s active projects performed satisfactorily. There is no 

problematic or ageing operation. There is no agriculture sector project in Namibia. There is no PCR 

backlog of completed agriculture operations. 

 

1.3.  Donor Coordination   
 

1.3.1. Development Partners’ (DPs) coordination in Namibia is not very strong. Efforts to improve 
coordination have just started under the leadership of the United Nations Resident Coordinator’s office 

in collaboration with the National Planning Commission (NPC) to enhance cooperation, coordination 



 

4 

 

of policies, strategies and approaches which support development and effective communication with the 

Government. The dialogue platform under NPC is for all the sectors and thus there is no platform 

specific to agriculture sector. Through the dialogue platform coordinated by NPC, DPs carry out 

activities and finance projects whose outcomes are usually considered during policy formulation. The 

DPs contribution to the agriculture budget is about 4.2% (2016/2017 financial year), as summarised in 

Table 1.1. Although the Bank (AfDB) has been active in other Sectors (Finance, Transport and Social), 

it is one of the donors, coming on board, to support a major project in the agriculture sector. The Bank 

partnerships will be harnessed with all DPs particularly those operating within the CSP (2014-2018) 

focus areas.  
 

Table: 1.1 Donor Support to Agriculture (2016/2017 Fiscal Year) 
 

  
Sector or subsector* 

Size   

  GDP Exports Labour Force    

  Agriculture 3.4% 3.4% 70%    

  Players - Public Annual Expenditure (average) : 2016/17   

  Government Donors Japan,  EU       

ZAR m 

(%) 

ZAR 1,068.50 m 

(95.8%) 

ZAR 44.64 m 

(4.2%) 

China, 

FAO  
USAID       

   Level of Donor Coordination  

  Existence of Thematic Working Groups (this sector)   [Y]   

  Existence of SWAps or Integrated Sector Approaches   [Y]   

  ADB's Involvement in Donors Coordination   [M]   
 

Key:    L: Leader.    M: member but not leader.     None: no involvement.      Y: Yes.      N: No 
 

 

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

 

2.1.  Project Objectives and Components 

 

2.1.1 Project Objectives: The Project’s goal is to improve household food security and reduce poverty. 
The Project’s objectives are to (i) enhance agricultural productivity in order to reduce annual importation 

of staple cereal crops/grains, (ii) facilitate job creation, and (iii) enhance household incomes, which will 

improve the lives of the rural people. 

 

2.1.2 Project Components: NAMSIP has 2 components, namely: (a) Component 1 - Value Chain 
Improvement, with 2 sub-components, (i) Agricultural Mechanisation and (ii) Certified Seed Systems 

Improvement; and (b) Component 2 - Institutional Support, with 2 sub-components, (i) Capacity 

Building, and (ii) Project Management. The NAMSIP components and major activities are summarised 

in Table 2.1. 

Table 2.1: Description of Project Components and Sub-components 
 

No Component 

Name 

Cost (ZAR 

billion) and  

% allocation 

Sub-Component Description, Costs (ZAR billion) and % allocation 

1 Value Chain 

Improvement 
0.99 

(69.8%) 

Sub-component 1.1: Agricultural Mechanisation (ZAR 0.78 billion, 

55.3%) 

• Procure assorted crop production, harvesting, processing and storage 
machinery and equipment (as indicated in Appendix 4), for farmer 

cooperatives or individuals. 

• Procure assorted livestock production (animal health, livestock feed and 
traceability) equipment (as indicated in Appendix 4), for farmers 

cooperatives or individuals. 

• Supply and install 3 drip/sprinkler irrigation systems (each covering 
200ha) for crop production. 

 

Sub-component 1.2: Certified Seed Systems Improvement (ZAR 0.21 

billion, 14.5%) 

• Supply and install 169 standard drip/sprinkler irrigation systems (each 
covering 10ha, total 845ha) for production of certified seeds (maize, 

pearl millet, sorghum and cowpeas). 



 

5 

 

No Component 

Name 

Cost (ZAR 

billion) and  

% allocation 

Sub-Component Description, Costs (ZAR billion) and % allocation 

• Procure assorted machinery and equipment for production and 
processing of certified seed (as indicated in Appendix 4). 

• Facilitate production of certified seeds under dryland and irrigation. 
• Support 200 certified seed inspection activities (seed production under 

dryland/rainfed and irrigation). 

• Facilitate distribution of certified seeds to silos. 
• Construct 5 full-house-certified seed processing plant (buildings 

including installation of appropriate equipment). 
 

2 Institutional 

Support 
0.43 

 (30.2%) 

Sub-component 2.1: Capacity Building (ZAR 0.07 billion, 4.8%) 

• Support 3 agricultural institutions, under MAWF. 
• Sensitise/mobilise communities/beneficiaries to participate in 

NAMSIP activities. 

• Form/strengthen 111 farmer cooperatives (total membership 10,681, 
including 6,912 women). 

• Train 2,100 households in food security and nutrition activities. 
• Support infants feeding programme (Government support). 
• Support behaviour communication change at household on Infant and 

Young Child Feeding Practices (IYCFP), food diversification and 

water born related diseases (Government support)  

• Intensify campaign on Conservation Farming, agricultural 
mechanisation and improved seeds (Government support). 

• Support livestock (small stock) pass-on scheme for women groups (at 
least 80% women) 

• Train 4,000 farmers in various agriculture-related practices. 
• Facilitate international training for 5 MAWF staff (Training of 

Trainers/ToT, covering operation and maintenance of agricultural 

machinery and equipment).  

• Conduct national training (ToT) for 28 MAWF staff from the 
participating Regions (Training of Trainers/ToT, covering operation 

and maintenance of agricultural machinery and equipment).  

• Facilitate implementation of ESMP activities. 
• Support the existing MAWF-ESMP Task Force. 
• Recruit 3 TAs for MAWF. 
• Support gender mainstreaming activities. 
 

Sub-component 2.2: Project Management (ZAR 0.36 billion, 25.4%) 

• Support the Project Implementation Unit (PIU). 
• Provide PIU and Focal Point with Government offices including 

utilities and vehicles (on-going/existing arrangement-Government). 

• Facilitate 5 financial audits and procure 1 accounting package. 
• Facilitate 5 procurement audits. 
• Support activities of Project Steering Committee (PSC). 
• Carry out Project coordination activities. 
• Establish and operationalize gender sensitive participatory Monitoring 

and Evaluation (M&E) system. 

• Prepare 5 Project annual work plans and budgets. 
• Conduct 1 baseline survey, 1 beneficiary impact assessment (BIA), 1 

MTR and 1 PCR. 

Total 1.42  
 

Notes:  

i. Unless stated otherwise, for each activity, the Project is targeting at least 50% of the beneficiaries to be women. 
ii. Under Component 1 (Value Chain Improvement), the type, quantities, and distribution of Project interventions are indicated in 

Appendix 4 of this Project Appraisal Report (PAR) - Volume I.  

iii. Details of the activities are provided in PAR Volume II Technical Annexes B.2 and C.2.  

 

2.2. Technical Solutions Retained and Other Alternatives Explored 
 

The technical solution which was retained comprises use of modern farming machinery, 

equipment and vehicles in order to reduce the time required for land preparation. The drip and sprinkler 

irrigation systems have been chosen, due to their high irrigation efficiency, taking into account the 



 

6 

 

scarcity of surface and groundwater resources in Namibia. NAMSIP has included the equipment to 

address the problem of livestock diseases in order to enhance the marketing of livestock and livestock 

products. Table 2.2 indicates other alternatives which were explored.   

 

Table 2.2: Alternatives Considered and Reasons for Rejection 

 
Altenative Name  Brief Description Reasons for Rejection 

Animal draught 

power and manual 

system. 

Use of work oxen for 

garden preparation.   

Use of animal draught power is relatively less efficient. Livestock 

diseases may affect farming activities if not timely controlled  

Use of traditional hand 

hoe.  

Use of hand hoe is less efficient in terms of timeliness and increases 

drudgery on farmers (low factor productivity – land and labour). 

Surface irrigation 

system 

Irrigating crops from 

open canals using 

furrow or beds.  

This technology is not suitable since water is very scarce resource and 

there is very high evaporation. Surface network attracts high 

maintenance costs and may accelerate soil erosion.  

 

2.3.  Project Type 

 

The NAMSIP is a stand-alone investment Project aimed at improving cereal-crops/grains and 

livestock value chains.  

 

2.4.  Project Cost and Financing Arrangements 
 

2.4.1 The proposed ADB loan is denominated in South African Rand (ZAR) since Namibia Dollar 
(NAD/N$) is pegged to ZAR (1:1) thus (i) avoiding further exchange rate risk exposure, and (ii) 

increasing foreign exchange reserves. The Project cost, including physical and price contingencies, is 

ZAR 1.42 billion (net of taxes and duties) which will be financed by (i) ADB Loan of ZAR 1.00 billion 

(70.5%) covering all major Project activities, (ii) the Government contribution of ZAR 0.36 billion 

(25.5%) through in-kind (monetary value) for existing Government staff salaries linked to Project 

activities, office space including utilities, and vehicles, and (iii) beneficiaries in-kind contribution of 

ZAR 0.06 billion (4.0%) through specific labour during agricultural production activities and also 

valuable time for attending training sessions. The price contingencies were based on projected local and 

foreign inflation rates of 5% and 2% per annum, respectively. The physical contingencies ranged from 

0% (Government staff salaries) to 8% (works) based on (i) common technical practices, and (ii) 

available Engineer’s cost estimates. Summary of the Project costs by components, sources of financing, 

expenditure categories and schedule by component are presented in Tables 2.3 to 2.6 and the details are 

in Project Appraisal Report (PAR) Volume II Technical Annex B.2.  

 

2.4.2 Justification for Government Level of Contribution: The Government/beneficiary’s total 
contribution of ZAR 0.42 billion represents about 29.5% of the total NAMSIP cost which is less than 

the recommended 50% minimum counterpart contribution as per the Bank’s 2008 “Policy on 

Expenditure Eligible for Bank Group Financing”. The policy further stipulates that the ADB may 

finance more than 50% of the total project costs on a case-by-case basis and up to a limit that does not 

exceed 100%. The justifications for the reduced Government contribution is based on (i) Government’s 

budget situation and debt level, (ii) country’s Financing Allocation to the Agriculture Sector, and (iii) 

Government’s commitment to implement other development programmes including proposed Transport 

Sector project (ZAR 5.52 billion) in which the Government has contributed over 64%. Details are in 

Appendix 5. In view this, there is a case for the Bank to reduce the Government’s counterpart funding 

of NAMSIP to 25.5%.  

  



 

7 

 

Table 2.3:  Project Cost Estimates by Components (NAD and ZAR ‘000) 

 
Component 

Name 

NAD ‘000 ZAR ‘000 % Foreign 

Cost Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total 

1. Value Chain 

Improvement 
479,909.91 411,779.00 891,688.91 479,909.91 411,779.00 891,688.91 46 

2. Institutional 

Support 
332,965.00 50,938.00 383,903.00 332,965.00 50,938.00 383,903.00 13 

Total Base 

Costs 
812,874.91 462,717.00 1,275,591.91 812,874.91 462,717.00 1,275,591.91 36 

Physical 

Contingencies 
21,346.82 18,474.82 39,821.64 21,346.82 18,474.82 39,821.64 46 

Price 

Contingencies 
82,642.99 20,745.81 103,388.80 82,642.99 20,745.81 103,388.80 20 

Total Project 

Cost 
916,864.72 501,937.63 1,418,802.35 916,864.72 501,937.63 1,418,802.35 35 

 

Table 2.4:  Sources of Financing (Amount in ZAR ‘000) 

 

Source of Financing 

Total Amount (ZAR ‘000) and Percentage Contribution (%) 

Foreign Local Total 

ZAR % ZAR % ZAR % 

ADB Loan 501,937.63 100.0 498,062.37 54.3 1,000,000.00 70.5 

Government - - 362,174.70 39.5 362,174.70 25.5 

Beneficiaries - - 56,627.65 6.2 56,627.65 4.0 

Total 501,937.63 35.4 916,864.72 64.6 1,418,802.35 100.0 

 

Table 2.5:  Project Cost by Categories of Expenditure (Amount in ZAR ‘000) 

 

Category of Expenditure 
Total Amount (ZAR '000) % Foreign 

Cost Foreign Local Total 

A. Investment Costs     

1. GOODS     

Vehicle 67,352.00 - 67,352.00 100 

Equipment 126,519.00 - 126,519.00 100 

Plant and Machinery 100,368.00 333,940.00 434,308.00 23 

Sub-total 294,239.00 333,940.00 628,179.00 47 

2. WORKS     

Irrigation Works 84,500.00 80.00 84,580.00 100 

Seed Processing Plant 1,080.00 42,414.91 43,494.91 2 

Sub-total 85,580.00 42,494.91 128,074.91 67 

3. SERVICES     

Training 31,138.00 52,150.00 83,288.00 37 

Technical Support (MAWF) 30,760.00 - 30,760.00 100 

Financial Audit 1,500.00 - 1,500.00 100 

Procurement Audit 2,000.00 - 2,000.00 100 

Consultancy – Other (Individual) 17,500.00 - 17,500.00 100 

Sub-total 82,898.00 52,150.00 135,048.00 61 

Total Investment Costs 462,717.00 428,584.91 891,301.91 52 

B. Recurrent Costs     

1. OPERATING COST     

Personnel-Govt Staff/NBF - 274,400.00 274,400.00 - 

Daily Subsistence Allowance - 4,590.00 4,590.00 - 

Operation and Maintenance - 105,300.00 105,300.00 - 

Sub-total - 384,290.00 384,290.00 - 

Total Recurrent Costs - 384,290.00 384,290.00 - 

Total Base Costs 462,717.00 812,874.91 1,275,591.91 36 

Physical Contingencies 18,474.82 21,346.82 39,821.64 46 

Price Contingencies 20,745.81 82,642.99 103,388.80 20 

Total Project Cost 501,937.63 916,864.72 1,418,802.35 35 

 

  



 

8 

 

Table 2.6:  Expenditure Schedule by Components (Amount in ZAR ‘000) 

 

Item Description 
Amount (ZAR ‘000) 

PY1 PY2 PY3 PY4 PY5 Total 

1. Value Chain 

Improvement 
225,436.51 212,053.60 152,053.60 151,628.60 150,516.60 891,688.91 

2. Institutional Support 101,492.00 74,273.00 76,673.00 65,792.00 65,673.00 383,903.00 

Total Base Costs 326,928.51 286,326.60 228,726.60 217,420.60 216,189.60 1,275,591.91 

Physical Contingencies 11,678.86 8,271.59 6,831.59 6,548.94 6,490.66 39,821.64 

Price Contingencies 5,467.56 13,774.15 20,323.71 27,692.29 36,131.09 103,388.80 

Total Project Cost 344,074.93 308,372.34 255,881.90 251,661.83 258,811.35 1,418,802.35 

 

2.5.  Project Target Area, Population and Beneficiaries 

 

 The Project will be implemented nationwide (14 Regions of Namibia) as indicated in Appendices 

4 and 6. Appendix 4 has also included population data for each Region. Namibia has 517,649 households 

with estimated population of 2.28 million (2016/2017 NHIES). The agriculture mechanization scheme, 

if fully implemented, will target 58,900 crop producers (including 50% female) with about 117,857 ha 

of land to be serviced per annum and thus within a period of 5 years the scheme will benefit 

approximately 294,500 producers (including 50%) on 589,285 ha under production. The Project will 

directly target and empower 10,000 livestock farmers (including 2,500 women livestock farmers). In 

addition, 33 agricultural extension staff will be capacitated on agriculture mechanization for transfer of 

skills to the beneficiaries. The Project will fully support 111 farmer cooperatives with a total 

membership of 10,681 of whom 6,912 will be women. The Project will generate 111,240 jobs for men, 

women and youth in agricultural production and processing, as indicated in Appendix 7. The Project 

will also indirectly benefit from 300,000 people under dryland/rainfed agriculture and irrigation through 

generation of employment along cereal crops and livestock value chains, including suppliers, local 

traders, casual labourers, agro-processors, millers, transporters, rural youth, men and women. About 

500,000 people will indirectly benefit and be food secure due to improved cereal crop production. 

2.6. Participatory Process for Project Identification, Design and Implementation 

 

The proposed Project intervention areas have been extracted from the HACCIADEP which was 

developed by the MAWF after countrywide consultations with key stakeholders inorder to give 

practical, tangible and visible meaning to policy intentions of the Government, as defined in Vision 

2030, HPP and NDP5. These 3 policy documents had also gone through intensive countrywide 

consultations with key stakeholders during their formulation. The Bank, during NAMSIP preparation in 

January/February 2017, held consultations with senior Government staff in the Ministry of Finance, 

NPC, MAWF, Ministry of Gender and Social Welfare, Ministry of Poverty Eradication and Social 

Welfare, Ministry of Industrialization, Trade and SMEs Development, Ministry of Environment and 

Tourism (MET), and representatives from SOEs (Namibia Agronomic Board/NAB, Agricultural 

Business Development Agency/AgriBusDev, Agricultural Bank of Namibia/AgriBank, Agricultural 

Marketing and Trading Agency/AMTA), Namibia National Farmers Union (NNFU), DPs, and Private 

Sector. Consultation and feedback on the interventions were undertaken which informed the NAMSIP. 

During the Project Appraisal Mission (July 2017) further consultations were made with the same 

institutions. Project implementation will be carried out through the existing Government/MAWF 

structures. In line with the Project’s capacity building sub-component, smallholder farmers (rural men, 

women and youth) will be fully involved during implementation of planned activities including 

participatory Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E).  

 

2.7. Bank Group Experience and Lessons Reflected in Project Design 

 

 The Bank has enormous experience in designing and implementation of agriculture projects in 

Africa. Some lessons learnt from implementing past projects and through experience of other donors in 



 

9 

 

Namibia have been used to inform the design and subsequent implementation of NAMSIP, as tabulated 

below: 

 
No Lessons Learnt  Actions incorporated in the Project design 

1.  Lack of construction drawings at project start-up 
resulted in delay in implementation. 

Drawings and tender documents for standard drip and sprinkler 

irrigation systems are available with the Government.  

2.  Role played by Project Implementation Unit (PIU) 
in expediting project execution. 

MAWF’s Project implementation capacity will be enhanced through 

recruitment of 3 TAs who will be part of the PIU. 

3.  Inadequate consultation with stakeholders results 
in poor management of the proposed investments 

Adequate consultations with key stakeholders were undertaken during 

Project preparation and appraisal phases. 

4.  Weak M&E system results in poor assessment of 
implementation progress 

M&E activities with adequate financial allocation have been 

included in Project design. 

 

2.8. Project Performance Indicators 
 

The logical framework (LogFrame) has provided the impact, outcome and output indicators 

which will be measured during Project implementation using M&E system. The impact indicator is 

“percentage (%) reduction of food insecure people”. The outcome indicators are (i) nutrient dense crop 

production (tonnes), (ii) percentage (%) reduction of annual cereal imports, and (iii) number of jobs 

created. Major output indicators are reflected in the LogFrame. 

 

III. PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

 
 

3.1.  Economic and Financial Performance 

 

3.1.1. Financial Analysis: The financial analysis has been carried out at the farm household level as 
well as the entire Project level. This has been done by comparing the benefits accruing to the individual 

beneficiaries, and aggregated for the Project as a whole on “with Project” and “without Project” basis. 

Gross margin analyses have been carried out for the major crops to be grown under the Project, namely 

maize, pearl millet (mahangu), sorghum and wheat with first 3 crops to be grown under dryland/rainfed 

while wheat will be grown under irrigation. Pearl millet will take up the largest share of land which 

constitutes about 57% of the total land under cultivation. These analyses assumed full utilization of the 

area targeted for production starting from third year of Project implementation period. The land 

distribution per crop per season, summary of analysis of individual crop budgets, and net income (gross 

margin) at household level have been presented in PAR-Volume II Technical Annex B.7. Results: The 

analysis shows that annual net income (gross margin) per farming household in the Project increased 

(under crop production) from ZAR 19,742 to ZAR 74,179 while income from livestock production 

increased from ZAR 5,221 to ZAR 16,012. The gross margin analyses took into consideration the farm 

gate prices of the produce and the total cost of production, including an imputed wage of ZAR 300 per 

hectare for family farm labour per farming season. The financial internal rate of return (FIRR) to the 

Project is estimated at 26.00%, and the net present value (NPV), at 12% opportunity cost of capital, is 

estimated at ZAR 1.13 billion.  

 

3.1.2. Economic Analysis: The agriculture sector farm inputs market is subsidized by Government and 
therefore financial prices for the farm inputs have been adjusted by a standard conversion factor of 1.3 

that took into account the level of subsidies for the farm inputs and taxes. The economic prices for farm 

produce have been derived using a standard conversion factor of 0.82   Results: The economic internal 

rate of return (EIRR) to the Project is estimated at 23.74% and the net present value (NPV), at 12 % 

opportunity cost of capital, is estimated at ZAR 1.03 billion. 

 

3.1.3. Sensitivity Analysis: Sensitivity analysis shows that an increase in the cost of production  by 
10% reduces FIRR to 17% and NPV to ZAR 0.51 billion and a fall in the revenue by 10% reduces FIRR 

to 13 % and NPV to ZAR 0.065 billion. An increase in the cost of production by 5% reduced EIRR to 

18.78% and NPV to ZAR 0.64 billion while a fall in revenue by 5% reduced EIRR to 16.88% and NPV 

to ZAR 0.45 billion. 



 

10 

 

 

FIRR, NPV, 12% (base case) 26.00% : ZAR 1,13 billion 

EIRR, NPV, 12% (base case) 23.74% : ZAR 1.03 billion 
 

Note: calculations are indicated in Appendix 8 of this PAR and also in PAR Volume II, Technical Annex B.7. 

 

3.2.  Environmental and Social impacts 

 

3.2.1. Environment and Social Issues: The Project was classified as Category 2 in line with the Bank’s 
Environmental and Social Assessment Procedures (ESAP), which requires only the Environmental and 

Social Management Plan (ESMP). The ESMP was prepared by the Government, cleared by the Bank 

and posted on Bank’s website5 on 25th October 2017. The provision of farm machinery and equipment 

to smallholder farmers and agro-processors as well as the development and supply of improved seeds 

are slated to engender significant positive impacts on food production, climate resilience, economic 

development, livelihoods and quality of life of NAMSIP beneficiaries. Nevertheless, the development 

of crop and livestock operations can result in direct and indirect environmental and social impacts, 

including loss of fauna and flora, degradation of terrestrial habitats and disruption or contamination of 

water courses. These negative impacts are expected to be site-specific and can be minimized by applying 

appropriate mitigation measures. During Project implementation, the existing MAWF ESMP Task 

Force will be maintained inorder to ensure adequate environmental and social management, compliance 

with national laws, and to monitor and report on ESMP implementation. NAMSIP has made financial 

provision to address ESMP implementation capacity gaps and environmental and social management 

needs. The total cost associated with ESMP implementation is about ZAR 8 million, excluding costs for 

mitigation measures related to civil works which will be reflected in respective contractors’ bills of 

quantities (BoQs). Additional information on environmental issues is in Appendix 9 and also in PAR 

Volume II Technical Annex B.8. 

 

3.2.2. Climate Change: The Project was classified as Category 2 and is potentially vulnerable to climate 
risk. Practical climate risk mitigation measures have been taken into consideration in the location and 

design of the proposed irrigation infrastructure. Furthermore, arid conditions and erratic rainfall threaten 

the viability of agricultural production. Therefore, the inclusion of the component on certified seed 

(cereal crops) production through irrigation qualifies as an adaptation activity. This Project will be 

implemented taking into consideration opportunities to enhance climate resilience of the agriculture 

value chains and also enhance adaptive capacity of stakeholders to manage the impacts of climate 

change through improved extension services. The implementation of these activities is aligned with 

national ambitions to “instil resilience to impacts of climate change in the most vulnerable sectors of 

the economy” articulated in Nationally Determined Contributions to the UNFCCC. Proposed activities 

include developing and implementing appropriate responses and adaptation strategies to reduce the 

impacts of floods, low rainfall and high temperatures on people, crops, livestock and infrastructure. 

Agricultural adaptation strategies include (i) coordinating the timing of ploughing and crop planting 

with rainfall events, (ii) using drought-resistant crop varieties and livestock breeds, (iii) shifting 

livestock to alternative grazing areas, and (iv) implementing soil and water conservation activities. 

Mechanisation in agriculture is usually associated with use of diesel powered equipment whose emission 

will be mitigated through specifications of engines which include either (i) recirculation of exhaust gas 

to dilute intake of air/oxide, or (ii) cooling the exhaust gases in order to inhibit formation of nitrogen. 

With regards to climate finance, NAMSIP’s climate related activities will contribute ZAR 0.2 billion to 

the Bank’s target. The majority of Namibian population, especially rural households, depend on climate-

sensitive sub-sectors such as crop production and livestock farming. Consequently, climate change 

variability will only serve to compound the impacts on livelihoods, food security, and community well-

being. Changes in rainfall patterns and increased temperatures affect crop yields, increases droughts and 

reduces feedstock resulting in livestock losses. Namibia has thus prioritized environmental protection, 

specifically climate change, as evidenced by the adoption of the National Policy on Climate Change 

                                                 
5Web-link:    Namibia - Namibia Agricultural Mechanisation and Seed Improvement Project (NAMSIP) - ESMP Summary 

https://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Environmental-and-Social-Assessments/Namibia_-_Namibia_Agricultural_Mechanisation_and_Seed_Improvement_Project__NAMSIP__-_ESMP_Summary.pdf


 

11 

 

(2011) and the National Climate Change Strategy and Action Plan (2013-2020). The latter aims, under 

the food security and sustainable resource use pillar, to: (i) improve climate change understanding and 

related policy responses in food security; (ii) develop, identify and disseminate climate resilient crop 

farming practices; (iii) enhance sustainable land management and suitable land use practices; and (iv) 

ensure maintenance of resilient ecosystems to ensure climate resilience, and environmental 

sustainability. 

 

3.2.3. Land Issues: Land is fundamental to the lives of smallholder farmers especially women and 
youth since women account for 59% of people engaged in skilled and subsistence agriculture in 

Namibia. The Namibia Constitution and the National Land Policy (1998) lay the foundation for land 

ownership and established basic principles for the governance of all land in Namibia, with a strong 

emphasis on protecting the rights of the poor and women and promoting transparency and accountability 

in land administration. Namibia’s agriculture sector consists of 2 types of land ownership, namely, 

freehold title deeds mainly in the central and southern commercial areas and non-title deeds mainly in 

the Northern Communal Areas (NCA). The Government efforts are in place to bring equity in land 

ownership, through land redistribution and tenure reform which have been shaped by Agricultural 

(Commercial) Land Reform Act 6 of 1995 and the Communal Land Reform Act 5 of 2002. These land 

reforms focus, amongst others, on redistribution of commercial farmland to redress past imbalances in 

land ownership among Namibians. Considering that land tenure is important for the Project, the MAWF 

emphasised the role the communal land reforms plays in strengthening the smallholder farmers’ access 

and ownership to land and credit. The Namibia Constitution in Article 95 (a) accords women the same 

status as men, with regard to all forms of land rights, either as individuals or as members of family land 

ownership trusts. Equal rights to land have been granted to both men and women in communal areas. 

 

3.2.4. Gender: In Namibia, 44% of rural households are headed by females. Most female landowners 
are widows who inherited the land from their husbands, followed by women who obtained land through 

divorce or inheritance from families. Since the commencement of the Communal Land Reform Act 

(CLRA) No. 5 of 2002, single women can register their land without the consent of family members. 

The CLRA protects wives and gives them the right to apply for and register land in their names. In 2016, 

it was estimated that more than 40% of all land use certificates in Namibia were issued to women. The 

land use certificates for communal land guarantee the use of the land in perpetuity. Furthermore, the 

CLRA mandates the inclusion of a minimum of four women in the Communal Land Board (CLB) that 

facilitates land registration. The main source of income for female farmers is subsistence farming. They 

dominate in most cropping activities except in land preparation. On the other hand, animal husbandry 

(cattle, sheep and goats) is almost exclusively a male domain although herding small stock is sometimes 

done by women whilst feeding livestock has a 50/50 gender division of labour. Women and children are 

responsible for fuel wood and wild fruit gathering. Women also dominate post-harvest processing of 

crops such as sun drying, threshing and winnowing, head-loading to markets, and storing for market or 

future use. The Government has embarked on new levels of improving women’s lives in rural areas but 

according to the 2013 Gender Needs Assessment, there are challenges which include: (i) unequal access 

to and control over resources such as agriculture support services, appropriate technology – about 0.9% 

of females in rural areas own tractors in comparison with 2.6% of males; (ii) rural women’s workload - 

family welfare and subsistence agriculture functions increase due to rural-urban migration of men; and 

(iii) inadequate representation in structures of decision making, at community levels - only 10% of 

women head traditional authorities. 

 

3.2.5. Equitable agricultural mechanization in the agriculture value chain will therefore contribute to 
addressing some of the challenges faced by women farmers. Equitable distribution of equipment will 

contribute to higher production levels and reduce the drudgery that women face through non mechanized 

agriculture. Current figures indicate that women form majority of members of seed multiplication, crop 

production and marketing cooperatives. Women will participate as individuals or members of 

cooperatives. The Project will promote: (i) equitable access to farm equipment by women; (ii) training 

female farmers to increase the uptake of technology and mechanization, and in the maintenance of the 



 

12 

 

equipment (at least 50% for female farmers); and (iii) women’s participation in leadership of 

cooperatives. 

 

3.2.6. Social: NAMSIP is aimed at addressing some of the major limiting factors to increased food 
security and sustainable agricultural production through provision of agricultural mechanisation and 

improvement of seeds which will result in multiple socio-economic benefits including contributing to 

improved household income, enhanced food security and nutrition, and increased rural employment. 

The Project will also result in social risks, safety and security concerns related to the increased use of 

machinery and equipment which will be addressed and minimized through implementation of the 

ESMP’s mitigation measures. 

3.2.7. HIV/AIDS: According to the 2015 National HIV sentinel survey, out of the population of over 
2.2 million people, about 210,000 to 230,000 people (10.5%) are living with HIV and the virus 

prevalence is highest among women aged 35-39 years at 32.3%, and women aged 45-49 years at 31.6%. 

The survey highlighted a higher prevalence in rural areas than in urban areas. The most affected Regions 

are Zambezi (23.7%), Omusati (17.4%), Kavango (17%), Oshana (16.1%) and Ohangwena (15.6%). 

Consequently, HIV/AIDS campaigns will be mainstreamed in the implementation of the Project, 

targeting beneficiaries including civil works contractors and consultants. The farmer cooperatives will 

be used to deliver HIV/AIDS awareness messages to the communities. 

 

3.2.8. Inclusive Growth: In the context of broad-based and pro-poor growth, the Project will promote 
inclusive growth with equitable allocation of resources to activities which will benefit all levels of the 

participating communities. In particular, NAMSIP will be implemented in rural areas which (i) have 

very poor households, (ii) are frequently affected by drought, and (iii) have food shortages during some 

months of the year and are consequently nutritionally vulnerable. The Project will assist poor rural men, 

women and youth to participate in planned agricultural activities for increasing productivity, job 

creation, and income generation. 

 

3.2.9. Food Security and Nutrition: Namibia’s food security and nutrition have been weakened by 
severe droughts leading to a number of households depending on market and Relief Food Programmes. 

Namibia produces about 40% of the food it consumes and is highly dependent on imports (60%), mainly 

from South Africa. According to NDP5, poverty is a major factor limiting access to food. Access to 

food in Namibia is affected by reliance on market purchases for food. When combined with the heavy 

reliance on food imports, it makes Namibia vulnerable to high food prices. Overall, the production scale 

of smallholder farmers is lower which is attributed to limited access to inputs, poor soils, access to land 

and frequent occurrence of natural disasters such a drought and flood. For 2016/2017 cropping season, 

MAWF has estimated below average cereal crop production of 75,300 tonnes. Considering that the 

annual national cereal consumption is about 326,500 tonnes, this leaves a huge deficit of 251,200 tonnes. 

Based on the number of food insecure rural people, the Project will scale up irrigated agriculture, dry 

land crop production intervention and promote food security resilience measures through the provision 

of agricultural machinery, equipment and improved seeds at subsidized rates for drought affected 

farmers. Nationwide, the stunting rate for children under 5 is between 24% and 30%. Malnutrition 

continues to blemish the future of children, with an average of 1 out of every 4 children under the age 

of 5 more likely to be stunted. Stunted growth is strongly associated with poor living conditions, 

household food insecurity, poor breastfeeding practices and inappropriate foods for children. The 

Project will support the Government’s efforts on (i) nutrition, especially, breastfeeding awareness 

campaigns, and (ii) expansion of the existing infant (6-24 months) feeding programmes within the 

NAMSIP communities. To that effect, the Project interventions will also lead to increase appropriate 

knowledge and practices regarding infant, young child and maternal nutrition with the aim of 

contributing to SDG #2 target. With regards to nutrition, NAMSIP will promote the Government’s 

feeding programme (1,000 days from pregnancy to two years) in order to reduce malnutrition and 

child/women morbidity. Promotion of availability, accessibility, and consumption of a variety of foods 

will strengthen the capacity of women and households to adopt the optimal nutritional practices. 

Sensitization on water related diseases will help to improve the health of the population.  



 

13 

 

 

3.2.10. The modernization of agriculture through agricultural mechanization for cereal crops and 
livestock production will contribute to overall increase in food production in the country. This will result 

into 40% reduction of the country’s imports of grains/cereal crops which is currently estimated at 60% 

for grain/cereals every year according to MAWF/FAO reports (2016). The use of mechanization will 

also enhance the value of the products and industrialization of the agriculture sector since some of the 

livestock and livestock products will be exported.  

 

3.2.11. Involuntary Resettlement: There will be no involuntary resettlement or land acquisition 
envisioned during implementation of Project activities. The agricultural mechanization and seed system 

development activities will be carried out in beneficiaries’ fields or public land which will benefit 

individual farmers and cooperative members. 

 

IV. IMPLEMENTATION 

 

4.1. Implementation Arrangements 

 

4.1.1. MAWF will be the Executing Agency (EA) of the Project which will be implemented, over a 
period of 5 years, using the existing Government structures. At National Level, the existing Programme 

Steering Committee (PSC) comprises (i) Presidential Advisor - Policy Implementation and Monitoring, 

as the Chairperson; (ii) Presidential Advisor - Constitutional Affairs and Private Sector Interface; (iii) 

Presidential Advisor - Economic, and (iv) Permanent Secretary (PS)-Ministry of Finance (MoF). MoF 

will serve as the secretariat of the PSC. This is in line with the Government’s wish to have oversight 

responsibility, at the highest level, for NAMSIP and also the Transport and Education Sectors’ projects 

which have been appraised concurrently, under the Bank’s current support to the country. The PS-

MAWF shall be co-opted when the PSC is deliberating issues concerning agriculture sector. The PSC 

will meet on semi-annual basis, and as need arises, in order to (a) approve annual work plan and budget, 

(b) review progress reports, and (c) provide overall policy and strategic direction of NAMSIP. At Sector 

level, the existing HACCIADEP Coordination Team (HCT) consists of MAWF’s (i) PS, (ii) Deputy PS 

(Department of Agricultural Development), and the Directors of: (iii) Directorate of Planning and 

Business Development, (iv) Directorate of Agricultural Production Extensions and Engineering 

Services, (v) Directorate of Agricultural Research and Development, and (vi) Directorate of Veterinary 

Services. The HCT will (i) give the overall sectoral guidance to NAMSIP, (ii) approve Project 

information to be uploaded on MAWF website, and (iii) approve quarterly progress reports (QPRs). The 

MAWF DPBD will be the secretariat of HCT. The HCT has already appointed: (1) members of the 

Project Implementing Unit (PIU) comprising the (a) Project Coordinator, (b) Accountant, (c) Monitoring 

and Evaluation (M&E) Specialist, and (d) Procurement Specialist who will be in charge of day-to-day 

Project implementation; (2) focal points/desk officers (existing MAWF staff) from each Directorate; 

and (3) a focal point (existing senior-level MAWF staff) in each of the 14 participating Regions. The 

PIU staff will spend, at least, 90% of their official time on NAMSIP activities. The Project Coordinator 

will report to the Deputy-PS (Agriculture). The PIU will work closely with the Government appointed 

focal points in the (i) Directorate of Planning and Business Development (DPBD), (ii) Directorate of 

Agricultural Production Extensions and Engineering Services (DAPEES), (iii) Directorate of 

Agricultural Research and Development (DARD), (iv) Directorate of Veterinary Services (DVS), and 

(v) Nutrition Unit. The DAPEES and DVS will be responsible for sub-component 1.1 (Agricultural 

Mechanisation) and DARD will be responsible for sub-component 1.2 (Certified Seed Systems 

Improvement). The DAPEES and DARD will be supported by 3 Technical Advisors (Cereal Crops, 

Livestock and Seed Systems) who will be competitively recruited by the Project, based on Bank’s Rules 

and Procedures. Based on the value chain approach, including construction activities, the PIU will be 

supported by SOEs, namely, (i) AgriBusDev Agency, (ii) AMTA, (iii) AgriBank, and (iv) Namibia 

Agronomic Board (NAB). The PIU will also work closely with the Namibia National Farmers Union 

(NNFU). 

 



 

14 

 

4.1.2. The NAMSIP Component 1 will mainly be implemented through farmer cooperatives or 
individual farmers who will be required to save part of their income in a group bank account. The 

cooperatives and individuals, with the assistance of MAWF, AgriBusDev and AMTA, will identify 

appropriate machinery/equipment for their operations based on their needs. A qualifying 

cooperative/farmer will be expected to directly pay about 10% of the overall cost of the associated 

machinery/equipment from their own resources. Procurement of standard machinery/equipment will 

commence in Project Year 1. 

 

4.1.3. Procurement Arrangements:  Procurement of goods, works and the acquisition of consulting 
services, financed by the Bank for the Project, will be carried out in accordance with the “Procurement 

Policy and Methodology for Bank Group Funded Operations” (BPM), dated October 2015 and 

following the provisions stated in the Financing Agreement. Specifically, procurement will be carried 

out using the following: 

 Borrower Procurement System (BPS): Specific Procurement Methods and Procedures (PMPs) 
under BPS comprising its Laws and Regulations, Procurement Act of 2015 and Public 

Procurement Regulation (no. 2016), using the national Standard Solicitation Documents (SSDs) 

or other Solicitation Documents agreed during project negotiations” for various group of 

transactions to be entailed under the project.   

 Bank Procurement Methods and Procedures (Bank’s PMPs): The Project will use Bank 
standard PMPs, using the relevant Bank Standard   Solicitation Documents SDDs, for contracts 

that are either: (i) Contracts procurement under Open Competitive Bidding (OCB)–international; 

Limited Competitive Bidding (LIB) and Consultancy services of firms; (ii) in case BPS is not 

relied upon for a specific transaction or group of transactions; and (iii) in case Bank’s PMPs have 

been found to be the best fit for purpose for a specific transaction or group of transactions. 

 

4.1.4. Procurement Risks and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): the assessment of procurement risks at 
the Country, Sector, and Project levels and of procurement capacity at the Executing Agency (EA), were 

undertaken  for the project and the output have informed the decisions on the procurement regimes (BPS 

or Bank’s PMPs)  being used for specific transactions or groups of similar transactions under the project. 

The appropriate risks mitigation measures have been included in PAR Volume II, Technical Annex B.5. 

Various items under different expenditure categories and related procurement arrangements have been 

developed for goods, works and consultancy services, as reflected in PAR Volume II, Technical Annex 

B.5. 

 

4.1.5. Financial Management (FM): An assessment of the Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Forestry 
(MAWF) as Project Executing Agency (that included a review of the budgeting, accounting, treasury 

systems, internal controls, reporting, and external audit arrangements) was done to ascertain effective 

financial management of the project. The Department of Finance headed by a Director of Finance within 

the MAWF is responsible for the function of planning and budgeting at central and local levels including 

recording expenditures and maintaining assets through the use of the Government-wide IFMIS. The 

system has, however, not been configured to enable comprehensive Project reporting, therefore, a 

suitable system that will include the use of spreadsheets will be used for supplementing the recording 

and reporting of the Project transactions. The MAWF staff (Finance Department) have been involved 

in implementation of donor (EU, FAO, JICA and South-South Cooperation China) funded projects. 

Given the fiduciary requirements related to the Bank’s financing, MAWF has already appointed a well-

qualified Project Accountant to handle Project financial management (FM) tasks.  The Project 

Accountant will work together with other PIU members including Project Coordinator, M&E, and 

Procurement Specialist. Training in Bank requirements regarding financial management will be 

provided as part of project launching and during implementation.   

4.1.6. Internal audit function at the Ministry will cover the project, the reports resulting from the audits 
will be shared with the Bank during supervisions. All deficiencies identified by internal audits will be 

communicated in a timely manner to the Government, for action. The PIU will also be responsible for 

ensuring compliance with the Bank’s reporting requirements, regarding the submission of periodic 



 

15 

 

progress reports with financial information for the Bank loan and Government contribution to the Bank 

not later than 45 days after the end of the respective quarter. The PIU will also be required to produce 

annual project financial statements. The Ministry’s financial statements are audited annually by the 

Auditor General of Namibia.  In this regard, the Project financial statements will also be subject to audit 

by the AG (or a private independent audit firm under the oversight of the AG) with the audit done in 

accordance with a Bank approved Terms of Reference. The audit reports (including management letter) 

will be submitted to the Bank within six months after the end of the reporting period with costs of the 

audit borne by the loan. These arrangements are in line with the current moderate country fiduciary risk 

levels after mitigation factors. 

 

4.1.7. The overall conclusion of the assessment is that the MAWF’s capacity, to handle all the FM 
aspects of the project, currently meets the Bank’s minimum requirements as laid out in the Bank’s FM 

guidelines. In addition, with the implementation of the proposed FM actions, there will be further 

improvement in the Project financial management systems to ensure funds to be made available to 

finance Project activities would be used economically, efficiently and for the purpose intended. The 

overall initial FM risk for the Project is assessed as “Moderate”. This is also in line with current country 

fiduciary risk levels that allow the use of existing systems subject to their satisfactory assessment. The 

detailed analysis and financial management arrangements are contained in PAR Volume II, Technical 

Annex B.4. 

 

4.1.8. Disbursement arrangements: Disbursement of funds under the project shall be primarily by the 
Direct Payment method for the activities under the project. The PIU will be responsible for certification 

of invoices submitted and preparation of disbursement application which will be reviewed and signed 

off by Government designated staff and submitted to the Bank for payment. The Special Account 

method to be managed by the PIU will be limited to financing the smaller and recurring operating 

expenses. The opening of the Special Account denominated in ZAR together with the associated local 

currency account denominated in NAD will be “other condition” to the Loan. In addition, the 

Reimbursement method will also be available. All disbursements under the Loan would be made in 

accordance with the Bank’s rules and procedures as laid out in the Disbursement Handbook, as 

applicable. In addition, the Bank will issue a Disbursement Letter whose contents were discussed and 

agreed upon during the loan negotiations meeting between the delegations from the Government of 

Namibia and the Bank. 

 

4.2.  Monitoring  

 

The Project monitoring will be at different levels with the highest level being the NPC. NPC has 

developed an M&E framework that guides various sectors and assists to monitor the HPP and NDP5 

Results Framework. In addition, the Namibia Statistics Agency (NSA) will assist the Project to carry 

out regular surveys. At Sector level, the DPBD will have the overall responsibility for Project monitoring 

and evaluation activities. The Project activities will commence with preparation of AWP&B (based on 

detailed cost tables/DCTs, PAR Volume II Technical Annex B.2), which will be submitted to the PSC 

for approval, before transmission to the Bank. The Project M&E Specialist will establish participatory 

M&E system based on performance indicators. If need be, a short term individual consultant will be 

recruited by the Project to develop the participatory M&E system which will be linked to NPC M&E 

framework. The Project has allocated financial resources to facilitate training on data collection, 

processing and reporting. In Project Year 1, the PIU will develop the Project Implementation Manual 

highlighting the organisation, implementation, financial, disbursement and procurement arrangements. 

The Regional Project launch workshops will be organised by MAWF for key stakeholders with the 

purpose of (i) ensuring that all partners understand the Project components, subcomponents, activities, 

implementation modalities, and reporting needs, and (ii) acting as a networking event to build 

relationships for future knowledge sharing. All spending Regions will submit monthly reports for 

compilation of Quarterly Progress Report (QPRs). All QPRs will be reviewed and cleared by HCT 

before submission to the Bank, not more than 45 days after the end of reporting period. The key Project 



 

16 

 

M&E milestones/reports are presented in Table 4.2. The Bank will monitor NAMSIP implementation 

through supervision missions, at least twice per calendar year, in order to verify progress and monitor 

key verifiable indicators. 

 

Table 4.2: Project Key Milestones 

 

Timeframe Milestone 
Monitoring and Evaluation Process/Feedback 

Loop 

Year 1  Baseline Survey Report MAWF/NSA: Baseline data generation 

Year 1 - 5 
Procurement (goods, works 

and services) Reports 
MAWF/Bank: Review and approvals 

Year 1 - 5 
Project Implementation 

(QPRs and Aide Memoires) 

MAWF/Bank/Beneficiaries: Progress review 

meetings. Bank supervision missions. 

Year 1 - 5 Audit Reports MAWF/Auditors: Annual financial audit  

Year 3 Mid-Term Review Report MAWF/NSA/Bank Mid-Term technical review 

Year 4 
Beneficiary Impact Study 

Report 
MAWF/NSA: Project beneficiary impact assessment  

Year 5  Project Completion Report MAWF/NSA/Bank: End of Project technical review 

 

4.3. Governance  
 

4.3.1. Namibia is one of the countries with the best governance record in Africa and has continually 
been ranked within the top ten performers on the Mo-Ibrahim Index of African Governance (IIAG), 

which measures the quality of governance in every African country. Namibia has been ranking 6th since 

2000 and improving to 5th in 2015 (2016 IIAG report) based on 4 categories of governance, namely, (a) 

Safety & Rule of Law (score 76.1/100, rank 4th/54), (b) Participation and Human Rights (score 76.1/100, 

rank 2nd/54), (c) Sustainable Economic Opportunity (score 62.2/100, rank 7th/54), and (d) Human 

Development (score 64.7/100, rank 10th/54). The 2013 Corruption Perception Index by Transparency 

International ranked Namibia as the 7th least corrupt country in sub-Saharan Africa. In January 2017, 

Namibia unconditionally acceded to the African Peer Review Mechanism (APRM), which provides for 

self and peer-assessment of governance policies and practices in Africa. 

 

4.3.2. To achieve inclusive and sustainable development, Namibia has put in place strong 
accountability systems in line with the Constitution and the State Finance Act of 1991 (amended 1995). 

The Minister of Finance presents accountability report, together with other budget documents, at the 

National Assembly every year. The Country’s efforts to reform the Public Financial Management (PFM) 

system are yielding results. This is testified by a transparent, consultative, and inclusive fiscal budgetary 

process that is succeeded by well-controlled and coordinated budget execution mechanisms, which have 

resulted in the decline in public sector over-expenditures. The modernization of the public procurement 

system is being pursued through the new Public Procurement Act 2015, which became effective on 1st 

April 2017, following issuance of Regulations. The Constitution clearly defines the legal and 

institutional framework for the fight against corruption. The Namibia Anti-Corruption Commission, 

established under the Anti-Corruption Act No. 8 of 2003, is mandated to combat and prevent corruption. 

The 2016 Corruption Perception Index ranks Namibia 53 out of 176 countries, with an overall score of 

52/100. The agriculture sector will benefit from AfDB-funded PBO reforms through (i) strengthened 

PFM and SOE efficiency; and (ii) improved business enabling environment, which are expected to result 

in higher GDP growth rates, and reduction in unemployment and poverty. NAMSIP institutional 

arrangement has been designed to ensure good governance, and will serve as an instrument for achieving 

intended objectives. The Project’s specific governance risk mitigation measures include (i) recruitment 

of external audit firm, and (ii) training of PIU in Bank’s rules and procedures. 

  



 

17 

 

4.4.  Sustainability 
 

The Project has been designed in a participatory and consultative manner in order to enhance 

ownership by beneficiaries thus ensuring sustainability. The Project will be implemented using the 

existing Government structures and SOEs, with minimal outsourced technical assistance, which will 

assist to preserve the institutional memory and also build the capacity of the Government staff to ably 

assist the smallholder farmers during and after Project implementation (operation and maintenance) 

period. The Project’s focus on seed system development and agriculture mechanization will enhance 

Private Sector involvement, with good back-up service. Major maintenance of machinery and equipment 

will be carried out by the suppliers and the cooperatives will be paying for the services. Through the 

cooperatives, the beneficiaries will be mobilised and trained to properly operate and carry out routine 

maintenance of the agricultural machinery and equipment. The capacity building for MAWF staff and 

cooperatives will guarantee sustainability of planned activities when the Project phases out. The certified 

seed processing plant including associated equipment will be operated and maintained by the 

cooperatives (Private Sector) for sustainability. Behaviour communication and awareness campaigns 

for food diversification and nutritional interventions have been mainstreamed to build resilience and 

sustainability of the investments. The Project is financially viable and the analysis indicated that 

beneficiaries will be able to generate adequate funds for their household needs, as well as sustain the 

investments made in the agriculture ventures.  
 

4.5 Risk Management 

 
No Potential Risks Rating Mitigation Measures 

1.  Poor sustainability of irrigation 
schemes and certified seeds 

processing plant. 

Medium Project, through cooperatives, will facilitate 

establishment of management entity. The certified 

seed processing plant will be managed by the Private 

Sector. 

2.  Project implementation delays. Low Regular and close follow up by the NPC, HCT and 
Bank.  

3.  Drastic weather 
variations/climatic conditions. 

Medium Dryland/rainfed Project activities with be 

implemented together with conservation agriculture 

based on cropping schedule so that little amount of 

rainfall can fully be utilised by the crops. 
 

4.6 Knowledge Building   
 

4.6.1. The Project’s agricultural mechanization will scale-up the existing MAWF Dry Land Crop 
Production Programme subsidy-mechanisation programme but using a concept of ownership scheme 

which will generate considerable knowledge on access and sustainable use of modern farm 

machinery/equipment. The focus on livestock disease control will also generate lessons for future 

interventions to enhance livestock animal health, traceability, and productivity. The lessons and 

experiences from NAMSIP will be shared within the Bank and other institutions interested in 

implementing future similar projects. The value chain approach for both crops and livestock production 

will generate information on profitability and sustainability of agricultural investments. The 

establishment of certified seed processing plant to be managed by the Private Sector and cooperatives 

will also provide lessons on how the small-scale farmers’ cooperatives can be integrated into the 

certified seed production value chain.  
 

4.6.2. The Project will contribute to knowledge building through: (i) the M&E system which will be 
designed to generate information on implementation achievements, Project financing, disbursement 

trends, procurement, contractor performance, beneficiary participation, Project outputs and outcomes 

and sustainability; (ii) lessons learnt from supervision mission reports, MTR and PCR; and (iii) 

beneficiary impact assessment and final stakeholders’ workshop will provide feedback on key lessons 

and experiences. NAMSIP will provide an opportunity to strengthen the Bank’s knowledge on the 

agriculture sector in Namibia. Above that, the Project has incorporated specialised training which will 

help to build knowledge, skills and capacity of MAWF staff, cooperatives members and other individual 

beneficiaries.  



 

18 

 

4.6.3. Documentation and sharing of lessons, experience (successes and failures) and good practice 
will be carried out continuously during and after Project implementation. Depending upon the need, 

appropriate support (print and electronic media) and several communication channels (such as 

newspapers, mobile-phone-SMS, radio, TV and billboards) will be used in order to boost visibility. The 

Project-related online information will also be available on the existing Government/MAWF website 

which will be regularly posted after approval by HCT. 

 

V. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

 

5.1.  Legal Instruments 

 

5.1.1 ADB Loan to the Republic of Namibia.  

 

5.2.  Conditions Associated with Bank’s Intervention 

 

5.2.1 Condition Precedent to Entry into Force: The entry into force of the Loan Agreement shall be 

subject to the fulfilment by the Borrower of the provisions of Section 12.01 of the General Conditions 

of the Bank. 

 

5.2.2 Condition Precedent to First Disbursement: The obligations of the Bank to make the first 

disbursement of the Loan shall be conditional upon the entry into force of this Agreement. 

 

5.2.3 Other Conditions: The Borrower shall:  

 

a. Prior to the request for disbursement of advance to the special account provide evidence of 
having opened one (1) Special Account denominated in ZAR and one (1) local currency account 

denominated in NAD, at the Bank of Namibia into which the proceeds of the Loan will be 

deposited (§4.1.8); and 

 

b. within six (6) months of the signing of the Loan Agreement, provide evidence, in form and 
substance satisfactory to the Bank, of the recruitment of 3 Technical Advisors (TA) to MAWF, 

each with skills and qualifications acceptable to the Bank (§4.1.1). 

 

5.3.  Undertakings 

 

The Borrower undertakes to implement the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 

of NAMSIP, and report to the Bank on a quarterly basis, as part of the quarterly progress report, 

throughout the Project implementation period (§3.2.1). 

 

5.4 Compliance with Bank Policies 

 

 This project complies with all applicable Bank policies. 

 Non-standard conditions (if applicable): N/A 
  

VI. RECOMMENDATION 

 

 Management recommends that the Board of Directors approves the proposed ADB Loan of One 

Billion South African Rand (ZAR 1 billion) to the Republic of Namibia for the purpose of 

implementing the Namibia Agricultural Mechanisation and Seed Improvement Project (NAMSIP) and 

subject to the conditions stipulated in this report. 

 

 



 
 




















































 
 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 

 

 

 
 

 

PROJECT:  PROJECT TO STRENGTHEN RESILIENCE OF RURAL 

COMMUNITIES TO FOOD AND NUTRITION INSECURITY IN 

NIGER (PRECIS) 

 

COUNTRY:  NIGER 
 

APPRAISAL REPORT  

Date: October 2020 

 

 

 


 
 

Project Information 

 

 

Client Information 

 

BORROWER   :   Republic of Niger 

EXECUTING AGENCY  :  Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAE) 

 

Financing Plan 

Source  Amount Instrument 

   

TSF  UA 25.859 million Grant 

IFAD  UA 70.803 million Loan and Grant 

OFID  UA 11.381 million Loan 

GEF  UA 4.582 million Grant 

GCF   UA 7.538 million Loan and Grant 

BAGRI  UA 0.739 million Private Sector  

Government  UA 2.614 million Contribution 

Beneficiaries  UA 4.286 million Grant 

TOTAL COST  UA 147.802 million  

 

 

 

Key TSF Financing Information  

 

TSF grant currency  UA 

IRR (baseline scenario) 

ERR (baseline scenario) 

NPV  

 

17.3 % 

18.8 % 

CFAF 59.96 billion  

 

Timeframe – Main Milestones (Expected) 

  

Concept Note Approval 20 December2019 

Project Approval 8 October 2020 

Effectiveness January 2021 

Grant Closure 31 December 2025 

___________________________________________________________________________ 



 

iv 

 

Executive Summary 

 

 

Project overview: The Project to Strengthen Resilience of Rural Communities to Food and 

Nutrition Insecurity in Niger (PRECIS) aims to sustainably improve the food and nutrition 

security of rural households and strengthen their resilience to climatic and environmental 

shocks. It will support small-scale producers by removing production and marketing constraints 

in the cereal, market gardening, poultry and small livestock production sub-sectors, through 

two technical components that will have the following effects: (i) diversify production, increase 

yields and the capacity to adapt to external shocks, particularly climatic shocks, as well as 

improve the nutrition security of rural producers (including women and young people); and (ii) 

enhance the value of agro-sylvo-pastoral production surpluses through increased marketing on 

semi-wholesale markets and the promotion of agricultural entrepreneurship with sustainable 

integration into the local, regional and national economy.  

The main achievements expected from PRECIS include: (i) increased income for some 210,000 

households, or approximately 1,470,000 persons; (ii) the building of 117 water harnessing 

structures; (iii) the creation/strengthening of 30,040 Rural Young Enterprises (RYEs), 

including at least 30% owned by women; (iv) direct support for 35,000 households in the form 

of nutrition education, benefiting 245,000 persons; (v) the opening of 660 literacy centres to 

build the capacity of 33,000 household members; (vi) the strengthening/consolidation of 2,080 

producer organisations/groups to improve their technical and management capacity; (vii) the 

creation/consolidation of approximately 45,060 direct jobs in rural areas; (viii) the training of 

at least 33,000 beneficiaries in the various themes related to climate change adaptation and the 

management and promotion of micro-enterprises; (ix) the construction of 9 semi-wholesale 

markets and 18 operational collection centres; (x) the setting up of 10 operational farmers' 

houses offering input and production equipment supply services to family farmers; (xi) the 

rehabilitation of 348 km of roads linking production areas to collection centres and semi-

wholesale markets; and (xii) enhancement, in the short and long term, of the resilience of 

communities in the target areas enabling them to cope with the effects of COVID-19 and other 

natural and health shocks in the future.  

The overall programme will be implemented over a six-year period for a total sum of UA 147.80 

million (Bank financing will cover a five-year period). The Bank's contribution to the project 

financing will amount to UA 25.859 million, provided in the form of a grant from the Transition 

Support Facility (TSF). More specifically, the Bank's financing will be earmarked for the "water 

harnessing" and "agricultural entrepreneurship" components and will be incorporated into the 

operational mechanism of the IFAD-funded Family Farming Development Programme 

(ProDAF), which will be strengthened.  

In the context of the response to post-COVID-19, the project plans to carry out a short- and 

medium-term emergency programme to help people affected by the disease who were obliged 

to deplete their stocks and savings. This operation will restore the productive base of farmers 

in the project area who have been severely hit by the pandemic.  

Needs assessment: The size and fertility of farmland in the project area is steadily declining 

due to lack of water, loss of vegetation cover, arid climate, erosion and increasing population 

pressure. Surface water resources are severely affected by recurrent and chronic droughts. 

Moreover, Niger is facing a situation of growing insecurity, characterized by terrorist attacks 

on the borders with Nigeria and Mali, aggravating the people’s vulnerability. The livelihood of 

the population concerned by the project consists mainly of small-scale agriculture and family 

livestock farming, which employ more than 85% of the workforce. Agriculture is the leading 



 

v 

 

sector in terms of economic activity in the region and in the country, accounting for the largest 

contribution to GDP, estimated at 43.4% in 2018. However, the region has huge, but 

inadequately exploited, resources in the agro-pastoral sector. The under-exploitation of these 

resources leaves the rural sector vulnerable to the vagaries of climate, which adversely impact 

agriculture by causing the degradation of natural resources. As a result, performance in terms 

of output and productivity is poor and food insecurity is a virtually permanent problem. With 

an estimated 200,000 hectares of land lost to desert encroachment annually, the environmental 

situation of the project is all the more precarious due to the magnitude of land degradation, poor 

preservation of biodiversity, and difficulties in ensuring the sustainable management of land 

and water resources. This project aims to sustainably improve the food and nutrition security 

of rural households in the targeted areas and to strengthen their resilience to climatic shocks 

and natural resource degradation. It will work towards the emergence of development poles in 

four regions of the country, which are home to 12.9 million inhabitants, representing 60.2% of 

the national population.  

Value added for the African Development Bank: For more than 20 years, the Bank has 

accumulated special experience in Niger in the area of water harnessing and natural resource 

protection. It has financed about a dozen studies and projects (PMET Tahoua, PADAZ Zinder, 

PADL Diffa, PVDT Dosso-Tillaberi, PMERSA-MTZ, PROMOVARE, PDIPC, P2RS, etc.) for 

specific regions of the country, and which have improved the living conditions of men and 

women in rural areas, while developing technical and organisational approaches tailored to 

local contexts. The Bank has become a privileged partner in this sector thanks to its success in 

water control and harnessing. On the strength of this experience and given the numerous 

challenges that Niger still faces (climatic, economic, security, etc.), the Bank must continue its 

efforts in the areas of water harnessing, women's empowerment and support for agricultural 

entrepreneurship. The Bank's operations will help reduce poverty, promote youth and women's 

employment, strengthen adaptation to climate change and increase the resilience of vulnerable 

segments of the population to food and nutrition insecurity. By co-financing PRECIS, the Bank, 

in full compliance with its strategic guidelines, will strengthen the partnerships already 

established with other TFPs and contribute significantly to the mobilization of financial 

resources for a wide-ranging programme. 

Knowledge building: PRECIS will contribute to the training and the consolidation of the 

know-how of producers. With regard to resilience to climate change, the project will develop 

and disseminate innovative technologies in agriculture and small-scale livestock farming, for 

both production and processing activities, while enhancing local know-how and skills in the 

Sahelian environment. In an inclusive manner, it will enable young people and women to 

develop technical and entrepreneurial capacities by settling on land with modern infrastructure 

and means of exploitation and will promote the development of para-agricultural activities 

through supported rural micro-enterprises. Furthermore, it will support the water harnessing at 

regional level and provide expertise in terms of irrigation techniques at the individual and local 

levels, coupled with the judicious use of climate information. The project will help to build 

women's leadership capacity and strengthen their economic empowerment, as well as contribute 

to the greater implementation of gender equality-promoting policies. The mechanisms for 

disseminating and capitalizing on the project's outcomes and best practices, and the process of 

generating endogenous value for the benefit of vulnerable groups through the development of 

value chains will also contribute to knowledge building. 

  



 

vi 

 

 

The project will be coordinated by the staff of the National Representation and Technical 

Assistance Unit (CENRAT), which will benefit from skills transfer. Best practices in water 

resource management, irrigation, agricultural extension, database management, dissemination 

and use of climate information, youth entrepreneurship and environmental and social 

safeguards will be capitalized on and disseminated, using various communication mechanisms 

already set up under PRECIS (awareness-raising meetings, agricultural advisory services, 

farmer field schools, etc.). 

 



 

vii 

 

PRECIS_Results-Based Logical Framework  
 

 Project Name: Project to Strengthen Resilience of Rural Communities to Food and Nutrition Insecurity in Niger (PRECIS) 

 Project Goal: Sustainably improve the food and nutrition security of rural households and strengthen their resilience to climate shocks and natural resource degradation. 

RESULTS CHAINS  
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS  MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS/MITIGATION  

MEASURES  Indicator  Baseline * Target (2025) 

IM
P

A
C

T
 Improved food and nutrition security of the 

people of Niger 

- Prevalence of chronic malnutrition among under-five 

children (% 
 

- Prevalence of severe food insecurity in rural areas 

ND (baseline study) 

 

 

ND (baseline study) 

 

% TBD (baseline study) 

 

 

% TBD (baseline study) 

 

INS periodic monitoring 

reports and surveys 

(EVIAM) 

Risks 

 

- Deterioration of security conditions. 

- Severe climatic conditions that could lead to the 

decapitalisation of the most vulnerable groups. 

- Political stability in the run-up to the 2020 

presidential elections. 

- Risks of inter-community conflicts. 

- Effects of COVID-19. 

 

 

Mitigation measures 

 

- Political commitment by the authorities and 

support from regional actors and the international 

community. 

-Participation in political dialogue with the 

Government alongside other TFPs. 

- A delegation-of-work approach involving local 

economic actors. 

 - Planned actions for water mobilisation and 

protection of productive capital. 

- Special attention to vulnerable groups. 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

  

1. Improved production and agricultural 

productivity in the project area. 

1.1 Increase in the production of main foodcrops and cash 
crops as a result of the project (tonnes) 

 

P1: Millet production 

P2: Sorghum production 

P3: Cowpea production 

P4: Peanut production 

P5: Sesame production 

 

1.2 Increase in crop yields (T/ha) as a result of the project 

 

R1: Millet yield 

R2: Sorghum yield 

R3: Cowpea yield 

R4: Peanut yield 

R5: Sesame yield  

 
 
 

P1: 120 

P2: 130,000 

P3: 400,000 

P4: 120,000 

P5: 66,000 

 
 
 

 

R1: 0.5 

R2: 0.4 

R3: 0.375 

R4: 0.5 

R5: 0.45 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

P1: 150,000 

P2: 160,000 

P3: 600,000 

P4: 150,000 

P5: 80,000 

 
 
 

 

R1: 0.75  

R2: 0.7 

R3: 0.75 

R4: 0.8 

R5: 0.6 
 

--Periodic reports and 

project monitoring surveys 

 

-Mid-Term Review Report 

and Project Completion 

Report 

 
2. Young "profitable" and job-creating rural 
enterprises are promoted. 

 

2.1     Number of direct jobs created (% held by women) 

2.2     Number of rural micro and small enterprises that 

remain operational 3 years after their creation (% managed by 

women  

ND (baseline study) 

ND (baseline study) 

 

45,060 jobs 

 

90% 



 

viii 

 

 Component A: Sustainable agricultural development and strengthening of the resilience of rural households  
 

 

1.1: Access to water for family farmers (women 

and young people) is improved 

 

1.2: Irrigation farming areas and small-scale 

irrigation schemes are implemented. 

 

 

 

 

 

 
1.3: The technical, organisational and institutional 

capacities of family farms are strengthened. 
 

 

 

 

 

1.4: Resilient and innovative agricultural practices 

are promoted and disseminated among individual 

or organised producers. 

 

1.1 Total surface area equipped for irrigation by the 
project/number of beneficiaries (ha) 

 

 

1.2.1 Number of structures by type built or rehabilitated 

(number) 

 

1.2.2. Irrigated area developed (ha)/number of people 

 
 

 

1.3.1 % of farmers who have applied/adopted the technologies 

that were taught (including women) 

 

 

 

1.4.1. Number of people trained in sustainable production 

practices and technologies 

1.4.2 Number of rural producers/organisations supported 
 

1.1  ND (baseline study) 

 

 
 

1.2.1.   ND (baseline study) 

 

 

1.2.2.   ND (baseline study) 

 

 

 

 

 

1.3.1.  ND (baseline study) 

 

 

 
 

 

1.4.1.  ND (baseline study) 

 
 

1.4.2. ND (baseline study)      

 

1.1            1,320  

 
 

 

1.2.1. 3 mini dams; 106 flood diversion 

weirs; 5 ponds; 66 DWS boreholes 
 

 

1.2.2. 3,000 ha (30% of the 

irrigable land potential)/5,000 

producer households; 40,000 

people) 

 

1.3.1:  60 (50% of them women) 

 

 
 
 

 

 

1.4.1.      33,000 producers 
 

 

1.4.2          2,080 POs 

- Progress reports of the 

project 

- Contracts signed with 

enterprises and firms 

- Reports of control 

offices 

- Bank supervision and the 

Government's external 

monitoring reports  

-PRECIS monitoring 

report 

Risks 

- Delays in the start-up and procurement process 

- Socio-cultural barriers that do not always favour 

women and young people's access to factors of 

production 

- Low capacity of construction companies 

 

Mitigation measures  

- Implementing agency already in place (ProDAF) 

- FDS and BDs available 

- Decentralisation of procurement at regional level 

- Addition of a procurement assistant within 

CENRAT (besides the manager) 

- Proactive approach of the project 

- Specific activities in favour of women and young 

people 

- Intelligent allotment to take into account the 

capacities of the works companies. 

 

 Component B: Sustainable agricultural development and strengthening the resilience of rural households 
 

 

2.1: The integration of young people into rural 
trades is improved/strengthened 

 

 
 

 

2.2:  Actors and promoters have access to 

information on the agricultural/rural 

entrepreneurial environment 

 

 

 

2.3: Access to finance and other financial 
services for agricultural enterprises is ensured 

 

 
2.4: system to strengthen and support rural 

microenterprises is set up 

 

 

 

2.5: Built/rehabilitated rural infrastructure is 

managed in a sustainable manner 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.1.1 Number of young entrepreneurs supported and self-

employed (% of women) 

2.1.2. Number of functional agribusiness micro enterprises 

 
 

2.2.1   Number of studies carried out 

2.2.2   Number of young people trained in entrepreneurship 

with the support of the project (% of women) 

2.2.3 Number of users with access to business development 

services (% of women) 

 
 

2.3.1 Number of people trained/supported who received credit 

(% of women) 

2.3.2. Number of agribusiness micro enterprises financed for 

the benefit of young people (by type) 

 

2.4.1. Number of functional agricultural business incubators 

2.4.2 Number of agricultural entrepreneurship mentoring 

structures strengthened with project support  

 

 

2.5.1.  Length of roads rehabilitated (km) 

 

 

 

2..1.1 ND (baseline study) 

 

 

2.1.2 ND (baseline study) 

  

2.2.1 ND (baseline study) 

2.2.2: ND (baseline study) 

 

 

2.2.3 ND (baseline study) 

  

23.1 ND (baseline study) 

 

2.3.2 ND (baseline study) 

 

 

2.4.1 ND (baseline study) 

2.4.2 ND (baseline study) 

 

 

 

2.5.1: ND (baseline study) 

 

 

 

 

 

1.1: 400 (50% of them women) 

 

1.2: 9.800 micro-enterprises 

 

 
 

2.2.1    3 studies  

2.2.2: 30,000 (33% of them women) 

 

 

2.2.3    15,000 (40% of them women) 

 

 

2.3.1     400 (30% of them women) 

 

2.3.2     9,800 enterprises 

 

2.4.1:     2 

2.4.2:    5 

 

  

 

2.5.1     348 

- Project progress reports 

 

- Contracts signed with 

companies and firms 

 

- Reports from control 

offices 

 

- Bank supervision and 

Government external 

monitoring reports 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

  

Risks 

- Difficulties in selling market gardening produce 

- Young people's mobility and/or disinterest in 

promoting enterprises 

 

Mitigation measures  

- Activities to facilitate access to markets (opening 

up, storage, organisation), support for farms in the 

choice of crops and in marketing. 

- A proactive project approach 

- Specific actions in favour of women and young 

people 

- Support package including installation of young 

people and strengthening of existing companies  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

ix 

 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

3.1 Monitoring and evaluation, knowledge 

building and visibility ensured 

 

 

 

 

3.2 Operational project management 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

3.3 Environmental and social management 

ensured  

 

 

3.1.1 M&E baseline and manual developed and validated 

3.1.2 Number and % of indicators regularly collected and 

analysed 

3.1.3 Number of progress reports validated/year 

3.1.4 Communication strategy and plan developed and 

implemented 

3.1.5 Number of shared capitalisation reports 

3.2.1 Number of procurement plans (PPs) developed and 

complied with 

3.2.2 Compliant disbursement rate 

3.2.3 Number of audit reports produced and validated 

3.2.4 Gender mainstreaming ensured 

 

3.3.1 Number of ESIAs/ESMPs and RAPs implemented 

 

3.1.1 available (T4 2020) 

3.1.2 collected (T4 2020) 

3.1.3  0% (early 2020) 

3.1.4 Plan prepared (T1 

2021) 

3.1.5    0 

3.2.1 PP prepared (2020) 

3.2.2 0% (early 2020) 

3.2.3 Firm Recruited (end-

2020) 

3.2.4 Promoted (end-2021) 

 

3.1       0 

 

3.1.1 M&E baseline and manual  

3.1.2 TBD 

3.1.3: 3 quarterly reports;1 annual rep. 

13.4 Communication tools 

disseminated.  

3.1.5: 2 

 

3.2.1: PP updated once/year  

3.2.2: 20% annually on average  

3.2.3: 5 audit reports validated 

3.2.4: Gender disaggregated data 

available 

 

3.3.1: 10 ESIA/ESMP and 5 RAPs 

 

 

PP 

SAP system  

Audit reports 

Progress and M&E reports 

Brochures, website, films  

 

 

M&E audit reports and 

Quarterly M&E reports  

 

 

 

 

Risks 

- Implementation delays 

 

Mitigation measures  

- A majority of FDS and BDs are available 

- Use of existing management entities 

- Anticipation of "works" procurements 

- Experience from previous projects 

 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

I
E

S
  

COMPONENTS  RESOURCES 

 

Component A: Sustainable agricultural development and strengthening of the resilience of rural households 

Construction of 3 mini-dams, 62 new flood diversion weirs, rehabilitation of 44 old degraded flood diversion weirs, 5 ponds, 

development of 1,320 ha of small irrigation schemes linked to the mini-dams at the weirs, treatment of watersheds against erosion 

and run-off, covering an areas of 5,833 ha, 66 boreholes, procurement of 1,000 tonnes of cereals, 200 tonnes of fertiliser, 500 tonnes 

of seeds, 2,000 L/kg of phytosanitary products and 50 solar pumps, to cope with the effects of COVID -19. 

 

Component B:   Promotion of youth entrepreneurship and market access 

Installation of 42 business advisers; setting up of 2 pilot business incubators; signing of an agreement with a local bank to facilitate 

access to financial services; Islamic financing line for youth and women's 300 self-employment projects; financing of 50 agricultural 

youth VSEs/SMEs supported by business incubators; financing of 50 cooperatives and MSEs for the processing and packaging of 

agricultural produce; financing of 45 para-agricultural service enterprises for young graduates; modular training in financial education 

for young entrepreneurs and women's groups; study of value chains and mapping of eligible activities for youth entrepr eneurship; 

awareness raising, youth mobilization and training campaigns; database of proposed project ideas and applicant profiles and strategy 

for strengthening agricultural entrepreneurship support structures. 

Component C: Project Management 

Coordination of project activities; administrative, accounting and financial management; procurement of goods, works and services; 

establishment of a communication plan; monitoring and evaluation of project implementation. 

 

 

Components:                                                                                  Sources of financing: 

Component A           :  UA 63.994 million (42.7%)         TSF : UA 25.859 million            GEF        :  UA 4.582 million   

Component B           :  UA 60.498 million (41.8%)          IFAD  : UA 70.803 million            GCF         :  UA 7.538 million   

Component C           : UA 23.310 million (15.5%)         OFID : UA 11.381 million            BAGRI     : UA 0.739 million   

                                                                                                   Govt.    : UA 22.614 million              BEN        :    UA 4.286 million                                      

*The values of the baseline indicators are not known at this stage. They will be determined by a baseline study that will be carried out after the start of the project. 

 

  



 

x 

 

 

 

Project Appraisal and Implementation Schedule 

 

 Year 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025  

 Quarter 
Q

3 

Q

4 

Q

1 

Q

2 

Q

3 

Q

4 

Q

1 

Q

2 

Q

3 

Q

4 

Q

1 

Q

2 

Q

3 

Q

4 

Q

1 

Q

2 

Q

3 

Q

4 

Q

1 

Q

2 

Q

3 

Q

4 

Q

1 

Q

2 

Q

3 

Q

4 

Q

1 

0 PREPARATORY ACTIVITIES                            

 AfDB Preparatory Mission                            

 
Complementary mission for the definition of the agricultural 

entrepreneurship component 
                          

 

 Preparation of the ESMF in conjunction with CENRAT                            

 
Targeting of water harnessing sites by DGGR/CENRAT in line with 

the FDS and BDs 
                          

 

 AfDB Evaluation Mission                            

1 INITIAL ACTIVITIES                            

 PRECIS/AfDB financing negotiations                            

 ADF loan approval                            

 Signing of the financing agreement                            

 
Implementation and fulfilment of conditions precedent to 1st 

disbursement 
                          

 

 Publication of the AfDB General Procurement Notice                            

2 START-UP ACTIVITIES                            

 Recruitment of additional PRECIS/AfDB staff                            

 PRECIS/AfDB launching Mission                            

 CENRAT training in AfDB procedures (procurement, disbursement)                            

     Preparation of ESIAs / ESMPs and RAPs                            

3 ENHANCEMENT OF WATER MANAGEMENT                            

 Procurement process for water harnessing works                             

 Procurement process for works control and supervision                             

 Construction of water harnessing facilities (dams, weirs, ponds, etc.)                            

 Setting up, training and support of management bodies                            

 
Setting up and monitoring of the environmental and social management 

framework 
                  

         

4 PROMOTION OF ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND MARKET ACCESS                            

 
Actions in support of rural entrepreneurship and youth and women's 

employment 
                  

         

 Support and monitoring of young and female entrepreneurs                            

 FDS and BDs on for the Taza-Tahoua priority feeder road                            

 Feeder road construction                             

5 PROJECT MANAGEMENT+                            



 

xi 

 

 

 

 
Adaptation of ProDAF management and monitoring-evaluation tools to 

the PRECIS project 
                  

         

 Baseline situation and adaptation of the M&E system to PRECIS/AfDB                             

 
Coordination, management, monitoring-evaluation and communication 

activities 
                  

         

 Annual accounts audit and environmental and social audits                            

 Mid-term review of PRECIS/AfDB                            

 ADF and Government completion report, in conjunction with IFAD                            



 

1 

 

NIGER 

 

PROJECT TO STRENGTHEN RESILIENCE OF RURAL COMMUNITIES TO FOOD 

AND NUTRITION INSECURITY IN NIGER (PRECIS) 

 

Management submits this report and recommendations concerning the proposed award of a TSF 

grant of UA 25.859 million to the Republic of Niger to finance the Project to Strengthen Resilience 

of Rural Communities to Food and Nutrition Insecurity in Niger (PRECIS). 

I  STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE  

1.1. Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives  

1.1.1 Niger's 2018-2022 Country Strategy Paper (CSP) is based on two strategic pillars, with 

two main sub-pillars, namely: mobilisation and harnessing of water resources, and development 

of agro-pastoral value chains. These two areas are already being supported by the Bank and 

other TFPs, whose efforts have yielded encouraging outcomes that will be consolidated and 

amplified by PRECIS, as part of the consolidation of the "development poles" approach that is 

already in place and which aims to promote the transformation of production systems and the 

establishment of strong links between the various segments of the value chains within the main 

agro-pastoral sub-sectors. PRECIS is also in line with the foundations of the 3N (Nigeriens 

Nourish Nigeriens) Initiative, which aims to protect the people of Niger from hunger and 

malnutrition, in the long term, and to create conditions enabling them to participate fully in 

national production and improve their income. Furthermore, in 2018, the Government of Niger 

developed an "Integrated Programme for Resilience to Food and Nutrition Insecurity" (Pro-

resilience Programme 2019-2021), aimed at, inter alia: (i) increasing and diversifying agro-

sylvo-pastoral and fisheries production; (ii) ensuring the regular supply of agricultural and agri-

food products to rural and urban markets; and (iii) improving the people's resilience to food 

crises and natural disasters and/or climatic shocks. The project activities will also be in line 

with the Small-Scale Irrigation Strategy in Niger (SPIN), which is currently being implemented, 

as well as with the Five-Year Action Plan for the implementation of the National Gender Policy 

(NGP), whose vision for 2027 is to "build, with all stakeholders, a society, without 

discrimination, where men and women, girls and boys have equal opportunities to participate 

in its development and enjoy the benefits of its growth". Lastly, the project is consistent with 

Niger's nationally determined contribution (NDC), particularly in the context of climate 

adaptation and resilience in the agricultural sector, as well as the reduction of emissions related 

to land use patterns and land allocation.  

1.2. Rationale for Bank Intervention  

1.2.1 For more than 20 years, the Bank has accumulated special experience in Niger in the 

area of water harnessing and natural resource protection. Indeed, it has financed about a dozen 

studies and projects (PMET Tahoua, PADAZ Zinder, PADL Diffa, PVDT Dosso-Tillaberi, 

PMERSA-MTZ, PROMOVARE, PDIPC, P2RS, etc.) targeted at the regions, and which have 

improved the living conditions of men and women in rural areas, while developing technical 

and organisational approaches tailored to local contexts. The Bank has become a privileged 

partner in this sector thanks to its success in water control and harnessing.  

 

1.2.2 The portfolio review, conducted by the Bank in December 2019, revealed that the 

Bank's active portfolio in Niger comprises 15 operations worth a total of just over UA 

476,000,000, with national projects accounting for 49.21%, multinational projects for 48.08%, 



 

2 

 

and a private sector operation for 2.7%. The average timeframe for fulfilling the conditions 

precedent to first disbursement is longer than the institutional standard, but the projects 

approved in 2019 performed well in terms of the timeframes for signature (1 month) and 

effectiveness (2.8 months). The review also noted satisfactory progress in the performance of 

the agricultural project portfolio. In particular, the PMERSA-MTZ, which was closed in 

September 2019, yielded satisfactory results, reflected especially in the completion of 69 water 

harnessing works, the development of 2,343 ha of small irrigated areas (PPI) and the 

reclamation of 2,100 ha of degraded land, making it possible to: (i) harness more than 70 million 

cubic metres of water; (ii) increase production by more than 168,720 tonnes (irrigated/flood-

recession and rain-fed crops); (iii) create more than 41,805 jobs; and (iv) multiply the income 

of producers by 3.9 times compared with the baseline situation. On the strength of the 

experience it has acquired over the past two decades, and given the numerous challenges that 

Niger still faces (climatic, economic, security, etc.), the Bank must continue its efforts on water 

harnessing, women's empowerment and support for agricultural entrepreneurship. By co-

financing PRECIS, the Bank, in line with its strategic orientations, will strengthen the 

partnerships already established with other TFPs (such as the co-financing of the Kandadji dam) 

and contribute to the significant mobilisation of financial resources. This type of investment is 

likely to limit security risks by targeting the most vulnerable local communities.  

 

1.2.3 The objectives of PRECIS are in keeping with the Bank's High 5s, which aim to feed 

Africa by 2025 and improve the living conditions of people of the continent by developing 

value chains, building the capacities of stakeholders, creating jobs and generating income. The 

project is directly linked to the specific areas of the Bank's Long-Term Strategy (LTS 2013-

2022), dealing with agriculture and food security, as well as gender issues. Moreover, by 

involving producers in private initiative, the project is aligned with the Bank's Ten-Year 

Strategy (2013-2022) and particularly with the objective of inclusive growth. The project also 

dovetails with the guidelines of the Bank's Agricultural Sector Strategy (2016-2025), which 

give pre-eminence to the development of value chains and agricultural entrepreneurship. 

Furthermore, the project supports the Bank's Climate Change Action Plan (CCAP II 2016-

2020), especially Pillar I on climate adaptation and resilience in key sectors including 

agriculture, as well as Pillar II which aims to promote low-emission development. 

1.3. Aid Coordination  

1.3.1 In Niger, official development assistance is coordinated by the consultative and 

consultation bodies of the Economic and Social Development Plan (PDES). Thus, several sector 

coordination poles have been set up. The Bank co-chairs the PDES “Infrastructure” sector 

coordination pole with the Ministry of Equipment. It is a member of the "rural areas 

transformation" pole. The Bank's role has been strengthened following the opening of its 

Country Office in Niger. The TFPs are also involved in the National Technical Committee in 

charge of monitoring PDES implementation. The technical partners are engaged in a constant 

process of dialogue and mutual consultation with a view to ensuring the effective coordination 

of their respective operations in Niger.  

  



 

3 

 

 

1.3.2  The operations of the various partners in the broader rural sector (agriculture, livestock, 
fisheries, environment, etc.) are presented in Annex A4 of Volume 2 and may be summarised as 

follows: 

II  PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

2.1. Project Components  

2.1.1 The overall objective of PRECIS is to sustainably improve the food and nutrition 

security of rural households and strengthen their resilience to climate shocks and natural 

resource degradation. The specific development objectives of the project are to increase rural 

household incomes, improve livelihoods and lives, and the socio-economic integration of young 

people (men and women) into productive rural occupations. 

2.1.2 PRECIS covers a period of five years and is structured around three main components: 

Component A, which will focus on sustainable agricultural development, strengthening the 

resilience of rural households and short-term response to the effects of COVID-19; Component 

B, which will focus on promoting youth entrepreneurship and market access; and Component 

C, which will be dedicated to coordination, management, monitoring/evaluation and knowledge 

transfer. The following table presents the main activities planned by component and sub-

component: 

Table 2.1: Project Components  

Sector or Sub-Sector* 

Scope (in 2018) 

GDP  Exports 

Labo

ur  

Agriculture and Rural Development 43.4% 35% 85% 

Stakeholders – Annual Public Expenditure (CFAF Billion) 

Government (2015-2018 average) Donors  (2015-2018 averages) 

 
 

25 (23.33% of total expenditure)  

 

BADEA 0.74 

IsDB 1.13 

IDA 30.43 

IFAD 6.69 

ADF 7.26 

BOAD 1.87 

EU 20.00 

Aid Coordination Level 

 Existence of thematic working groups  Yes  

 Existence of an overall sector programme 3N (Nigeriens Nourish Nigeriens) Initiative 

 Role of AfDB in aid coordination  Member (not leader) 

Components Cost  Description of the Components of PRECIS 

Component 1:  

Sustainable 

agricultural 

development and 

UA 

63.994 

million 

(43.3%) 

1.1 Strengthening surface water control and sustainable land 
management. 3 mini-dams, 62 new flood diversion weirs, 

rehabilitation of 44 old degraded flood diversion weirs, development 

of 5 ponds, development of 1,320 ha of small irrigated areas, recovery 



 

4 

 

*This percentage relates to the overall programme management, while for the Bank's financing this percentage is 9.8% (see 
details in the cost table in Annex B 2.2). 

2.2. Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Considered  

2.2.1 The technical solutions selected take into account: (i) lessons and experiences derived 

from the implementation of similar projects; (ii) socio-economic and environmental criteria; 

and (iii) best practices in the development and maintenance of structures, with emphasis on the 

quality of their implementation. The Bank's intervention focuses on specific areas where it has 

a comparative advantage and proven experience. This positioning will favour the 

implementation of operations and ensure greater efficiency of interventions. The technical 

solutions relating to infrastructure were adopted on the basis of standards that would ensure the 

sustainability of the investments, at acceptable costs, and ownership on the part of the 

strengthening of 

rural household 

resilience 

 

of degraded land upstream of watersheds and treatment of watersheds 

against erosion and runoff, covering an area of 5,833 ha, stabilization 

of 400 ha of dunes around the ponds, promotion of assisted natural 

regeneration (ANR) on 50,000 ha, control of invasive plants on 350 

ha, building the capacity of 39 management committees for small 

irrigation areas, and 66 boreholes.  

 

1.2 Building of the technical and institutional capacities of 

beneficiaries: Creation of 100 new rain-fed farming field schools (FFS) 
and 150 market gardening FFS, consolidation of 100 existing FFS, access 
to inputs for 10 farmer houses, 18 small ruminant farms, 2,000 small 

ruminant kits, establishment of 80 granaries, 4,340 nutrition gardens, 250 

support contracts for the agricultural advisory support system for farmers 

(ACAP), procurement of 150 motor pumps for farmer field schools, and 48 

animal production support agreements. 
 

1.3 Post COVID-19 Response 

Procurement of 1,000 tonnes of cereals, 200 tonnes of fertiliser, 500 tonnes 

of seeds, 2,000 L/kg of phyto-sanitary products and 50 solar pumps 

Component 2: 

Promotion of youth 

and women's 

entrepreneurship 

and access to 

markets 

 

UA 

60.498 

million 

(40.9%) 

 

2.1 Support for the creation and development of sustainable rural 

enterprises for young people and women: Installation of 42 business 

advisers; setting up of 2 pilot business incubators; signing of an agreement 
with a local bank to facilitate access to financial services; Islamic financing 

line for 300 youth and women's self-employment projects; financing of 50 

agricultural youth VSEs/SMEs supported by business incubators; financing 

of 50 cooperatives and MSEs for the processing and packaging of 

agricultural produce; financing of 45 para-agricultural service enterprises 

for young graduates; modular training in financial education for young 

entrepreneurs and women's groups; study of value chains and mapping of 

eligible activities for youth entrepreneurship; awareness-raising, youth 

mobilization and training campaigns; database of proposed project ideas 

and applicant profiles; and strategy for strengthening agricultural 

entrepreneurship support structures. 
 

2.2 Market development: 9 semi-wholesale markets, 18 collection centres, 

capacity-building for management structures, 348 km of roads serving the 

production areas, 20 trade fairs and days centred on Economic 

Development Plan (PDE), and 20 public-private exchange workshops. 

 

Component 3: 

Project 

Management 

UA 

23.310 

million 

(15.8%*) 

Coordination of project activities; administrative, accounting and financial 

management; procurement of goods, works and services; establishment of 

a communication plan; monitoring and evaluation of project 

implementation. 



 

5 

 

beneficiaries. The design of water harnessing structures (mini-dams and weirs) takes into 

account the experience gained over more than two decades at both technical and organisational 

levels. The roads will be rehabilitated with special focus on the treatment of the critical points, 

which will allow uninterrupted and smooth traffic all year round. The table below summarises 

the main alternatives that were considered and finally rejected. 

Table 2.2: Alternative Solutions Considered and Reasons for Rejection  

Alternative 

Solutions  
Brief Description Reasons for Rejection 

Bank interventions 
in all components 

and sub-

components of 

PRECIS. 

TSF resources for this 
programme are limited and are 

mobilized to partially finance the 

various project activities, with 

no specific targeting. 

Spreading the Bank's funding across multiple 

activities would limit its impact and make 
implementation more difficult. Focusing TSF 

financing on water harnessing and youth 

employment facilitates implementation while 

remaining consistent with CSP priorities. 

Development of 

large irrigated 

areas downstream 

of dams. 

Development of large irrigated 

areas downstream of new dams. 

This solution is ill-adapted to all regional 

configurations and entails significant capital 

requirements, which would limit the number of 

structures and hence the number of people affected. 

Light resurfacing 

of the roads to be 

rehabilitated. 

Repairing existing roads by 

lightly resurfacing the wearing 

course in place. 

The targeted areas will not be opened up on a 

sustainable basis due to numerous critical points 

and crossings that have not been repaired. The 

option of comprehensive rehabilitation, including 

all the critical areas, was therefore selected. 

2.3. Project Type  

PRECIS is an investment operation that is in line with a programmatic approach co-financed 

from various resources including those of TSF, OFID, GEF, GCF and IFAD. The Government 

of Niger has not yet fully committed itself to implementing projects and programmes through 

the sector-based approach, on account of several institutional constraints. The programme-

based co-financing approach is at this stage more advisable, since it guarantees the achievement 

of outcomes and ensures the effective and efficient use of the resources allocated to the project 

which will, in addition, capitalise on the Bank's achievements in Niger. 

2.4. Project Cost and Financing Arrangements 

2.4.1 The total project cost is estimated at UA 147.802 million (CFAF 119.450 billion), of 

which UA 34.620 million is in foreign exchange (CFAF 27.979 billion) and UA 113.181 

million in local currency (CFAF 91.470 billion). Customs duties and taxes have been accounted 

for and will be borne by the State which will take the necessary steps to ensure that this 

arrangement is adhered to. The foreign exchange portion constitutes 23.4% of the total cost and 

the local currency portion amounts to 76.6%. Contingencies have thus been estimated at UA 

14.647 million (CFAF 11.837 million). The project cost by component and by expenditure 

category is summarized in tables 2.3 and 2.4 below. 

  



 

6 

 

Table 2.3: Estimated Costs by Component  

COMPONENTS 
(CFAF ‘000) (CFAF ‘000) 

% F.E. 
L.C. F.E. Total L.C. F.E. Total 

COMPONENTS  
       

Agricultural development  34,479,121.6 12,114,286.0 46,593,407.6 42,662.8 14,989.6 57,652.4 26.0% 

Promotion of entrepreneurship  33,079,721.5 10,967,843.8 44,047,565.3 40,931.2 13,571.1 54,502.3 24.9% 

         

Project management  14,629,709.2 2,342,111.2 16,971,820.4 18,102.1 2,898.0 21,000.1 13.8% 

Sub-Total 82,188,552.4 25,424,241.0 107,612,793.3 101,696.1 31,458.7 133,154.8 23.6% 

CONTINGENCIES  - 
  - - -  

Physical contingencies  2,478,322.6 1,288,125.1 3,766,447.8 3,066.6 1,593.9 4,660.4 34.2% 

Financial contingencies  6,803,818.9 1,267,140.6 8,070,959.5 8,418.7 1,567.9 9,986.6 15.7% 

Sub-Total 9,282,141.5 2,555,265.8 11,837,407.3 11,485.3 3,161.8 14,647.0 
 

TOTAL  91,470,693.8 27,979,506.7 119,450,200.6 113,181.4 34,620.5 147,801.8 23.4% 

 

 

Table 2.4: Estimated Costs by Expenditure Category  

CATEGORIES 
CFAF Million UA Million 

% F.E. % 
L.C. F.E. Total L.C. F.E. Total 

Works 24,452.38 15,898.08 40,350.46 30.26 19.67 49.93 39.40% 33.8% 

Goods  8,894.71 2,933.36 11,828.07 11.01 3.63 14.64 24.80% 9.9% 

Services 27,935.26 6,766.93 34,702.19 34.57 8.37 42.94 19.50% 29.1% 

Credit and subsidies  10,519.48 0.00 10,519.48 13.02 - 13.02 0% 8.81% 

Operation 4,715.66 227.38 4,943.04 5.83 0.28 6.12 4.60% 4.1% 

Staff  5,269.57 0.00 5,269.57 6.52 - 6.52 0% 4.4% 

Base Cost  81,787.046 25,825.747 107,612.79 101.20 31.96 133.155 24.00% 90.1% 

Physical contingencies  2,478.32  1,288.13 3,766.45 3.54 1.12 4.66 34.20% 3.2% 

Price escalation  6,803.82 1,267.14 8,070.96 7.59 2.40 9.99 15.70% 6.8% 

TOTAL 91,069.19 28,381.01 119,450.20 112.33 35.47 147.80 23.76% 100% 

2.4.2 The project will be financed by the African Development Fund (ADF), through the 

TSF, jointly with four other technical and financial partners (IFAD, OFID, GEF and GCF), a 

private agricultural bank (BAGRI), the Government and the beneficiaries. The ADF 

contribution to PRECIS will amount to UA 25.859 million (CFAF 20.898 billion), accounting 

for 17.63% of the total project cost as shown in Table 2.5 below. 

Table 2.5: Financing Sources  

SOURCES 
CFAF Million UA Million 

% Total 
L.C. F.E.  Total L.C. F.E. Total 

ADF 14,106.09 6,792.85 20,898.935 17.45 8.41 25.859 17.50% 

IFAD 42,266.28 14,955.21 57,221.496 52.30 18.50 70.803 47.90% 

OFID 5,253.02 3,944.64 9,197.665 6.50 4.88 11.381 7.70% 

GEF 2,622.60 1,080.36 3,702.956 3.25 1.34 4.582 3.10% 

GCF 5,539.17 552.79 6,091.960 6.85 0.68 7.538 5.10% 

BAGRI 544.21 53.04 597.251 0.67 0.07 0.739 0.50% 

Govt.  18,275.88 0.00 18,275.881 22.61 - 22.614 15.30% 

BEN 2,883.59 580.47 3,464.056 3.57 0.72 4.286 2.90% 

TOTAL 91,490.84 27,959.36 119,450.200 113.21 34.60 147.802 100.00% 

  



 

7 

 

Table 2.6 – Expenditure Schedule by Component (in CFAF thousand) 
 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 T 

COMPONENTS         

C1. Agricultural 
Development  

1,766,410.8 9,666,755.5 17,651,318.3 11,277,214.1 5,010,803.4 1,220,905.5 46,593,407.6 

C2. Promotion of 
Entrepreneurship  

1,250,713.9 7,650,679.3 20,722,129.3 6,607,519.0 5,394,769.0 2,421,754.9 44,047,565.3 

C3. Project 

Management  
1,702,567.8 1,831,875.8 1,999,375.8 4,471,336.3 3,628,536.3 3,338,128.3 16,971,820.4 

Total Base Cost  4,719,692.56 19,149,310.53 40,372,823.35 22,356,069.45 14,034,108.70 6,980,788.71 107,612,793.31 

CONTINGENCIES         

Physical 

contingencies  
165,189.24 670,225.87 1,413,048.82 782,462.43 491,193.80 244,327.60 3,766,447.77 

Financial 

contingencies  
353,976.94 1,436,198.29 3,027,961.75 1,676,705.21 1,052,558.15 523,559.15 8,070,959.50 

Total Contingencies 519,166.18 2,106 424.16 4,441,010.57 2,459,167.64 1,543,751.96 767,886.76 11,837,407.26 

        

TOTAL 5,238,858.74 21,255,734.69 44,813,833.92 24,815,237.09 15,577,860.66 7,748,675.47 119,450,200.58 

2.4.3 Slightly more than two-thirds of the Bank's financing is allocated to the Agricultural 

Development and Resilience component, mainly for the extension and development of irrigated 

land. About 15.5% is devoted to the promotion of youth and women's entrepreneurship and 

9.4% to operating expenses. Physical contingences account for 3% and financial contingencies 

for 5.5%. 

For ADF financing, and considering the country's tight budgetary context, the Government will 

not be required to make any financial contribution, apart from granting exemptions. Given the 

specific character of this programme and the nature of the activities financed, the various TFPs 

have decided to finance the project on a parallel basis. 

2.5. Project Area and Beneficiaries  

2.5.1 In its entirety, PRECIS covers 186 municipalities located in the regions of Dosso, 

Tahoua, Maradi and Zinder (PRECIS-AfDB will not be involved in the Dosso region), and will 

directly affect nearly 210,000 households, or approximately 1,470,000 people. The population 

of the neighbouring areas should also benefit indirectly from the momentum created by the 

Economic Development Pole (PDE) approach. The agro-socio-economic environment of the 

resident rural inhabitants is characterised by a low rate of access to support and development 

infrastructure, especially roads, shops and other infrastructure for processing and for promoting 

rural entrepreneurship, required to stabilise young people, ease the chores of women and reduce 

their economic vulnerability in the regions concerned. 

2.5.2 PRECIS will target more specifically: (i) sedentary small farmers engaged in cereal 

production (maize, sorghum, millet), rice farming in the Dosso region, market gardening, 

poultry farming and small-scale stockbreeding; (ii) employed or unemployed young men and 

women (18 to 35 years old) who wish to set up their own micro and small enterprises in the 

various selected sub-sectors; (iii) women farmers or women wishing to carry out income-

generating activities; (iv) actors upstream and downstream of the production chain, engaged in 

related trades and in service provision; (v) professional organizations (grassroots groups, 

cooperatives, unions and federations); (vi) vulnerable farming households that are motivated 

and wish to enlarge and develop their farms; and (vii) persons with disabilities in rural areas 



 

8 

 

who participate or intend to participate in activities along the selected value chains. PRECIS 

aims ultimately to achieve gender parity by ensuring that women (youth and adults) make up 

50% of project beneficiaries and that at least 30% of Rural Young Enterprises (RYEs) set up 

and/or strengthened are women-owned. 

2.6. Participatory Approach to Project Identification, Design and Implementation 

2.6.1 The project is the result of a participatory and inclusive approach that involves all 

stakeholders: technical services, producers' organisations, women/youth groups, civil society, 

the private sector, TFPs and projects, etc. These broad consultations, which took place at all the 

formulation and evaluation stages, focused particularly on the criteria for choosing operation 

sites, the prospects for developing the value chains of profitable sub-sectors, the opportunities 

for promoting youth employment and entrepreneurship and their financing mechanisms, the 

lessons derived from previous similar projects, the shortcomings noted during the 

implementation of the projects, the main PRECIS intervention guidelines and strategies, the 

role of various actors in the new project context and the operating methods for ensuring proper 

implementation of the project, and the opinions and recommendations of key players.  

2.6.2 The project design was based on experience gained from carrying out or having carried 

out operations on the ground (PMERSA, ProDAF), and conducted in close collaboration with 

rural communities and local stakeholders. The activities identified are the result of ongoing 

consultations conducted during implementation and take into account the needs expressed by 

the population, civil society (including women), partner NGOs, producers and development 

partners. During project preparation, IFAD and the Bank carried out numerous field visits to 

potential intervention sites and to sites where projects have already been implemented. These 

visits offered an opportunity to have discussions with the communities concerned in order to 

better identify the difficulties facing them and to define the priority interventions to be carried 

out. The implementation mechanisms planned at the regional level will enable this inclusive 

approach to be continued during the implementation phase. 

2.7. Consideration of the Bank's Experience and Lessons in the Project Design 

For more than 20 years, the Bank has accumulated special experience in Niger in the area of 

water harnessing and natural resource protection. Indeed, it has financed about a dozen studies 

and projects (PMET Tahoua, PADAZ Zinder, PADL Diffa, PVDT Dosso-Tillaberi, PMERSA-

MTZ, PROMOVARE, PDIPC, P2RS, etc.) targeted at the regions, and which have improved 

the living conditions of men and women in rural areas, while developing technical and 

organisational approaches tailored to local contexts. In particular, the PMERSA-MTZ project, 

worth UA 30.36 million, was concluded in September 2019, and its completion report, 

produced in November 2019, showed satisfactory outcomes with a rating of 3 out of 4. The 

design of the current project will incorporate lessons from the implementation of Bank portfolio 

projects in Niger, particularly in the agricultural sector, as well as those of TFPs, including 

IFAD. Overall, the main generic lessons derived from the implementation of water harnessing 

projects in Niger may be summarised as follows:  

 

  



 

9 

 

 

Commitments  Arrangements Adopted for PRECIS 

Delays in the start-up of initial works: For 

irrigation infrastructure projects, there are 

often significant delays in the start-up of 
works due to the non-availability of final 

design studies (FDS) and bidding documents 

(BDs). 

- Majority of existing FDS and BDs. Use of existing FDS and 

BDs already produced by PRODAF, PMERSA and DGGR;  

- Launching of the maximum number of procurements during 
years 1 and 2, including for major works; 

- Recruitment of an additional water resource management 

expert for the "water harnessing" component. 

Delays and bottlenecks encountered in the 

procurement process: The lengthy timeframes 

for the appraisal of procurement files, 

involving various parties (PMU, Bank, Govt., 

etc.), are often the cause of delays and have an 

impact on compliance with the schedule. 

- Quality in the preparation of BDs; 

- Strengthening of qualified staff at CENRAT; 

- Implementation of the recent circular prohibiting double ex-

ante controls (Govt. and AfDB); 

- Close monitoring of the validation and signing processes 

(posting of dedicated staff); and 

- Conduct of ex-post reviews/audits. 

Overall weakness and failure of enterprises: 

Irrigation projects in Niger are hampered by 

the low technical, organisational and financial 
capacity of enterprises, which makes it 

difficult to carry out works on time and in 

accordance with the required standards. 

- Quality of specifications in BDs; 

- Choice of suitable allotments; 

- Stringency in the procurement process; need to verify the 
actual experience of the companies and the projects they have 

previously implemented; 

- Adoption of a system for the close monitoring of works, 

involving qualified technicians; and 

- Capacity-building activities (companies; oversight offices,  

 and technical services). 

Difficulties in assuming responsibility for 

management and maintenance: Beneficiaries 

often find it difficult to ensure the proper 

management and maintenance of the 

infrastructure provided, and to meet operating 

costs. 

- Involvement of the communes and beneficiaries at all stages, 

including requiring financial and/or physical contributions 

from beneficiaries; 

- Setting up and training of representative and empowered 

structures in charge of management; 

- Capacity building and support for management structures; 

- Introduction of a water pricing system; and 

- Use of solar energy whenever possible to limit operating 

costs. 

2.8. Key Performance Indicators 

The monitoring and evaluation mechanism of the TSF financing will be part of the overall 

framework of the PRECIS mechanism, which is itself based on the existing PRoDAF 

mechanism. This system has a consolidator at central level (CENRAT), and M&E managers at 



 

10 

 

regional level supported by assistants. The mechanism is supported by a computerised system, 

with on-line information at regional level that geo-localises all the interventions. It is possible 

to filter requests by funding source. The system is based on permanent internal monitoring and 

periodic internal and external evaluations. Information is regularly collected and analysed, 

notably on: (i) progress towards the expected outcomes as set out in the project's logical 

framework, with the possibility of isolating those of TSF funding, and the performance of the 

actors involved in the implementation of activities; (ii) the recording and assessment of the 

effective involvement of beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender, at various stages of 

implementation; (iii) the attention given to cross-cutting aspects, nutrition, gender, youth, 

climate change, and fragility/vulnerability; and (iv) the effects and impacts of the project on 

beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender, through various types of surveys. A baseline study will 

be carried out at the start of the PRECIS to establish the values of the quantitative and qualitative 

indicators by region. The main indicators monitored, relating to TSF financing, will concern 

the number of water harnessing structures built, the areas benefiting from irrigation (hectares), 

the number of kilometres of roads rehabilitated, the number of jobs and micro-enterprises 

created, with special focus on the situation of young people and women, the number of young 

people supported, production levels (tonnes) and crop yields (t/ha) in the project area. 

III.  PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1. Economic and Financial Performance 

Table 3.1: Key Economic and Financial Data 

NPV (baseline scenario) USD 102 million  

IRR (baseline scenario) 17.3 % 

ERR (baseline scenario) 18.8 %` 

3.1.1 The economic and financial analysis of PRECIS was conducted from the standpoint 

of national interest and covers the entire programme in calculating the overall return on the 

investments to be made. The analysis is based on the following assumptions: (i) a 20-year 

lifespan for the project, (ii) an opportunity rate of 10% was used to reflect the opportunity cost 

of capital in Niger, (iii) the analysis was done in constant prices and the economic benefits were 

expressed in constant values, and (iv) the supplementary agricultural production of farmers 

(millet, sorghum, cowpea, onions, cabbages, etc.) was enhanced. Crop budgets as calculated in 

the financial analysis were transformed into economic budgets by taking into account the 

economic prices (obtained using the benchmark price method) of outputs and inputs, and by 

eliminating financial costs. The detailed assumptions of the financial and economic analysis, 

the operating model tables (the baseline situation and the situation with project) and the 

financial and economic flows are recorded in Annex B7 of Volume 2. The results of the 

financial and economic analysis show that PRECIS is financially and economically viable. 

3.1.2 Financial performance: The analysis of financial return was based on the results 

produced by ProDAF's updated Economic and Financial Analysis system. For the main 

products, the results obtained suggest a satisfactory financial return for all production models. 

For market gardening, the internal rate of return (IRR) of the production models is between 

11.9% and 36%. For rain-fed cereal production (millet, sorghum and cowpea), gross margins 

are established according to the combinations between CFAF 14,000/ha and CFAF 85,000/ha, 

for IRRs of between 12% and 33%. In the case of micro-enterprises in the animal sector, gross 

margins are estimated at CFAF 58,000 (family chicken farming), CFAF 205,000 (family guinea 



 

11 

 

fowl farming), CFAF 1,033,000 (goat farming), and CFAF 1,860,000 (poultry marketing). The 

financial analysis also shows that specific youth activities offer opportunities for wealth and 

employment creation in rural areas. The following financial margins were thus recorded for the 

main activities (in CFAF million): 2.9 for meat grilling, 1.3 to 4 for onion conservation, 3 for 

egg production, 2 for bourgou production from two hectares of land, etc. 

3.1.3 Economic performance: On the basis of the adopted assumptions, the project's 

overall economic rate of return (ERR) is 18.9% and the net present value (NPV) of the net 

economic cash flow generated by PRECIS will be USD 102 million, which is a satisfactory 

result. A sensitivity analysis was carried out to test the ERR variation on the assumption of: (i) 

a 10% reduction/increase in costs and a 10% reduction/increase in profits, (ii) a variation in the 

survival rate of Rural Micro-Enterprises (RMEs), and (iii) a reduction in the size of the areas 

developed for irrigated crops. The results show that the ERR is sensitive to an increase in profits 

linked to an improvement in selling prices. In all cases, the ERR remains above the 10% 

opportunity rate. The other economic impacts of the project also concern the upstream effects 

of additional income generation on service providers (NGOs, enterprises, suppliers, 

consultancy firms, etc.), and the downstream effects of additional income generation on 

producers, traders and those engaged in processing, who are women for the most part. For 

households, the benefits of the project will include improved nutrition for vulnerable groups 

(children, women of childbearing age and the elderly), reduced medical bills, reduced hardship 

for agricultural workers, especially women, reduced incidence of monetary and non-monetary 

poverty, enhanced livelihoods and strengthened resilience to food insecurity and the effects of 

climate change for those targeted by PRECIS. 

3.2. Environmental and Social Impact 

3.2.1 Environment: PRECIS is classified in environmental and social category 1, in 

accordance with Niger's environmental and social assessment regulations and the Bank's 

Integrated Safeguard System. The prepared Environmental and Social Management Framework 

(ESMF) and the Pest and Pesticides Management Plan (PPMP) were reviewed and approved 

by the Bank, prior to their publication by the Borrower on 15 May 2020, and then by the Bank 

on 27 May 2020 following the Borrower's authorization of 25 May 2020. The Bank has 

ascertained that public consultations were duly held by the Borrower and the minutes thereof 

are annexed to the safeguard instruments that were prepared. 

The expected positive impacts are: (i) water control and land restoration; (ii) the preservation 

of pools of great biological interest; (iii) improved soil productivity; and (iv) decreased water 

erosion and land degradation within and downstream of developed areas. However, the 

following major and moderate adverse risks and impacts are expected: (i) bacteriological and 

physio-chemical pollution due to the increased use of agricultural inputs (chemical fertilisers 

and pesticides), coupled with the misuse of phyto-sanitary products; (ii) over-exploitation of 

wood for the construction of dead hedges around plots following their development for 

irrigation purposes; and (iii) outbreaks of waterborne diseases and cases of poisoning, etc. To 

address these risks and adverse impacts, environmental safeguard instruments that have been 

developed: (i) specify the procedure for ensuring the environmental and social management of 

project activities, and (ii) outline the environmental surveillance and monitoring programme as 

well as the arrangements for implementing safeguard measures, including the preparation of 

ESIAs/ESMPs and the conduct of audits during project implementation. 

  



 

12 

 

3.2.2 Social: A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) developed pursuant to Decree No. 

2019-027/PRN/MESU/DD of 11 January 2019 was reviewed and approved by the Bank and 

published on the same dates as the ESMF and PMP.3.2.6. In terms of benefits, the project will 

directly affect nearly 210,000 households, or approximately 1,470,000 people. However, the 

potential social risks and impacts, ranging from major and moderate, are: (i) encroachment on 

the landed property of certain households during the construction of water control infrastructure 

(dams), irrigation facilities, market infrastructure and rural roads, etc.; (ii) land conflicts due to 

irrigation facilities (irrigated areas, various reservoirs, etc.), which will lead to a rapid surge in 

the value of land; and (iii) conflicts between farmers and herdsmen. 

The budget for the implementation of safeguard instruments is estimated at CFAF 612,000,000. 

To that, should be added the sum of CFAF 100,000,000 for the compensation of project-

affected persons (PAPs) in anticipation of the construction of water harnessing infrastructure 

and irrigation development works.  

At the institutional level, the National Representation and Technical Assistance Unit 

(CENRAT), which serves as the Project Implementation Unit, has a social safeguard specialist, 

and the process to recruit an IFAD-financed environmental safeguard and climate change 

specialist is under way. As far as Regional Project Management Units (RPMUs) are concerned, 

the recruitment of four environmental and social safeguard experts is planned, two of whom 

will be financed by the AfDB and the other two by IFAD. 

3.2.3 Climate change and green growth: The project is classified in Category 2 according 

to the Bank's climate information system. The project is therefore vulnerable to the impacts of 

climate change as it is located in the Sahel, a region highly sensitive to climate change. Niger 

is a country that is extremely vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. The ND-GAIN 

climate vulnerability index ranks Niger as the second most vulnerable country in the world to 

climate change after Somalia. Niger's climate has become increasingly arid, with a sharp decline 

in rainfall and an increase in temperatures in recent decades. A more intense variability of 

Niger's climate is projected by 2050, characterized by higher risks of aridity, according to the 

dry scenario (a sharp drop in rainfall and rising temperatures), or by excessive humidity, 

according to the wet scenario. With regard to climate risks, the models indicate a predominance 

of droughts, heat waves, an upsurge in extreme wet events and locust invasions. Project 

operations may therefore be severely affected by climate change. The main climate risks that 

may affect the project outcomes are droughts, floods, increasing temperatures and irregular 

rainfall. The project as a whole aims to reduce climate vulnerability and strengthen the 

resilience of small-scale farmers to water scarcity and droughts through the harnessing and 

control of water, the development of small irrigation areas with solar-powered dewatering 

systems, agricultural diversification, improving access to climate-resilient seeds for family 

farmers, supporting the production, dissemination and use of climate information and services, 

as well as promoting youth agricultural entrepreneurship and market access. The reclamation 

of degraded agricultural land, watershed management and erosion control will also help to 

foster the long-term resilience of farmers to flood risks and water scarcity and ensure the 

sustainability of food production systems in Niger. The project will also contribute to climate 

change forecasting by producing and disseminating meteorological information to 

prevent/anticipate climatic shocks.  

3.2.4 Gender: Niger ranks 157th out of 189 countries on the gender inequality index of the 

2016 Human Development Report. This poor ranking is due to the persistence of gender 

discrimination and inequality in Niger, which causes enormous economic and social losses for 

the country. The loss of income associated with gender inequality was estimated in 2015 by the 



 

13 

 

IMF at 32% of GDP. Female-headed households are more severely affected by food insecurity 

at 59.4%, compared with 38.2% of male-headed households.  

To address the shortcomings hindering gender equality, the initiatives undertaken during the 

implementation of the IFAD-funded PRoDAF programme will be continued and strengthened 

within the context of PRECIS. These include, in particular: (i) improving the resilience of the 

most vulnerable households through the establishment of women's granaries; (ii) improving 

food, nutrition and hygiene practices in households; (iii) supporting the development of income-

generating activities for women and young people in the agricultural, pastoral, poultry and craft 

sectors; (iv) ensuring information, education, communication and advocacy for a change in 

behaviour that should lead to equitable access to productive resources for women and young 

people; (v) building the entrepreneurial capacity of women and young people by means of 

functional literacy training, institutional and organisational development of women's groups, 

study tours and training in self-employment through women's centres; (vi) providing chores-

easing equipment (grinding mills, boreholes, processing units, improved stoves, etc.) for 

women in the villages covered by the project; (vii) recruiting local assistants to organise and 

rally women's and youth groups around the structures built; and (viii) developing a gender 

strategy specific to PRECIS, drawing on the experience gained from implementing ProDAF.  

The project has thus been classified in category 2 of the Bank's gender marker system. The 

budget allocated more specifically to gender promotion and women's economic empowerment 

activities is estimated at UA 6 million. 

IV.  IMPLEMENTATION  

4.1. Implementation Arrangements  

4.1.1 Implementation modalities: PRECIS will be under the technical supervision of the 

Ministry in charge of Agriculture. It will be coordinated by the National Representation and 

Technical Assistance Unit (CENRAT), whose fiduciary and technical capacities were assessed 

and deemed acceptable by the Bank. Two orders, respectively designating CENRAT as the 

management and coordination unit for TSF financing and the Senior National Technical 

Assistant in charge of Policy Dialogue as Project Coordinator, will be signed by the Minister 

of Agriculture and Livestock. The signing of these two orders will constitute a condition 

precedent to project implementation. The current Steering Committee of ProDAF will also 

serve as the Steering Committee of PRECIS. Establishment Order No. xxxxx will be revised to 

accommodate the actors that are not yet included, in order to ensure the consistency of the 

operations and facilitate work coordination. This committee shall meet twice a year, and as 

many times as necessary, to review project outcomes, validate financial statements, discuss 

programmes and approve related budgets. To ensure implementation of the project, the current 

ProDAF mechanism, operating in the regions of Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder, will be used after 

adjustment to the specific context of PRECIS (for more details, see the current ProDAF 

mechanism in Annex C1). The project’s management will thus benefit from the various existing 

mechanisms relating to coordination, financial management, procurement, monitoring and 

evaluation, communication, etc. (for more details, see the current ProDAF mechanism in Annex 

C1). An assessment of the various existing mechanisms indicates that it should be relatively 

easy to adapt the current systems to the addition of a new source of financing and also to the 

requirements of the Bank, especially its rules and procedures.  

  



 

14 

 

To support the implementation of AfDB financing, additional staff will be recruited, funded 

with TSF resources. The additional staff should include: (i) one (1) resource management (RM) 

expert embedded in CENRAT to coordinate the "water harnessing" component; he/she will also 

specifically ensure the monitoring of all AfDB financing activities, focused on structuring 

works; (ii) two (2) environmental protection and social safeguard experts, who will be added to 

the two other IFAD-supported experts; (iii) one (1) procurement expert within CENRAT, in 

charge of the preparation and close monitoring of procurement files for Bank-financed 

operations; (iv) one (1) senior accountant specifically in charge of processing TSF financing 

accounts, under the responsibility of the CENRAT Administrative and Financial Manager 

(AFM); (v) two (2) "Youth Entrepreneurship" assistants who will be under the responsibility of 

the RPMU component manager and will maintain close working relations with the National 

Technical Assistant of CENRAT; three (3) accounting assistants under the responsibility of the 

AFMs of the Regional Project Management Units (RPMUs) in Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder; ten 

(10) local development assistants (LDAs), including six for the Agricultural Council and four 

for monitoring and evaluation. Of these 10 LDAs, 9 will be assigned to RPMUs and only 1 to 

CENRAT to strengthen the monitoring and evaluation team. These LDAs will be equipped with 

motorbikes and will be added to the water harnessing assistants already in place. They will be 

distributed in each region, according to the areas of concentration of the work in progress. 

Special attention will be paid to gender parity in the staff recruitment, given that mixed teams 

will be more efficient. 

4.1.2 Procurement: All goods, works and consulting services financed with Bank resources 

will be procured in accordance with the Procurement Policy for Bank Group-Financed 

Operations ("AfDB Financing Policy"), October 2015 edition, and in accordance with the 

provisions set out in the Financing Agreement. Pursuant to this policy, the country system was 

assessed in 2019 using the critical indicators assessment method defined by the Bank. Based 

on the findings of the assessment, the overall level of risk associated with the use of the country 

system for Bank-financed operations was deemed "Substantial" and certain procurements will 

be done following the country's procurement system ("National System") enshrined by law 

(Law No. 2011/037 of 28 October 2011 on the general principles, control and regulation of 

public procurement and public service delegations), decree (Decree No. 2016-641/PRN/PM of 

1 December 2016 establishing the Public Procurement Code and Public Service Delegations) 

and various implementing instruments, based on national standard bidding documents 

(NSBDs). 

Using the national system for part of the project will improve efficiency thanks to better 

ownership of the procurement system to be used by the executing agency. However, the Bank 

reserves the right to request the Borrower to revert to the use of the Bank's system if: (a) Niger's 

legal procurement framework happens to change to a system that is unsatisfactory to the Bank; 

(b) the executing agency fails to comply with the arrangements in force; or (c) the appropriate 

risk mitigation measures included in the risk assessment action plan that was made at the time 

of the project appraisal are not adhered to. The procurement risk mitigation action plan is 

annexed to Volume 2. 

4.1.3 Financial Management: The National Representation and Technical Assistance Unit 

(CENRAT), based in Niamey and placed under the supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture 

and Livestock, will be responsible for the administrative, financial and accounting management 

of the project. The activities will be carried out by three Regional Project Management Units 

(RPMUs) based in Maradi, Tahoua, Zinder.  

  



 

15 

 

CENRAT and the RPMUs have financial management staff with extensive experience in the 

accounting and financial management of development projects, and who are also familiar with 

most of the tools required for proper recording of financial operations, and for monitoring the 

financial execution of activities and accountability. Regarding the needs of PRECIS, the 

financial management staff in place will be strengthened through the recruitment of a senior 

accountant for CENRAT and an accounting assistant for each RPMU. The staff will also be 

trained in the Bank's financial management and disbursement rules and procedures at the launch 

of the project and in the use of the software.  

 

The budgetary management of PRECIS will be based on the existing mechanism in CENRAT 

and the RPMUs. The Project will continue to produce an annual work plan and budget (AWPB) 

that will incorporate the resources of the Bank as well as those of the national counterpart. It 

will be validated by the Steering Committee and submitted to the Bank for its no-objection 

before 31 December of the current year. The TOM2PRO software will be reconfigured to 

support PRECIS by allowing the Budget execution and the production of quarterly financial 

monitoring reports based on the implementation of the work plan and the annual budget, 

annexed to the quarterly progress reports transmitted to the Bank within 45 days following the 

end of each quarter.  

 

The accounting system will be private in nature and will be in conformity with the standards of 

the revised SYSCOHADA and based on the TOM2PRO software. It will make it possible to 

perform the three types of accounting (general, budgetary and analytical) and to produce annual 

financial statements which will be audited. 

 

Internal oversight is based on the existing procedures manual, but the manual will be revised 

and submitted to the Bank for its no-objection. The internal audit will be conducted by the 

internal auditor who will be recruited with IFAD funding. The General Finance Inspectorate 

(IGF) could provide support to the internal auditor, covering part of the project's internal audit 

activities. The administrative, accounting and financial procedures manual will be subject to 

the Bank's no-objection. 

 

Financial reporting will be based on consolidated quarterly financial monitoring reports which 

will be transmitted to the Bank no later than forty-five (45) days after the end of the quarter. 

The assessment of CENRAT's capacities is provided in detail in the technical annexes, as well 

as the financial management risk, which was assessed to be substantial. 

4.1.4 Disbursements: Three (3) payment methods will be used for the financial 

implementation of the project namely: (i) reimbursement, (ii) the special account, and (iii) direct 

payment. The special account method will be used to finance minor operating expenses, short 

training courses and miscellaneous expenses. A special account will be opened for this purpose 

with a commercial bank acceptable to the Bank. The opening of this account will be a condition 

precedent to first disbursement. This special account will be used to receive an initial advance, 

whose amount will be determined on the basis of the provisional operating budget for six 

months of project activity. The special account will be replenished on the same basis, after the 

borrower has justified at least 50% of the amount of the previous advance. The direct payment 

method will be used for disbursement for contracts relating to the goods, services and works 

categories. Training in the Bank's disbursement rules and procedures will be provided at the 

launch of the project. 

  



 

16 

 

4.1.5 Audits: In accordance with the general conditions applicable to the financing 

agreements of the African Development Fund, the country will be required account for the use 

of the resources allocated to it. An independent and competent external audit firm will therefore 

verify once a year the accuracy of the annual consolidated financial statements prepared by the 

project management team and assess the functioning of the internal oversight system of the 

entire project. It will be recruited by CENRAT on the basis of terms of reference previously 

agreed on with the Bank and in accordance with Bank rules and procedures. The audit contract 

will be for a maximum duration of three fiscal years, and the auditor will be required to submit 

his/her report no later than six (6) months after the end of the fiscal year to which the audit 

relates. The audit fees will not be paid in full unless the report is approved by the Bank. The 

auditor shall not be allowed to render services in respect of a year unless the services of the 

previous year were satisfactorily performed. 

 

The country will also be required to carry out an environmental and social performance audit 

on a yearly basis. To that end, an independent consultant will to be recruited to carry out that 

environmental and social audit. 

4.2. Monitoring  

4.2.1 Monitoring mechanisms: The monitoring and evaluation mechanism of 

PRECIS/AfDB will be part of the overall framework of the PRECIS mechanism, itself backed 

up by that of ProDAF, which is already in place. A baseline situation will be established at the 

start of the project to set the quantitative and qualitative values of the indicators selected for the 

logical framework. The M&E system is based on a continuous internal monitoring of selected 

activities with emphasis on the effects and changes brought about by the project's achievements. 

This system will be participatory and will involve the beneficiaries and actors of the project in 

the collection of data and information feedback from the field (difficulties encountered, possible 

risks and delays, etc.). Thematic surveys and external evaluations will be conducted in order to 

better assess issues relating to food security, nutrition, job creation, gender mainstreaming and 

aspects associated with resilience. External monitoring tasks, involving relevant line ministries, 

will also be regularly organised by the Government, in addition to the two annual supervision 

missions organised by the Bank and the close monitoring carried out by the Bank’s Country 

Office in Niger (CONE). Several participatory workshops will also be organised to enable local 

actors to evaluate by themselves the operations implemented. A mid-term review and a final 

evaluation are planned, involving the Bank and the Government, in order to allow for possible 

readjustments and capitalisation of achievements, respectively, accompanied by an evaluation 

of the Bank's contribution to outcomes on the ground. The monitoring and evaluation 

framework will systematically include gender-disaggregated data to ensure greater readability 

of the outcomes on women and vulnerable groups. A baseline study will be carried out at the 

start of PRECIS to establish the values of quantitative and qualitative indicators by region. The 

system in place currently has a consolidator at the central level (CENRAT), and M&E officers 

at regional level supported by assistants. The mechanism is supported by a computerised system 

that provides on-line information at regional level and geo-localises all operations. It is possible 

to filter requests by funding source. 

 

4.2.2 The following is a summary of the provisional project implementation schedule. 

  



 

17 

 

Activities     Date/Period   Responsible 

Preparation    November-December 2019  AfDB/Govt. 

Census FDS and sites   January-February 2020  DGGR/CENRAT 

Preparation ESMF, RPF and PPMP January -April 2020  CENRAT 

Appraisal     June-July 2020  AfDB/Govt. 

PRECIS negotiation   End-August 2020  Govt./AfDB 

Board of Directors   October 2020  AfDB/Govt. 

Signing of the Financing Agreement October 2020  AfDB/Govt. 

Effectiveness of 1st disbursement December 2020  Govt./AfDB 

Launch of PRECIS/AfDB  January 2021  AfDB/Govt./CENRAT 

Implementation of operational activities 2021-2025 CENRAT/Govt./Sce, Providers 

Construction of water harnessing structures 2021-2023   CENRAT/Enterprises 

Mid-term review 1st half 2023  AfDB/Govt./CENRAT 

Project closing date 3  1 December 2025  CENRAT/AfDB/Govt. 

Completion report   1st half 2026  AfDB/Govt. 

4.3. Governance 

The project falls within the framework of the Economic and Social Development Plan (PDES, 

2017-2021) which is founded on the strategy to ensure sustainable development and inclusive 

growth by 2035. Under this strategy, the country continues to work towards the consolidation 

of democratic institutions and the promotion of good governance. Niger has made significant 

strides in improving the overall governance framework in recent years and has finalized the 

establishment of all the institutions of the Republic, in accordance with the Constitution of 25 

November 2010. Niger is also in the process of implementing the National Justice and Human 

Rights Policy adopted in 2016, which led to the adoption in October 2017 of a bill on the 

organisation and jurisdiction of courts, aimed at improving public access to fair justice. With 

regard to combating corruption, the powers of the Supreme Authority to Combat Corruption 

and Related Offences (HALCIA) were strengthened in 2016 by law. According to Transparency 

International, Niger ranks 112th out of 180 countries. Niger has also been working on improving 

public finance governance for at least a decade. Accordingly, it adopted implementing 

instruments for the six WAEMU directives on public finance management; adopted a new 

customs code in line with community directives; delegated financial controls to the country's 

regional capitals; conducted the 2013 and 2014 public procurement audits; drafted and adopted 

a new public procurement code (in 2016); prepared implementing instruments and new BDs; 

and adopted and implemented a comprehensive public procurement capacity-building plan. 

Thus, the national procurement system is deemed to be largely compliant with international 

standards, even if certain provisions need to be strengthened, notably in order to (i) cap the 

proportion of direct agreement contracts at 15%; (ii) build the professional capacity of the actors 

involved in the procurement and contract execution process; and (iii) institute a policy to 

promote and strengthen the participation of national companies in competitive bidding. 

4.4. Sustainability  

4.4.1 Sustainability is a central concern for PRECIS. This is evident in the choice of 

transformative investments in socio-economic areas (Development Pole) that promote the 

transformation of production systems and the forging of strong links between various segments 

of the value chains of the main agro-pastoral sub-sectors. These transformative investments, 



 

18 

 

whose quality will be subject to ongoing control (works control and supervision and 

procurement audits), will be supplemented by technical and organisational capacity-building 

for beneficiaries. The emphasis placed on promoting youth entrepreneurship and women's 

empowerment will also be continued and scaled up beyond the project's financing period. 

4.4.2 The institutional structure of the project, the approach of outsourcing tasks to 

established institutions and the involvement of beneficiaries right from the planning to the 

operation stages (in the case of infrastructure) will guarantee the sustainability of PRECIS 

achievements after the project ends. Indeed, the PRECIS project is modelled on ProDAF, and 

stands to benefit from ProDAF staff who are already experienced in most of the implementation 

strategies, and also from ProDAF methods, tools and lessons, as well as from the availability 

of FDS on water harnessing structures; this will help to avoid the delays often experienced 

project commencement. Furthermore, this will help to ensure the rapid and timely deployment 

of all operations, thereby allowing sufficient time to support producers and to monitor the 

capitalisation and the strengthening of gains by the beneficiaries. Following the example of 

ProDAF and PMERSA, PRECIS will help to build the capacities of established entities with 

which it will collaborate during implementation (STC, STD, NGOs, RECA, CRA, POs, etc.). 

This will help to strengthen them and to provide them with the resources required to continue 

monitoring the activities entrusted to them after the end of the partnerships.  

4.4.3 Regarding the implementation strategy, the civil and social engineering duo will 

promote greater ownership by the beneficiaries and their empowerment. Thus, many of the 

project activities will contribute to its sustainability, especially in terms of securing land tenure, 

supporting the organisation of beneficiaries and introducing management tools to ensure better 

maintenance and coverage of recurrent infrastructure costs (water harnessing works, irrigation 

development works, markets, shops, farm-to-market roads, etc.), and strengthening of the 

organisation of producers. In addition, the activities included in the components relating to the 

promotion of rural entrepreneurship, processing and market access, will generate value-added 

and create wealth, thereby contributing to ownership of the project's achievements by the direct 

beneficiaries. With regard to the entrepreneurship component, the exit strategy will be based on 

the establishment of business development service (SDE) providers and building their capacity 

so that they can set up their own businesses. 

4.5. Risk Management  

The potential risks identified in PRECIS implementation and their mitigation measures are 

summarised in the table below: 

 

Risks Mitigation Measures 

Worsening of security conditions, 

particularly in localities of the 

northern part of Tahoua 

-Targeting of areas currently without security problems; 

-Political commitment of the authorities and support from regional 

actors and the international community; 

-An outsourcing approach that is reliant on local economic and civil 

society actors; and 

-Integration of pastoral water projects in the North. 

The sometimes protracted delays in 

procurement procedures, which 
undermine the capacity to absorb 

available funding; 

-Anticipation of procurement operations thanks to the existing 

agencies and the availability of BDs; 

-Decentralisation of part of the procurement process to the regions; 

and 

 



 

19 

 

-Recruitment of a procurement assistant to follow up the files at the 

Ministry. 

Unfavourable environmental and 

climatic conditions in the Sahel 

region, which could lead to 

decapitalisation of the most 

vulnerable groups during severe 

crises 

- Development and implementation of environmental and social 

safeguard instruments (ESMF, RPF, PPMP, ESIA/ESMP, RAP); 

-Planned water harnessing activities; and  

-Specific attention to vulnerable groups. 

Socio-cultural barriers that do not 

always favour the access of women 
and young people to factors of 

production 

-A proactive approach of the project and specific activities carried 

out in favour of women and young people; and 

-Addressing land tenure issues through an agreement with the Rural 

Code Secretariat and support for grassroots land commissions 

(COFOB and COFOCOM). 

Difficulties relating to ownership and 

management of the new areas by the 

communities 

- Training and structuring activities; 

- Organisation of exchange visits; and 

- Ongoing support of beneficiaries. 

Lack of interest among young people  

(18-24 years of age) 

- Conduct of communication, information and awareness-raising 

activities for young people; and 

- Continuous mentoring and support for young people and the most 

vulnerable groups. 

4.6. Knowledge-Building  

PRECIS activities that will lead to better knowledge management and development may be 

summarised as follows: (i) strengthening of local expertise in terms of resilience and the 

capacity of local communities to adapt to the recurrent effects of climate change, through 

irrigation development and better control and management of water resources; (ii) 

dissemination of new production and processing technologies: development of expertise in 

localised irrigation techniques at the individual level, promotion of appropriate crop sequencing 

techniques for the Sahel region, dissemination/extension of assisted natural regeneration 

(ANR), promotion of improved stoves made from local materials, etc.; (iii) setting up of 

demonstration units and dissemination of best practices: farmer field schools (FFS) and small 

livestock innovation demonstration units (DIPE) which will help to disseminate knowledge and 

improve productivity and yields, integrated soil fertility management (ISFM), sustainable land 

and water management (SLWM), and integrated predator and pest management (IPPM) which 

will enable the protection and preservation of resources and help to mitigate the vulnerability 

of soil resources; (iv) organisation of production and processing technology review workshops 

and exchange visits, as tools for interaction between researchers, support and extension agents 

and producers with a view to adapting technologies to the local context; (v) awareness-raising 

and dissemination of information, through various communication channels (community radio, 

media programmes, website, films, etc.), aimed at promoting the use of these technologies in 

water resource management; (vi) strengthening of women's leadership and economic 

empowerment, supported by a commitment to policy dialogue with the ministries concerned, 

with a view to greater implementation of policies that promote gender equality; and (vii) 

promotion of innovative activities to improve the employability of young people and women, 

and the development of rural micro and small enterprises, through targeted support and 

customized assistance. 

  



 

20 

 

V.  LEGAL FRAMEWORK  

5.1. Legal Instrument 

The project's legal framework will be a TSF Grant Protocol Agreement between the Republic 

of Niger (the "Donee") and the Bank and the Fund, as TSF administrators (the Bank and the 

Fund are hereinafter collectively referred to as the "Fund"). 

5.2. Conditions Associated with the Bank’s and the Fund’s Intervention  

5.2.1 The Grant Protocol Agreement shall become effective on the date of its signature by 

the parties, in accordance with Section 10.01 of the General Conditions Applicable to Grant 

Protocol Agreements of the Fund. 

5.2.2 In addition to the effectiveness of the Grant Agreement, the first disbursement of the 

TSF Grant will be subject to fulfilment by the Donee, to the satisfaction of the Fund, of the 

following conditions: 

(a) submission of [the ministerial order(s)] confirming (i) the designation of 
CENRAT as the Project Coordination Unit ("PCU"); and (ii) the appointment of 

the Senior National Technical Assistant in charge of Policy Dialogue as the PCU 

Coordinator; 

 

(b) submission of evidence of the recruitment within the PCU of (i) one (1) 
environmental and social safeguards expert; (ii) an accountant; and (iii) a 

procurement expert; whose respective qualifications and terms of reference will 

have been previously approved by the Fund; 

 

(c) submission of evidence deemed satisfactory by the Fund, on form and substance, 
of the configuration of the integrated TOM2PRO software allowing the 

Executing Agency to ensure the keeping of accounts for the Project. 

5.2.3 Conditions precedent to disbursements for works involving resettlement: Subject 

to the arrangements relating to effectiveness of the Protocol Agreement and the conditions 

precedent to first disbursement above, the Fund's obligation to disburse grant resources for 

works involving an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a 

Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) shall be contingent upon fulfilment by the Donee of the 

following additional conditions: 

(a) submission, for the site concerned, of an Environmental and Social Impact 
Assessment (ESIA), an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 

and a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the works, prepared in accordance 

with the ESMF, the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPC), and the Fund's 

Safeguards Policies, and satisfactory to the Fund in both substance and form;  

(b) submission of satisfactory evidence that all project-affected persons (PAPs) in 
the works area have been compensated and/or resettled in accordance with the 

Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) developed for a specific 

site, the RAP developed for a specific site, the developed works and 

compensation schedule, and the Fund's Safeguard Policies, prior to the start of 

such works and, in any event, prior to the displacement of the PAPs and/or 

appropriation of their land and/or related property; or 



 

21 

 

(c) in lieu of paragraphs (b) above, submission of satisfactory evidence that 
resources allocated for PAP compensation and/or resettlement have been 

deposited in a dedicated account with a bank acceptable to the Fund or deposited 

with a trusted third party acceptable to the Fund, where the Donee can prove to 

the satisfaction of the Fund that the compensation and/or resettlement of the 

PAPs, pursuant to paragraph (b) above, could not be fully or partially carried 

out, for the following reasons: 

(i) identification of PAPs by the Donee is neither feasible nor possible; 

(ii) there are ongoing disputes involving the PAPs and/or affecting the 
compensation and/or resettlement exercise; or 

(iii) any other reason beyond the control of the Donee as discussed and agreed 
with the Fund. 

5.2.4  Environmental and social safeguards: The Donee undertakes to: 

 

(a) implement the Project in accordance with the ESMP, RAP, the Work and 
Compensation Schedule, the Fund's Safeguard Policies and national legislation;  

(b) prepare and submit to the Fund, no later than fifteen (15) days following the 
period covered, quarterly reports on the implementation of the site-specific 

ESMP and the RAP;  

(c) refrain from any action that would prevent or hinder the implementation of the 
site-specific ESMP and RAP; 

(d) fully cooperate with the Fund in case the implementation of the project or any 
change in its scope leads to unforeseeable displacement and/or resettlement of 

people; and 

(e)  recruit on a competitive basis with the Fund's approval an independent external 
consultant to carry out an annual audit of the environmental and social 

performance of the project throughout its implementation period using the 

Fund's resources, in accordance with terms of reference previously deemed 

acceptable by the Fund. The annual audit report will be submitted to the Fund 

no later than 30 January of the year following the audited year. 

5.2.5 Other undertakings: The Donee undertakes to:  

(a) no later than six (6) months following the effectiveness of the Protocol of 
Agreement, recruit the independent auditor for the project. 

(b) no later than three (3) months following the first disbursement of the Grant 
resources: 

(i) update the administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual of 
the Executing Agency; and 

 



 

22 

 

(c) no later than six (6) months following the first disbursement of the Grant 
resources 

(i) recruit within each PMU (Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder) an assistant 
accountant, on a competitive basis; 

(ii) recruit, on a competitive basis and with the prior approval of the Fund, one 
(1) expert in environmental and social safeguard within the URGP of 

Maradi and one (1) expert in environmental and social safeguard within 

the URGP of Tahoua 

(iii) recruit within the PCU, on a competitive basis, the following experts: (A) 
one (1) Agricultural Engineering (AE) expert to monitor all project 

activities, focusing on structural works; (B) two (2) assistants specialised 

in youth entrepreneurship, placed under the responsibility of the RPMU 

component manager and who will work in close cooperation with the 

national technical assistant of CENRAT; (D) ten (10) local development 

assistants (LDAs), six (6) of whom will be tasked with agricultural 

extension and four (4) with monitoring and evaluation. Nine (9) local 

development assistants will be assigned to RPMUs; and one (1) to 

CENRAT to strengthen the monitoring and evaluation team.  

 

 (d) no later than twelve (12) months following the first disbursement of Grant  

                   resources: 

(i) elaborate and sign the conventions listed in Annex IV (Conventions) of the  
Memorandum of Understanding 

5.3. Compliance with Bank Policies 

This project complies with all applicable Bank policies. It will be implemented as part of the 

Bank's intervention strategy for Niger defined in the CSP (2018-2022). 

VI. Recommendation 

Management recommends that the Boards of Directors of the Bank and the Fund, acting as 

administrators of the Transition Support Facility (TSF), should approve the proposed award of 

a TSF grant of UA 25.859 million to the Republic of Niger, for the purpose and under the 

conditions set forth in this report. 

 

 



 





















































 
AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 

 

 
 
 

MAURITANIA 
 
 

AGRICULTURAL TRANSFORMATION SUPPORT PROJECT  
(PATAM) 

 
 

 
 

APPRAISAL REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Project Information Sheet 
Client Information 
BORROWER:   Islamic Republic of Mauritania  

(Ministry of Economy and Finance - MEF) 
 
EXECUTING AGENCY: Ministry of Rural Development - MRD  
 
Financing Plan 

Source Amount  Instrument 
ADF  UA 7.00 million. Loan 
NTF UA 6.00 million. Loan 
Mauritanian government UA 1.67 million. Treasury/Own resources 

TOTAL COST UA 14.67 million.  

 
Key AfDB Financial Information  
 

Item ADF loan NTF loan 
Loan currency Unit of Account (UA) Unit of Account (UA) 
Interest Type 1% NA 
Base rate NA NA 
Service commission 0.75% per year of the disbursed loan 

amount not reimbursed 
0.75% per year of the disbursed loan 
amount not reimbursed 

Commitment fee 0.50% per year on the non-disbursed 
and non-reimbursed portion of the loan, 
effective 120 days after signature of the 
Loan Agreement 

0.50% per year on the non-disbursed and 
non-reimbursed portion of the loan, 
effective 120 days after signature of the 
Loan Agreement 

Other Fees None None 
Maturity 30 years 20 years 
Grace period 5 years 7 years 

 
Timeframe – Main Milestones (expected) 

Concept Note approval July 2018 
Project appraisal July 2018 
Loan negotiations (ADF & NTF) 8-9 November  2018 
Project approval 12 December 2018 
Loan effectiveness (ADF & NTF) February 2019 
Project completion 31 December 2023 
Last disbursement 31 December 2024 

  



 

 iv 

Executive Summary 
 

I.  General Project Overview  

1.1  This project will support the upstream and downstream agricultural production subsectors in the 
Brakna-Ouest region. Its purpose is to improve food security and the living conditions of target 
communities through the inclusive and sustainable development of crop sectors. The Agricultural 
Transformation Support Project in Mauritania (PATAM) is fully consistent with the Accelerated Growth 
and Shared Prosperity Strategy (SCAPP) intended, among others, to consolidate the role of the agro-
pastoral sector and transform it into a source of economic diversification and growth. It is fully aligned 
with the Bank’s: (i) High 5s; (ii) the Ten-Year Strategy (2013-2022); (iii) the Feed Africa Strategy (2016-
2025); (iv) CSP 2016-2020 for Mauritania (Pillar 1 - Support for agricultural transformation); and (v) the 
Bank's flagship initiatives: Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT), Young 
Entrepreneurs (Enable Youth), Risk Sharing Facility (RSF), and Agro-industrial Processing Zones 
(APZ). The project will focus on the Brakna-Ouest region, considered a zone afflicted by extreme 
poverty (12 points higher than the national poverty rate), and will affect Trarza and Nouakchott 
regions when it is scaled up to promote: (a) value chains (support for the establishment of agro-
industrial processing zones; (b) youth1 and women's entrepreneurship (support for the establishment 
of an incubation structure): and (c) the establishment of guarantee funds for agricultural sector 
financing. 

1.2  The project will finance: (i) the establishment of the main irrigation infrastructure (vegetable 
farming areas for women on 200 ha and flood-recession farming areas on 3,300 ha); (ii) the promotion 
of value chains and of youth and women's entrepreneurship as well as the establishment of inclusive and 
innovative agricultural sector financing mechanisms (guarantee funds, agricultural insurance, etc.); and 
(iii) institutional capacity-building and project coordination. It will affect 6,700 households, with an 
estimated target population of 42,600 inhabitants (52% being women), with a predominance of 
smallholders considered to be the Bank's main target group. The project will cost MRU 743.37 million 
(i.e., new Ouguiya), equivalent to UA 14.67 million, over a five-year period (2019-2023) and will be 
financed by an ADF loan of UA 7 million and an NTF loan of UA 6 million. It is an excellent climate 
change adaptation project and constitutes support for the transition to inclusive and sustainable growth. 

II. Needs Assessment 

Efficient natural resource management has become an imperative in Mauritania, given the country’s 
severe exposure to the effects of climate change. Consequently, economic diversification is necessary to: 
(i) get the country out of its undiversified and relatively fragile economy, which is dependent on 
extractive industries (particularly iron) that account for four-fifths of total exports on average and 30% 
of total budget revenue; and (ii) mitigate the risks associated with the reduction in iron prices and boost 
the competitiveness of the agro-pastoral sector through inclusive and sustainable development. The 
project was initiated based on the conclusions of the high-level “Feed Africa” conference held in Dakar 
in October 2015, which recommended that particular attention be paid to supporting agricultural 
transformation in African countries. The needs stem from the logic of consolidating and building on the 
significant achievements recorded by the West Brakna Irrigation Scheme Project (PAHABO) and 
strengthening the transformative dimension (promotion of value chains by focusing on two key sectors: 
rice cultivation and market gardening). It was designed through a concerted systemic method that 
involves stakeholders and emphasises a participatory and integrated approach (PIA). 

  

                                                
1  The National Youth Policy defines youth as the population of men and women aged 12 to 30 years. The beneficiaries are young people - 

(women and men aged 12 to 30 years), as well as women of any age. 



 

 v 

III. Bank Value-added  

Cognisant of the successful results of PAHABO,1 the Government considers the African 
Development Bank Group as a multilateral donor capable of addressing sector issues related to the 
development of irrigation and agricultural production, value chain promotion, and advancement of 
youth and women's entrepreneurship, in addition to assisting the country to rally other development 
partners. This project is an extension of PAHABO. Moreover, it builds on the reforms initiated under 
Phases 1 and 2 of the Economic Reform and Diversification Support Programme (PAREDE-1 & 2) and 
complements the PAFEJ and PAMPEJ projects. Lastly, PAHABO was awarded the High-5 Award (Feed 
Africa) at the Bank's annual meetings held in India in May 2017. The best practice developed under this 
programme will be replicated and the lessons learned have been factored into PATAM’s design. 

IV. Knowledge Management  

The project will help to strengthen the Bank's innovative operations in the agricultural and rural sector. 
It will help to modernise irrigation systems, promote agricultural transformation and value chains, 
develop youth and women's entrepreneurship, set up innovative and inclusive financing, and disseminate 
the requisite technical and organisational knowledge (use of the various information systems to be set up, 
agricultural advisory, etc.) to its stakeholders. Hence, the contribution through the TAAT initiative will 
be highly useful. The dissemination of smart agricultural technologies and practices to adapt to climate 
change and the guidance of farmers to improve market access will equally be relevant. These operations 
will build the capacity of institutional stakeholders such as administrative entities as well as inter-
professional and beneficiary organisations (water users' associations, rice cooperatives, women's 
vegetable farming cooperatives, EIGs, etc.). The knowledge generated will be disseminated to Mauritania 
and Bank structures through their respective websites, monitoring/evaluation, supervision, midterm 
review and completion reports, etc. Interactions with the African Digital Financial Inclusion (ADFI) have 
also been initiated to achieve innovative solutions aimed at promoting smart agriculture. 

                                                
1  The return of more than 1500 households to the project area is one of the key indicators of the project's success.  



 

 
 

vi 

PRELIMINARY RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 

Country and Project Title: MAURITANIA - AGRICULTURAL TRANSFORMATION SUPPORT PROJECT (PATAM) 
Project Goal: Contribute to the improvement of food security and the living conditions of the target communities through inclusive development and sustainable agricultural subsectors. 

 

RESULTS CHAIN 

PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 
MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 
RISKS/ 

MITIGATION MEASURES Indicators  
Baseline 
Situation 

(2017) 
Target 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

1. Impact: Long-term Impacts 
Improved food security and living 
conditions of target communities  

Improvement of the nutritional status  
 
 
Reduction of the poverty rate in the project area 
 
Reduction in imports of food products (cereals and 
vegetables) in tons 

2,283 Kcal 
 
 

43.3 %  
(EPCV, 2014) 

 
712.850 

(ASYCUDA, 2017) 

Daily calorie intake per adult rises from 2,283 
(2017) to 2,900 by 2030 
 
Reduce the poverty rate in Brakna-Ouest to 40% in 
2023 and to 35% by 2030 
 
Reduce imports by 10% in 2023 and 20% by 2030 

Statistical reports 
MEF, MY and ME 
reports 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S 

2. Outcomes: Medium-Term 
Outcomes 
Incrased and enhanced 
agricultural output  
 
 
 
 
 
Additional jobs created 
 
Increased income per household  

Contribution to the increase in the acreage of 
efficiently managed irrigation and flood-recession 
farming areas 
 
Cereal output from irrigation farming t/ha (rice & 
wheat) 
Flood-recession farming output t/ha (sorghum, maize) 
Vegetable farming output t/ha (sorghum, maize) 
 
Increased storage capacity for vegetable products 
 
Number of additional jobs created 
 
Improvement of annual income per household 

4,000 ha 
5,000 ha 

 
 

4.3; 2.6 
 

0.44; 0.5  
12; 15  

 
0 
 
0 
 

MRU 51,400 

4,200 ha of irrigation farming areas and 8,300 ha of 
flood-recession farming areas effectively managed 
in 2023 
 
Improve yields by 2023 by at least 30%  
 
 
 
 
360 t/year of packaged vegetable products by 2023   
 
2,200 jobs created in 2023 (40% for women). 
 
Improve the average income per household by at 
least 20% in 2023. 

Statistical reports 
MEF, MY and ME 
reports 

Risks: 

(i) Insufficient capacity for inter-sector coordination at 
the national level and consultation at the local level 

(ii) Recurrent climatic hazards and droughts 

 

Mitigation Measures: 

(i) Establishment of a strategic national steering 
committee and a local consultative committee (LCC)  

(ii) Dissemination of technologies and resilient seeds, 
and guidance of farmers to ensure that they factor 
climate information into the management of agricultural 
activities. 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S 

COMPONENT 1: Transformative irrigation schemes  
3. Outcomes: Short-Term 
Outputs 
3.1.1 Construction works 
executed 
 
3.1.2 Agro-pastoral ecosystem 
restored in the project area 

Construction of a dike track  
Construction of recessed water basins 
Vegetable farming areas for women (VFW) 
 
 
Number of ha of regenerated pastureland 

62 km degraded 
0 
0 
 
 
0 

62 km of dike tracks constructed in 2023 
3,300 ha of basins developed in 2023 
VFWs established on 200 ha of land in 2023 
 
 
At least 600 ha of pastureland regenerated in 2023 

Control Office’s 
monitoring and works 
supervision reports  
 
 
Project progress reports  

COMPONENT 2: Promotion of value chains, youth and women’s entrepreneurship 



 

 
 

vii 

RESULTS CHAIN 

PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 
MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 
RISKS/ 

MITIGATION MEASURES Indicators  
Baseline 
Situation 

(2017) 
Target 

3.2.1. Agricultural value chains 
developed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3.2.2. Youth (boys and girls) and 
women's entrepreneurship 
developed 
 
 
 
 
3.2.3. Inclusive financing 
developed 

Strengthening of the seed sector  
 
 
 
Strengthening of the Rural Farmers’ Training Centre 
(CFPR) 
 
 
Strengthening of the vegetable products packaging 
centre and women's cooperatives 
 
Development of irrigated cereal and vegetable farming 
clusters 
 
 
 
Number of economic interest groups set up and 
supported  
 
Number of women's cooperatives supported  
 
Dissemination of smart farming technologies and 
practices to adapt to climate change and ensure 
increased market access 
 
 
Implementation of a training programme for the youth 
(boys and girls) and women 
Establishment of an incubation structure for the youth 
(boys and girls) and women 
Number of agri-businesses created- YAE (by gender) 
 
 
Establishment of a guarantee fund and farm insurance 

0 
 
 
 

120 participants 
 
 
 
0 
 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
 

95 
 
0 
 
 
 
 
0 
 
0 
 
0 
 
 
0 
 

Equipped seed multiplication centre, control 
mechanism and approved multipliers in place in 
2023 
 
Intake capacity of the centre increased to 180 and 
the capacity of 12 trainers strengthened in 2023 
 
 
4 cold rooms equipped (capacity =  80 tons) and 90 
women's cooperatives strengthened in 2023  
 
Two irrigated cereal and vegetable farming clusters 
developed and the study on the establishment of the 
agro-industrial processing area in Rosso available in 
2023 
 
6 EIGs 
 
 
135 women's cooperatives supported  
 
At least 10 thematic and practical demonstrations 
are organised for farmers (men and women).  
 
 
 
Training of 2000 young people (of which 40% 
girls) in 2023. 
Entrepreneurship incubation structure for the youth 
and women set up in 2023 in 2023 
Training of 700 YAE (of which 40% girls) in 2023 
 
Guarantee fund and agricultural insurance 
established in 2023 

Project progress report  
 
Specific reports  
 

Risks: 

(i) Limited institutional capacity of stakeholders 

(ii) Problem of financial inclusion and access to funding 
and credit 

(ii) Poor servicing and maintenance of irrigation 
schemes 

(iv) Limited human and material resources at 
SONADER for project monitoring and implementation 
(v) Delays in procurement, launch of BDs and 
disbursements 
 
Mitigation Measures: 

(i) The programme provides for stakeholder capacity 
building  

(ii) The project provides for: (i) a Guarantee Fund to 
improve financial inclusion; (ii) assistance in 
organising the beneficiaries to facilitate access to credit; 
and (iii) the promotion of agricultural insurance 
(iii) The project provides for: (i) a Servicing and 
Maintenance Fund (FEM); (ii) support to establish the 
said fund 

(iv) The programme provides for stakeholder capacity 
building 

(v) Engage technical assistance, develop and implement 
the PPM, improve expenditure upstream (procurement 
monitoring) and downstream (disbursement planning 
and monitoring). 

COMPONENT 3: Institutional capacity-building and project coordination 

3.3.1 Institutional capacity 
strengthened. 
 
3.3.2 Coordinating Unit set up 

Creation of the Servicing and Maintenance Fund 
(SMF) 
M/E system for the project (gender-sensitive) 
Administrative/accounting procedures manual 

0 
0 
0 

Servicing and Maintenance Fund (SMF) created 
and operational in 2023 
M/E system operational in 2019 
Manual in use in 2019 

Specific report on the 
SMF  
Project progress report  

IN
P

U
T

S 

Component 1: Transformative irrigation schemes 
Component 2: Promotion of value chains, youth and women’s entrepreneurship 
Component 3: Institutional capacity-building and project coordination 

Component 1:                    UA 8.5 million 
Component 2:                     UA 3.15 million 
Component 3:                     UA 2.00 million 
PPF advance:                      UA 0.63 million  
TOTAL:                              UA 14.67 million 

Sources of Financing  
ADF: UA 7 million (PPF - UA 0.638 million)  
NTF: UA 6 million  
Government: UA 1.67 million  
Total: UA 14.67 million 



 

 
 

viii 

Project Implementation Schedule (2018-2023) 

 
 

Quarter (Q) Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
1. Approval of ADF & NTF loans

2. Installation of project staff

3. Entry into force of the ADF & NTF loans

4. Preparation/launch/signing of the works control and monitoring TA contract

5. Preparation/launch and allocation/signing of works contracts

6. Consutancy services/studies over 200 ha vegetable farmland

7. Launch of works
8. Consolidation of the 62 km track dike 
10. Irrigation scheme works on 3300 ha of basins
11. Upgrading of 200 ha of vegetable farmland
12. Environmental and Social Procedures
13 Promotion of value chains
14 Promotion of youth and women's entrepreneurship
15 Development of inclusive funding 
16 Capacity-building

17 Procurement audit 

18 Financial audit of project

19 Project management

18 Mid-term review

19 Drafting of completion report

ACTIVITIES 2018 2019 2020

CHROGRAMME OF ACTIVITIES 2018 - 2023

2022 2023
Years

2021



 

 1 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF MANAGEMENT OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
GROUP TO THE BOARDS OF DIRECTORS REGARDING A PROPOSAL TO GRANT AN ADF LOAN AND AN 

NTF LOAN TO THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF MAURITANIA  
TO FUND THE AGRICULTURAL TRANSFORMATION SUPPORT PROJECT (PATAM) 

 

Management hereby submits this report and recommendations concerning a proposal to grant an ADF loan 
of UA 7 million and an NTF loan of UA 6 million to the Islamic Republic of Mauritania to finance the 
Agricultural Transformation Support Project (PATAM). 

I. Strategic Thrust and Rationale 

1.1 Project Linkage with Country Strategy and Objectives 

1.1.1 PATAM reflects efforts by Mauritanian authorities to move from a rent economy to a 
diversified one driven by promising productive sectors, excluding extractive industries.1 In recent 
years and with a view to diversifying the national economy, the Mauritanian Government has taken 
measures to promote an institutional framework conducive to agricultural sector development. Thus in 
2012, it adopted a Rural Sector Development Strategy (SDSR), accompanied by a Framework Law on 
Agriculture (LOA), an Institutional Review of the Agricultural and Livestock Sector (RISAP) and a 
National Livestock and Agriculture Development Plan (PNDEA). Furthermore, the Government adopted 
an investment code and an Accelerated Growth of Shared Prosperity Strategy by 2030 (SCAPP). The 
intention is to ensure that agricultural development, poverty reduction, food security and the improvement 
of community living conditions become top priorities. Hence, a National Agricultural Development Plan 
(PNDA) was drawn up based on the SDSR and the initial PNDEA. Approved by the Council of Ministers 
in October 2016, this PNDA is the main operational reference framework and reflects Government's desire 
to ensure better coordination of agricultural sector actions to promote modern, resilient and competitive 
agriculture by 2025 (see strategic framework in Annex 1). 

1.1.2 To optimise the potential for agricultural and rural development, the Ministry of Agricultural and 
Rural Development defined its development policy in 2012, through the design and adoption of a Rural 
Sector Development Strategy (SDSR) and an Agro-pastoral Framework Law (LOA), in harmony with the 
Poverty Reduction Strategic Framework (PRSF 2011-2015) and the National Food Security Strategy 
(SNSA - 2012). Five strategic areas have been defined by the SDSR, namely: (i) infrastructure; (ii) 
research; (iii) rural advisory services; (iv) funding; and (v) trade. SCAPP (2016-2030), which is the 
reference framework for Mauritania as regards development, poverty reduction and job creation, thus 
confirmed these orientations and adopted the following three pillars: (i) promotion of robust, inclusive and 
sustainable economic growth; (ii) human capital formation and access to basic services; and (iii) 
strengthening of governance in all its dimensions. The “Produire en Mauritanie” (“Made in Mauritania”) 
Initiative (IPM), adopted by the Council of Ministers in October 2016, has consolidated the instruments 
established to diversify the Mauritanian economy, and reflects Government's desire to capture value added 
locally and to promote value chains. All these strategies highlight the considerable potential of the 
agricultural sector to reduce poverty, improve food security and create sustainable jobs. 

1.1.3 The project is well aligned with the strategic guidelines presented above and is underpinned by 
the pillars and priorities set by the Government of Mauritania (see 1.1.2). It is an attempt to combine 
production support (support for the upstream agricultural subsector) with the enhancement of production 
value (support for the downstream agricultural subsector). The focus is on: (i) consolidating the significant 
impact of PAHABO; (ii) replicability and extension of recorded achievements; and (iii) targeted support 

                                                
1  These efforts are reflected in the country’s new strategic vision for development, which are intended to be sustainable, inclusive and fair, and which 

seek to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDG 2015-2030). 



 

 2 

to the transformative dimension that is compatible with available financing resources. The project as 
designed provides an opportunity to consolidate, extend and support transformation with a view to 
enhancing the linkages and continuity with PAHABO, and scaling up the pilot action. Therefore, it 
prepares a solid foundation for innovative and high value-added transformative agriculture in the second 
part of Mauritania's CSP that is consistent and fully compatible with the reform programme aimed at 
diversifying the economy and advocating support for the agro-pastoral sector. By adopting an inter-sector 
approach, the project strives to achieve complementarity and synergy with other sector strategies and 
initiatives, such as the Produire en Mauritanie Initiative (IPM); the National Employment Strategy; the 
Industrial Sector Development Strategy (2015-2019), especially for the agri-food and agro-industry 
component; the National Strategy for the Promotion of Micro- and Small-sized Enterprises (2015-2019), 
particularly the pillar relating to the integration of MSEs in sectors with high potential for value added and 
job creation; and the National Microfinance Strategy (2015-2019), with its fourth pillar related to the 
development of an inclusive supply of products. 

1.1.4 The agro-pastoral sector is strategic in Mauritania and contributed 23.4% to national GDP 
formation in 2017. Agriculture has considerable potential: nearly 500,000 ha of arable land, including 
about: (i) 365,000 ha for rain-fed crops; (ii) 135,000 ha for irrigated crops; (iii) 19,700 ha planted with 
palm trees; and (iv) 22,500 ha under dam-irrigated farming. There is also an undervalued irrigable potential 
along the Senegal River, with 46,100 ha of developed land. Livestock is another strategic sector. It 
contributed on average 20% of GDP over the 2014-2017 period, and accounted for 85% of rural value-
added and 78% of the national value added in the agricultural sector. Mauritania’s livestock population is 
significant and estimated at 21.05 million sheep and goats, 1.95 million cattle and 1.47 million camels 
(ONS, 2016). The agro-pastoral sector is the largest employer, despite the many obstacles that limit its 
development (access to finance, vocational training, new technologies, etc.). It has great potential that 
remains untapped in terms of mobilisation (intensification, productivity improvement, preservation, etc.) 
and enhancement to promote agricultural sector value chains. The institutional development of agricultural 
research, advisory and service structures, the reorganisation of professional structures, the structuring of 
strategic sectors and the upgrading of value chains are all challenges to overcome. 

1.1.5 The agro-pastoral sector is also a major employer in the country and accounts for 30% of 
the labour force. It provides income to approximately one (1) million inhabitants and plays a key role in 
food security and resilience. However, according to the latest ONS report on the poverty situation in 
Mauritania, households headed by persons working in the agriculture and livestock sectors are the poorest, 
with an incidence of 59.6% and 41.8%, respectively (2014). 

1.1.6 The lack of value-added in the agro-pastoral sector limits the country's prospects for 
diversification and job creation. The sector has great potential that remains untapped in terms of 
mobilisation (intensification, productivity improvement, preservation, etc.) and enhancement to promote 
agricultural sector value chains. Hence, the institutional development of agricultural research, advisory 
and service structures, the reorganisation of professional structures, the structuring of strategic sectors and 
the upgrading of value chains are all constraints to be addressed to ensure that Mauritania fully enjoys the 
economic potential of its agro-pastoral sector.  

1.2 Rationale for Bank Involvement 

1.2.1 The project needs stem from the logic of consolidating and extending the significant 
achievements of PAHABO and strengthening the transformative dimension (promotion of value chains by 
focusing on two key sectors that are crucial to the economy and to inclusive development, namely: rice 
farming and vegetable gardening). The project is consistent with the Bank's strategic guidelines and High 
5s, including the priorities “Feed Africa” and “Improve quality of life for the people of Africa”, food 
security enhancement and climate change adaptation measures. It is fully consistent with the Bank’s: (i) 
Ten-Year Strategy 2013-2022 (objectives of inclusive growth and transition to green growth); (ii) Pillar I 



 

 3 

of CSP 2016-2020 for Mauritania related to “Support for agricultural transformation”; (iii) agricultural 
strategy (Feed Africa [2016-2025]; (iv) Jobs for Youth in Africa Strategy (2016-2025) and (v) Investing 
in Gender Equality for Africa's Transformation (2014-2018), including Pillar II on “Economic 
Empowerment”. PATAM’s implementation requires significant investments and consistent technical 
support. Only the main multilateral donors, including the Bank, are considered by Mauritanian authorities 
as catalysts capable of helping to address such sector issues, and of involving other partners through their 
operations. The Bank has supported the agro-pastoral sector in the past and accumulated significant 
experience in the areas requested. In addition to its earlier funding of two agro-pastoral operations (PADEL 
and PAHABO) for UA 7.67 million and two phases of the Reform Support Programme (PAREDE), the 
Bank is currently engaged in a multinational agro-pastoral operation (P2RS), for which UA 11.5 million 
has already been allocated to Mauritania. It is also worth noting that Mauritania is engaged in transforming 
its economic model, which has so far been based on mining sector exports, into a sustainable dynamic 
economy characterised by diversification and job creation. In this regard, PATAM complements the 
reforms recommended by the PAREDE programme (1 & 2). 

Box 1: Towards a holistic, participatory and integrated approach oriented towards value chains 
The project is an attempt to adopt a holistic, participatory and integrated approach oriented towards the promotion of value chains. 
It is aimed at two levels of intervention: (i) upstream agricultural production to rationalise the use of natural resources (in particular 
water and soil), rehabilitate the natural environment and consolidate the socio-territorial unit; and (ii) downstream agricultural 
production to enhance the value of agricultural products (from farm to market) with particular emphasis on the promotion of public 
investments, improvement of the business environment, increase of the attractiveness of the private sector, promotion of PPPs , co-
responsibility of stakeholders and complementary synergy with other partners. The project also attempts to leverage the Bank's 
flagship initiatives: TAAT, Enable Youth, RSF, ZTAI, etc.  

 

1.2.2 Particular attention is paid to the synergy between various instruments adopted by the Bank in 
Mauritania, namely: investment support (PAHABO, PATAM), reform support (PAREDE 1 & 2) and 
technical support (PPF-PAHABO-2) to back reforms and investments, and increase their sustainability. In 
terms of comparative advantages, there are five basic arguments in favour of the AfDB Group's 
intervention in this project: (i) the Bank Group plays a strategic role in infrastructure development in 
Mauritania; (ii) the project builds on PAHABO and is in synergy with reform support (PAREDE-1 
completed and PAREDE-2 in progress), thus contributing to the establishment of an institutional and 
regulatory framework for economic diversification and support for the agro-pastoral sector; (iii) the project 
will boost agricultural transformation, combat poverty, and improve the conditions of young people and 
women through the promotion of entrepreneurship and job creation; (iv) the project will contribute to the 
improvement of food security in view of the projected additional agricultural output; and (v) the project is 
one of the measures relevant to climate change adaptation and support for the MDGs (end poverty in all 

Trade
and exports

Commodity Products
Improve the Agricultural Value Chain

Farmers Agro Dealers
Seed 

companies
Fertilizer 

companies
Agro 

processors
Industrial 

manufacturers

!"#$%&'())*+'+",,)-./''
01.23+%)3, 4)5*+6'7--%85.%)36'49:6';.)-5826'2.&<

Integration of the 
Private Sector

! Focus on Key 
Value Chains;

! Go to Scale

0=>7;7?='– @?AB;'C ;ADE0

D@:F'@$58+G%,+'5$)38'.G2'>5$"2'AG5%3

HDDH 0=DFE0'I)".G 4;@ D@DJD D8-),)$2+ !!!

"



 

 4 

its forms and everywhere; end hunger and achieve food security; improve nutrition and sustainable 
agriculture). 

1.3 Aid Coordination 
Sector development is ensured by the Government with the support of a number of bilateral and 
multilateral donors. The main partners in agricultural sector development are the World Bank (WB), the 
European Union (EU), the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), the Islamic 
Development Bank (IsDB), the Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development (AFESD), the African 
Development Bank (AfDB) and bilateral cooperation (Saudi Fund, AFD, GIZ, etc.). Coordination between 
the various donors is carried out through thematic groups, including the Agriculture Group chaired by the 
Directorate for Strategy, Planning and Monitoring and Evaluation (DSPSE) in the Ministry of  Rural 
Development.  

  
Sector or Subsector* 

Scope   
  GDP Exports Jobs    
  [Agriculture] [23.4%](1) [0%] [30%](1)   
  Stakeholders – Cumulative Public Expenditure   
  Government Donors  

 

[%]   
USD [USD 67.86 million] [USD 461.96 million] WB [34.2%]   

% [13%] 87%] EU  [20.4%]   
    IFAD [17.9%]   
   Saudi Fund  [7.4%]  
   IsDB [6.4%]  
   AFESD [4.7%]  
           AFD [2.9%]   
   AfDB [2.6 %]  
   GIZ [1.3 %]  

  Aid Coordination Level   
  Existence of thematic working groups [Yes]    
  Existence of a global sector programme [Yes]   
  AfDB role in aid coordination** [M]***   
*the most appropriate ** for this sector or subsector   
** L: Lead; M: Member (non-lead): None: No role 
(1) Including livestock farming    

II. Project Description 

2.1 Project Objectives: The project aims to achieve the inclusive and sustainable development of 
the agricultural sector. It will contribute to the improvement of food security and the living conditions of 
target communities. More specifically, it will support agricultural transformation in Mauritania by 
increasing the output and value of agricultural products.  

2.2 Project Components: To achieve its objectives, the project has identified the following three 
components: (i) transformative irrigation schemes; (ii) promotion of value chains, youth and women's 
entrepreneurship; and (iii) capacity building and project coordination. The first component, reserved for 
the development of transformative infrastructure, accounts for more than 65% of the total project cost. 

Table 2.2: Project Components 
No. Component 

Name 
Cost 

Estimate 
Description of Components 

 
I Transformative 

irrigation 
infrastructure 

9.52 
UA million 

(65.0%) 

 Establishment of transformative infrastructure for the irrigation of 200 ha of 
vegetable farms for women and 3,300 ha of flood-recession farming basins. 
Implementation of environmental and social measures 

 Support Measures: Monitoring and control of infrastructure construction works; 
including PPF for project preparation; implementation of ESMP through MEDD. 

II Promotion of 
value chains, 
youth and 

3.15 
UA million 

(21.5%) 

 Agricultural Production Support: Technical support to farmers, research and 
development, training of farmers (men and women), agricultural advisory. 



 

 5 

women’s 
entrepreneurship 

 Support for value chain promotion: support the IPM (support for the establishment 
of an agro-industrial processing area); equipment of the packaging centre, sales 
and marketing support (certification process, PPP initiative). 

 Support for the promotion of youth and women's entrepreneurship (YAE, Start-
up, etc.) and establishment of an incubation structure for YAEs, support for 
innovation, etc. 

 Support for the development of inclusive financing: support for the establishment 
of guarantee and risk-sharing funds, promotion of agricultural insurance, 
certification financing in the agricultural sector and agricultural entrepreneurship. 

III Capacity building 
and project 
coordination 

2.00 
UA million 

(13.5%) 

 Institutional and stakeholder capacity building for the project  

 Support for the establishment of a Servicing and Maintenance Fund (SMF) 

 National and regional coordination of the project; socioeconomic 
monitoring/evaluation (gender disaggregated) 

 Management of activities, physical and financial monitoring, internal and external 
audit. 

2.2.1 Transformative Irrigation Schemes: The main achievements and activities planned under this 
component are: (i) Consolidation and rehabilitation of the dike track over a distance of 62 km: This will 
open up access to existing villages and farming areas, and speed up the development and operation of new 
areas included under the project. The dike will be consolidated by upgrading the technical characteristics 
of its dimensions (including structures) based on new hydraulic, geotechnical, pedological and 
topographical studies. The dike will also increase protection against floods and ensure steady water supply 
to the flood-recession areas to be developed (basins). Installation of equipment to regulate the N'Diorol 
backwaters and weir for the introduction of fish farming; (ii) Development of seven basins (3300 ha): 
recalibration of the backwaters and supply channels of the seven basins to ensure and develop flood-
recession farming; (iii) Development of 200 ha of vegetable farms for women: Development and equipment 
of 200 ha of irrigated vegetable farming areas for women along the river; (iv) Implementation of 
environmental and social actions: environmental and social works (reforestation, dune fixation, etc.) to be 
undertaken to ensure the sustainability of the transformative structures to be built: (v) Technical assistance: 
all works on the transformative irrigation infrastructure will be executed by a contractor, and controlled 
and supervised by a consultancy firm and a works quality control laboratory. All the technical studies on 
the irrigation project carried out by the PPF are available.  

2.2.2 Promotion of value chains and of youth and women’s entrepreneurship: The main activities 
planned under this component are: (i) the promotion of value chains, mainly through equipment of the 
market gardening product packaging centre, support for the Rural Producers' Training Centre (CFPR), 
support to IPM (support to the market gardening and rice clusters, and support for the establishment of 
agro-industrial processing areas in Rosso), promotion of PPP initiatives and agricultural marketing, etc.; 
(ii) the promotion of agricultural and women’s entrepreneurship, in particular through support for 
ANAPEJ to champion youth and women's entrepreneurship, and the establishment of start-ups to 
complement PAFEJ and PAMPEJ. In this regard, a regional ANAPEJ agency will be opened at Boghé to 
promote local services. (iii) the development of inclusive financing through support to BCM for the 
establishment of a Guarantee Fund, promotion of agricultural insurance and support for the certification 
and entrepreneurship mechanism, with the mobilisation and backing of CAM, NBM and the SNIM 
Foundation. 

2.2.3 Capacity-Building and Project Coordination: The project will support capacity building for 
its staff (DSCSE, DDFCA, CNRADA, PCU, etc.) and beneficiaries as well as the establishment of a 
Servicing and Maintenance Fund (SMF) for irrigation infrastructure. 

 



 

 6 

2.3 Technical Solution Adopted and Alternatives Explored 

2.3.1 PATAM follows an integrated approach that links the upstream and downstream farming sectors 
to enhance value and promote value chains. It builds on PAHABO (2005-2014), which generated 
undeniable physical, human and institutional achievements that need to be consolidated and extended to 
surrounding areas. Consultation with stakeholders during project design missions made it possible to adopt 
the same technical solution implemented by PAHABO for transformative irrigation schemes. This 
technical solution has the advantage of: (i) setting up infrastructure to ensure adequate water collection 
and better use; (ii) opening up access to the area; and (iii) ensuring better optimisation of investment costs. 
The project will fund water supply right down to individual plots (farms). With regard to the promotion of 
value chains, two key sectors have been identified, namely rice cultivation and vegetable farming, which 
have tangible value margins and are aimed at differentiated target groups (male cooperatives for rice 
cultivation and female cooperatives for vegetable farming). Hence, PATAM seeks to build on these 
achievements by capturing value added at the local level and creating employment opportunities. It is also 
an appropriate solution for mitigating the effects of climate change. 

2.3.2 The technical design of the project took into account: (i) lessons from PAHABO; (ii) the 
availability of water and soil resources; (iii) consultation with irrigation water users and their approval of 
technical solutions for the choice of proposed works; and (iv) farmers’ capacity to master the techniques. 

Table 2.3: Project Alternatives Explored and Reasons for their Rejection1 
ALTERNATIVE 

EXPLORED 
BRIEF DESCRIPTION REASONS FOR REJECTION 

 Development and 
irrigation of the basins  

This entails building the necessary equipment 
to collect water for irrigation of the basins as 
well as land development to ensure sustainable 
irrigation. 

High cost of the investments and the transition 
towards flood-recession farming. 

 Regulation of the 
channels supplying 
water to the basins 

Regulation of the channels supplying water to 
the basins makes it possible to ensure flood-
recession farming. The solution considered is 
to carry out such regulation naturally without 
acting on the system. 

This option was abandoned because it does not 
guarantee proper regulation of flood recession. 
There are plans to install control structures to 
regulate the water level in the basin according to the 
flow rate of the backwaters that feed each basin. 

 Development of roads 
and bridges to open up 
access to the project 
area 

To ensure access, it is proposed that access 
roads be developed in the project area. 

Very high cost. Only the bridges for crossing the 
main backwaters have been retained and will be 
funded through an additional NTF loan.  

2.4 Type of Project 

This is a sector investment project that has the particularity of adopting a participatory and integrated 
approach to target investments and link up the upstream and downstream agricultural subsectors (see 
details in Technical Annex B.3, Volume 2). 

2.5 Project Cost and Financing Mechanisms 

2.5.1 The overall project cost, net of taxes and customs duties, is estimated at UA 14.67 million, 
equivalent to MRU 743.37 million. The foreign exchange share constitutes 73% of the total project cost. 
Customs duties and taxes will be defrayed by the State. Physical and financial contingencies, which total 
11% of the base cost, have been calculated based on detailed estimates presented by the Borrower. The 
Government contributes UA 1.67 million, equivalent to MRU 81.56 million, representing about 11.3% of 
the total project cost. The detailed project costs are presented in the technical annexes (C9). The ADF and 
NTF loans are valued at UA 7 million and UA 6 million, respectively. 

                                                
1  See detail of alternatives explored in Technical Annexes Volume 2 (Annex B.1).  



 

 7 

2.5.2 The project costs are summarised in Tables 2.4 and 2.5 below. 

Table 2.4 : Cost Estimate by Component [in MRU and UA million] 

COMPONENTS 
MRU million UA million % 

F.C. 

%  
Base 
cost 

L.C.  F.E Total L.C. F.C Total 

1. Transformative irrigation infrastructure  102.26 332.31 434.57 2.02 6,56 8,58 75 65 
2. Promotion of value chains and 
entrepreneurship  36.74 107.75 144.41 0.73 2,13 2,85 75 22 

3. Capacity building and project coordination 32.62 59.19 91.81 0.64 1,17 1,81 64 14 
BASE COST 171.62 499. 26 670.88 3.39 9, 86 13,24 74 100 
Physical and financial contingencies 29.84 42.65 72.29 0.59 0,84 1,43 60 11 
TOTAL PROJECT COST 201.46 541.90 743.37 3.98 10,70 14,67 73 111 

The exchange rates used are indicated in the introduction to this report [page (i)]. 

Table 2.5: Financing Sources [in MRU million and UA million] 

Financing Sources 
MRU million Millions UC 

% Total 
M. Locale  Devises Total M. Locale  Devises Total 

ADF loan 85.48 272.07 357.56 1.63 5.37 7.00 47.7 
NTF loan 82.16 222.09 304.25 1,62 4.38 6.00 41.0 
Mauritanian governement  33.82 47.74 81.56 0.69 0.98 1.67 11.3 
Total 201.47 541.90 743.37 3.94 10.73 14.67 100 

2.5.3 The breakdown of financing by expenditure category and expenditure schedule are presented 
in Tables 2.6 to 2.7 below. 

Table 2.6: Project Cost by Expenditure Category [in MRU and UA million]  

 
Table 2.7: Expenditure Schedule by Component (in UA million) 

Components 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 TOTAL 
1. Transformative irrigation infrastructure  0.23 1.40 4.50 2.64 0.14 8.91 
2. Promotion of value chains and entrepreneurship  0.59 1.57 0.49 0.29 0.22 3.16 
3. Capacity-building and project coordination  0.61 0.37 0.3329 0.32 0.33 1.96 
4. PPF Reimbursement  0.64 - - - - 0.64 
TOTAL 2.07 3.34 5.32 3.25 0,69 14.67 

2.6 Project Area and Beneficiaries  

2.6.1 The planned investments target historically poorly endowed areas where a large number of 
farmers are exposed to droughts and poverty and insecurity because they lack the resources to develop 
the existing potential (water and soil). These investments will promote shared prosperity and build the 
resilience of these target communities to future shocks, including those relating to climate change. 
The project will benefit a population of 42,600 (20,448 men, i.e. 48%, and 22,152 women, or 52%) 
from 6,700 households. The region is qualified because it is exposed to extreme poverty and is reputed 
for seasonal immigration; mainly men seeking informal employment.1 The main activities practised 
by the population and which constitute livelihoods within their local economy are (in descending 
                                                
1  2017 data from the Boghé Basic Health Center. 

EXPENDITURE CATEGORIES  
MRU Million UA million % 

F.C 

%  
Base 
cost 

L.C F.C Total L.C. F.C Total 

Investment 146.73 462.75 609.48 2.90 9.13 12.03 76 91 
Works  93.99 275.69 369.68 1.85 5.44 7.30 75 55 
Goods 8.17 23.95 32.12 0.16 0.47 0.63 75 5 
Services  44.58 163.10 207.68 0.88 3.22 4.10 79 31 
Operation 24.89 36.51 61.40 0.49 0.72 1,21 59 9 
Base cost 17162 499. 26 670.88 3.39 9.86 13.24 74 100 
Physical contingencies 8. 80 25.82 34.63 0.17 0.51 0.68 75 5 
Financial Contingencies 21.04 16.83 37.86 0.42 0.33 0.75 44 6 
COÛT TOTAL DU PROJET 201.46 541.90 743.37 3.94 10.73 14.67 73 111 



 

 8 

order): agriculture (43%), livestock (14.14%), trade (10.42%) and fishing (3.48%). Women are 
engaged in many activities: mainly agriculture (crops, vegetables), small livestock production, petty 
trading and handicraft. The project's support for job creation will be provided through ANAPEJ 
(promotion of YAE and innovative start-ups). Farmers in the rice and vegetable farming sectors and 
clusters are the main beneficiaries of IPM support. 

2.7 Participatory Approach to Project Design and Implementation 

2.7.1 PATAM was designed with the sustained involvement of the stakeholders concerned 
(various administrative entities, grassroots organisations, socio-professional structures, private 
operators, beneficiaries and development partners). The participatory approach was adopted prior to 
project design, from technical studies carried out under the PPF where the findings were submitted 
and validated with the relevant technical departments and representatives of the target communities. 
The process is fully participatory since the Local Consultation Council (LCC), the women's Economic 
Interest Group (EIG), representatives of women's cooperatives and user associations established since 
the implementation of PAHABO were involved in all the stages. As was the case in PAHABO-1, 
women's organisations, users' associations, the LCC and the EIG will also be involved in 
implementing this project. 

2.7.2 Furthermore, the Bank's various design missions also held numerous consultation meetings 
with the administrative entities concerned, professional structures, private operators likely to be 
involved in the project and beneficiary representatives (cooperatives, etc.). Moreover, the 
implementation of various proposed activities will be based on a participatory approach actively 
involving the LCC, the CNP and the organisations, to improve their governance and increase their 
accountability.  

2.8 Bank Group Experience and Lessons Reflected in Project Design 

2.8.1 The Bank’s portfolio in Mauritania (mid-November 2018) comprises 15 operations worth 
UA 239 million (see details in Annex 3). While the overall quality of the portfolio is deemed 
satisfactory, there are still some implementation problems, including: (i) start-up delays due to lack 
of project ownership on the Mauritanian side; (ii) procurement delays; and (iii) weak project 
implementation capacity. The measures designed to address these challenges include: (a) quality 
improvement at entry by setting up project management bodies prior to approval; (b) establishment 
of more rigorous procurement plans; and (c) assessment of implementation capacity problems and 
substantial capacity building. All these recommendations have been factored into PATAM. In 
particular, lessons from PAHABO are strategic guidelines that can further strengthen PATAM’s 
design and implementation. These include the need to: (1) ensure the availability of implementation 
studies and the finalisation of project BDs prior to project approval; (2) ensure geographic 
concentration and a particular interest in development to maximise value added at the local level and 
ensure better stakeholder mobilisation and beneficiary ownership; (3) strengthen the project 
monitoring, evaluation and coordination function, which are crucial to project implementation quality; 
(4) appoint a procurement manager and support procurement and disbursement procedures (provide 
capacity-building measures); (5) raise awareness among the client and target population on the role 
of servicing and maintenance to ensure better operation and sustainability of the facilities; and (6) 
improve the environment and business climate to ensure better private sector involvement.  

2.8.2 Based on these factors, project design focused on: (i) the availability of technical studies 
carried out under PPF-PAHABO-2 and which are highly useful for mobilising co-financing (IsDB, 
GCF, GEF, SF, EIB, etc.); (ii) the consolidation of results achieved, extension of PAHABO's 



 

 9 

outcomes to other areas and consideration of an entire component for the promotion of value chains 
as well as women's and youth entrepreneurship that are central to the project’s design and underpinned 
by a participatory and integrated process; (iii) measures to strengthen project monitoring, evaluation, 
steering and coordination have been planned to consolidate the quality of project implementation; (iv) 
crucial measures are planned to accelerate procurement: the appointment of a procurement officer 
from among the PCU staff, the use of advance contracting and the national system according to 
recommended thresholds, the implementation of capacity-building and support measures (support to 
the Public Procurement Regulatory Authority-ARMP), the conduct of procurement audits, the 
preparation of a procedures manual, the establishment of an accounting system for procurement, and 
the improvement of disbursements; (v) support for the establishment of a Servicing and Maintenance 
Fund (FEM), which will be provisioned from 2021 with a start-up allocation for more sustainable 
development; and (vi) innovative actions to strengthen the sustainability of the activities executed and 
private sector mobilisation: support for the establishment of a guarantee fund and a risk-sharing 
system, promotion of agricultural insurance, support for the establishment of an integrated logistics 
platform (agro-industrial processing area in Rosso in support of the “Produire en Mauritanie” 
Initiative (IPM), promotion of new concepts allowing the involvement of the private sector and the 
development of PPP initiatives (certification concept, agricultural entrepreneurship oriented towards 
high value-added services, supported and sponsored by the private sector: NBM, CAM, SNIM 
Foundation, etc. that have expressed interest in joining and backing these concepts). The Bank will 
seek technical support, through trust funds, to promote and ensure the implementation of these 
initiatives. 

2.8.3 PATAM has also benefited more from sector budget support (PAREDE-1 & 2) and technical 
support under PPF-PAHABO-2, which is still being implemented. One of the recorded achievements 
concerns the complementarity and synergy adopted between the Bank's three financing instruments 
(reform support, investment support and technical support) and the complementarity linkages with 
operations in a logic of convergence: 

 Bank Group: (i) PAREDE 1 & 2 (including support for PPPs and land reforms - 
agricultural and rural land is at the heart of this reform process and after significant 
progress in the Rosso region, agricultural and rural land regularisation is expected to 
start in the Brakna region; support for the establishment of a service and maintenance 
fund for agricultural infrastructure and structures, support for the establishment of 
innovative and inclusive mechanisms for financing the agro-pastoral sector); (ii) 
PAFEJ (technical and institutional support for ANAPEJ, support for the opening of 
local offices, support for the integration of young people); (iii) PAMPEJ ( 
establishment of the microfinance refinancing mechanism via the FOREMI fund 
hosted at the CDD); (iv) P2RS which intervenes partly in Brakna. 

 TFPs in Mauritania: The concentration on the agricultural sector is justified by the 
principle of complementarity with the operations of the World Bank (focused on core 
livestock sector projects such as the Regional Support Project for Pastoralism in the 
Sahel-PRAPS, USD 45 million), the EU (RIMRAP, RIMDIR and RIMFIL), GIZ 
(Promotion of Employment and Professional Integration in Rural Areas - PELIMIR) 
and AFD (CAP-Insertion).  

2.9 Key Performance Indicators  

The key project performance indicators are: (i) the total length (in km) of track dikes constructed or 
consolidated; (ii) the surface area (in ha) of basins developed; (ii) the surface area (in ha) of vegetable 



 

 10 

farming areas developed for women (FAW); (iii) the average yields obtained in basins and FAWs; 
(iv) additional agricultural output; (v) the number of farmers benefiting from the basins developed 
and the number of women farmers benefiting from FAWs; and (vi) the number of operational rice-
farming cooperatives for men and vegetable farming cooperatives for women as well as the respective 
memberships of both. The main impact indicators are: (a) improvement of the agricultural income of 
target communities; (b) contribution to poverty reduction; (c) contribution to the improvement of the 
nutritional status; (d) contribution to the reduction of food imports (in tons of cereals and vegetables); 
and (e) contribution to the creation of decent and sustainable jobs. The main data sources for 
monitoring these indicators are the PCU, DSCSE, ONS, CSA, BCM and ASYCUDA. This data will 
be supplemented by field surveys and targeted analyses, with occasional support from technical 
assistance, if necessary. The relevant data will be collected, processed and the results disseminated 
through the results-based monitoring and evaluation system set up by the project. 

III. Project Feasibility 

3.1 Economic and Financial Performance 

3.1.1 The transformative infrastructure to be constructed (irrigation schemes, access roads), the 
structures to be built in the basins (recalibration, cleaning) and women's vegetable farming areas will 
provide the population with newly cleared plots of irrigated good soil conducive to the development 
of the available potential (water, soil and labour force). This new situation, long awaited by the target 
communities, will stimulate the execution of vital activities that will help them to achieve poverty 
reduction, self-reliance, permanent employment, decent income and self-development. This will help 
to increase the added value of the irrigated areas concerned and to generate positive impacts that would 
be social (creation of local jobs, poverty reduction, improved nutritional status, reduction of rural 
exodus, etc.), economic (increased agricultural output, better use of irrigation water, enhanced 
regional balance, etc.), environmental (mitigation of the negative effects of climate change, rational 
exploitation of river water, substitution of water pumping by flood spreading and use of renewable 
energies vegetable-farming areas, which will lead to a reduction in energy demand, etc.) and 
institutional (consolidation of cooperatives, EIGs and water users' associations, institutional capacity 
building, organisation of farmers to improve market access, funding and service provision, etc.). The 
main benefits generated by the project are assessed through the following key indicators: 

Table 3.1: Project Economic and Financial Performance Indicators  
Indicators Per farm 

Farmed surface area in the current situation (ha) 0.67 
Farmed surface area in the future situation (ha) 1.5 
Current net average income per farm in flood-recession areas (MRU) 18,923 
Future net average income per farm in flood-recession areas (MRU) 70,409 
Future net average income per hectare in flood-recession areas (MRU) 306,606 

Indicators Project total 
Total output value per year of normal operation (MRU thousand) 295,084 
Jobs created during the investment phase (WD)(1) 186,288 
Jobs created from the year of normal operation(2) 451,877 

(1) Additional jobs created (in WD) during the construction phase in 2019-2023                 (Source: Feasibility and Field Studies, 2018) 
(2) The year of full operation is the fifth year of the project 

3.1.2 Financial profitability analysis yielded a FIRR of 18.8% and the sensitivity tests showed that 
profitability remains around the threshold of the opportunity cost of capital, even when there is a 10% 
decrease in output value and a concurrent 20% increase in investment costs, with the FIRR then being 
13%. Economic analysis was done based on the benchmark price method and comparison of the "no-
project" and "project" situations. The economic and financial performance was assessed based on an 



 

 11 

investment life of 30 years. The project costs relate to the investments made, including physical 
contingencies, repair and maintenance costs, production and renewal costs. The analysis focused on 
the seven basins (Afnia, Balla, Moi - Moi, Diayolé- Djoulé, Nevga, Regba), thanks to which the six 
creeks can be exploited (Lougué, Sidi Youkel, Koundi, Ngaleng, Ballabour, Regba) and a cluster of 
small vegetable farming areas developed along the river bank that will subsequently be allocated to 
women's cooperatives. The operation of this infrastructure will increase the average net income per 
farm in the flood-recession farming areas from MRU 18,923 in the current situation to nearly MRU 
70,409 in future, representing an increase of more than 3.5 times (3.62).  This income will directly 
benefit fragile rural households and contribute to poverty reduction among vulnerable groups 
(especially women and the youth).  

3.1.3 The project’s economic benefits stem from the increase in agricultural output during normal 
operation, with an additional annual output of 107,530 quintals of cereals produced from flood-
recession farming (sorghum and maize), 8,320 tons of rice, 4,000 tons of vegetable products, 5,100 
tons of fodder to be valued in terms of milk and meat, and value chain development for certain 
vegetable products (vegetable recycling and drying). Other project impacts such as opening up access 
to villages, facilitating access to farms, transporting products, developing marketing channels and 
improving access between farming areas, local (Boghé, Dar El Baraka, Ouled Biram, Dar El Avia, 
Aleg) and national markets (development of certification contracts and PPP initiatives) were not 
factored into the analysis.  

ERR (base-case scenario): 18.4 %  NPV (10%): MRU 462,125 

3.1.4 The sensitivity tests conducted show the profitability of the project: a 10% increase in 
investment costs reduces the ERR to 16.9%; a 10% decrease in production reduces the ERR to 15.0%; 
a 10% increase in investment costs combined with a 10% reduction in production yields an ERR of 
13.7%. 

3.2 Environmental and Social Impact 

Environment 

3.2.1 Based on the Bank's Environmental and Social Assessment Procedures (ESAPs), the project 
was classified under Category 2 due to the limited scale of the irrigation schemes that only concern 
200 ha, and the local and temporary scope of the expected impacts following the rehabilitation of the 
existing dike track. Decree No. 2007.105, which defines the content and procedure for conducting 
environmental impact assessment (EIA) and monitoring their implementation, classifies the project 
under the category of operations subject to an EIA. On this basis, an environmental impact assessment 
with an environmental and social management plan was prepared in accordance with the Bank's 
Integrated Safeguards System (ISS) and the national system. The study was validated and its summary 
submitted for publication for a period of 30 days prior to the Board of Directors' meeting. In 
accordance with Decree No. 2007.105, the consultation was organised with the target groups. The 
Decree stipulates and requires that any decision should be preceded by a public inquiry to seek public 
input and comment on the likely impacts of the project and the acceptability of alternative solutions 
or mitigation measures under consideration. 

3.2.2 From an environmental standpoint, the project will mainly lead to: (i) better management of 
water and soil resources, and development of the irrigation potential; (ii) a better understanding of 
rational water use for agricultural purposes; (iii) water and soil conservation; and (iii) the creation of 
favourable conditions for restoring the biodiversity in the backwaters. The positive impacts of project 



 

 12 

activities from the social standpoint essentially relate to: (i) improvement of agricultural production 
techniques and systems; (ii) improvement of income and marketing conditions; (iii) broadening of the 
product range and enhancement of output value through processing; and (iv) strengthening of the 
skills of the various agricultural sector stakeholders. In terms of impact on the community living 
environment, it will: contribute to food and nutritional security; famine control; and job creation. 
During the construction phase, the negative impacts will essentially be limited to the works area and 
generally be of low intensity. The ESMP prepared under this project includes a series of measures 
during the construction and operational phases aimed at mitigating negative impacts and ensuring the 
project's sustainability. In terms of job creation, the project provides technical guidance as well as 
innovative and inclusive financial support to the agricultural sector. Furthermore, with a view to 
promoting women's and youth entrepreneurship, the project seeks to combat women’s and youth 
marginalisation by setting up an inclusion mechanism to reduce cultural barriers that negatively affect 
these groups, and support financing for granting specific microcredit to this category of investors. 

Social 

3.2.3 The “Systematic Country Diagnostic” report prepared by the World Bank in May 2017, 
concludes that “the main driver of poverty reduction in rural areas has been the increase in the welfare 
of agricultural and livestock producers”. It also concludes that despite significant improvements, 
social indicators remain among the lowest in the world. Mauritania was ranked 153rd out of 186 
countries in the Human Development Index in 2014. Despite the progress made in reducing poverty, 
it remains a widespread phenomenon, mainly in rural areas, and is associated with unequal access to 
social services and productive capital. The qualitative data in this report indicates that land is unevenly 
distributed, particularly in the fertile Senegal River Valley, where the majority of poor agro-pastoral 
producers operate. Women are particularly affected; only 18.7% of them have land in the country. 
The highest poverty rates are recorded in households headed by persons who are illiterate or have not 
completed primary education. The “40 per cent poorest” have the lowest access to other basic services, 
such as health, water and sanitation. Limited access to land in rural areas and high food prices in urban 
areas prevent the poorest from accumulating assets. Very few poor small farmers hold formal land 
rights in the Senegal River Valley, while most of them depend on informal customary rights. This 
situation has caused land insecurity for land users and investors as well as social tensions.  The project 
responds to expressed needs and has taken into consideration the lessons from the previous PAHABO 
project. It addresses food shortages and malnutrition, inadequate access to agricultural inputs leading 
to low production, limited access to financial support and high youth (male and female) 
unemployment rates. All said, despite the relative socioeconomic progress, poverty remains high in 
Mauritania at 31% (EPCV, 2014) compared to 42% and 51% in 2008 and 2000, respectively. Poverty 
remains rural in nature (about one in two people in the rural areas is poor - 44.4%).  Brakna is among 
the four willayas with a worrying poverty rate that exceeds the national poverty threshold (43.3% in 
Brakna compared to 31% at the national level, i.e. 12.3 points above the average). The illiteracy rate 
is 52.5% (59% for women). With regard to income, the data indicates that the average annual income 
is estimated at MRU 224,800 for a “typical” well-off household and MRU 159,000 for an average 
household, while poor to very poor households have MRU 89,000 and MRU 51,400, respectively. 

3.2.4 The 2016 ONS data indicate that Brakna’s population is relatively young (the 15 to 39 
age group represents 35.2% of the total population). On the social level, the foreseeable negative 
impacts would affect farmers who are not project beneficiaries and whose competitiveness on the 
market would be relatively low, as well as rural women whose participation in project benefits remains 
limited due to cultural barriers. However, these impacts will be significantly reduced by the mitigation 
measures provided for in the ESMP, in particular the strengthening of women's participation in 



 

 13 

cooperatives and associations, and measures to support and finance income-generating activities for 
women and the youth who constitute the vulnerable segment of the population. 

Adaptation to Climate Change 

3.2.5 In terms of vulnerability to climate change risks, the project is classified in Category 2, which 
reflects medium vulnerability that requires the implementation of climate adaptation measures and 
their integration into the design of facilities planned. The following measures were considered to 
strengthen ecosystem and community resilience: (i) development of irrigated areas and reduction of 
extensive farming; (ii) introduction of innovative technologies for the optimal management of natural 
resources, particularly water; (iii) promotion of climate-friendly smart farming practices; (iv) 
promotion of small livestock farming, in particular goats and sheep, which also helps to fertilise the 
soil, etc.; and (v) programming of reforestation actions that reduce bank erosion and have a beneficial 
effect on carbon sequestration. An entire component is reserved for climate financing, on which a 
concept note has been submitted by the Bank to the Green Fund. 

Gender 

3.2.6 In Mauritania, efforts must be made to promote gender-sensitive human development. 
Women are among the prominent development stakeholders in rural areas (representing over 52% of 
the rural population in Mauritania). Agriculture is also the main economic activity of rural women 
and employs more than 90% of working women. About 90% of vegetable farmers are women. Indeed, 
almost the entire female labour force is engaged in this activity.  Apart from agricultural activities, 
rural women are involved in agricultural product processing and handicrafts, which is a key domain 
(weaving, wool processing, etc.). Furthermore, the agricultural model in Mauritania is based on cash 
crops and food crops farmed by men and women, respectively. Hence, farmers are organised into rice 
cooperatives (mainly men, with 30% women) and food crop cooperatives (mainly women). Two 
major challenges arise from this mode of organisation: access to land and financial assistance. 
Women's cooperatives specializing in food crops need small-sized farms and, consequently, the 
women cannot access financial assistance to increase their production. Furthermore, women have 
limited access to agricultural inputs because of their low level education and limited access to 
information. Since women also perform a triple function (childbearing, production and social 
responsibility), solutions must be found to reduce their workload. 

3.2.7 The project is intended to support women's cooperatives through: (i) improvement of 200 
hectares and expansion of the irrigation system of 90 women's cooperatives; (ii) increased access to 
financial support for women's cooperatives through the establishment of a gender-sensitive 
agricultural insurance guarantee fund (to reach 50% of women); (iii) development of a comprehensive 
training centre (incubation) equipped with the necessary demonstration equipment and a teaching 
model to improve agricultural products and agro-industry. Moreover, (iv) the operation of storage 
rooms and improved market access are expected to increase with the construction of the two bridges 
and the organisation of extension services.1 

  

                                                
1  See details in the technical annexes (B.9 &10). 



 

 14 

Forced Resettlement 

3.2.8 The Project does not involve the displacement or resettlement of people from the project area. 

IV. Project Implementation 

4.1 Implementation Arrangements 

4.1.1 Executing Agency: The project is placed under the technical supervision of the Directorate 
for Strategy, Cooperation and Monitoring/Evaluation (DSCSE) in the Ministry of Rural Development, 
which will entrust its management and coordination to an autonomous unit based in Boghé within the 
SONADER Regional Directorate. This will promote local supervision, the benefits of which were 
confirmed by PAHABO. The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will comprise eight experienced 
managers,1 capable of executing the main project tasks:  (i) construction of infrastructure and 
development of flood-recession farmlands, land enhancement, farmers’ advisory, training, 
agricultural extension services, and support for project activities; (ii) project planning, programming, 
and administrative and financial management; and (iii) project coordination, monitoring/evaluation 
and control. Specifically, it will be responsible for the following tasks: (a) preparation and 
implementation of project work programmes and annual budgets (PTBAs); (b) preparation and 
monitoring of bidding documents, works execution, goods and services contracts and disbursement 
requests; (c) internal monitoring of the project; and (d) preparation of financial statements and 
progress reports. The PCU, the DSCSE and the SONADER regional management will work closely 
together to ensure the smooth implementation of project activities. Targeted technical assist ance 
missions (monitoring/evaluation, environmental monitoring) and certain technical departments 
(DDFCA, CNRADA, ENFVA-CFPR, DAR, ANAPEJ, IPM, DPN-MEDD, etc.) will periodically 
support the PCU. 

4.1.2 Institutional Arrangements: Based on the recommendations of the Paris Declaration and the 
conclusive lessons from PAHABO, particularly in terms of institutional arrangements, the project 
will recommend a light coordination and management structure, and will build on the State's 
sustainable structures through the signing of a coordination charter (between Ministry of Rural 
Development stakeholders) and specific partnership agreements with partners involved in its 
implementation (apart from the Ministry of Rural Development:  ANAPEJ, DPN-MEDD, etc.). (i) A 
National Steering Committee (CNP) will be set up at the start of the project to guide, orient and 
supervise its implementation. This committee will be chaired by the Secretary General of the Ministry 
of Agriculture and comprise representatives of stakeholders involved in the project: (MEF, DSCSE, 
DPN-MEDD, ANAPEJ), the PATAM Coordinator (Secretary) and two beneficiary representatives 
(including one woman). It will meet at least twice yearly to review the annual work and budget 
programme (AWBP), and assess project progress. (ii) A Local Consultation Committee (LCC), 
responsible for monitoring and organising activities within the area, will also be set up at project 
commencement. It will be chaired by the Hakem of Boghé, comprising representatives of NGOs and 
two representatives of beneficiaries per area (including one woman), and will meet at least four times 
a year. This Committee may be expanded as necessary to include other persons from the decentralised 
technical services and other structures present in the area (e.g. civil society, representatives of local 
authorities and beneficiaries). The project provides for the signing of a Project Coordination Charter 
(PCC), specific partnership agreements and performance contracts with members of the PCU team to 
ensure results-based management and promote a culture of performance. 

                                                
1  The coordinator, agricultural engineer, agronomist, procurement expert, monitoring/evaluation expert, gender and communication expert, 

administrative and financial officer (AFO), accountant (see organisation chart and job profiles in Annex C1). 



 

 15 

4.1.3 To preserve institutional integration, coherence and continuity, it was agreed to entrust the 
management of PATAM (ADF & NTF funding), the PATAM Project (IsDB funding) and the Climate 
Change Resilience Development Project (Green Fund financing) to the same coordination unit (PCU) 
by adopting the same implementation mechanism.  

Procurement Arrangements (Works, Goods and Services)  

4.1.4  Applicable Procurement Policy and Framework: All goods, works and services funded with 
Bank resources shall be procured in accordance with the Procurement Policy for Bank Group-funded 
Operations (“AfDB Procurement Policy”) October 2015 edition, and the provisions set out in the 
financing agreement. Pursuant to this policy and following various assessments conducted, it was 
agreed that all works, with the exception of irrigation works, and all goods shall be procured in 
accordance with the Borrower's procurement system ("National System") embodied in Law No. 2010-
044 of 22/07/2010 on the Public Procurement Code, its implementing decree No. 2017-216 and other 
statutory texts governing procurement in Mauritania, using national standard bidding documents as 
amended during the project negotiations.   

4.1.5 Irrigation works and all consultancy services will be procured in accordance with the Bank's 
procurement system ("AfDB System") and the Bank's relevant standard bidding documents (BD). The 
Borrower is expected to submit to the Bank a request to use advance contracting (AC), as defined in 
Article 11.2 of the Bank's Procurement Policy of October 2015. The activities targeted by such ACs 
are essentially those related to irrigation scheme works and ancillary control services. 

Special Conditions Stemming from Usage of the National System. 

4.1.6. Eligibility: The Bank's resources for financing project activities come from the joint ADF 
and NTF financing. Procurement financed by the NTF resources administered by AfDB is subject to 
compliance with the rule of origin. Following the assessment of procurement risks and capacities, it 
was decided that the National Procurement System be used for part of this project. All activities of 
this project, whose implementation is planned according to the national public procurement system,  
are financed exclusively from ADF resources. Therefore, no restrictions on the rule of origin will be 
applied to these activities. The only procurement co-financed by the NTF and the ADF, namely the 
consolidation of the track dyke and the development of 7 basins, will be subject to the Bank's 
procurement system and the Bank's rule of origin will be applied. 

4.1.7 Assessment of Procurement Risks and Capacity: Procurement provisions, including risk 
assessment, appropriate risk mitigation measures, procurement capabilities as well as procurement 
implementation details and associated control mechanisms are detailed in Annex B5.  

4.1.8 Advance Contracting: Considering the scheduling constraints related to the Borrower's 
agenda, a number of procurements may, at the Borrower's request, be implemented through advance 
contracting in accordance with the provisions of Article 11.2 of the AfDB Policy. The procedures and 
methods used for such advance contracting shall be identical to those adopted for the project. A 
reasoned request listing the procurements concerned together with a procurement plan shall be 
submitted to and accepted by the Bank.  

4.1.9 Financial Management: The financial management arrangements below are based on an 
assessment of the Executing Agency's financial management capabilities and fiduciary risks detailed 
in the technical annex. They will be redefined during the training to be provided when the project is 
launched. Responsibility for financial management shall rest with the Project Coordination Unit 



 

 16 

(PCU). The PCU will be created by the Ministry of Rural Development and placed under the technical 
supervision of the Directorate for Strategy, Planning and Monitoring/Evaluation (DSPSE). The 
financial management staff will include: a Coordinator, an administrative and financial officer, and 
an accountant. Their recruitment and performance contracts shall be subject to the Bank’s prior 
agreement. Before the beginning of each budget year, the PCU shall prepare an annual work 
programme and budget (AWPB) to be submitted to the Ministry of Rural Development for validation 
through the DSPSE, the Steering Committee and the Bank. It will produce the AWPB implementation 
reports that will serve as the basis for the analysis of variances between projections and actual figures 
(costs and timeframes), supplemented by corrective measures considered in the event of an 
unfavourable variance. These financial performance monitoring reports shall be annexed to the 
quarterly progress reports sent to the Bank latest 45 days after the end of the quarter. Although an 
administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual was prepared under the PPF, it will have 
to be revised and adapted to the final organisation chart of the PCU with a view to its harmonious 
integration within the Ministry of Rural Development, where it will collaborate with certain services. 
The internal control of the project will be based on this manual. 

Project accounting will be kept using the “Success” software procured with an advance from the 
Project Preparation Fund (PPF). The accounting will include all project sources of financing (ADF 
loan, NTF loan and counterpart contributions). The “Success” software will be configured to cover 
all project components and expenditure categories. It should be able to produce quarterly financial 
reports and annual financial statements. 

4.1.10 Disbursement Arrangements: The ADF and NTF loans will be disbursed in accordance with 
the rules and procedures of the Bank's Disbursement Manual, using the direct payment methods (ADF 
loan and NTF ) and the special account method (ADF loan for expenses related to recurrent activities 
and operations). A special account will be opened for this purpose in a bank acceptable to AfDB. 

4.1.11 Account Audit: project financial statements will be audited by an independent external auditor 
annually and at project completion in accordance with the terms of reference (TORs) for the audit of 
AfDB-funded projects. The first audit of the project will include an audit of the use of the Project 
Preparation Fund (PPF) advance in accordance with the Letter of Agreement. Project audit reports 
shall reach the Bank latest six months following the end of the audited fiscal year.  

4.2 Monitoring and Evaluation 

4.2.1 The project will adopt a results-based approach and impact-oriented monitoring (IOM). In 
this regard, a performance measurement framework (PMF) was prepared during the appraisal in 
consultation with the project team (see details in Appendix C.3 Volume 2). As regards this PMF, 
internal monitoring will be carried out by the M/E officer at the PCU level and will serve as a basis 
for evaluating project performance. Monitoring at the central level will be carried out jointly by the 
Directorate for Strategy, Cooperation and Monitoring/Evaluation (DSCSE) in the Ministry of 
Agriculture and MEF's General Directorate for Public Investments and Economic Cooperation 
(DG/IPCE). 

4.2.2 Activities scheduled under the project are summed up in the table below. These activities 
will be conducted following the project implementation schedule presented on Page (vi).  

  



 

 17 

Table 4.2 : Schedule and Key Stages of the Project 
Period Stages Monitoring Activities/Feedback Loop 

September 2016 Application of advance 
contracting (AC) 

Adoption of the national system 

December 2018 Project approval  Approval by the AfDB Group Board of Directors 
December  2018 Signature of the loan 

agreements 
Letter of Invitation to the Borrower  

February 2019 Project launching  Jointly organise the launch of the workshop with the Government 
(Bank’s launch mission) 

2019 – 2023 Award of contracts for the 
procurement of materials and 
equipment  

Bid invitation and evaluation (PCU and associated partners); signing of 
contracts (PCU/Ministry of Rural Development): Involvement of 
ANAPEJ, IPM, ENFVA-CFPR, CNRADA, DDFCA etc. 

Works and services Works execution (companies); works supervision and control; launch of 
DPs and bid evaluation; signing of TA contracts; TA coordination and 
supervision (transformative structure component); etc.  

2019 – 2023 Project supervision Loan administration; Supervision of project activities; Field supervision 
(two missions per year) 

December 2023 Project completion Completion report drafting meeting by ADF/NTF 

4.3 Governance 

4.3.1 The Mauritanian Government has made efforts over the past five years to increase 
transparency in public affairs management, adopt good governance practices and streamline 
public spending. Hence, it created the Monitoring Committee responsible for implementing the 
National Anti-Corruption Strategy (SNLC) to strengthen the powers and effectiveness of the 
supervisory authorities and the judiciary, and to enhance the key role of Parliament as an entity tasked 
with public expenditure control. This strategy gives civil society the opportunity to express itself, 
formulate opinions and take action with the authorities and the judiciary. The Government has also 
directed macroeconomic policy towards the elimination of extra-budgetary expenditure and budgetary 
financing by the Central Bank of Mauritania, as well as the reduction of recurrent expenditure. 
However, despite these efforts, governance reforms remain insufficient. In 2017, Mauritania was 
ranked 41st out of 54 African countries by the Ibrahim Index of African Governance (IIAG). 
According to the same report, the country's ranking deteriorated over the 2012-2016 period. Under 
Transparency International's Corruption Perceptions Index (CPI), Mauritania's score also deteriorated 
from 31/100 in 2015 to 28/100 in 2017, dropping 31 spots in world ranking (143rd in 2017 compared 
to 112th in 2015). Also, the 2016 Global Competitiveness Index identifies corruption as the third most 
problematic obstacle to doing business in Mauritania. 

4.3.2 In recent years, the Mauritanian Government, with the support of its technical and financial 
partners (TFPs), has initiated a sustained reform programme to improve the national public 
procurement system. This resulted in the adoption of Public Procurement Code 2010-040, which 
incorporates best practice in transparency and competition. To build on this regulatory environment 
for implementation of the provisions of the Paris Declaration on the use of national procedures for the 
execution of AfDB-funded projects, the Bank conducted a detailed review of Mauritania's 
procurement system in 2017. The review, which is currently being validated, concluded that the 
criteria of economy, equity, transparency and integrity are generally met by Mauritania's country 
procurement system. In terms of reforms, and with a view to improving the fiduciary framework for 
public expenditure and procurement efficiency, Mauritania adopted a new decree (No. 126-2017) in 
November 2017 repealing all the implementing decrees of Public Procurement Code 2010-040. This 
new implementing instrument ensures better consistency between the regulations and the public 
procurement code. In the area of financial management, the Government recently introduced a public 
budgetary and accounting management system, called Rashad. State expenditure on projects is 
executed through this system. 



 

 18 

4.4. Sustainability  

4.4.1 In view of the high priority given by the Mauritanian authorities to the agricultural sector 
with a view to diversifying the national economy, major public expenditure has been planned to 
support the construction of the irrigation schemes. Therefore, this project will enjoy total ownership 
by government structures (MEF, Ministry of Rural Development, MEDD, etc.) that have the required 
qualifications in the field, and will receive adequate counterpart funding. Recurrent (additional) 
expenditure due to the project will be budgeted and borne by the (regular) operating budget of the 
Ministry of Rural Development, to which the Servicing and Maintenance Fund to be established will 
make a significant contribution mainly to cover the maintenance and servicing costs of the 
transformative irrigation schemes.  

4.4.2 The project seeks to revive flood-recession farming in seven basins totalling 3,300 ha, 
develop vegetable farming areas totalling 200 ha for women, guarantee and ensure the availability of 
water for flood-recession farming, protect against floods and open up access to these areas. Thus, 
through the activities planned, PATAM will have a strong impact to stimulate the social and economic 
development of the project area. It will be recalled that one of the significant impacts of PAHABO is 
the reverse exodus phenomenon that has resulted in the resettlement of more than 1,500 households 
in the project area from the big cities (Nouakchott, Rosso, Nouadhibou, etc). Thus, farmers’ 
involvement in ensuring project ownership and their participation in financing and executing works 
to rehabilitate the farming areas, as well as measures taken to train and organise beneficiaries to ensure 
proper infrastructure management and maintenance will increase project viability and sustainability. 

4.5. Risk Management 

4.5.1 The main risk factors that could compromise project implementation are: (i) insufficient 
interdepartmental coordination; (ii) climate hazards; (iii) limited stakeholder institutional capacity; 
(iv) lack of financial inclusion and insufficient access to finance and credit; (v) poor maintenance and 
servicing of the irrigation schemes that affects the sustainability of the system, crop production and 
profitability; and (vi) procurement delays and their impact on the disbursement rate. 

4.5.2 The main risk factors and appropriate mitigation measures are summarised in the table below: 

Potential Risks Mitigation Measures Level 
Insufficient capacity for inter-sector 
coordination at the national level and 
consultation at the local level 

Establishment of an inter-sector National Steering Committee and a 
Local Consultative Committee. ++ 

Recurrent climatic hazards/droughts Dissemination of resilient technology and seeds. ++ 
Limited stakeholder institutional capacity The programme provides for stakeholder capacity building. ++ 

Problem of financial inclusion and access to 
funding and credit 

The project provides for: (i) a guarantee fund to improve financial 
inclusion; (ii) a partnership convention with Crédit Agricole de 
Mauritanie (CAM); (iii) assistance in the organisation of the 
beneficiaries to facilitate access to credit; and (iv) promotion of 
agricultural insurance. 

+++ 

Poor servicing and maintenance of irrigation 
schemes 

Support for the organisation of water usage, socio-professional 
associations (SPAs) and the establishment of a Servicing and 
Maintenance Fund. 

+++ 

Procurement delays and impact on bid 
invitations and on the disbursement rate 

(i) Use of the national system (ref. applied thresholds); (ii) application 
of advance contracting (APA); (iii) development and implementation of 
necessary tools and capacity building: technical support in procurement, 
development and implementation of public procurement to improve 
upstream (procurement monitoring) and downstream expenditure 
(disbursement planning and monitoring). 

+++ 

Highly significant: +++; Significant: ++; Less significant: +; Not significant: - 



 

 19 

4.6 Knowledge Building 

4.6.1 PATAM’s implementation will help to develop knowledge on new irrigation techniques, 
yield enhancement, promotion of the rice and market gardening sectors, farming of high value-added 
crops, management and saving of water resources, and mitigation of the effects of climate change. 
The TAAT initiative will provide support and contribute to: (i) the optimal exploitation of water 
resources; (ii) the adoption of participatory management of the irrigation scheme; and (iii) the use of 
various information systems established (monitoring/evaluation, mapping, agricultural insurance, 
guarantee system, etc.). The training and information sessions envisaged by the project for the 
provision of agricultural advice on irrigation techniques and farming practices to beneficiaries and 
technicians will provide another channel for enhancing and disseminating knowledge. The project 
will also run the Research and Development Programme sub-component, in addition to supporting 
Young Agricultural Entrepreneurs and their involvement in the priority subsector value chains 
retained. The main knowledge gained and lessons learned will be reflected in the project's periodic 
reports and completion report, filed in the Bank's archiving system and published on the websites of 
the ministries concerned (MEF, Ministry of Rural Development, MEDD and ANAPEJ, etc.); (iv) 
design production value models, value chain development in project areas and market access; and (v) 
promote a contractual framework between the stakeholders involved in project implementation. The 
training and information sessions envisaged by the project to promote research and development, and 
support farmers to master irrigation techniques and farming practices constitutes an ideal channel for 
knowledge dissemination. Furthermore, the institution building provided to grassroots organisations 
(rice cooperatives, women's vegetable-farming cooperatives, EIGs, water users' organisations, etc.) 
will give these structures the necessary capacity to serve more effectively as an interface with the 
Ministry of Rural Development. This knowledge will be systematically captured and documented in 
best practice manuals, monitoring and evaluation reports, supervision missions and periodic reports 
that will be shared at country and Bank level. The main knowledge gained and lessons learned will be 
reflected in the project's periodic reports and completion report, filed in the Bank's archiving system 
and published on the websites of the Ministries and stakeholders concerned (MEF, Ministry of 
Agriculture, MEDD, ANAPEJ, IPM, BCM, CAM and NBM). The “African Digital Financial 
Inclusion (ADFI) initiative will be promoted for innovative solutions targeting smart agriculture. 

V. Legal Framework 

5.1 Legal Instrument 

The financing instruments selected are: (i) a loan agreement between the ADF and the Islamic 
Republic of Mauritania; and (ii) a loan agreement between the AfDB acting as the administrator of 
the Nigeria Trust Fund (NTF) and the Islamic Republic of Mauritania. 

5.2 Conditions Associated with the Bank’s Intervention 

5.2.1 Conditions Precedent to Effectiveness: The NTF and ADF loan agreements shall become 
effective subject to the Borrower’s fulfilment, to the satisfaction of the ADF and the Bank, of the 
conditions provided for in Section 12.01 of the General Conditions for Loan Agreements and 
Guarantee Agreements of the ADF and the ADB respectively. 

5.2.2 Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement of the Loans: Apart from effectiveness of the 
Loan Agreements, first disbursement of the ADF and NTF loan resources shall be subject to the 
Borrower’s fulfilment of the following conditions, to the Bank’s satisfaction: 



 

 20 

 Provide evidence to the Bank (representing the NTF) and the ADF of the decision to create 
the Project Coordination Unit under the technical supervision of the Directorate for Strategy, 
Cooperation and Monitoring/Evaluation (DSCSE) within the Ministry of Rural Development; 
 

 The submission of a certified copy of the Project Coordination Charter (PCC) signed between 
the Project Coordination Unit (PCU), the Directorate in charge of Strategy, Cooperation and 
Monitoring and Evaluation, Directorate in charge of the Development of Sub-sectors and 
Agriculture Board (DFCA), National Center for Agronomic Research and Agricultural 
Development (CNRADA), National School of Training and Agricultural Extension (ENFVA) 
and Rural Producers Training Center (CFPR), the National Agency for the Promotion of 
Youth Employment (ANAPEJ) and the Directorate of Environmental Protection (DPN), and 
approved by the Secretary General of the Ministry of Rural Development and the Minister of 
the Environment. Economy and Finance, the terms and conditions of which will have been 
satisfactory to the Fund;  
 

 The submission of a certified copy of each of the Partnership Agreements signed between the 
Project Coordination Unit ("PCU") and (i) the Department in charge of the Development of 
Sub-sectors and the Agricultural Board (DFCA); ( ii) the National Center for Agronomic 
Research and Agricultural Development (CNRADA); (iii) the National School of  Training 
and Agricultural Extension (ENFVA) and the Rural Producers Training Center (CFPR); (iv) 
the National Youth Employment Agency (ANAPEJ); and (v) the Directorate of 
Environmental Protection (DPN), the terms and conditions of which have been deemed 
satisfactory by the Fund; and  
 

 The submission of satisfactory evidence of the inclusion in the State budget for the 2019 year 
of the government's financial contribution and the opening of the annual budgetary 
appropriation relating thereto. 

5.2.3 Other conditions: Furthermore, the Borrower shall: 

 submit to the Fund within three months of the first disbursement, evidence of the recruitment 
of members of the PCU, namely: Project Coordinator, Administrative and Financial Manager, 
procurement expert, GR Engineer, Agronomist, Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist, Gender 
and Communication Specialist, and Accountant within the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) 
whose qualifications and terms of reference have been deemed acceptable by the Funds; 

 submit to the Fund within three months of the first disbursement, evidence of the creation of: 
(i) a National Steering Committee (NSC) chaired by the Secretary-General of the Ministry of 
Rural Development and whose composition has been deemed satisfactory by the Fund; and 
(ii) a Local Consultative Committee (LCC) chaired by the Hakem of Moughatâa of Boghé and 
whose composition has been deemed satisfactory by the Fund; 

 send to the Fund, before 31 December 2020, evidence of the establishment and opening of a 
regional agency of the National Agency for Youth Employment (ANAPEJ) in Boghé; 

 set up, no later than 30 June 2019, a technical committee to support the Project Coordination 
Unit (PCU) in charge of the validation of studies planned for within the framework of the 
Project; 



 

 21 

 submit to the Fund, no later than 31 December 2019, a summary note from the land reform 
study and prospects for agricultural land; 

 send to the Fund, before 31 December 2020, evidence of the availability of the seed grant 
within the Maintenance and Operations Fund; and 

 provide the Fund, by 31 January of each year, with evidence of the inclusion in the State budget 
for the year concerned of the Government's counterpart contribution and the opening of the 
related annual budgetary appropriation. 

5.2.4  Commitments  

(i) The Borrower undertakes to comply with the project. In this regard, the Borrower shall implement 
the project and ensure that the Executing Agency, its contractors and/or agents implement it in 
accordance with the provisions of the Loan Agreements and Article IX (Project Implementation - 
Cooperation and Information) of the General Conditions. 

(ii) Institutional Provisions: The Borrower undertakes to act as follows, to the Bank’s satisfaction: 

 The main tasks of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will be to ensure (i) the 
construction of infrastructure and flood control structures, their development, 
animation, training, extension and support. Project activities; (ii) Planning, 
programming, and administrative and financial management of the Project; and (iii) 
Coordination, monitoring and evaluation and supervision of Project activities; and 

 The National Steering Committee (NSC) will be in charge of guiding, orientating and 
supervising the implementation of the Project, notably through the review of the annual 
work programme and budget submitted by the PCU and the assessment of the project 
implementation status. 

(iii) Environmental and Social Safeguards 

The Borrower shall undertake and ensure that the Executing Agency and each of its contractors, sub-
contractors and workers also undertake to: 

(a) Implement the Project in accordance with the ESMP, the Fund's Safeguards Policy and 
applicable national legislation in a manner satisfactory to the Fund, in substance and 
form; 

(b) Prepare and submit to the Fund, as part of the Project Report, [semi-annual/quarterly 
reports] on the implementation of the ESMP, including identified shortcomings and 
corrective actions taken; and 

(c) Refrain from any action that would prevent or hinder the implementation of the ESMP, 
including any modification, suspension, waiver and/or cancellation of any provision 
related thereto, in whole or in part, without the prior written consent of the Fund; and 

(d) Cooperate fully with the Fund in the event that the implementation of the Project or 
any change in its scope results in unforeseen displacement and / or resettlement of 
populations; and undertake to commence works in the area affected by the 



 

 22 

implementation of the Project only if all Project Affected Persons (PAPs) are 
compensated and / or resettled in accordance with the Resettlement Plan (RP) prepared.  

(iv)  Other commitments: The Borrower undertakes, to the satisfaction of the Fund, to maintain the Project 
Coordination Unit (PCU) under the technical supervision of the Directorate for Strategy, 
Cooperation and Monitoring and Evaluation (DSCSE) within the Project Executing Agency up to 
completion of the Project. 

(v) Integrity: The Borrower shall implement the project, and ensure that the Executing Agency and 
each of its contractors and/or agents implements the project, in accordance with the provisions of the 
Anti-Corruption Policies. 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Group Policies 

The project complies with all applicable Bank policies. 

VI. RECOMMENDATION 

Management recommends that the Boards of Directors approve: (i) the proposal to grant an ADF loan 
not exceeding UA 7 million to the Islamic Republic of Mauritania; (ii) the proposal to grant an NTF 
loan not exceeding UA 6 million to the Islamic Republic of Mauritania, to finance the Agricultural 
Transformation Support Project in Mauritania (PATAM) under the conditions set out in this report. 

 



 

























































 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 

 

 
 

SAVANNAH-BASED AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS 

DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT  

(PADECAS) 

 

 

COUNTRY:  CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT 

 

PROJECT BRIEF 
 

Client Information 

 
BORROWER:    Central African Republic 

EXECUTING AGENCY:  Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 

 

Financing Plan 

 
Source 

 
Amount 

 
Instrument 

AfDB 
UA 1.28 million  

UA 7 million 

ADF Grant 

TSF Grant 

IFAD UA 12.8 million Grant 

Government and 
Beneficiaries 

UA 1 million  Counterpart Funds 

TOTAL COST UA 22.1 million  

 

Key AfDB Financing Information 

 
 

 

Time Frame – Key Milestones (expected) 

  

Concept Not Approval July 2018 

Project Approval October 2018 

Signing of Grant Agreement December 2018 

First Disbursement February 2019 

Completion/Last Disbursement December 2023 

 
 

  



 

iv 

 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

1. The Savannah-Based Agricultural Value Chains Development Support Project 
(PADECAS), jointly financed with the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) 

seeks to sustainably grow food and beef production. PADECAS, which will span five years (2019-

2023) and cost UA 22.1 million (CFAF 17.3 billion) including an UA8.28 million grant from the 

Bank, will be implemented in the Prefectures of  Lobaye, Ombella-Mpoko and L’Ouham Péndé. The 

project will target around 60,000 households with over 500,000 direct beneficiaries.  

2. The agricultural sector employs 66% of the labour force and accounts for 23% of GDP. The 
agricultural and livestock sectors together employ 63% of poor households. Thanks to the agricultural 

sector assessment and ongoing operations, the project intervention will target five promising sectors: 

cassava, beans, maize and rice for plant production and cattle for animal production. The value chains 

approach was adopted to boost productivity and agriculture production through the introduction of 

innovative technologies that will enhanced the competitiveness of the sectors. The project will also  

involve the development  of infrastructure to support the sector. Lastly, the project aims to boost 

inclusive development in the sectors, particularly by encouraging the involvement of women and 

young people and improving access to affordable financing and the marketing of productions.  

3. CAR went through an unprecedented political and security crisis between 2012 and 2015. 
Two years after a return to constitutional order and the establishment of all democratic institutions, 

the security situation remains extremely fragile. Indeed, less than 40% of the territory is controlled 

by the Central African State. The crisis had devastating effects on the agricultural and livestock 

sectors,  and led to food and nutritional insecurity as well as increased poverty. In this context, 

improving agricultural and livestock production became an urgent priority for the Government. 

4. PADECAS stems from the CAR Government’s desire to make the agriculture and livestock 
sectors participate actively in the quest for economic growth capable of generating jobs and 

substantial incomes for rural communities. The project is perfectly in line with the Bank’s Ten-Year 

Strategy (2013-2022), especially 2 of High-fives: “Feed Africa” and “Improve the quality of life for 

people in Africa. It is also consistent with the Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa, 

2016-2025; the Strategy to Address Fragility and Strengthen Resilience in Africa (2014-2019); the 

Youth Employment Strategy in Africa; and the Bank’s Technologies for African Agricultural 

Transformation (TAAT) Programme which seeks to disseminate agricultural technologies to boost 

productivity and agricultural production in the selected five sectors.  

5. PADECAS will experiment on a pilot basis: (a) new technologies for increasing 
productivity; (b) inclusive funding mechanisms; and (c) youth entrepreneurship. In addition, a 

mechanism will be put in place to monitor dynamics of the food and cattle sub-sectors as well as the 

initiative designed to extend social protection to rural areas. The sum of these interventions will serve 

as pilot experiments for the Bank in the Central African Republic and generate invaluable knowledge 

for the future development of agricultural sub-sectors in the country and elsewhere in Africa. These 

interventions will be documented and will enable the Central African Government to redirect and 

better entrench its agro-pastoral development policies and strategies.



 

v 

 

PADECAS : RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 

 
Country and Project Name: Central African Republic (CAR): Savannah-Based Agricultural Value Chains Development Support Project (PADECAS) 
Project Goal: Sustainably increase productivity and food and cattle production in CAR 

RESULTS CHAIN 

PERFORMANCE INDICATORS  MEANS OF VERIFICATION 
RISKS/ 

MITIGATION MEASURES  

Indicator  

(including CSIs) 

Baseline 

Situation 
Target   

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Contribute to improve the food 
and nutritional security of the 
population 

Rate of food and nutritional security 48% 
 
 

40% 
 

Annual and statistical reports of 
CAR Ministries in charge of 
Planning and Agriculture and 

Rural Development   

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

Outcome 1 : Agricultural 
productivity and production 
increased 

Increase in productivity  
- Cassava                                                                                                      
- Rice 
- Maize  
- Beans  
 
Milk production 

 
 

 
8t/ha 

1.5t/ha 
0.85T/ha 
0.86t/ha 

 
1.5 liters/day 

 
 

 
10t/ha 
4t/ha 

1.5t/ha 
 1.3t/ha 

 
10 liters/days 

Annual and statistical reports of 
CAR Ministries in charge of 
Planning and Agriculture and 

Rural Development   

Risk: looting of project assets by 
armed groups 
 
Mitigation: Continued mediation 
efforts; fragility mitigating actions 
planned in the project 

Outcome 2 : Agro-pastoral 

production increased 

rate of increase of livestock 5% 10%  

Outcome 3 : Jobs created for 

youth and women 

Number of jobs created for youths/women 

Gender-disaggregation suggested.   
NA 1,500 permanent 

jobs and 3,000 
temporary jobs 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

Component 1 Development of 
plant and animal sub-sectors 
Output 1.1 New technologies are 
customized by beneficiaries  
 

 
 
1.1.1 Number of households adopting the 
new technology 

 
0 

 
 
 

 

 
18000 

Project progress reports Risk: Degradation of the security 
situation 
 
Mitigation: The project has 
targeted security-accessible areas 
and the Government with the 
support of the international 
community is continuing the Output 1.2 Rural infrastructures 

are rehabilitated 
1.2.1 Number of km of rural roads 
rehabilitated 

0 
 

 

498 km  



 

vi 

 

Output 1.3 Rural infrastructures 
are created 

1.3.1Number of processing 
units/multipurpose platforms installed 

0 8 dialogue to bring peace to the entire 
national territory 
 
Risk Extreme weather events 
 
Mitigation: Integration adaptation 
measures into activities (ex: 

introduction of seed varieties 
adapted to extreme climate risks, 
integrated approach to agriculture 
and livestock farming, 
establishment of a concerted 
system of warning and control and 
capacity building of stakeholders 
involved in the implementation of 

activities 

1.3.2 Number of processing units (small-
scale cheese factories) established 

0 12 

1.3.3 Number of warehouses, depots, 
drying facilities, input shops, markets 
constructed 

0 4  

    

 
Output 1.4 Cows are inseminated 
artificially 

 
1.4.1 Number of cows inseminated 

0 500  

 
Output 1.5 Women and youths 
are integrated in the agricultural 
value chains 

 
1.5.1 Number of women 

 
0 

 
240,000 

 

1.5.2 Number of youths 0 140,000  

 
Component 2 
Institutional support, 
improvement of governance and 
capacity-building 
Output 2.1 

Structuring of farmers’ 
associations guaranteed 

 
 
 
 
 
 

2.1.1 Number of structured associations 

 
 
 
 
 

 

0 

 
 
 
 
 

 

1,500 

 

 
Output 2.2 
Capacity of research institutes 
and agricultural board 
strengthened 

2.2.1  Number of ICRA laboratories 
rehabilitated (Bakere and Boukoko) 

0 2  

    

    

 

Output 2.3 
The Groupements Agri 
Multiplicateurs des semences 
(Seed Multipliers Association - 
GAM) and Seed Producers 
Networks 

(REPROSEM) supported 

 
2.3.1 Nbre de groupement REPROSEM 

 
0 

 
100 

 

Output 2.4 

Mutualistes Groupements 
d’intérêt Pastoraux (Pastoral 
Interest Groups - GIP) supported 

2.4.1 Number of pastoral interest groups 

(GIP) 

0 4  

     



 

vii 

 

     

Output 2.5 Agriculture sector 
governance strengthened 
 
 

2.6 Entrepreneurial skills 
development mechanism 
improved 
 
 
 
Output 2.9  
Capacity of community workers 
and nutritional health agents 

strengthened 

2.5.1-Private seed producers’ platform put 
in place  
 

0 
 

1 
 
 

  

 
2.6.1 Number of businesses created  
 
2.9.1 Number of trainings on nutrition held 

to train health workers  
2.9.2 Number of people sensitized on 
nutrition, hygiene and HIV/AIDS, 70% of 
them women  

 
0 
 

0 

 
 

0 

 
500 

 
2 

 
 

15000 

 
 
 
 

 
 
Reports of the Ministry of 
Health, UNICEF surveys 

  



 

viii 

 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

 

 

COMPONENTS 

 

RESOURCES  

Component 1 : 
 Improved seed production and seed conservation technologies 
 Improvement of production technical itineraries 
 Deployment of technologies for production, processing, packaging and storage of products 
 Supply of inputs and agricultural tools 
 Rural roads to opening up production areas 
 Socio-economic infrastructure to support the value chaines 
 Rehabilitation and strengthening of irrigated perimeters 
 Increased livestock productivity through artificial insemination 
 Rehabilitation of pharmaceutical depots and supply of veterinary drugs 
 Strengthening the epidemiological surveillance network for livestock farming 
 Financial and technical support for the establishment of processing units for women and young people 
Component 2 
 Study on the structuring of agricultural sectors and on the needs for skills and related professions 
 Strengthening improved seed multiplication and transfer system in the real world 
 Capacity building of support institutions 
 Creating conditions for the integration of young people and women in the sectors 
 Farm school to train young people in agricultural entrepreneurship 
 Support to agricultural entrepreneurship and training in management tools 
 Establishment of Seed Private Enterprise Platform 
 Adding value to products, technologies related to nutrition and demand  
 Strengthening the capacity of community relays and health workers in nutrition 

Component 3 

 Monitoring of project and ESMP implementation 
 Project administrative, accounting and financial management 
 Preparation of annual work plans and budgets, progress reports 
 Procurement of project goods, works and services 
 Project Audit 
 

Component 1 (UA 16.9 million) 
 
Component 2 (UA 2 million) 
 
Component 3 (UA 3.32 million) 

FAD: 1.28 MUC 
TSF: 7.0 MUC 
IFAD: 12.8 MUC 
Counterpart in kind: 1 MUC 



 

 

ix 

 

PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE 

 
  

2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 

Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 

1 Board Approval 
                     

2 Signature of Grant Agreement 
                     

3 Grant Effectiveness 
                     

4 First Disbursement 
                     

5 Project Commencement                      

6 
Signing of Conventions and Establishment of Protocols with 
Research Institutions 

                     

7 Signing of Contracts 
                     

8 
Commencement of Works (roads, various infrastructure and 
PI) 

                     

9 Implementation of Protocol of Research Institutions 
                     

10 Implementation of Capacity-Building Activities 
                     

11 Mid-Term Review 
                     

12 Audits 
                     

13 Government’s Completion Report 
                     

14 Completion of Activities 
                     

15 Closing December 2023 
                     



 

1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION BY BANK GROUP MANAGEMENT TO THE 

BOARD OF DIRECTORS CONCERNING A PROPOSAL TO AWARD A TSF AND 

ADF GRANT TO CAR TO FINANCE THE SAVANNAH AGRICULTURAL VALUE 

CHAINS DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT  

(PADECAS) 

 

Management hereby submits this report and recommendations concerning a proposal to award 

UA 7.0 million and an ADF grant of UA 1.28 million to the Central African Republic (CAR) to 

finance the Savannah-Based Agricultural Value Chains Development Support Project in 

(PADECAS). 

 

I. STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE 
 

 National Context 

1.1.1 The outbreak of the March 2013 crisis 
led to the most serious security, political and 

humanitarian crisis in CAR's history. This 

political crisis gave rise to a difficult three 

years’ political transition, supported by the 

international community. The return to 

constitutional order, notably with the elections 

of February 2016, made it possible to form a 

Government regrouping several political 

parties. With the exception of the Senate, all 

republican institutions were set up within the 

constitutional period. The last reshuffle of the 

Government in September 2017 was 

representative, taking into account all the 

sociological and political diversity of the 

country, including representatives of armed 

groups. 

1.1.2 On the security front, the presence of 
the UN peacekeeping force (MINUSCA) of 

nearly 12,000 men has stabilized the country, 

despite the fact that less than 40% of the 

territory is controlled by the Central African 

Government. Community tensions and regular 

clashes between armed groups are common 

across the country. In addition, the formation of 

several armed groups, who now clash for 

control of some areas of the country's mineral-rich territory, hold back hopes of a swift 

appeasement of the situation. On the other hand, in rural areas, especially those with significant 

mineral resources, insecurity remains persistent and could continue until disarmament of armed 

groups is effective. Several mining sites have been taken over by these groups and the resulting 

looting of resources is funds the war and further weakens the capacity of the state to meet the 

urgent needs of the population. 

1.1.3 Despite this relatively volatile security situation, the Central African authorities remain 
strongly committed to implementing the Disarmament, Demobilization, Reintegration and 

Repatriation (DDRR) program, whose success is a key element of the Government's strategy to 

Text box 1: Summary of the main fragility factors in 

CAR 

The key factors of CAR’s  persistent fragility are many, 
complex, and intertwined. The country’s violent political 
history, malfunctioning institutions, previous failed 
disarmament, demobilisation and reintegration 
programmes and social exclusion have hindered social 

and national cohesion. The main challenges the country 
must tackle include: 

Restore security throughout the national territory and 

consolidate peace and national cohesion. Despite the 

return to constitutional order in 2016 and the 

establishment of key democratic institutions enshrined in 

the Constitution, insecurity persists and inter-community 

confrontations have continued in several localities of the 

country. Today the CAR Government controls only a 

very small part of its territory, and armed groups have 

split into numerous uncontrolled rebel factions, which 

has multiplied criminal activities. 

Limited productive capacity of businesses and their 

financial situation depressed by the plunder and 

destruction of their production tools. CAR is particularly 

vulnerable to external shocks because of poor economic 

diversification, including specialisation in primary 

products. Developing the private sector is crucial for the 

expansion and diversification of the economy. 

Poor development of economic infrastructure (transport, 

energy, ICT, water and sanitation). In the context of a 

vast landlocked country like CAR, the availability of 

infrastructure in quantitative and qualitative terms is a 

major factor for reducing fragility and poverty.  

 



 

2 

 

work for an inclusive peace. The process launched on August 30, 2017, allowed, the collection 

of weapons, the insertion of more than 200 ex-combatants in the socio-economic process and the 

incorporation of more than 200 others in the national army. 

 Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives  

1.2.1 The country's medium-term development and socio-economic objectives are contained 
in the National Plan for Recovery and Peacebuilding (RCPCA, 2017-2021), adopted in October 

2016. This plan aims to create the foundations for 'sustainable and inclusive economic and social 

development, in particular through' the restoration and extension of the State throughout the 

national territory and massive public investment, in order to consolidate peace. 

1.2.2 PADECAS activities align with the pillars of the RCPCA. In addition, the project is in 
line with the two pillars of the CAR Country Strategy Paper (CSP) 2017-2021 Country Strategy 

namely: (i) Support for agriculture development and for social inclusion support infrastructure; 

and (ii) Strengthening of institutional capacity and governance. The project is also in line with 

the National Agricultural Investment and Food and Nutritional Security Programme (PNIASAN) 

and the National Employment and Vocational Training Policy Framework Paper (PNEFP).  

 Rationale for the Bank’s Intervention 

1.3.1 The agricultural sector employs 66% of the labour force and accounts for 23% of GDP; 
livestock is practiced by more than 80% of the rural population. The two sectors occupy 63% of 

poor households, and are thus crucial for improving food security and reducing poverty. The 

security crisis led not only to the loss of all inputs for agricultural and livestock production and 

the destruction and plunder of socio-economic facilities (storage facilities, markets, 

slaughterhouses, agricultural processing centres, etc.). The necessary support services for 

agricultural and livestock activities also declined during the crisis years. For example, only 4% 

of communes indicate that trade in inputs as fertilizers, seeds and phytosanitary products is 

conducted in their headquarters, which represents a 10% drop compared to the pre-2013 crisis 

period. Approximate 41% report the existence of veterinary services in their communes, 

representing a nearly 60% drop compared to the pre-2012 crisis situation.  

1.3.2 The food security situation remains disturbing. According to the 2016 National Food 
Security Survey (ENSA), about half of the population (48%), making up 2.1 million people, live 

in food insecurity. The crisis takes a heavier toll on women since 22% of urban women declare 

that their income sources are aid, gifts and family transfers, against 14% of men. For their part, 

rural women mostly depend on petty trading, agriculture and processing of natural products. The 

main income-generation- related constraints mentioned by households are the lack of capital to 

invest (61%), the lack of job opportunities (31%) and the lack of land /production equipment 

(27%).  

1.3.3 AfDB’s comparative advantage to implement PADECAS is that the project is in line 
with the Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy (2013-2022), especially 2 of High-fives: “Feed Africa” and 

“Improve the quality of life for people in Africa. It is also consistent with the Strategy for 

Agricultural Transformation in Africa, 2016-2025; the Strategy to Address Fragility and 

Strengthen Resilience in Africa (2014-2019); the Youth Employment Strategy in Africa; and the 

Bank’s Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) Programme which seeks 

to disseminate agricultural technologies to boost productivity and agricultural production in the 

selected five sectors. 

 



 

3 

 

 Donor Coordination 

1.4.1 In CAR, aid is the main source of financing for Government programmes. Aid 
coordination has been strengthened under the RCPCA. A Technical Secretariat has been 

established to monitor the implementation of TFP commitments. The Bank, through COCF 

played a key role in putting this mechanism in place. 

 
Table 1: Partners’ Intervention in the Rural Sector 

Sector or sub-sector* 
Scope (in 2018) 

GDP Exports Jobs 

Agriculture and rural development 22.8% 36.9% 66% 

Stakeholders – Annual Public Expenditure (CFAF Billion)** 

Government (2010-2013 average) Donors  

CFAF 174.901 billion (5% of total 
expenditure) (*) 

AfDB CFAF 14.298 billion (2018-2021) 

World Bank CFAF 15.091 billion (2017-2021) 

IFAD  CFAF 16.208 billion (2018-2021) 

FAO  CFAF 2.5 billion 

EU CFAF 13 billion 

UNDP CFAF 3.001 billion 

 Others CFAF 0.838 billion 

Level of Aid Coordination 

 Existence of thematic working groups [Yes, established during RCPCA] 

 Existence of an overall sector programme  
[Yes, (i) The PNIASAN; (ii) Regional Agricultural Development 
Programmes; (iii) 2016-2018 Agricultural Recovery Roadmap; (iv) 
2017-2021 Livestock Roadmap. 

 AfDB’s role in aid coordination Active member (not leader) 

(*) Sources: RCPCA; Ministry of Rural Development; Ministry of Livestock and Animal Health.   

 

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION  

 Project Components 

2.1.1 PADECAS complements IFAD's Agropastoral Production Revival Project (PREPAS). 
It will be implemented through three components as follows: (i) Development of agricultural and 

animal sectors; (ii) Institutional support to the agricultural sector; and (iii) Project Coordination 

and Management. 

2.1.2 Component 1 aims to develop value chains for the cassava, maize, rice, bean, and 
bovine value chains. The project will introduce technologies to improve the productivity, 

processing and marketing of agriculture products. Through this component, the project will 

support farms and groups through an approach focused on the development of a strategy for the 

inclusion of women and youth in selected activities. The project will contribute to the 

establishment of the necessary agricultural and rural infrastructures that will allow the opening 

up of the production areas, as well as the storage, marketing of plant and animal productions. 

This component also aims to provide livestock farmers with the knowledge, skills and material 

resources to increase livestock productivity and production. 

2.1.3 Component 2 supports coordination and dialogue among actors in value chains through 
capacity building of support institutions (the Central African Institute for Agronomic Research 

(ICRA), the National Agency for Development of Agricultural Livestock (ANDE), National 

Federation of Central African Herders (FNEC), Central African Agency for Agricultural 

Development (ACDA)) and through support for partnership between stakeholders, including 

public-private partnerships. The Project will support the preparation, adoption and 

implementation of detailed policy documents, with the aim of improving governance and 



 

4 

 

enabling an effective transformation of the rural environment. These supports will target in a 

non-exhaustive way, seeds being the most decisive factor of production on which the efficiency 

of the other inputs depends. The project will work with the International Labor Office (ILO) to 

create conditions for youth and women's participation in value chains. 

 

2.1.4 Component 3 provides technical, administrative and financial management of the 
project. 

2.1.5 A Summary of the activities for each of the components is provided below. 

 
Table 2 : Description and Costs of Project Components 

No 
Component 

Cost 

(MUA)1 
Description 

1 
Development of vegetable 
and livestock sub-sectors  

16.9 

 Improved seed production and seed conservation technologies 
 Improvement of production technical itineraries 
 Deployment of technologies for production, processing, 

packaging and storage of products 
 Supply of inputs and agricultural tools 
 Rural roads to opening up production areas 
 Socio-economic infrastructure to support the value chaines 
 Rehabilitation and strengthening of irrigated perimeters 
 Increased livestock productivity through artificial insemination 
 Rehabilitation of pharmaceutical depots and supply of 

veterinary drugs 

 Strengthening the epidemiological surveillance network for 
livestock farming 

 Financial and technical support for the establishment of 
processing units for women and young people 

2 Institutional support 2 

 Study on the structuring of agricultural sectors and on the needs 
for skills and related professions 

 Strengthening improved seed multiplication and transfer system 
in the real world 

 Capacity building of support institutions 
 Creating conditions for the integration of young people and 

women in the sectors 
 Farm school to train young people in agricultural 

entrepreneurship 
 Support to agricultural entrepreneurship and training in 

management tools 
 Establishment of Seed Private Enterprise Platform 
 Adding value to products, technologies related to nutrition and 

demand  
 Strengthening the capacity of community relays and health 

workers in nutrition 

3 
Project coordination and 

management 
3.3 

 Monitoring of project and ESMP implementation 
 Project administrative, accounting and financial management 
 Preparation of annual work plans and budgets, progress reports 
 Procurement of project goods, works and services 
 Project Audit 

 
 Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Explored 

2.2.1 Discussions with the ministries responsible for agriculture and livestock and various 
stakeholders allowed for the consensual adoption of the project’s technical design centred on 

support for the vegetable and cattle sub-sector with private sector participation. The option 

adopted is to introduce proven technologies in the different value chain segments to increase 

their productivity and agricultural production. In addition, the project aims to stimulate and 

support private initiative and lend impetus to inclusive sub-sector development by encouraging 

                                                             
1  These costs do not include unallocated sums.  



 

5 

 

the involvement of women and youths and improving access to sustainable and customized 

financing. 

 

Table 3: Project Alternatives Explored and Reasons for their Rejection 
Titre   Brief Description Reasons for Rejection 

Integrated rural 

development project 

A rural development project 

encompassing all sub-sectors 

A traditional rural development project that 

does not rely on market-oriented and non-

market-related sectors will have limited 

effects on the incomes and employability of 

rural communities. young people and 

women 

Use of natural 

breeding 

Use of natural and uncontrolled 

breeding 

The results of natural breeding are usualy 

modest. The choice to use artificial 

insemination to improve cattle productivity 

is based on numerous advantages offered, 

namely:  

 Better disease control under tropical 
conditions;  

 Post-weaning performance improved 
 Carcass value improved and  
 More productive dairy replacement 

heifers 

Development of 

livestock as a 

dominant sector 

Implement project activities focused 

on intensive stockbreeding (imported 

breeds, close veterinary monitoring, 

feeding based on concentrates and 

cultivated fodder)  

 Veterinary treatment and intensive 
feeding cannot be afforded by most 

stockbreeders 

 Poor adequacy between human and 
institutional capacity and the practice of 

intensive stockbreeding 

 

 Project Type 

This intervention is an autonomous investment project.  

 Project Cost and Financing Arrangement  

2.4.1 The indicative project cost, net of taxes and customs duty, is estimated at about UA 
22.1 million (CFAF 17.3 billion), 52% of which in foreign exchange and 48% in local currency. 

The project financing includes UA 7 million, or CFAF 5.5 billion, by a TSF grant; UA 1.28 

million or CFAF 1.6 billion by an ADF grant; UA 12.8 million or CFAF 10 billion by an IFAD 

grant; and the rest, UA 1 million or CFAF 784 million constitutes the in-kind contribution of 

Government and beneficiaries. Project activities will span a period of five (5) years. The 

summary of project costs, financing distribution and expenditure schedule is presented in Tables 

4-8. 

2.4.2 The IFAD co-financing comes in the form of a project that will be implemented 
concurrently with PADECAS. IFAD is in the process of developing the project concept note 

which, once approved, will enable the preparation mission to undertake the studies for the 

proposed infrastructure. According to IFAD’s provisional schedule, these studies will be 

conducted at the end of 2018 or at the latest beginning of 2019. 

  



 

6 

 

Table 4: Estimated Costs by Component 

COMPONANT 

($US, 000) (UCA000) 

% 

FE 

% 

Base 

Cost 

Local 

Currency  

Foreign 

Exchange Total 

Local 

Currency  

Foreign 

Exchang

e 

Total 

1. Development of vegetable and 

livestock sub-sectors 8 824,56 12 814,58 21  639,14 6 258,55 9 088,35 15 346,91 59 75 
2. Institutional Support 1 602,80 1  133,24 2 736,04 1 136,74 803,72 1 940,46 41 9 

3. Project Coordination and Management 4 308,80 174,90 4 483,70 3 055,89 124,04 3 179,93 4 16 

Base Cost 14 736,17 14 122,72 28 858,88 10 451,18 10 016,11 20 467,29 49 100 

Physical Contingencies 524,54 1 246,59 1 771,13 372,02 884,10 1 256,12 70 6 

Financial Contingencies 266,90 311,01 577,91 189,29 220,57 409,86 54 2 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 15 527,60 15 680,31 31 207,92 11 012,49 11 120,79 22 133,27 50 108 

 

Table 5: Project Cost by Expenditure Category 

 

Tableau 6: Schedule of Payments by Category  (amounts are in ‘000 UA) 

Components 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 TOTAL 

1. Development of vegetable and livestock sub-

sectors 2 240,56 6 537,46 5 079,36 2 039,11 963,74 16 860,22 

2. Institutional Support 1 132,11 518,51 141,27 119,78 106,32 2 017,99 

3. Project Coordination and Management 775,01 640,20 608,58 613,27 618,00 3 255,06 

TOTAL 4 147,68 7 696,17 5 829,21 2 772,16 1 688,06 22 133,27 

 

Table 7: Sources of Financing 

Source of Finance 

(UC, 000) ($US, 000)  

% Total Local 

Currency  

Foreign 

Exchange 

Total Local 

Currency  

Foreign 

Exchange 

Total 

TSF 5 044,9 1 956,8 7 001,7 7 113,3 2 759,1 9 872,4 31,6 

FAD 379,5 898,3 1 277,9 535,2 1 266,7 1 801,8 5,8 

Government 1 086,6 0,0 1 086,6 1 532,1 0,0 1 532,1 4,9 

IFAD 4 501,5 8 265,6 12 767,1 6 347,1 11 654,5 18 001,6 57,7 

TOTAL 11 012,5 11 120,8 22 133,3 15 527,6 15 680,3 31 207,9 100,0 

 

Table 8: Project cost by category and sources of financing 

  

Expenditure Category 

($US, 000) (UA, 000) 
% 

Dev

. 

% Base 

Cost 

Local 

Currency  

Foreign 

Exchange 

Total Local 

Currenc

y  

Foreign 

Exchange 

Total 

Investment         

Works 4 905,61 11 446,43 16 352,04 3 479,16 8 118,03 11 597,19 70 57 

Goods 656,63 2 071,59 2 728,22 465,70 1 469,21 1 934,91 76 9 

Services  5 017,02 604,70 5 621,72 3 558,17 428,86 3 987,04 11 19 

Operational 4 156,90 - 4 156,90 2 948,16 - 2 948,16 - 14 

Base Cost 14 736,17 14 122,72 28 858,88 10 451,18 10 016,11 20 467,29 49 100 

Physical Contingencies 524,54 1 246,59 1 771,13 372,02 884,10 1 256,12 70 6 

Financial Contingencies 266,90 311,01 577,91 189,29 220,57 409,86 54 2 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 15 527,60 15 680,31 31 207,92 11 012,49 11 120,79 22 133,27 50 108 

EXPENDITURE CATEGORY 
Source of Finance (UA, 000) % 

TSF  FAD IFAD Government  Total 

I. INVESTMENT 5 065,4 1 277,9 12 767,1 - 19 110,4 86,3 

A. SERVICES 3 053,9 - 959,1 - 4 013,0 18,1 

B. Goods 1 979,8 76,4 - - 2 056,2 9,3 

C. Works 31,7 1 201,5 11 808,0 - 13 041,3 58,9 

II. OPERATIONAL 1 936,3 - - 1 086,6 3 022,9 13,7 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 7 001,7 1 277,9 12  767,1 1 086,6 22 133,3 100,0 



 

7 

 

 Project Target Area and Beneficiaries 

2.5.1 PADECAS will intervene in the prefectures of Lobaye in the southwest; Ombella 
Mpoko in the center-west and Ouham Pandé (Bozoum) in the north-west. With regard to support 

to the vegetable and animal sectors; the project area includes the following: (i) for Ombella-

Mpoko: Bimbo, Boali, Bossembele, Damara-Bogangolo; and (ii) for Lobaye: Boda-Mbaiki and 

Boganda-Boganangone. Added to this is Bozoum and Sakai for rice. The choice of these zones 

is justified by their accessibility to the security plan. The project will target about 30,120 

households to be added to the other 30,000 households of the PREPAS Project, making a total 

of 60,120 households with more than 500,000 direct beneficiaries. 

2.5.2 The main areas of the project, Ombella Mpoko and Lobaye, cover an estimated 
beneficiary population of about 1.5 million inhabitants, or 32% of the total population of the 

country. The young make up 61% of this population while women make up 50%. The prefecture 

of Ouham Pandé, which is predominantly young (63% of the total population) and female (51% 

of the population), is estimated at more than 60,000 inhabitants. Agriculture, which mobilizes 

more than 85% of the population, is the predominant sector for the prefecture's economy. Fishing 

Livestock and trade are also practiced. 

2.5.3 A landlocked area whose economy is essentially based on agriculture, the Préfecture of 
Lobaye has enormous potentialities that remain poorly exploited. In fact, of the nearly 2.3 million 

hectares of arable land, only 2% are cultivated each year. The region has a dense hydrographic 

network, 1.750 million ha of forest, 2.75 million ha of pasture and 2 800 km of road and rural 

roads of which only 12% are accessible by vehicle. The prefecture of Ouham Péndé, like the 

whole country, enjoys considerable assets. Its abundant rainfall and very fertile lands that 

facilitated the development of groundnut economy, earned it its former name of "the lung of the 

Central African economy." 

2.5.4 Lobaye belongs to the Guinea forest zone with 9 months of rainy season and 3 months 
of dry season and annual rainfall exceeding 1,600 mm. Mean annual temperature is 23° with 

relatively low thermal amplitude. Ombella Mpoko occupies the Guinean forest zone to the South, 

the Sudano-Oubanguian zone in the Centre and the Sudano-Guinean zone to the North. Peak 

rainfall varies between 1,200 to 1,500 mm per year. Temperatures range between 23 and 24°C, 

making the thermal gap low. Ouham Péndé (Bozoum) sits astride the Sudano-Oubanguian and 

Sudani-Sahelian climates. Rainfall ranges between 900 and 1,200 mm per year. This zone is 

typified by relative humidity with a more contrasted regime and longer periods of sunshine in 

the year, considering the country’s latitudinal position. Mean annual temperature is 25°C while 

the annual thermal amplitude is 6°C. 

 Participatory Approach in Project Identification 

2.6.1 This project was designed using an integrated participatory approach to improve 
beneficiary ownership and build the resilience of the rural poor. PADECAS design is the result 

of popular consultations (meetings and discussions) with stakeholders (rural population, NGOs, 

institutions, etc.) who expressed their views and concerns about the project’s objectives and 

technical choices during the identification, preparation and appraisal phases. Thanks to the 

participatory approach adopted, stakeholders supported the project objectives and technical 

choices. This same approach, used during the formulation stage, will be continued during project 

implementation. Different agricultural sector actors, State agents, the Chamber of Agriculture, 

NGOs, commercial banks as well as MFIs (micro-finance institutions) were all consulted.  

  



 

8 

 

 Consideration of Bank Group Experience  

2.7.1 The Bank’s portfolio is being implemented in an unstable security context, 
characterised by the occupation of three-quarters (¾) of the country by rebel factions. In these 

circumstances, project activities will preferably by located in safe areas to guarantee proper 

implementation with real impacts for the beneficiary population. The July 2017 review noted 

shortcomings in terms of project commencement time frames. The above lessons are reflected 

in the project design. This can be seen in the targeted choice of value chains and consequently a 

better concentration in terms of geography and actors. Government also took measures for final 

design studies to be completed and for the coordination team to be established as soon as possible 

to facilitate the commencement of the project.  

 Key Performance Indicators  

2.8.1 In the long term (2030), the key performance indicator is the rate of food and nutritional 
insecurity and the poverty rate. The rate of food and nutritional insecurity is expected decrease 

to 40% from 48% in 2016. In the medium term (in terms of outcomes), PADECAS will 

contribute to increase agricultural production marketed from 8 to 10t/ha for cassava; 1.5 to 4t/ha 

for rice; 0.85 to 1.5t/ha for maize; and 0.86 to 1.3t/ha for red beans. For animal production, 

additional milk production will increase to 10 liters/day from 1.5 liters per day in the optimal 

year of production. Commercial operators’ incomes (producers, agripreneurs, cooperators, 

collectors, processing operators, traders, etc) will also increase by over 100%. Similarly, the 

project will bring the creation of 1,500 permanent jobs and 3,000 temporary jobs, including 75% 

for women and youths through the creation of about 500 local businesses, making it possible to 

improve the quality and living conditions of the poor. 

III. PROJECT FEASIBILITY 
 Economic and Financial Performance 

3.1.1 Economic and financial performance concerned the trading results of the main selected 
foodstuff and animal products (milk and cheese) based on models integrating both project 

support for each value chain segment (production, collection, marketing and processing) and the 

promotion of agricultural entrepreneurship, especially for the youth.  

3.1.2 In terms of profitability, the project posts a satisfactory rate of economic rate of return 
(ERR) of 19% and a net present value (NPV) of CFAF 10.728 billion at 12% capital opportunity 

cost. A test was conducted to measure ERR sensitivity test to cost and revenue fluctuations. It 

revealed that raising investment costs or reducing project revenue by 10% will not have a very 

significant impact on the  economic rate of return of at least 13%. In contrast, this rate is sensitive 

to a simultaneous variation of 10% of costs and revenue. Indeed, if costs increase while revenue 

drops, the effect will be to reduce ERR to 12.4%.  

3.1.3 The real situation is far better because other economic benefits exist which are not 
quantified. These can be summarized as follows: (i) the upstream effects of additional revenue 

on providers (NGOs, businesses, suppliers, consultancy firms); (ii) the downstream effects of 

the generation of additional revenue on producers, traders and processing operators, most of 

whom are women. Foreign exchange costs will also reduce thanks to the significantly smaller 

import bill of food products in the balance of trade; and wealth will be created in the country due 

to the higher GDP induced by the generation of additional value added. For households, the 

project’s benefits include better feeding of vulnerable groups (children, women of child-bearing 

age and the elderly), a reduction of the medical bill and the painfulness of the work of the 

agricultural labour force, especially the female workers. 



 

9 

 

 Environmental and Social Impact  

Environment  

3.2.1 PADECAS is classified in Category II. The implementation areas for the infrastructures 
are defined and the project will not involve the resettlement of populations nor the restriction of 

their access to resources or means of life. considering the limited scope of the facilities that will 

be constructed and/or rehabilitated. An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) 

was prepared from 6 to 21 August 2018 and posted on the Bank’s website on 3 September 2018. 

The PADECAS infrastructure will not generate any major negative environmental and social 

impacts. Most will not only provide an answer to real social issues (fight against unemployment, 

socio-economic integration of underprivileged persons, diversification of agricultural and 

pastoral production etc.), but also improve the beneficiary population’s living conditions and 

boost the rural, semi-urban and even national economy.  

3.2.2 No irreversible or large-scale negative impact was reported. Most impacts are 
temporary and time-bound (local nuisances and the dangers confronting workers and the public) 

during the construction phase (flow of waste water from slaughtering areas and the proliferation 

of solid and liquid wastes.). Possible negative impacts include: (i) air pollution by balls and rice 

sounds, transportation of construction materials (sand, gravels), carbon monoxide emissions 

from gasoline-driven rice hulling machines ; (ii) soil pollution linked to cattle and the 

immoderate use of fertilizers and/or pesticides by framers); (iii) risk of water pollution by the 

worksite, use of pesticides and fertilizers, wastes from slaughtering areas); (iv) destruction of 

plant cover; and (v) destruction and moving away of wildlife. 

3.2.3 To prevent these risks, the ESMP already developed will guide the various stakeholders 
in managing the impacts resulting from the activities in question. The cost of implementing the 

ESMP is 70,000,000 XAF. The project management unit will be responsible for the 

implementation of the ESMP. 

3.2.4 At the institutional level, the monitoring of the ESMP is under the responsibility of the 
Directorate General for the Environment and includes the monitoring, impact control and 

evaluation activities. The coordination of the monitoring of the implementation of ESMP is 

ensured by the Ministry in charge of the environment in collaboration with the administrative 

and local authorities of the project area, the Ministries in charge of Agriculture and Livestock 

and as well as local civil society organizations working in the project areas. 

Climate Change Adaptation 

3.2.5 The sectors considered the most vulnerable to climate change in CAR are in order of 
importance: agriculture, health, fishing, energy, water resources, livestock, forestry, wildlife, 

habitat, transport and industry. Although there is no baseline data on GHG emissions in project 

zones, a rise in these emissions is to be expected due to the development of agriculture, intensive 

stock-breeding, and increased road transport due to the production of agricultural and livestock 

products and sub-products and their evacuation to markets.  On the other hand, two mitigation 

actions will be carried out : (i) setting up of rice hulling units running on an energy-mix (gasoline 

and solar power) which can reduce CO2 emissions by 50% to process paddy into polished rice; 

and (ii) planting of hedges to demarcate areas allocated for intensification of stock-breeding as 

these will contribute to the sequestration of part of the carbon emitted. Other actions to be carried 

out  include: (i) the establishment of prairies for cattle fodder; (ii) the introduction of varieties of 

rice, maize, beans and cassava that are adapted to extreme weather risks; and (iii) the restitution 

of crop residues to cultivated soils.  The use of green fertilizers, the reduction of work on land 

and sprinkling of organic fertilizers will contribute to replenish the soil’s carbon stocks. 



 

10 

 

3.2.6 Weather vagaries (floods, late arrival of the rainy season, prolonged drought, etc.) will 
negatively affect the production level and hence, the products of processing. To remedy this 

situation, the project will need to set up on a concerted basis an early warning and control system 

to monitor these vagaries and build the capacity of stakeholders involved in the implementation 

of activities. As recommended, these actions are consistent with the Strategic and Operational 

Plan for CAR’s Climate Change Response for the 2017-2020 period. 

Gender   

3.2.7 Agriculture and livestock breeding are the main activities in the project intervention 
area. Although these activities employ men, women and youths, it should be noted that men 

control these two sub-sectors since cultivated land and cattle herds are mostly owned by them. 

The plant and animal sub-sectors have great economic potentials to create wealth and generate 

significant revenue.  That is why women and youths are excluded from their control. The 

discrimination women suffer in both sub-sectors is further heightened by social roles which 

determine the position of the woman. She is considered as a chattel belonging to her husband’s 

lineage if she is married or that of her father if unmarried. On the strength of that, she is 

recognized to have the right to only use but not to own property of any kind.  

3.2.8 Although empirical data shows that women and youths are present in different 
segments of the selected value chains, no reliable statistical data exists for characterizing their 

involvement in these sub-sectors. PADECAS will support the conduct of preliminary surveys on 

the participation of women and youths in the plant and cattle value chains. The aim is to collect 

as much information as possible to prepare strategies for action. Therefore, the project will help 

to prepare a gender profile in the selected value chains. Besides, the project plans to construct 

markets for agricultural and dairy products mostly controlled by women.  

Social  

3.2.9 PADECAS will have a sure impact on the population’s food insecurity, seen in 
increased production and better product quality from the five sub-sectors concerned. It will also 

improve the nutritional status of the direct beneficiaries of the support comprising about 60,000 

households including 55,000 children who are under 5 years old and 22,000 pregnant women 

and breast-feeding mothers who are the most vulnerable to malnutrition. Improving the 

nutritional status of women and children will contribute to reducing mortality and morbidity in 

the project areas. Indirectly, all nutrition-sensitive activities such as water/sanitation 

interventions will also contribute to the better nutrition of the population.  

3.2.10 The success of PADECAS’ advocated approach consisting in concentrating activities 
by intervention site will induce a process of self-satisfaction and popular support among the 

population. Due to proximity, this will allow for endogenous development throughout the project 

area, the only factor that can, in the medium-term, roll back poverty, unemployment and rural 

exodus. Youth and women’s entrepreneurship will help to reduce unemployment in the project 

area and increase the incomes of the most vulnerable segments of the population.  

 

IV. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION  
 

 Implementation Arrangements 

4.1.1 PADECAS will be placed under the joint supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural Development. MARD will supervise the project and, as such, coordinate interactions 

with other sector ministries, technical and financial partners as well as coordinate monitoring 



 

11 

 

and evaluation activities in relation to PREPAS. National-level consultation will be handled by 

a National Steering Committee (CNP) which will be established by a joint order of MADR and 

MESA. At the devolved level, consultation will be done within sub-prefectural Consultative 

Committees (CC) which will approve investment plans at their level and supervise 

implementation in order to ensure that they are aligned and consistent with regional strategies 

and other sector interventions. 

4.1.2 The project will be managed by the PPF Coordination Unit under way for the Support 
for the CAR Agricultural Transformation Strategy and Youth Agriculture and Agri-Business 

Entrepreneurship Promotion (PASTAC-PEJA) whose capacity will be strengthened by recruiting 

new experts. An Order of MADR to broaden the mandate of the PASTAC-PEJA Coordination 

Unit into the PADECAS Management Unit (UCG) must be signed before project 

commencement. Three area offices will be created in the project area within the sub-prefectures 

of Boda, Bouali and Damara. 

 Procurement Arrangements 

4.2.1 Applicable Procurement Policy and Framework :All procurement of goods, works and 
consultancy services financed with Bank resources will be done in accordance with the 

Procurement Policy for Bank Group-Funded Operations (AfDB Policy), October 2015 edition 

and the Methodology for the Implementation of the Procurement Policy of the African 

Development Bank. Details of procurement performance (system, cost, schedule, method, 

review type) agreed between the Borrower and the Bank are described in Technical Annex B.7.  

4.2.2 Procurement implementation: Project procurement will be carried out by a 
procurement expert of the Project Management Unit to be recruited through an open call. This 

expert will be recruited as soon as the project commences in order to carry out procurement 

activities as defined in Technical Annex B7 with the support of a Procurement Assistant, civil 

servant of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development to be appointed. To this end, the 

Central African Government has submitted to the Fund a request to authorize early actions for 

the following acquisitions: recruitment of an administrative and financial manager, a 

procurement specialist and an expert in monitoring and evaluation. 

4.2.3 Procurement Capacity and Risk Assessment (ERCA): In order to take the 
specificities of the project into consideration, the Bank assessed: (i) risks at the national, sector 

and project level; and (ii) the capacity of the executing agency. The results of these assessments 

concluded that the risk level for procurement is high and made it possible to determine that all 

project procurements will be carried out according to the Bank’s system, subject to the 

application of the mitigation measures proposed in paragraph 5.9 of Technical Annex B.5. 

 Financial Management  

4.3.1 The evaluation concluded that the Project Coordination Unit does not have the 

adequate and satisfactory financial management capacity to provide, with reasonable 

assurance, accurate and complete information in a timely manner on the status of the 

project as required by the Bank. The initial level of fiduciary risk related to aspects of 

financial management is considered high due to: (i) the absence of a manual of procedures 

incorporating the specificities of the PADECAS project; (ii) the size of the current fiduciary team 

which is not adequate to manage project funds. In fact, apart from the accountant, the team does 

not have an administrative and financial manager; (iii) lack of refresher training for the existing 

team (revised SYSCOHADA, cash management, disbursement procedures, internal control, 

etc.), this situation may cause the project to risk significant errors in the financial statements for 

the 2018 financial year; (iv) the absence of accounting software; and (v) the absence of an 



 

12 

 

independent internal inspection mechanism within the Unit (internal audit and / or financial 

controller). As a reminder, some of these weaknesses were identified by the evaluation mission 

of the PPF of July 2017, without a satisfactory evolution being observed. Arrangements have 

been formulated to reduce this level of risk. 

4.3.2 Financial Management Arrangements: The fiduciary responsibility for the 
implementation of the project lies with the Central African Republic through the Ministry of 

Agriculture and Rural Development. The Coordination Cell set up under the PPF will be 

responsible for the overall coordination, technical coordination and financial management of the 

project. 

4.3.3 Financial management of the project will be ensured through the implementation of the 
following system: (i) development of the manual of administrative, financial and accounting 

procedures in order to integrate the improvements provided by the new provisions of the revised 

SYSCOHADA standard. It should also describe the organization chart of the project with all the 

actors involved in its implementation, the roles and responsibilities and activities of each actor, 

(ii) organize training in the revised SYSCOHADA, cash management and internal control for 

the benefit the entire Project fiduciary team; (iii) recruitment of an administrative and financial 

manager; (iv) validation of financial reporting formats within three months of effectiveness to 

improve the quality and timeliness of financial statements required by the Bank, (v) in the 

absence of an internal auditor, ensure the involvement of the financial controller of MADR in 

the chain of validation of expenditure and disbursement. In addition, the Coordinator should be 

personally involved in the proper functioning of the internal control system. Before the 

disbursement of resources for capacity building, ensure the implementation, and control by users, 

management tools for the periodic establishment of accounting, budget, and financial reports and 

financial statements closing date. 

 Disbursements  

4.4.1 Disbursement of the FAD and TSF resources under the project will be done pursuant to 
the provisions of the Disbursement Handbook in force at the Bank. For ADF resources: the direct 

payment method for the payment of goods and works. For TSF resources: (a) the special account 

method (for operating expenses, capacity building activities, and the management of certain 

partnership agreements) and (b) the direct payment method for the payment of works , goods 

and service contracts. 

4.4.2 The opening of the XAF-denominated special account for TSF resources, for 
PADECAS, under the responsibility of MADR will be carried out in a local bank deemed 

acceptable to the Bank. All supporting documentation for project expenditures (all funding 

combined) will be filed and maintained in a secure location and in accordance with the Law. 

These supporting documents must be available and accessible for review / audit / audit by 

periodic Bank supervision missions, external audits and internal audits. 

 Audit Arrangements 

4.5.1 Pursuant to the general conditions of the Bank, an annual audit of financial statements 
including, will be performed by an independent audit firm which will be recruited on a 

competitive basis. MADR’s PMU will be responsible for recruiting the independent audit firm 

with the support of the Unit’s Procurement Expert. The selection of the firm will be done 

according to Bank procedures. The auditor’s terms of reference will comply with the model in 

force at the Bank, and submitted for the latter’s approval.  



 

13 

 

4.5.2 The contract with the auditor will not exceed three years and the acceptance by the 
Bank of the first audit report is a prerequisite for the auditor to continue his work. The scope of 

the audit will cover all project activities, all sources of funding, as well as the activities of the 

value chain development fund. Audits reports shall be transmitted six months after the end of the 

fiscal year at the latest. 

 Project Monitoring and Evaluation   

4.6.1 The basic tool for monitoring and evaluation of this project is the logical framework 
that details the impact, effect and product measurement indicators. The PADECAS monitoring 

and evaluation officer who will be recruited after approval by the Bank of his qualifications and 

experience will be placed under the authority of the coordinator. He/she will be responsible for 

the monitoring and evaluation of project activities and the implementation of the ESMP. He/she 

will also be responsible for establishing a diagnosis and baseline situation for the project as well 

as developing specific tools for planning and data collection 

4.6.2 The PMU will be required to provide the Bank with a quarterly report showing progress 
in implementing the approved program and annual budget. This report should include the 

following information for each activity: the physical objectives, the level of achievement and the 

explanation of any discrepancies, the expected costs and actual costs, and the explanations of 

any discrepancies, the financial data of the project. The Bank will carry out two (2) supervisory 

missions per year to assess progress in terms of realization of products and effects as well as 

administrative and financial performance. The mission will then make recommendations to 

improve project implementation. A performance status report will be written after each 

supervision mission. A review will be scheduled mid-term and a project completion mission at 

the end. The project implementation schedule is summarized below. 

Table 9: Project Implementation Schedule 

Time Frame Milestones Responsible Body 

October 2018 Board approval Bank 

December 2018 Signing of Grant Agreement Beneficiary / Bank 

March 2019 First disbursement Beneficiary/Bank 

December 2021 Mid-term review Bank/Borrower 

June 2020 Submission of first audit report Borrower 

December 2023 Project completion Bank/ Borrower 

 Governance 

4.7.1 The multi-sector good governance challenges (environment, agriculture, livestock etc..) 
to be tackled include lengthy time frames and transparency in procurement, the establishment of 

a reference framework for planning investments, transparency in the financial management of 

works maintenance associations and obstacles to the implementation of sub-regional and 

regional policies. However, the management of public resources and the state of corruption in 

the country require that greater attention be paid to procurement mechanisms. In this framework, 

PADECAS should be implemented to strengthen local institutions and improve citizen control 

through better involvement of civil society and farmers’ organisations. 

 Sustainability 

4.8.1 The fact of carrying out activities that meet stakeholder demands, global sub-sector 
needs and priority national and local guidelines while empowering national partner institutions, 



 

14 

 

is the main guarantee of the project’s sustainability. Since the selected value chains indeed exist 

already, the project places emphasis on strengthening their segments and on integrating them 

with a view to upgrading and professionalizing these sub-sectors. Besides, the targeted value 

chain actors (producers, stock-breeder, transporters, processing operators, research, supervision 

and support/advice structures, etc.) participated in project design and are committed to being part 

of its implementation and steering. The involvement of sub-prefectural consultative committees 

makes project ownership possible at the decentralized level. 

4.8.2 The works will be managed and maintained by the beneficiaries or communes. The 
sustainability of the project largely depends on the quality of the works and adequate 

management and maintenance conditions. It also depends on the level of ownership by actors 

and beneficiaries as well as the desire and commitment displayed by Government and devolved 

structures, mostly sub-prefectures, to provide long-term support for the management of 

structures and facilities constructed by the project. There are plans to mobilize technical 

assistance support under PREPAS to define a viable model for the management of all 

infrastructure that will be constructed as part of AfDB and IFAD projects to ensure their 

profitability and sustainability.  

4.8.3 Project actions will also serve to lay the foundations for the promotion of 
entrepreneurship within small foodstuff and market-gardening cooperatives as well as animal 

production cooperatives. In the same vein, project actions in areas such as capacity-building in 

entrepreneurial culture, business management, organisational dynamics of beneficiary groups 

and the management and maintenance of works will stimulate the emergence of small and 

medium-sized enterprises also taking into consideration the technical, financial and 

organizational dimensions. They will also foster inclusive and responsible growth. All these 

support packages taken together constitute additional guarantee of the sustainability of outputs 

while enabling the dynamic initiated to continue after the project ends. 

 Risk Management  

4.9.1 The risks that could limit the achievement of project objectives are related to: (i) the 
deterioration of the country's political and security situation and its spread in the project area; 

(ii) looting of project assets by armed groups; (iii) extreme weather events. The risks identified 

above will be mitigated by strengthening the efforts of the Government and the International 

Community to fight against insecurity and by integrating the adaptation dimension into the 

project activities. 

 Knowledge Building 

4.10.1 PADECAS will experiment on a pilot basis: (a) new technologies for increasing 
productivity; (b) inclusive funding mechanisms; and (c) youth entrepreneurship. In addition, a 

mechanism will be put in place to monitor dynamics of the food and cattle sub-sectors as well as 

the initiative designed to extend social protection to rural areas. The sum of these interventions 

will serve as pilot experiments for the Bank in the Central African Republic and generate 

invaluable knowledge for the future development of agricultural sub-sectors in the country and 

elsewhere in Africa. These interventions will be documented and will enable the Central African 

Government to redirect and better entrench its agro-pastoral development policies and strategies. 

  



 

15 

 

V. LEGAL FRAMEWORK 
 

5.1 Legal Instrument 

The project will be financed through two Instrument ADF and TSF awarded to the Central African 

Republic each with its own grant agreement. 

5.2 Conditions Associated with the Bank’s Involvement 

5.2.1 Conditions Precedent to Grant Effectiveness: Grant effectiveness shall be subject to the 
signing of the Grant Agreement. 

5.2.2 Conditions Precedent to the First Disbursement: In addition to grant effectiveness, the 
first disbursement shall be subject to the Borrower fulfilling the following conditions to the 

satisfaction of the Bank: 

a) Provide to the Fund the decree from the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural 
Development extending the mandate of the Coordination Unit of the CAR 

Agricultural Transformation Strategy and Youth Agriculture and Agri-Business 

Entrepreneurship Promotion  to a Project Management Unit; 
 

b) Provide to the Fund evidence of the hiring of the Administrative and Financial 
Officer, the Procurement Specialist and Project Monitoring and Evaluation Expert, 

whose experience and qualifications have been deemed acceptable by the Bank; 

Provide to the Fund evidence of the establishment of the three antennas of Boda, 

Boali and Damara; and 

 

c) Provide the Fund with evidence of the development of the Administrative Procedures 
Manual, financial and accounting. 

5.2.3 Other Conditions: The Borrower must in addition: 

a. Execute the Project in accordance with the Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP), the Fund's Safeguard Policies and applicable national 

legislation in a manner satisfactory to the Fund, in form and substance; 
 

b.  Prepare and submit to the Fund, as part of the Project Reporting referred to in 
Section 7.01 of the Grant Agreement, quarterly reports on the implementation of 

the ESMP, including identified deficiencies and corrective actions taken thereon 

been brought; 
 

c. Refrain from any action that would impede or impede the implementation of the 
ESMP, including any amendment, suspension, waiver and / or cancellation of any 

provision thereof, in whole or in part, without the prior written consent of the 

Fund; 

 

d. Cooperate fully with the Fund in the event that the implementation of the Project 
or any change in its scope results in unforeseen displacement and / or resettlement 

of populations; and undertakes not to start working in the area affected by the 

implementation of the Project provided that all Persons Assigned by the Project 

are compensated and / or resettled in accordance with the Resettlement Plan 

prepared; 



 

16 

 

 

e. Provide evidence of revised SYSCOHADA training, cash management and 
internal control for the benefit of the entire Project fiduciary team; and 

 

f. Implement the Project, and ensure that each of its contractors and / or agents 
implement the Project in accordance with the provisions of the Anti-Corruption 

Policies. 

 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

 The project complies with all Bank policies. 

VI. RECOMMENDATION 

Management hereby recommends that the Boards of Directors approve the proposal to award a TSF 

grant not exceeding UA 7.00 and an ADF grant not exceeding UA 1.28 million to the Central 

African Republic subject and in accordance with the conditions set out in this report.



 

























































AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

 

PROJECT : SOUTH AGRO-INDUSTRIAL PROCESSING ZONE 

PROJECT    (PZTA-SUD) OR AGROPOLE SUD  

 

COUNTRY :  REPUBLIC OF SENEGAL 
 

 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT  
 

PROJECT INFORMATION SHEET 

 

Client Information 

___________________________________________________________________________ 

BORROWER  :  Republic of Senegal 
 

EXECUTING AGENCY: Ministry of Industrial Development and Small and Medium Industry 

(MDIPMI) 

Financing Plan (in thousands)   

Source 
Amount   

(EUR) 

Amount  

(CFAF) 

Amount  

(USD) 
Instrument 

AfDB 43,100 28,300,000 48,400 Loan 

IsDB 27,850 18,300,000 30,000 Loan 

Government  

(including FONSIS) 

16,800 

(1,525)  
11,000,000 

(1,000,000) 

18,800 

(1,700) 
Budget 

TOTAL COST 87,750,000 57,600,000 88,300 - 

 

Key Financial Information on AfDB Loan (SAP: P-SN-AAG-003) 
 

Loan currency: EUR  

Loan amount EUR 43 100 000  

Loan type: Fully flexible loan 

Maturity: 20 years  

Grace period: 5 years  

Average maturity: 12.75 years 

Reimbursements: Thirty (30) half-yearly payments at the end of the grace period 

Interest rate: Base rate + financing cost margin + lending margin + maturity premium 

(This interest rate shall be above or equal to zero). 

Base rate:  Floating (6-month EURIBOR reviewed on 1 February and 1 August) or any other 

acceptable rate, with a free base rate fixing option 

Financing cost  margin :  The Bank’s financing cost margin reviewed on 1 January and 1 July, and applied on 1 

February and 1 August with the base rate 

Lending spread 80 basis points (0.8%) 

Maturity premium: 0 

Front-end fee: 0.25% of the loan amount due latest than sixty (60) days from the effectiveness date or 

at first disbursement, whichever comes first. The Borrower may pay the front-end fee 

either from its own resources or deduct the same from the first disbursement proceeds. 

The front-end fee due shall be based on the full amount of the loan, notwithstanding 

any cancellation thereof in whole or in part, occurring after the effectiveness date. 

Commitment fee: 0.25% per annum on the undisbursed amount, effective 60 days following the loan 

signature date and due on interest payment dates (including during the grace period). 

The commitment fee ceases to accrue at the time of full disbursement or cancellation 

of the loan. 

Base rate conversion  

option* 

Besides the free fixing option, the Borrower may revert to the floating rate or reset 

the rate on all or part of the disbursed amount of its loan. 

Transaction fees apply. 



iv 

Rate cap or collar  

option* 

 

The Borrower may cap or collar the base rate for all or part of the disbursed amount 

of its loan. 

Transaction fees apply. 

Loan currency  

conversion option* 

 

The Borrower may change the currency of all or part of its loan, whether disbursed or 

not, into another loan currency of the Bank. The new loan currency shall apply for 

the remaining/full loan period or a shorter duration chosen by the Borrower after the 

approval of such a request by the Bank. 

Transaction fees apply. 

 

 

* The related conversion options and transaction costs are governed by the Bank’s Directives on conversion available on  
the website: http://www.afdb.org/en/documents/document/guidelines-for-conversion-of-loan-terms-july-2014-87643/ 

 

NPV (baseline scenario): CFAF 298.21 billion 

ERR (baseline scenario): 20.14% 

 

Timeframe – Milestones (expected)  

Concept note approval September 2019 

Project approval    December 2019 

Effectiveness March 2020 

Completion date December 2024 

Closing date March 2025 

Last reimbursement February 2040 

http://www.afdb.org/en/documents/document/guidelines-for-conversion-of-loan-terms-july-2014-87643/


v 

Executive Summary 

A. Project Overview  

A1. The South Agro-Industrial Processing Zone Project (PZTA-Sud, or Agropole Sud) is among 

the flagship projects of Senegal’s Vision 2035 Emerging Senegal Plan (PSE), which raises the number 

of growth drivers from two (telecommunications and services) to six, the four new ones being 

agriculture and agribusiness, housing, mining and tourism. It forms part of Pillar I of the PSE on 

“Structural transformation of the economy and growth” and is an integral part of the industrial PSE 

component that provides for the establishment of three “integrated and competitive agricultural hubs”. 

Furthermore, PZTA-Sud is in line with the priorities of the Country Strategy Paper (CSP) for the 2016-

2020 period and the Bank's Ten-Year Strategy 2013-2022 through its High 5s “Feed Africa”, 

“Industrialise Africa” and “Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa”. 

A2. PZTA-Sud is a pilot project to be implemented over five years for a total cost (net of taxes) 

of approximately EUR 87.75 million, broken down as follows: (i) ADB loan: EUR 43.1 million; (ii) 

IsDB loan: EUR 27.85 million, and (iii) the State: EUR 16.8 million. The project comprises 3 

components: (a) Support for the establishment of a business ecosystem conducive to private investment 

in agribusiness; (b) Sustainable improvement of the capacity of agro-industrial producers; (c) 

Coordination, management and monitoring/evaluation. A Project Implementation Unit (PIU), attached 

to the Ministry of Industry (Executing Agency), will be responsible for: (i) coordinating investments 

in the agricultural hub; and (ii) implementing public sub-projects. It will be complemented by the 

Sovereign Fund for Strategic Investment (FONSIS), for the implementation of PPP sub-projects 

through a Construction and Operation Company (SCE). Lastly, private companies will be responsible 

for private sub-projects, in partnership with local financial institutions.  

A3. The project area is the natural region of Casamance, which has real agro-industrial potential 

in its three administrative districts of Ziguinchor, Sedhiou and Kolda. Thus, the project aims to 

contribute to the revival of this region’s economic activities to support the current peace and 

reconstruction momentum. In this regard, the project will have to mitigate the adverse effects of the 

independence crisis of these last decades through the establishment of an ecosystem conducive to 

private investment in the agro-industrial sectors with high nutritional and market (national and export) 

potential. The key expected outputs of the project are: (i) increase in the share of locally processed 

agricultural production from 2% to 20% for mango and from 5% to 30% for cashew nuts; (ii) reach a 

cumulative amount of catalysed private investment of more than USD 200 million (of which 20% for 

SMEs/SMIs); (iii) increase by at least 40% the agricultural production of key sectors (mango, cashew 

and maize); and (iv) create jobs and wealth, including for youth and women. The project was the subject 

of a comprehensive state-funded feasibility study conducted by a private firm and supported by the 

United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO).  

A4. The project will enable the creation and consolidation of about 14,500 direct jobs (of which 

50% women and 60% youth) and 35,000 indirect jobs (of which 50% women and 60% youth). The 

number of households that will be affected is estimated at 65,000, or about 365,000 people (of which 

50% women and 60% youth). The number of people who will be indirectly affected corresponds to the 

population of the natural region of Casamance estimated at 2 million in 2018. The expected outcomes 

concern improving the food and nutritional security of beneficiaries as well as their income through 

improved access to markets, agricultural inputs, and services. To this end, the project provides for (i) 

the increase in private investment thanks to the facilities provided (more favourable business 

ecosystem, construction of a central agro-industrial module (Adéane), three (3) regional modules 

(Bignona, Sédhiou and Kolda) and five (5) aggregation and service platforms; and (ii) capacity building 

of value chain actors in agro-industrial sectors (structuring/organisation of value chains, training, ease 

of access to finance, production by researching in-vitro mango, cashew, maize seedlings, etc.).  

 



vi 

B. Needs Assessment 

B.1  Despite efforts by the State, food security remains a challenge and food importation continues 

to weigh on the trade balance. Thus, imports of cereals and fruits/by-products amounted respectively 

to CFAF 329.7 billion and CFAF 37 billion in 2017. This is due to the limited private investment as a 

result of the unfavourable business environment (land, taxation, etc.), inadequate infrastructure 

(energy, transport, water, ICT, etc.) and poor structuring/organisation of agricultural value chains 

(which employ about 60% of the working population). Furthermore, there is a low level of processing 

of agricultural products based on quality industrial processes (barely 13% at national level), low 

agricultural productivity and high vulnerability to climate change. This situation is more pronounced 

in the project area where barely 2% and 5% of the mango and cashew nut productions are processed, 

respectively. Thus, the project aims to facilitate the mobilisation of private investment especially in the 

processing and marketing of key sectors (mango, cashew, corn, etc.).  

C. Bank’s Value-Added  

C.1  Through its initiative to support the development of Agro-Industrial Processing Zones 

(AIPZs), the Bank aims to increase private investment in the agro-industrial sector for a sustainable 

transformation of the rural economy particularly by providing quality basic infrastructure and a more 

attractive business environment in the agricultural production basins. The Bank has the requisite 

experience to support the preparation and implementation of this type of project (including in Togo, 

Ethiopia, Guinea, Côte d'Ivoire, etc.), which calls for an integrated approach encompassing the entire 

value chain. Lastly, lessons from similar projects supported by the Bank militate for such an 

intervention that will mobilise the public component (with ADB and IsDB public windows), PPP (with 

FONSIS) and private (with FONSIS and financial institutions).  

D. Knowledge Building 

D.1  As PZTA-Sud is a pilot operation under the PSE, a mechanism will be put in place for 

monitoring/evaluation (M & E) of outcomes and impacts. The project will set up a suitable internal 

monitoring system for project performance led by the Steering Committee, on the one hand, and 

external evaluation, on the other hand, supervised by the Operational and Monitoring Office (BOS) of 

the PSE under the oversight of the Presidency of the Republic. The project will support BOS to carry 

out baseline and end-of-project surveys and, if necessary, specific studies (incentives, private 

financing, public-private partnership, etc.).  Lastly, the results of the M&E mechanism will be 

leveraged and shared through the BOS e-platform, the analytical reports, the consultation and 

experience sharing meetings organised at the regional, national and international level.  

 



 

vii 

 

VII. Results-Based Logical Framework (RBLF) of Senegal's PZTA-Sud 
 

NAME: South Agro-Industrial Processing Zone Project- PZTA-Sud (or Agropole Sud), Senegal 

GOAL: Contribute towards reducing rural poverty and increasing the share of agro-industry in the country’s economic growth 

 
RESULTS CHAIN  

PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS AND MITIGATION 

MEASURES  Indicators (including CSIs) Baseline Situation Target (2024) 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

  

1. Contribute towards increasing the value-

added of the agro-industrial sector and 

reducing the poverty rate (particularly in rural 

areas) 

  

1.0 Share of the industrial sector in GDP (%) 

  

1.1 Value of (i) imported; and (ii) exported food products 

(in EUR/per capita)  
 

1.2 Rural poverty rate in Casamance (moderate and severe 

- national threshold of less than USD 2/day)  

 

20.6 (2017) 

 

(i) 65.7; (ii) 

43.1 (2017) 
 

71.1% (2011) 

 

 

25%  

 

(i) 60; (ii) 49 

 
 

60%  

 

 

National and UN 

System Statistics  

  

 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

 

1/.  Increased share of locally processed 

agricultural production to the required 

standards. 

 
 

 

 

 
 

2/.  Increased private investment and jobs 

created/consolidated in agribusiness.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

3/. Sustainable improvement in the capacity of 

producers in the key agro-industrial sectors  

 

 

2.0. 
  

2.0.3  

 

 

1.0.1 Installed capacity for modern agricultural product 

processing (X ’000 T/year) (i) mangoes;( ii) cashew nuts; 

(iii) maize (of which % fortified)  
  

1.0.2 Share of agricultural products processed according to 

the required standards: (i) mango ;(ii) cashew; (iii) maize; 

(iv) banana. 
 

 

2.0.1 Cumulative amount of private investment catalysed 

by agribusiness (including SMEs/SMIs) in USD million 
 

2.0.2  Share of agro-industry in the portfolio of (i) banks; 

(ii) MFIs 
 

2.0.3 Additional decent jobs created /consolidated in the 

industrial sector (of which 50% women and 60% 

youth): (i) direct; and (ii) indirect  
 

 

3.0.1 Change in the average annual income level of farming 

households (headed by women) 

 

3.0.2   Average agricultural production of the key sectors 

(x1000 T): (i) mango; (ii) cashew; (iii) maize; (iv) banana 

 

3.0.3 Additional jobs created/consolidated in the agricultural 

sector (of which 50% women and 60% youth) ( i) 

direct; (ii) indirect 

 

(i) 0; (ii) 0; iii) 

0 (0%)  

 
 

(i) 2%; (ii) 5%; 

(iii) 9%; (iv) 

4%    
 

 

0 (0) 

 
 

(i) 5%; (ii) 10% 
 

 

(i) 0; (ii) 0 

 

 

 

 

0% 

 

 

(i) 43; (ii) 15.3; 

(iii) 45; (iv)19.2 

 

(i). 0;( ii) 0 

 

(i) 43; (ii) 16; (iii) 

20 (5%) 

 
 

(i) 20%; (ii) 30%; 

(iii) 18%; (iv) 

10% 
 

 

>200 (40) 

 
 

(i) 10%; (ii) 20% 
 

 

(i) 1400;(ii) 3200 

 

 

 

 

15% 

 

 

(i) 72; (ii) 24.8; 

(iii) 63; (iv) 42 

 

(i) 13100; (ii) 

31800 

 

Baseline survey 

and project 

completion 

reports 

 

 

National and 

Regional 

Statistics 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Demographic 

and health/ 

nutrition survey 

 

Risk 1: Lack of private sector 

interest could limit 

investment. 
Mitigation 1: (i) The private 

sector will be regularly 

consulted; (ii) the PIU will set 

up basic infrastructure 

(including a one-stop shop); 

(iii) SCE will facilitate the 

implementation of private 

sub-projects; (iv) credit access 

facilities will be put in place; 

(v) Non-tariff barriers will be 

applied as required. 

 

Risk 2: Climate change, 

discharges from industrial 

units and harmful practices of 

populations can degrade 

natural resources. 

Mitigation 2: The use of 

resilient technologies, 

planned mitigation measures 

in industrial parks, access to 

markets and agricultural 

insurance will mitigate the 

effects of CC and industrial 

risks. 
 

 

 

 



 

viii 

RESULTS CHAIN  
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS AND MITIGATION 

MEASURES  Indicators (including CSIs) Baseline scenario Target (2023) 
O

U
T

P
U

T
S

 
A/   Support for the establishment of an 

ecosystem favourable to IP in agribusiness 
 

A.1. Enhanced regulatory and institutional 

environment for private investment. 

 

 

 

A.2. Industrial superstructure of the South 

agricultural hub set up 

 

 

 
 

 

B/ Support to the sustainable improvement of 

the capacity of producers in agro-industrial 

subsectors 
 

B.1. Enhanced capacity of producers in agro-

industrial subsectors  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

B.2. Increased resilience of communities  

 

 

 

 

 

 

C/ Coordination, management and 

monitoring/evaluation 
 

C.1. Project coordination, management and 

monitoring/evaluation mechanism set up and 

operational 

 

A.1.1 Increased number of committees responsible for managing 

PSE (BOS) and integrated agro-industrial hubs (COPIL)  
  

A.1.2 Number of operational SME/SMI support and quality 

control structures in agro-industry (BMN, DPMI, etc.) 
  

A1.3 Private investment incentives study completed 
 

A.2.1 Area of the serviced APZ (ha) : (i) Central module; (ii) 

Regional modules; (iii) Aggregation and Services Platform 

(PAS)  

A.2.2 Construction and Operations Company (SCE) of the PZTA 

established by FONSIS operational (including one-stop shop) 
 

 

 

B.1.1 E-platform for access to functional services 
  

B.1.2 Additional number of farmers with access to (i) 

markets; (ii) agricultural services; (iii) financing; (iv) 

planned training  
  

B.1.3 Agricultural area targeted for the production of seedlings & 

seed (ha): i) grafted mango trees; ii) double-grafted mango 

trees; iii) cashew trees; iv) double-grafted cashew trees; v) 

maize (pre-base)   
  

B.1.4 Number of micro-enterprises & SMEs/SMIs having 

benefited from: i) upgrade of BMN; (ii) funding by financial 

institutions   
  

B.1.5 Number of partner financial institutions receiving technical 

assistance 

B.2.1 PZTA-Sud Regional Monitoring Committees (of which at 

least 30% women) operational  

B.2.2 Implementation rate of (i) ESMP; (ii) the Resettlement 

Action Plan (RAP);  

B.2.3 Number of women sensitised on nutrition/health issues 

B.2.4 Length of access roads to the rehabilitated agric. Pole 

 

C.1.1 Number of quarterly reports submitted on time (including 

AWPBs) 
 

C.1.2 Number of audit reports  submitted on time and approved : 

(i) Procurement; (ii) Financial  
 

C.1.3 Baseline surveys, PP and end of project surveys completed 

 

 

 

 

  

 

0 

 
 

0 

 
 

0 
 

(i) 0; (ii) 0; (iii) 0 

 
 

0  

 

 

 

 
 

0 
 

(i) 0;(ii) 0; (iii) 0; 

(iv) 0 

 
 

(i) 0; (ii) 0; iii) 0; 

(iv) 0; (v) 0 

 

 
 

(i) 0 ; (ii) 0 

 

 
 

0 
 

0 

 
 

(i) 0;(ii) 0;  

0 
 

0 

 
 

 

0 (0) 
 

 

(i) 0; ii) 0 

 
 

0 

 

2 

 
 

5 

 
 

1 
 

(i) 40; (ii) 15; (iii) 

10 
 

1 

 
 

 

 
 

1 
 

(i) 5000; (ii) 4000; 

(ii) 3000; (iv) 6000 

 
 

(i) 3000; (ii) 

25000; (iii) 6000; 

(iv) 4000; (v) 5000 

 
 

(i) 50; (ii) 30 

 

 

3 
 

3 

 
 

(i) 90%; (ii) 95%;  

65 000 
 

372 km 

 
 

 

20 5

) 

(i) 5; (ii) 5 

 

2 

 

 

 

 

Baseline survey 

and project 

completion 

reports 

 

 

 

 

 

Half-yearly 

project progress 

reports 

 

 

 

Bank supervision 

reports    

 

Risk 3: The expected benefits 

could be hijacked by a 

minority (including land). 

 

Mitigation 3: The measures 

included in the Strategic 

Environmental and Social 

Assessment (SESA) 

(including the Environmental 

and Social Management 

Framework Plan - ESMFP), 

the ESMP/RAP and the IEC 

should make its mitigation 

possible.  

 

Risk 4: Delays in project 

implementation due to 

insufficient familiarity with 

Bank procedures. 

 

Mitigation 4: Substantial 

institutional support and 

regular training will be 

provided to the PIU, AGEX 

and the Borrower (Ministries 

of Economy, Finance). 

 



 

ix 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

. 
 Components: (A) Support for the establishment of an ecosystem conducive to private 

investment in agribusiness; (B) Support for the sustainable improvement of the 

capacity of agro-industrial producers; (C) Coordination, management and 

monitoring/evaluation   

Resources by component: (1) Component A: EUR 47.3 million; 

(2) Component B: EUR 30.8 million; (3) Component C: EUR 

9.65 million  

Sources of financing: (i) AfDB: EUR 43.1 million; 

(ii) IsDB: EUR 27.85 million; (iii) the State: EUR 

16.8 million  



 

ix 

Provisional Project Implementation Schedule 

 

Year 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 
Quarter 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 
Preparatory activities                         
Joint project appraisal (AfDB, IsDB, Government)                        
Loan negotiations (AfDB and IsDB) and approval                         
Signing of loan agreements and fulfilment of conditions precedent to first disbursement                        
Publication of the General Procurement Notice (GPN)                        
Selection of key project personnel and official launch                        

A / Support for the establishment of an ecosystem conducive to private investment in agribusiness                        

Recruitment of the technical assistance firm to support Project Management and service delivery                         
Capacity building of the steering structures: COPIL (meetings & missions) and support to BOS/PSE 

(baseline, midterm and completion studies, special studies, etc.) 
                       

Build the capacity of structures responsible for quality, certification, etc. in agribusiness (equipment, 

training, etc.): DPMI, ASEPEX, ADPME, ASN, etc. 
                       

Selection of the complementary study (DD/BD) and supervision of works of the South Agricultural Hub 

(central module, regional modules and ASP) and service delivery 
                       

Selection of the South Agricultural Hub construction company (central module, 3 regional modules and 

aggregation and service platforms) and service delivery  
                       

Support Agreement with the Institute of Food Technology and the Upgrading Bureau                        
B / Sustainable improvement of the capacity of agro-industrial producers                        
Build the capacity of POs/SMEs (with a firm to be recruited): transformative sectors, technical and 

management training, procurement/management of inputs, agricultural services, etc. 
                       

Build the capacity of Women’s Promotion Groups: technical and management training, business plan 

development, upgrading of priority private sector equipment, financial support.  
                       

Build the capacity of communities (including leaders): agricultural hub approach, gender, environmental 

and social management, nutrition, climate change, fragility and resilience, etc. 
                       

Rehabilitation of access roads: selection of the engineering firm and works supervision, recruitment of 

the company, and service delivery 
                       

TA Agreement at ISRA: production of grafted plants (mango, cashew) and pre-basic seeds (maize)                        
Build the capacity of decentralised government structures (equipment, training, missions) and partner 

financial institutions (line of credit, equipment and training) 
                       

C / Coordination, management and monitoring/evaluation                         
Establishment of the financial, administrative and accounting management system                         
Procurement of furniture, office equipment and vehicles                        
Coordination, management and monitoring/evaluation                        
Annual audit reports                         
Midterm review                        
Completion report                         



 

1 

BANK GROUP MANAGEMENT’S REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION TO THE BOARD OF 

DIRECTORS CONCERNING A LOAN TO THE REPUBLIC OF SENEGAL TO FINANCE THE 

SOUTH AGRO-INDUSTRIAL PROCESSING ZONE PROJECT (PZTA-SUD) 
 

Management hereby submits this report and its recommendation concerning a proposal to grant a loan of 

EUR 43,100,000 to the Republic of Senegal to finance the activities of the PZTA-Sud project, commonly 

known as “Agropole Sud”. 

I. STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE 

1.1 Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives  

 

1.1.1 In 2014, the Government embarked on the implementation of the Emerging Senegal Plan (PSE), 

which aims to have “an emerging Senegal in 2035 with a society of solidarity in a nation of laws” through 

the structural transformation of the economic and social system. The strategic thrusts guiding the PSE are as 

follows: (i) Thrust 1: Structural transformation of the economy and Growth; (ii) Thrust 2: Human Capital, 
Social Protection and Sustainable Development; and (iii) Thrust 3: Governance, Institutions, Peace and 

Security. Thus, PZTA-Sud or ‘Agropole Sud’ falls within the framework of the PSE’s Thrust 1 and forms an 

integral part of the second Priority Action Plan (PAP) of PSE spanning the period 2019-2023. 

 

1.1.2 PZTA-Sud (or Agropole Sud) is one of PSE's three agro-processing hubs (or integrated agricultural 

hubs) through private investments in agribusiness. Thus, it is consistent with the Industrial Sector 

Development Policy Letter (LPSDI), which seeks to raise the industrial sector’s contribution to the GDP 

from 12 to 25% over the period 2014-35, by targeting the agricultural value chains with high potential (fruits 

and vegetables, oils, dairy products, cereals, and poultry). This will benefit the domestic market (import 

substitution) and the international market (fruits and vegetables, fishery products, etc.) as well. It is part of 

the guidelines of the Agricultural, Sylvicultural and Pastoral Policy Law (LOASP) 2004-24 aimed at 

reducing poverty and food security in rural areas. It also aligns with multisector strategies including the 

National Strategy for Food Security and Resilience (SNSAR 2015-35), the National Strategy for Social 

Protection (SNPS 2016-35) and the National Strategy for Equity and Gender Equality (SNEEG 2015-25).   

 Emerging Senegal Plan (PSE) 
  
PSE is the economic policy framework aimed at steering Senegal on the path of emergence by 2035. Pursuing the 
vision of "an emerging Senegal in 2035 with a society of solidarity in a nation of laws", it is structured around 3 thrusts 
targeting 6 priority sectors, 17 key reforms and 27 flagship projects. Thrust 1 aims at the structural transformation of the 
economy by strengthening the current drivers of growth and developing new sectors that create wealth and jobs. Thrust 2 
"Human Capital, Social Protection and Sustainable Development" aims to improve living conditions for the people while 
promoting the emergence of viable territories. Thrust 3 aims to modernise public administration and strengthen security, 
stability, governance, and consolidate the rule of law. 

The first priority action plan (PAP 1) over the 2014-2018 period has raised the GDP growth rate from an average of 
3.3% in 2009-2013 to more than 6% since 2015. Substantial progress has been made in key projects such as the Diass 
International Airport, the extension of the Dakar-Diamniadio motorway, the Thiès-Touba motorway, the Regional Express 
Train, the Diamniadio Industrial Park and the rehabilitation of the Dakar-Bamako railroad line. The agricultural sector has 
been strongly revitalised with the tripling of onion and groundnut production, the tenfold increase in potato production and 
the 141% increase in rice production. As regards energy, progress has been achieved in the installed capacity from 573 to 
1130 megawatts, but also in the generation of renewable energy (solar and wind) with 144 megawatts newly installed. The 
number of electrified villages over the period has increased from 1648 to 3864. The second Phase 2019-2023 (PAP II) 
seeks to remove or mitigate the potential constraints to this growth momentum, while promoting a better articulation 
between the development objectives (SDGs) and those of PSE. It emphasises improving the structuring and maturation of 
projects, and accelerating the implementation of reforms. 

Lastly, the PSE monitoring/evaluation system was strengthened with the implementation of the Harmonised 
Monitoring and Evaluation Framework (CASE) for Public Policy in 2015, comprising the Operational Monitoring Bureau 
(BOS), the Ministry of Economy and Planning and the Organisation and Methods Bureau (BOM). Thus, placed under the 
authority of the Minister in charge of monitoring the PSE, the role of BOS is to provide decision-making tools to the country’s 
highest authority on a weekly basis. It is also responsible for the organisation, coordination and management of 
maturation/structuring processes of projects or flagship reforms. 



 

2 

1.2 Rationale for the Bank’s Intervention 

 

1.2.1 Senegal’s economy continues to perform well, with average annual GDP growth of around 6.7% over 

the 2016-2018 period. This performance is attributable particularly to the dynamism of agriculture, 

construction, tourism, transport as well as financial and insurance service sectors. However, food imports 

continue to weigh on the trade balance and food security remains a challenge. Reasons identified include the 

low level of processing of agricultural products according to quality and competitive industrial processes, 

the low productivity of the agricultural sector and its high vulnerability to climate change. These constraints 

result from the limited private investment due to the business environment that remains unfavourable - 

despite jumping 18 spots in the Doing Business 2020 ranking, the poor quality of basic infrastructure (energy, 

transport, water, telecommunications, etc.) and the poor organisation of agricultural value chains (which 

employ about 60% of the labour force). 

1.2.2 The South Agro-Industrial Processing Zone Project (PZTA-Sud) aligns well with the priorities of 

the Bank's Country Strategy Paper 2016-2020 for Senegal, notably Pillar I on support for agricultural 

processing. Furthermore, it forms part of the Bank’s Regional Integration Strategy for West Africa (RISP 

2016-17, extended to 2019). It is in consonance with three (3) of the five (5) operational priorities of the 

Bank's Ten-Year Strategy 2013-2022, namely (i) the Feed Africa Strategy 2016-2025; (ii) the 

Industrialisation Strategy for Africa 2016-25; and (iii) the Strategy for Improving the Quality of Life for the 

People of Africa 2016-25. Furthermore, the project is in line with the Bank's Second Climate Change Action 

Plan (CCAP II 2016-2020). Lastly, the Bank's intervention forms part of the initiative launched in recent 

years for the development of "agro-industrial processing zones" in agricultural basins with high market 

(domestic and export) potential. Accordingly, Senegal has forged a strategic partnership with the Bank for 

the implementation of the three (3) "Competitive Integrated Agricultural Hubs" of the PSE. Therefore, the 

project will benefit from lessons learned from similar initiatives around the world, and from the Bank’s 

experience garnered in Africa (particularly in Togo, Ethiopia and Guinea), hence its comparative advantage. 

1.3 Donor Coordination  

 

1.3.1 Development assistance is coordinated by the Government through the Economic and Financial 

Cooperation Department (DCEF) of the Ministry of Economy, Planning and Cooperation (MEPC). 

Coordination is carried out by the Consultative Committee of Technical and Financial Partners (TFPs) 

through a three-tier consultation mechanism to which the Bank belongs: the G50, the G15 including a 15-

member Executive Committee (COMEX) and thematic groups. In the dialogues between the TFPs and the 

Government, the main issues addressed concern implementing the key PSE reforms, including land, portfolio 

performance, monitoring/evaluation of outcomes, strengthening of the road maintenance fund and resource 

mobilisation (including domestic resources) under the Ministry of Finance and the Budget (MFB). It is worth 

noting that for the "integrated competitive agro-industrial hubs" project, the agricultural sector TFPs 

participate in the meetings of the National Technical Working Group chaired by MDIPMI. 

1.3.2 Therefore, PZTA-Sud will make use of the results expected from the interventions of projects 

supporting increased agricultural productivity and the development of rural entrepreneurship, namely the 

Water Valorisation for Value Chains Development Project (PROVALE-CV), the Project to Open Up 

Production Areas in Support of the Local Development Programme (PDZP/PNDL-AfDB), the Support 

Project for Skills Development and Youth Entrepreneurship in Growth Sectors (PDCEJ-AfDB), the 

Multinational Programme to Build Resilience to Food and Nutrition Insecurity in the Sahel (P2RS-AfDB), 

and the Project to Develop Resilience to Recurrent Food Insecurity in Senegal (DRIARS-IsDB). 

1.3.3 Specifically, the project will work with the professional organisations engaged in these sub-sectors 

(producer organisations, aggregators/logisticians, agro-processing entities, and exporters) and synergize with 

similar ongoing projects, including Shelter for Life funded by the United States Development Agency 



 

3 

(USAID) and the Project to Support Investment and Competitiveness of Agribusiness in Senegal, focusing 

particularly on the mango industry in Casamance (also USAID-funded). Lastly, the following table shows 

the amounts currently committed in Senegal’s agro-industrial sector.  

Sector or Subsector* 
Scale 

GDP Exports Labour 

Agro-industrial sector  12.9% (2016) 9.1% (2014) Approximately 70% 

Stakeholders – Public Expenditure (ongoing programmes or projects) 

Government Donors Amounts (USD million) Period 

USD 100 to 112 million WB 95 2012-2019 

(per year) IFAD 130  2017-2024 

 USAID 277 2013-2017 

 AfDB 99.2 2013-2020 

 CIDA 79.3 2013-2017 

 IsDB 16 2011-2015 

 BOAD 35.5 Active Portfolio 2012 

 JICA 33 2015-2020 

 FAO 6.85 2012-2013 

 EU 105.7 2014-2017 

 France 79 2014-2017 

Donor Coordination Level 

Existence of thematic working groups Yes 

Existence of a general sector programme  No  

Sources: PRACAS/DCFE/MEFP 
 

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION    

2.0 Project Intervention Overview  

2.0.0  The project’s overall objective is to contribute towards improving living conditions for the people 

(including youth and women) through the creation of value-added on agricultural products and the 

sustainable increase of productivity of the priority agro-industrial subsectors (mango and cashew nut). The 

specific objectives of the project are (i) to create conditions conducive to private investment in the industrial 

processing of agricultural products, as well as in the provision of inputs and services; and (ii) enhance the 

capacity of priority sector actors to sustainably increase agricultural productivity. 

2.0.1 In terms of concept: the project was designed based on a feasibility study financed by the 

government with UNIDO support, as per the following principles: (i) the targeting of sectors with a domestic 

or international market potential, which led to the choice of two priority subsectors (mango and cashew) and 

three complementary subsectors (maize, banana and non-timber forest products); (ii) the presence of a high-

potential agricultural production basin; and (iii) private sector interest in investing, as confirmed during the 

consultation days (Labs) and with the creation of SOCAAS (Cooperative Society of Actors of the South 

Agricultural hub). The key expected results of mango processing are puree, nectar, dried mango and vinegar. 

For cashew, expected products are cashew nuts and cashew juice. 

2.0.2 At the physical level: PZTA-Sud (or Agropole Sud) will finance : (i) a central module for the 

industrial transformation of productions from the targeted sectors, their packaging and marketing, for a Phase 

1 surface area of 40 ha expandable to 85 ha; (ii) three regional modules for secondary packaging and primary 

processing (local and regional market) covering an area of 5 ha to be serviced, expandable to 10 ha; (iii) five 

division-level platforms for aggregation, cleaning, sorting and primary packaging with a unit area of 3 to 5 

ha; and (iv) collection points in villages (primary storage facilities). Furthermore, resources are earmarked to 

ensure access of modules and platforms to regional networks (roads, electricity, ICT, etc.). The land of the 

agricultural hub, which has been secured according to the requirements of national procedures and the Bank, 

will be registered in the name of SCE. 



 

4 

2.0.2 At the operational level:  three categories of sub-projects (SP) were deemed necessary to implement 

to ensure the success of the agricultural processing area (or Agricultural Hub), namely: 

 Public sub-projects (financed from AfDB and IsDB public windows) will be set up by the Project 
Executing Agency to facilitate private investment. These public sub-projects mainly concern the 

infrastructure of the central module (located in Adéane), regional modules (Kolda, Bignona and Kolda) 

and aggregation and service platforms for which the preliminary design studies (PDS) are in progress 

and those of detailed design (DD) are planned before end-2019. Thus, the project will finance the 

preparation of bidding documents (BD) as well as construction work. Capacity building of institutional 

structures (ministries, research centres, technical services, etc.) and actors of value chains (Banks/MFIs, 

POs, etc.) will be financed by the project to for performance enhancement. Partnership agreements, if 

needed, will be signed with the said structures. 

 

 The public-private sub-projects will be financed via the Sovereign Fund for Strategic Investments 
(FONSIS) to which this responsibility is entrusted under a MDIPMI-FONSIS-BOS tripartite agreement. 

Thus, FONSIS will set up a Construction and Operation Company (SCE), a public limited company 

whose majority capital will be held by the private sector (tenant companies, financial investors and 

members of inter-professional sectors), but will include public investors (FONSIS, local governments 

and the Central State). Alongside the relevant State entities, the SCE will be responsible for: (i) 

developing public-private sub-projects (about 5); (ii) promoting the arrival of private investors in the 

hub; and (iii) managing, recovering and maintaining the hub. SCE’s income will consist mainly of 

rentals, royalties and business services (see box 
 

South Agricultural Hub (Agropole Sud) Construction and Operation Company (SCE) 
 

The mobilisation of private investment is crucial for the success of Agropole Sud. The criteria influencing the investment 

decision include the country’s quality of life and stability, market size, existence of developed and competitive land for industrial units, 

quality of infrastructure (water, energy, wastewater treatment, etc.), connection to domestic and export markets, availability of 

qualified and affordable labour, and the existence of tax/non-tax incentives for targeted activities. 
 

In this regard, Agropole Sud has several strengths, among which: (i) the participatory structuring of the project, which has 

helped to obtain the commitment of producers of the targeted sectors and potential private sector interest; (ii) the upgrading of 

infrastructure thanks to the infrastructure provided for under the project (core module, regional modules, and aggregation and 

service platforms) and those planned by other actors (existence of the Trans-Gambia bridge, dredging of the Casamance River 

enabling the arrival of boats of 5500 tonnes, planned rehabilitation of the Senoba-Ziguinchor road, upgrading of the Ziguinchor 

airport, revival of tourism, etc.); and (iii) the facilitation of investments through the establishment by APIX of an Investment Platform 

in Ziguinchor and the future Agropole du Sud one-stop-shop, as well as the future implementation by FONSIS (Sovereign Fund for 

Strategic Investments) of the Agropole du Sud Construction and Operation Company (SCE). 
 

Thus, on the recommendation of the LAB (5-week participatory workshop organised by BOS, which brought together 96 structures 

for a total 10,500 working hours), a tripartite agreement (BOS-MDIPMI-FONSIS) was signed to entrust FONSIS with the creation 

of the SCE, as a founding shareholder. SCE will be a private company, majority owned by private companies including strategic 

investors (including tenant and inter-professional companies) and financial investors. The State (including FONSIS) and local 

authorities figure among the public shareholders. FONSIS will be responsible for developing and supporting the implementation of 

the future SCE business plan, with the possible involvement of a world-class strategic partner with expertise in the development, 

operation and promotion of private investments in the agricultural hub. The SCE will develop convincing business cases 

concerning specific investments expected in the modules (central and regional) and divisional -level platforms. In these efforts, SCE 

will synergize with the actors involved in investment promotion, including BOS, MDIPMI, APIX, and ASEPEX. 



 

5 

 Private sub-projects will be implemented by the interested companies that will be shareholders of the 
SCE. Among these are five (5) large companies and about 15 SMEs/SMIs. In this regard, this project 

will finance the intervention of the Upgrading Bureau (BMN) to provide non-financial support to about 

35 micro-enterprises and 15 SMEs. Access to financial services will be facilitated through local financial 

institutions (notably Banque Agricole, PAMECAS and ACEP), which have instruments tailored to the 

needs of short- and medium-term credit (“warrantage”, leasing, etc.). They will be supported by the 

Bank through a private sector-window operation under preparation (with PITD) to improve access to 

long-term resources, which is essential for the development of SMEs/ SMIs of the agricultural hub (see 

box). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Facilitating Access to Financial Services for SMEs/SMIs 

The country's financial system comprises 29 credit institutions, but its banking penetration rate is 19%. Access to 
financial services remains a challenge, especially for SMEs/SMIs, which account for around 80% of enterprises, contribute 30% 
of GDP formation, and employ nearly 60% of the workforce. Furthermore, there is limited access to credit for the agricultural 
sector, perceived as risky by the banks and the SFDs (insufficient financial standing, weak organisational and management 
structures, unreliable financial information, lack of guarantees, and climatic and edaphic hazards) with total or partial crop losses: 
climate, price volatility, markets, health hazards, locust invasions, etc.). They have put in place various types of credit, mainly 
short-term, including: (i) credits for agricultural production; (ii) marketing credits for agricultural products; (iii) credits to breeders' 
organisations for fattening and marketing; (iv) working capital loans, notably through "warrantage"; and (v) medium-long-term 
agricultural equipment credits (tractors, tillers, motor pumps, etc.) via collateral. 

Thus, the project will provide support in the form of: (i) an upgrade of SMEs/SMIs operating in the targeted sectors through 
a technical assistance agreement to SME/SMI support structures (such as the Upgrading Bureau); (ii) a medium-to-long term 
line of credit (from the ADB's private window) to be set up with one or two well-established financial institutions; (iii) strengthening 

the capacity of FS/banks networks (based on a call for proposals) to help them develop financial products adapted to the 
needs of the agro-industrial sector (warrantage, leasing, etc.), staff training and equipment purchase. 

 



 

6 

2.1 Project Components 

 

The contents of the key project components are shown in the following table. 
 

Components 
Cost 

(EURx10 6) 
Description of Components 

A/ Support for 

the establishment 

of an ecosystem 

conducive to 

private 

investment (PI) 

in agribusiness 

 

 

47.3 

 

A1/ Improve the regulatory and institutional framework for PI 

 Support to the Steering Committee of Agric. Hubs-COPIL (meetings and missions) and 
to BOS/PSE (baseline surveys, MTR, project completion report, specific studies). 

 Establishment of SCE by FONSIS, and the one-stop shop by APIX 

 Capacity building of State structures in charge of quality, standardisation, certification 
and export promotion (equipment, training, ad hoc studies, etc.): MDIPMI, ASEPEX, 

ASN, DPMI, ADPME etc. 

 Agreement with the Food Technology Institute of Senegal (ITA) for the establishment 
and management of the Centre of Excellence (lab) of the central module. 

 TA agreement with the Upgrading Bureau (BMN) for technical support and assistance to 
SMEs/SMIs of the agricultural hub. 

 

  A2/ Establishment of the industrial superstructure  

 Construction of the central module (Adéane): (i) external works (drinking water, 
electricity, sanitation, etc.); (ii) an administrative block (offices, conference room, etc.); 

(iii) a social space block (nursery, medical centre, gym, restaurants, etc.); (iv) a block of 

services (training centre, management centre, business incubator, etc.); (v) a logistics 

block (loading/unloading platform, weighing platform, storage/packaging hangars, etc.); 

(vi) 4 business blocks (serviced plots, parking lots, etc.); (vii) a technical block (drilling, 

water tower, generating set, etc.).  

 Construction of 3 regional modules (Kolda, Sédhiou & Bignona) of 10 ha each 
comprising: i) a serviced site (earthworks, site development ..); ii) logistics block & 

services (administrative building, management centre, financial services, serviced plots 

for private investment, market place, loading/unloading dock, weighbridge, 

storage/packing shed...); iii) a technical block (water tower, borehole, generating set, 

waste treatment...)  

 Construction of aggregation and services platforms (5 sites of 5 ha each) with (i) servicing 
of the site; (ii) a service block (administrative building, weighbridge, loading/unloading 

dock, etc.); (iii) a technical block (sorting space, primary storage, etc.).  

 Complementary engineering studies (DD, DCE, etc.) and control and monitoring of 
infrastructure works in the agricultural hub (firms). 

B/ Sustainable 

improvement of 

the productivity 

of agro-industrial 

sectors 

 

 

 

30.8 

B1/ Build the capacity of agro-industrial sector producers 

 Improvement of the non-financial services offer : (i) support to training and advisory 
support structures, POs/SMEs (equipment, training, missions, etc.); (iii) capacity 

building (technical , managerial, etc.) of POs/SMEs in the value chains (mango, cashew, 

maize, etc.) by a firm; (iv) agreement with ISRA (production of pre-base maize, mango 

and cashew seedlings, and support for over-grafting of mango and cashew trees). 

 Improvement of the financial services offer : (i) capacity building of financial 
institutions: devising financial products adapted to the needs of the sector, training of 

personnel, equipment; (ii) access to agricultural index insurance; (iii) medium- to long-

term line of credit (ADB Private Window) for 2 financial institutions.    

 Support for the implementation of an e-platform for access to agro-industrial services 
(mechanisation, storage, inputs, financing, information, etc.). 



 

7 

Components 
Cost 

(EURx10 6) 
Description of Components 

B/ Sustainable 

improvement of 

the productivity 

of agro-industrial 

sectors 

 

B2/ Build the community resilience capacity 

 Community capacity building on approach, social marketing and conflict 
prevention/management, PPP and fragility/resilience.  

 Rehabilitation of 372 km of access tracks to modules and aggregation platforms, and 
agricultural production areas, etc.  

 Implementation of the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), the 
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), the Nutrition and Health Component and the Climate 

Change Action Plan.  

 Support to the three (3) South Agricultural Hub Regional Monitoring Task Force 
(meetings). 

C/ Coordination 

and Management  

9.65  Coordination and management, and monitoring/evaluation 

 Procurement, Financial and Accounting Management, and Audit 

 Steering and supervision 

 

2.2 Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Explored 

2.2.1 PZTA-Sud aims to contribute to the transformation of the agro-industrial sector, with a view to 

inclusive agricultural growth reducing poverty and food imports and generating employment. Accordingly, 

PSE provides for the establishment of three "integrated competitive agro-industrial hubs or agricultural 

hubs", in public-private partnership. For Agropole Sud, the physical agro-industrial architecture planned for 

the targeted sectors (mango, cashew, corn, etc.) will include i) a centralised serviced module (external works, 

electricity, sanitation, one-stop shop, etc.) to accommodate the key industrial units and related services 

(logistics, services, etc.); ii) three serviced regional modules that will serve as storage, secondary packaging 

and primary processing areas for agricultural products; and iii) serviced aggregation and service platforms 

to facilitate interaction between value chain actors and to ease producers’ access to services, inputs and 

markets. With the support of the State services, this system will be complemented by improving the access 

of SMEs/SMIs and POs to technologies (quality plant material, inputs, etc.), knowledge (technical, 

organisational, management, etc.), physical infrastructure (access roads, shops, etc.) and soft infrastructure 

(ICT, digital platform, etc.). The system will be complemented by the establishment of the Construction and 

Operations Company by FONSIS. The company established will be in charge of agricultural hub construction 

and management, implementation of the PPP sub-projects (5) and support for private sector mobilisation (60 

enterprises of which 35 micro, 15 SMEs, 5 large), in conjunction with the other relevant State agencies 

(APIX, MDIPMI, ASEPEX, etc.). 

Table 2.2: Alternative Solutions Explored and Reasons for Rejection 
 

Alternative Solution Brief Description Reasons for Rejection  

Implement a classic project 

to support the improvement 

of agricultural production 

Finance the development of 

infrastructure and 

equipment for production, 

harvest and post-harvest 

 The State cannot afford to invest sustainably in the 

agricultural sector 

 Despite State efforts, food imports have remained on 

the rise   

Facilitate the establishment 

of private investors capable 

of investing in the entire 

value chain 

Secure sufficient land to 

woo private investors 

 Tens of thousands of families live on agriculture 

(mango, cashew nuts, etc.); it is unacceptable for 

private individuals to take the place of these 

families. 



 

8 

2.3 Project Type    

2.3.1 PZTA-Sud is a public investment project that aims to create the conditions for increased private 

investment in targeted value chains, particularly in the areas of agricultural processing, input supply and food 

services.  

2.4 Project Cost and Financing Arrangement 

2.4. Project Cost: The project’s overall cost is estimated at EUR 87.75 million (~ CFAF 57.6 billion), 

net of taxes and customs duties. This cost is broken down as follows: a portion in foreign exchange estimated 

at EUR 59.1 million (~ CFAF 38.8 billion) and a portion in local currency amounting to EUR 28.65 million 

(~ CFAF 18.8 billion). This cost includes provisions for physical and financial contingencies estimated at 

approximately 3% each. The estimate of the financial contingencies was made based on the current and 

projected annual rates of inflation of the local currency and foreign exchange estimated on average 

respectively at 2.5% and 1.5% per year. A summary of the estimated project cost by component and 

expenditure category is shown in Tables 2.3, 2.4 and 2.5 below, while the detailed tables are given as an 

Annex to the report.   

Table 2.3: Summary of Project Cost by Component 

PROJECT COMPONENTS 
(CFAF Million) (EUR Thousand)   

LC. FE Total LC FE Total FE %  % B.C. 

A. SUPPORT FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A PRIVATE 
INVESTOR-FRIENDLY ECOSYSTEM 

8 100 21 300 29 400 12 300 32 600 44 900 73 54 

 
Improved regulatory & institutional environment 
for private investment 

1 100 3 300 4 400 1 600 5 100 6 700 76 8 

 Establishment of the Industrial superstructure 7 000 18 000 25 000 10 700 27 500 38 200 72 46 

B. SUPPORT FOR THE SUSTAINABLE IMPROVEMENT OF 
THE PRODUCTION OF AGRO-INDUSTRIAL SUBSECTORS. 

5 000 14 200 19 200 7 700 21 600 29 300 74 35 

 Capacity building of agro-industrial producers 400 3 700 4 100 700 5 700 6 400 90 8 

 Building of community resilience 4 600 10 500 15 100 7 000 15 900 22 900 70  28 

C. COORDINATION, MGMT & MONITORING/ EVALUATION 4 800 1 400 6 200 7 250 2 100 9 350 26 10 

 Coordination and project management 4 800 1 400 6 200 7 250 2 100 9 350 26 10 

TOTAL BASE COST 17 900 36 900 54 800 27 250 56 300 83 550 68 100 

 Physical contingencies 400 1 000 1 400 600 1 500 2 100 72 3 

 Financial contingencies 500 900 1 400 800 1 300 2 100 62 3 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 18 800 38 800 57 600 28 650 59 100 87 750 69 105 

 

Table 2.4: Summary of Project Cost by Expenditure Category 

EXPENDITURE CATEGORIES 
(CFAF Million) (EUR Thousand)   

LC FE Total LC FE Total FE % % B.C. 

I. Investment cost 15 000 36 600 51 600 22 950 55 600 78 450 71 94 

 A. WORKS 9 300 24 600 33 900 14 300 37 400 51 700 73 63 

  Infrastructure 4 300 12 900 17 200 6 600 19 600 26 200 75 32 

  Construction and rehabilitation 5 000 11 700 16 700 7 700 17 800 25 500 70 31 

 B. GOODS 1 600 3 100 4 700 2 500 4 700 7 200 65 9 

  Vehicles 100 200 300 100 300 400 75 - 

  Equipment 1 500 2 900 4 400 2 400 4 400 6 800 65 8 

 C. SERVICES 1 500 8 900 10 400 2 200 13 500 15 700 86 19 

  Training 800 1 400 2 200 1 200 2 200 3 400 65 4 

  Technical assistance staff - 2 400 2 400 - 3 600 3 600 100 5 

  Studies 400 1 200 1 600 600 1 900 2 500 75 3 

  Contractual services 200 3 800 4 000 300 5 700 6 000 95 7 

  Audit 100 100 200 100 100 200 60 - 

 D. MISCELLANEOUS 2 600 - 2 600 3 850 - 3 850 - 3 

II. Recurrent cost 2 900 400 3 300 4 400 700 5 100 14 6 

 A. PERSONNEL 1 900 - 1 900 3 000 - 3 000 - 3 

 B. TRAVEL ALLOWANCE 500 - 500 700 - 700 - 1 

 MAINT., OPERAT. & REPAIR 100 200 300 100 400 500 69 1 

 D. OVERHEADS 400 200 600 600 300 900 30 1 

TOTAL BASELINE COSTS 17 900 37 000 54 900 27 250 56 300 83 550 69 100 



 

9 

EXPENDITURE CATEGORIES 
(CFAF Million) (EUR Thousand)   

LC FE Total LC FE Total FE % % B.C. 

 Physical contingencies 400 1 000 1 400 600 1 500 2 100 72 3 

 Financial contingencies 500 800 1 300 800 1 300 2 100 62 3 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 18 800 38 800 57 600 28 650 59 100 87 750 69 105 

 

Table 2.5: Disbursement Plan by Component (in EUR) 

PROJECT COMPONENTS 
PROJECT YEARS Total 

2020 2021 2022 2023 2024  

A. SUPPORT FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A PRIVATE SECTOR-
FRIENDLY ECOSYSTEM 

13 300 27 900 4 200 1 300 600 47 300 

 Improvement of the regulatory & institutional environment in favour of the 
private sector 

2 400 2 700 900 500 600 7 100 

 Establishment of the industrial superstructure 10 900 25 200 3 300 800 - 40 200 

B. SUPPORT FOR THE SUSTAINABLE IMPROVEMENT OF THE 
PRODUCTION OF THE AGRO-INDUSTRIAL SUBSECTORS 

5 900 21 000 1 600 1 400 900 30 800 

 Capacity building of agro-industrial producers 3 000 900 1 000 1 100 700 6 700 

 Building of community resilience 2 900 20 100 600 300 200 24 100 

C. COORDINATION, MANAGEMENT & MONITORING/EVALUATION 3 600 1 500 1 550 1 600 1 500 9 650 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 22 800 50 400 7 300 4 250 3 000 87 750 

 

2.4.2 Sources of Financing: The project will be financed by the AfDB, the IsDB and the Government of 

Senegal for the respective amounts of EUR 43.1 million (49%), EUR 27.85 million (32%), and EUR 16.8 

million (19%). Thus, it should be noted that the combined amount of the counterpart and IDB financing 

represents nearly 51% of the total, which indicates the Government's significant commitment. The 

government counterpart funding contribution, amounting to EUR 16.8 million, includes the seed money 

provided by FONSIS for implementing public-private sub-projects amounting to CFAF 1 billion, the 

compensation of affected persons, rehabilitation of some of the roads connecting the platforms/modules to 

the production areas and the social spending of the PIU. Details of expenditures by source of financing and 

expenditure category are given in Tables 2.6, 2.7 and 2.8, respectively. 
 

Table 2.6: Project Financing Plan 

 

Table 2.7: Project Cost by Component and by Source of Financing (in EUR thousand) 

PROJECT COMPONENT 
ADB IsDB STATE Total 

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount 

A.  SUPPORT FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A PRIVATE SECTOR-
FRIENDLY ECOSYSTEM 

25 000 53 20 700 44 1 600 3 47 300 

 Improvement of the regulatory & institutional environment in 
favour of PI 5 500 77 - - 1 600 23 7 100 

 Establishment of the industrial superstructure 19 500 49 20 700 51 - - 40 200 
B. SUPPORT FOR THE SUSTAINABLE IMPROVEMENT OF THE 
PRODUCTION OF THE AGRO-INDUSTRIAL SUBSECTORS 

12 900 42 3 500 12 14 400 47 30 800 

 Capacity building of agro-industrial producers 5 800 87 900 13 - - 6 700 
 Building of community resilience 7 100 30 2 600 11 14 300 60 24 100 
C. COORDINATION, MANAGEMENT & MONITORING/ EVALUATION 5 200 54 3 650 38 800 9 9 650 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 43 100 49 27 850 32 16 800 19 87 750 

 

 

 

 

SOURCE OF 
FINANCING 

(CFAF million) (EUR  thousand) 
% 

LC FE Total LC FE Total 

ADB Loan 8 600 19 700 28 300 13 200 29 900 43 100 49.2 

IsDB 6 400 11 900 18 300 9 650 18 200 27 850 31.8 

State of Senegal 3 800 7 200 11 000 5 800 11 000 16 800 19.3 

TOTAL 18 800 38 800 57 600 28 350 59 400 87 750 100.0 



 

10 

Table 2.8: Project Cost by Expenditure Category and by Source of Financing (in EUR Thousand) 

EXPENDITURE CATEGORIES  
ADB IsDB STATE Total 

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % 

I. Investment Cost 39 600 48 25 950 31 16 800 21 82 350 94 

 A. WORKS 21 900 40 21 100 39 11 600 21 54 600 62 

  Infrastructure 9 100 33 7 000 25 11 600 42 27 600 31 

  Construction and rehabilitation 12 800 48 14 100 53 0 - 29 900 31 

 B. GOODS 5 800 78 1 600 22 0 - 7 400 9 

  Vehicles 200 65 100 35 0 - 300 1 

  Equipment 5 600 79 1 500 21 0 - 7 100 8 

 C. SERVICES 11 700 72 2 100 13 2 600 15 16 400 19 

  Training 3 300 95 200 5 0 - 3 500 4 

  Technical assistance staff 3 400 90 400 10 - - 3 800 5 

  Studies 1 800 70 400 17 400 13 2 600 3 

  Contractual services  3 000 49 1 000 16 2 200 35 6 200 7 

  Audit 200 73 100 27 0 - 300 1 

 D. MISCELLANEOUS 200 4 1 150 29 2 600 67 3 950 4 

II.  Recurrent Costs 3 500 65 1 900 35 - - 5 400 6 

 A. PERSONNEL 1 600 48 1 400 52 - - 3 000 3 

 B. TRAVEL ALLOWANCES 600 69 200 31 - - 800 1 

 C.MAINT. OPERAT. & REPAIR 300 54 300 46 0 - 600 1 

 D. OVERHEADS 1 000 100 - - 0 - 1 000 1 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 43 100 49 27 850 32 16 800 19 87 750 100 

 

2.5. Project Area and Targeted Beneficiaries 

2.5.1 The project impact area covers the regions of Ziguinchor, Kolda and Sedhiou which constitute the 
natural region of Casamance and had a population of about 1,947,967 in 2018. The agricultural and socio-

economic environment of the rural population is characterised by a low access rate to rural roads, storage, 

processing and agricultural production infrastructure, particularly for youth and women. The area has the 

distinction of being among the country’s most productive in agriculture thanks to its good rainfall and soil 

quality. However, a large part of agricultural production is difficult to market owing to low value-added for 

agricultural products. 

2.5.2 The area of intervention has been the focus of attention by the State following the armed conflict of 
the 1980s and 1990s, thanks to the inclusive dialogue for peace and the implementation of multisector 

projects (PPDC, PACM, PARCES, PUDC, etc.), some financed by AfDB (PPDC, P2RS, PROVALE) and 

IsDB (DRIARS, PROMISE, RRVCP etc.). To date, Ziguinchor port and airport are functional, the bridge 

over the Gambia River was completed in 2019 and the road network expanded with the rehabilitation of the 

Sénoba-Ziguinchor road. Therefore, the project comes to consolidate these gains by financing the requisite 

actions to attract private investment in agribusiness. The project will create 14,500 direct jobs and 35,000 

indirect jobs. It will benefit approximately 65,000 households, or about 365,000 people (51% women). It 

will target farmers and the private sector (including SMEs/SMIs) that can invest in agricultural processing 

and service delivery. Specific actions will target the youth and women to integrate them into the agricultural 

value chains. The construction of the agricultural hub infrastructure will be based on local labour. Enterprises 

will receive advisory support to provide decent jobs with basic social security. 

2.6 Participatory Approach to Project Identification, Design and Implementation 

2.6.1 The project design is based on a participatory and inclusive approach involving all stakeholders: 

technical services, producer organisations, women/youth groups, civil society, private sector, TFPs and 

projects. These broad-based consultations took place at all stages, including pre-feasibility and feasibility 

studies, sub-project or 'LAB' structuring workshops, and project preparation and appraisal missions. Under 

the supervision of BOS, the PEMANDU Big Fast Results method (the equivalent of BOS in Malaysia) was 

applied to allow full stakeholder participation through the LAB, which brought 150 participants from 96 



 

11 

structures (private sector, financial institutions, public sector, civil society, etc.) for a total of 10,500 hours 

of work. 

2.6.2  The process helped to (i) delimit the Agropole Sud scheme, with a focus on the priority sectors (mango 

and cashew); (ii) structure the priority sub-projects (public, PPP, and private) to be retained in the agricultural 

hub; (iii) decide on the creation of a Construction and Operations Company (SCE) of the hub in the form of 

a company under private law, in particular to implement the PPP sub-projects; iv) adopt the principle of 

mandating FONSIS to create the SCE, through a tripartite protocol agreement duly signed by FONSIS, BOS 

and MDIPMI. Furthermore, the involvement of various stakeholders has served to identify private investment 

opportunities to be mobilised, with a view to generating wealth, employment & youth entrepreneurship. 

2.6.3 At the project area level, working sessions brought together the territorial administration, local 

elected officials, technical services (agriculture, livestock, water and forestry, etc.), research institutes (ISRA, 

ITA, etc.), financial institutions (Banque Agricole, PAMECAS, ACEP), representatives of producers, civil 

society and certain projects. These working sessions served to (i) present the project's intervention strategy; 

(ii) share the technical choices and channels chosen; (iii) discuss the role of the project actors, gather the 

opinions of the actors and measure the interest of the beneficiaries and their level of accountability in project 

formulation, implementation and sustainability. This participatory approach will be continued during project 

implementation. 

2.7 Bank Group Experience and Lessons Reflected in Project Design 

2.7.1 As of 30 September 2019, the Bank's portfolio comprised twenty-nine operations for a total net 

commitment of UA 1,030 million. This amount is broken down as follows: UA 864.29 million for the public 

sector and UA167.14 million for the private sector. The sector breakdown of national public sector projects 

is as follows: transport (54.0%); water and sanitation (15.1%); rural (17.5%); ICT (6.0%); social (2.1%); 

energy (3.5%) and governance (1.8%). The portfolio performance of national public sector projects remains 

satisfactory with 3 out of 4. The project effectiveness has decreased on average from 9.4 months to 5 months 

between 2011 and 2019 and the average time from approval to meeting the conditions precedent to first 

disbursement has improved from 9.6 months in 2013 to 7 months in 2019. The disbursement rate is 26% for 

an average portfolio age of 3.5 years. Lastly, the public sector portfolio comprises 4 regional operations for 

UA 83.52 million (Senegal) and a disbursement rate of around 35%. 

2.7.2 The mid-term review of the CSP 2016-2020, combined with the portfolio review provided lessons and 

recommendations as follows: (a) For the Bank : i) strengthen Bank support to the private sector to enhance its 

competitiveness and contribution to growth (including through PZTA); ii) improve the project preparation 

quality by using the Project Preparation Fund (PPF); iii) increase the role of the Bank's country office in 

Senegal in project supervision and assistance to reduce file processing times; iv) support agricultural hub 

development projects; vi) improve the country's absorptive capacity by removing bottlenecks during project 

implementation (procurement, disbursement, M&E, etc.); (b) For the Government : i) strengthen project 

monitoring (Ministries of Economy, Finance, Industry); and ii) raise the level of domestic resource 

mobilisation in a context where 50% of AfDB public project financing must be sourced from counterpart 

funding.  

2.8 Key Performance Indicators  

2.8.1 The key performance indicators of the project's logical framework are: Impact Indicators: (i) the 

rural poverty rate; (ii) the per capita value of food imports and exports; (iii) the share of the agro-industrial 

sector in GDP; Outcome Indicators: (i) modern installed capacity of agricultural product processing; (ii) the 

proportion of agricultural products processed according to the required standards (mango, cashew, maize, 

and banana); (iii) the cumulative amount in USD million of private investments catalysed by agribusiness 



 

12 

(including SMEs/SMIs); (iv) additional decent direct/indirect jobs created/consolidated (of which 50% 

women and 60% youth); (v) change in the average annual income level of agricultural households (headed 

by women); (vi) agricultural production of key sectors; (vii) the number of jobs created/reinforced in the 

agricultural sector (of which 50% women and 60% youth). 

III. PROJECT FEASIBILITY  

3.1 Economic and Financial Performance  

3.1.1 The project is designed to generate direct spin-offs in the processing of targeted crops, through 
private agribusiness investments in Agropole Sud (i.e. about 60 units), which can reach 90 by the end of ten 

(10) years. Besides the spin-offs on the private companies established in the agricultural hub, the farms will 

reap substantial income by supplying companies with raw materials for the targeted crops, namely: cashew 

(over 10,000 ha), mango (over 5,500 ha), maize (over 5,000 ha) and banana (over 1,500 ha). In addition 

to these benefits generated by the project and reflected in the economic and financial analysis, there will be 

several others in terms of: (i) creation of temporary and permanent jobs estimated at around 180 per 

processing unit (about 14,500 in total); (ii) improving and increasing the production of non-timber forest 

products (such as baobab, honey, seeds and wild fruits, oils and resins, infusions , etc.); (iii) improving 

the quality of nutrition as a result of capacity building in food fortification and hygiene; (iv) improving access 

to index insurance; and (v) improving the quality of natural resource management through the application of 

smart agriculture, climate change adaptation, biogas energy production and forest cover restoration.   

3.1.2 Financial analysis: the bulk of the above benefits are not tradable or even tangible items, and thus 
do not lend themselves to a financial performance analysis based on existing markets.  As a result, it has not 

been considered appropriate to include them in quantitative analysis, based on a production model or profit-

making activities approach. However, it has been possible to perform a cost/benefit analysis of agribusiness 

and other agricultural production models (FARMOD), as indicated above. 

3.1.3 For agribusiness enterprises, an assumption is proposed based on four (4) types of processing units, 
namely micro, small, medium and large enterprises, with respective investments of CFAF 7 million, 15 

million, 1.345 billion and 15 billion each, according to the average of investment profiles in these kinds of 

models. In this case, the annual turnover per company is CFAF 3.95 million, 11.48 million, 782.10 million 

and 8.88 billion, respectively, for micro, small, medium and large units, from the fifth year, on an operating 

life of approximately 20 years. For agricultural crops from farms and suppliers of agribusiness companies in 

the parks, FARMOD-type production cost/benefit models (Input/Output, Project and No Project) over a 20-

year operating life were used. 

3.1.4 Thus, the financial analysis gave: (i) a financial impact of over CFAF 70.54 billion per year from 
the fifth year of operations expected over 20 years, according to the same type of operations, according the 

life of the investments. This implies that the financial benefits of the project over the period of operation 

exceed the cost of the investments needed to finance it; (ii) a cost/benefit ratio of 1.60, which means that the 

benefits are higher than the cost of the investments; (iii) an internal rate of return of 19.44 %, which is higher 

than the opportunity cost of capital (the capital cost of financial resources for investments in the project) is 

estimated at 12%. Based on these results, it can be concluded that the project presents a profitability profile 

justifying the cost of the investments financially. 

3.1.5 Economic analysis: the economic analysis was carried out using the reference price method, 
namely the prices under conditions of economic efficiency, according to the "Pareto" optimum. It was 

conducted based on the comparison between the "no project" and "project" situation of the production models 

presented in the financial analysis. In this model, tradable goods, i.e. goods likely to be the subject of 

commercial transactions beyond the country (FOB at the port and CIF at the Port of Marseille), are 



 

13 

considered. In this case, the reference prices of these products (economic prices) are evaluated based on the 

ex-ante balance of these crops enabling to obtain export parity prices at farm gate. The labour force was 

economically valued at 65% of its financial value of CFAF 1,800/day, to take into account the inelasticity of 

the labour demand in the country in general and in the project in particular. Based on realistic assumptions, 

the economic rate of return (ERR) of the programme was estimated at 20.14%, with a B/C ratio of 1.62. In light 

of these results, the overall project profitability is deemed satisfactory. 

IRR (baseline scenario) : 19.44% NPV Amount:  CFAF 301.39 billion  

ERR (baseline scenario) : 20.14% NPV Amount:  CFAF 298.21 billion 

3.1.6 Sensitivity analysis: the sensitivity tests conducted based on the reduction in production prices were 
used to measure the stability of the financial and economic performance indicators. Thus, the tests show that 

prices should be lowered to 54.17% (break-even or " switching value") to cancel out the additional benefits 

generated respectively at the financial and economic level, with IRR and ERR equal to the opportunity cost of 

capital, i.e. 12 %. This test shows that the programme profitability profile is robust, although it has not been 

performed on all endogenous values of the model. However, the price variable is of paramount importance since 

it is the only one that is beyond the control of programme management and operation. The summary of the 

sensitivity analysis is presented in the Technical Annexes (Volume II). 

3.2 Environmental and Social Impact 

3.2.1 Environment  

3.2.1.1 PZTA-Sud (Agropole Sud) is classified in Category I. Its classification is justified by the activities 

likely to cause major environmental and social impacts to the natural and human environment conceived as 

an agro-industrial development hub. This approach led to the separation of the agricultural hub infrastructure 

on sites covering the three regions and networking actors of the targeted value chains (producers, processing 

firms, aggregators, etc.). This classification is also justified by the fact that it could trigger all five operational 

safeguards. The documents presented are the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) and 

the SESA summary, which were finalised and posted on 1 August 2019.  

3.2.1.2 Negative impacts: The key negative impacts expected from the project are: (i) risks of 

deforestation; (ii) disfigurement of the landscape; (iii) proliferation of disease vectors (malaria); (iv) 

degradation of ecosystems (soil, wildlife and water resources); (v) waste generation; (vi) dust and smoke 

emission; and (vii) traffic accidents, etc. The planned mitigation measures include: (a) tree planting; (b) 

application of appropriate pesticide management measures; (c) strict control of the pesticides used; (d) 

elimination of expired pesticides; (e) training in integrated pesticide management; (f) producer awareness 

and training; and (g) watering the site, waste collection, etc. The estimated cost of the measures to be 
included in the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and entirely financed by the Bank is 

about CFAF 665,000,000.  

3.2.1.3 Positive impacts: The key positive impacts are: (i) business development; (ii) improved mango, 

cashew and maize cultivation; (iii) linking farmers to processing industries; (iv) direct and indirect 

employment for youth; and (vi) increased municipal revenue. The cost of enhancing environmental benefits 

is included in the cost of environmental and social measures. 

3.2.2 Social 

3.2.2.1 PZTA-Sud will have a positive social impact in the construction phase in terms of increasing the 

people's income through the use of local materials (stone, sand, gravel, laterite) and the purchase of materials 

on the local market (cement, wood, iron, etc.). The work will inject fresh money into local markets, which 

will contribute to the development of socio-economic activities. The work will also lead to the development 

of retail trade around construction sites. The supply of construction equipment and materials should boost 



 

14 

transactions in the villages. In the operations phase, there will be a partnership between the agricultural hub 

and the farmers. The agricultural hub operation should generate around 14,500 direct jobs and 35,000 indirect 

jobs by 2024. The agricultural hub could be a means of creating jobs in agribusiness, transport, logistics and 

services (accommodation, catering, etc.), which will improve market access and farmers' income. Therefore, 

strengthening the skills of actors involved in the cashew and mango sectors (producers, traders, transporters, 

etc.) should facilitate access to salaried jobs and the creation of self-employment, thus contributing to the 

fight against poverty, rural exodus and illegal emigration.  

3.2.3 Environmental and Social Management Framework Plan (ESMFP)  

3.2.3.1 The following mitigation measures are included in the ESMFP: (i) development and reforestation 

of the agricultural hub module sites; (ii) application of adequate pesticide management measures; (iii) strict 

control of pesticides used by farmers; (iv) disposal of expired pesticides; (v) training in integrated pesticide 

management; (vi) sensitisation and training of producers; and (vii) application of the Laws on the Protection 

of Wildlife and Soil Degradation, etc. The SESA recommends conducting an Environmental and Social 

Impact Assessment (ESIA) that will: (a) describe the biophysical characteristics of the environment in which 

the project activities will take place, and highlight the major constraints that need to be taken into account 

when preparing the land, building, installing equipment, and operating; (b) assess the potential environmental 

and social impacts of project activities and recommend appropriate mitigation measures including cost 

estimates; (c) evaluate needs regarding the collection of solid and liquid wastes, their disposal and 

management, and make recommendations; (d) conduct a review of national environmental policies, 

legislation, and administrative and institutional frameworks and donor safeguard policies, indicate which of 

these policies are applicable to project activities, identify any gaps that could exist and make 

recommendations to fill them. 

3.2.4 Involuntary Resettlement 

3.2.4.1 Regarding involuntary resettlement, there are legal safeguards to protect the rights of potential 

project-affected persons. Section 31 of Law No. 64-46 of 17 June 1964 on National Land provides that: 

"After the declaration of public utility, the compensation to be paid to affected persons is evaluated on 

specified bases by a commission chaired by the prefect or his/her representative and composed of local 

representatives of the ministries in charge of public works, economy, lands, and those of the communities 

and associations including the mayor of the municipality. The compensations are established taking into 

account exclusively the existing constructions, developments, plantations and crops in the affected area 

undertaken by the affected persons (Section. 32). Displaced persons will be assisted and supported in their 

efforts to improve and rebuild their livelihoods and standard of living. The standard of living of resettlement 

populations will be more favourable than the original situation. Although not a tool offered by the AfDB 

ISS, the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) is required as a precaution, to clarify the process whereby land not 

currently concerned by the project will be developed subsequently. The projected amount to cover the 

displacement and resettlement of affected persons is CFAF 1 300 million (from the counterpart funding).   

3.2.5 Climate Change 

3.2.5.1 Senegal, in its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), agreed to unconditionally reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions by 3%, 4% and 5% respectively in 2020, 2025 and 2030, compared to “business 

as usual” (BAU) emissions for those years. The project will contribute to Senegal's climate change policies, 

particularly for the agricultural sector, with a view to adapting it and achieving the mitigation objectives set 

out in its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), particularly at regional level (Ziguinchor, Kolda and 

Sedhiou).  



 

15 

3.2.5.2  The project is vulnerable to climate risk (classified as Category 2). For this reason, risk 

management and adaptation options have been incorporated into the project design. The sizing of the 

structures will be done taking into account the geotechnical and climatic conditions specific to each site. This 

involves adaptation and mitigation measures in the agriculture, forestry and other land use sectors. In this 

way, the project will support measures that will enable farmers to mitigate and increase their climate change 

adaptation and resilience through, among others: (i) capacity building of state services (ISRA) to produce 

resilient and high-yielding varieties (cashew, mango and maize); (ii) supporting farmer organisations for 

better access to efficient and resilient technologies; (iii) strengthening the quality of advisory support services 

to farmers (climate information, digital platform, etc.); (iv) facilitating access to index insurance for farmers; 

(iv) improvement and adaptation of plant and forest production techniques; (v) changes in agroforestry 

practices to sustainably improve the production, yields and income of agro-foresters; (vi) addition of quality 

and value to agricultural production through post-harvest operations (storage and primary processing 

facilities); and (vii) access to more profitable markets through investment provided for in the agricultural 

processing modules (central and regional).  

3.2.6 Gender  

3.2.6.1 The project is classified under Category 3 according to the Bank's Gender Marker System. It will 

be implemented in a social environment where gender inequalities persist and are exacerbated by the 

migration of men. This situation reinforces the triple role of women with its corollaries of work overload and 

poverty. Thus, the project will take into account the specific needs of women and men as well as youths of 

both sexes. The aim is to reduce the inequalities of access for women and men of all social categories to the 

opportunities offered by the agricultural hub. Actions to be taken include: (i) promoting a gender-sensitive 

regulatory and institutional framework; (ii) equity in implementing project activities, including a quota of 

50% of agricultural project aggregation/primary processing of women-run cooperatives and SMEs (project 

selection, training, financing, etc.); (iii) development of gender-sensitive infrastructure (childcare facilities, 

separate showers and toilets, secure and equipped with water, etc.); (iv) support for women's cooperatives 

and SMEs through the structuring of their businesses and adapted training (including functional literacy, 

financial inclusion, processing, storage and conservation of agricultural products, leadership, natural resource 

management, etc.); (v) promoting women’s inclusion and leadership in the committees set up/consolidated 

under the project (50% women); (v) a campaign/sensitisation to fight and prevent malnutrition; and (v) the 

recruitment of a social development and gender specialist based on the South Branch. The budget allocated 
for specific and gender-sensitive activities is EUR 6.3 million, or about 14% of the total amount. 

3.2.7 Nutrition and Health  

3.2.7.1 The Rural Survey of Food Security and Nutrition (ERASAN 2014) shows that households in food-

insecure rural areas account for 30% of the total (153,728 households), of which 12% are in a severe 

situation and 18% in a moderate situation. The rate of food insecurity is higher for female-headed households 

at 40.4% compared to 29.4% for men-headed households. The regions of Ziguinchor (63%), Sédhiou (52%) 

and Kolda (52%) have the highest rates of households with food insecurity. The project will ensure that the 

modules and platforms take into account the establishment of medical services to support the safety of users. 

The agreements to be signed with the research institutes, particularly the ITA for the Centre of Excellence, 

will ensure that the nutritional quality of the processed products are acceptable to the local population and 

the market. At community level, to ensure resilience, awareness and communication sessions for behavioural 

change in nutrition, health and hygiene will be supported by the project. For vulnerable groups such as 

women, activities to support processing for the local or divisional (“département”) market will be funded, 

which will increase their income. For better social inclusion, the youth and women who will be selected for 

the labour-intensive works during the constructions on the agricultural hub sites will come largely from the 

poorest households. To this end, the project will use the single national registry targeting community-based 

activities. These activities will be supported by partners already on site such, for instance the Malnutrition 



 

16 

Control Unit. To ensure greater inclusion, the labour-intensive works will target the most vulnerable youth 

and women. Index insurance for producers is also a social protection measure for inclusion purposes. 

3.2.8 Youth Training and Employment 

3.2.8.1 The mapping of vocational training institutions in the project area indicates the existence of several 

Vocational and Technical Training and Handicraft (FPTA) structures, of which thirteen (13) in Ziguinchor, 

seven (7) in Kolda and three (3) in Sedhiou (one of the structures is being established). The project will work 

with these centres to ensure that agribusinesses moving into the region will have on-site skilled labour for 

the different trades. The project will help create around 1,400 direct and 35,000 indirect jobs for youth and 

women in the region, during the construction phase (which will use labour-intensive techniques) and in the 

operation phase by the 60 companies expected on the different sites. The project will also address the key 

challenges related to youth entrepreneurship, namely access to land and finance and the acquisition of 

technical skills for managing agro-industrial enterprises. At the agricultural hub, there are plans to build four 

training halls which will facilitate the upgrading of the salaried and self-employed workforce. Close 

collaboration will be established with at least three vocational training centres in the region, such as 

Goudomp, which is being developed, particularly for the processing of cashew nuts and fruits. The business 

incubator to be established at the Adéane central module will enable the incubation of youth-initiated 

projects. As regards access to finance for SMEs, the project will carry out capacity building of at least three 

financial institutions to develop services tailored to the needs of agro-industrial enterprises, particularly those 

of youth. Furthermore, the project will collaborate with the Mastercard Foundation, which supports the 

vocational training institutes in the project area as well as SMEs to strengthen youth employability. 

3.2.9 Fragility and Resilience  

3.2.9.1. The Casamance Natural Region, the project's impact area, experienced an armed conflict in the early 

1980s, whose victims lived mainly in Sedhiou and Ziguinchor regions. The induced fragility endured over 

nearly four decades slowed public and private investment in the region and has increased the social divide 

and the feeling of social and spatial exclusion. However, the State has made substantial efforts to develop 

infrastructure in the transport, energy and social sectors (drinking water, health, education, etc.), and this has 

contributed significantly towards strengthening social cohesion at inter-regional and national level. That 

notwithstanding, much effort remains to be made to mitigate the effects of regional disparity, gender 

inequality and youth underemployment. This peculiarity of the region has been reflected in the project design 

by taking into account existing resilience capacity in communities to address drivers of fragility. To reinforce 

this fragile cohesion, the project will support the agricultural potential of each region and organise the 

targeted sectors to provide economic opportunities for women, youth and vulnerable segments of the 

population. The sensitive land issue for this region of the country was also considered through the 

participatory approach undertaken for the project in terms of land tenure security. Areas with high production 

cashew and mango plantations located along the border strip south of Casamance pose a risk for producers 

due to the presence of mines in some places. This threat, already covered by the government’s partners 

specialising in this aspect, will be regularly monitored by the project at the National Demining Centre, to 

ensure that producers operating in the above-mentioned area are protected from this risk (see Annex).  

 

 

 

 

 



 

17 

IV. IMPLEMENTATION  

4.1. Implementation Arrangements  

4.1.1 Institutional Arrangements 

4.1.1.1 The Project Executing Agency (AGEX) will be the Ministry of Industry through a Project 

Implementation Unit (PIU). A Steering Committee (COPIL) chaired by AGEX will be set up to: (i) formulate 

the strategic thrusts of the agricultural hub programme; (ii) review and approve the AWPB; and (iii) analyse 

and adopt activity reports (including financial reports) and audit reports. It will include representatives of the 

ministries in charge of the following portfolios: Planning and Cooperation, Finance, Agriculture, Trade, 

Gender and Social Affairs, Environment, Regional Planning, Health and Nutrition; as well as representatives 

of the Private Sector, the Sovereign Fund for Strategic Investments (FONSIS), Federations of Farmers' 

Organisations, Local Authorities, Consular Chambers and BOS/PSE. The PIU Coordinator will provide 

secretarial support to COPIL. 

4.1.1.2 The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be responsible for project coordination, implementation 

and monitoring. The PIU will be based in Dakar and will ultimately be in charge of the 3 agricultural hub 

(PZTA) projects (it will have 3 regional agencies corresponding to the three (3) agricultural hubs (South, 

Centre and North). However, only the Agropole Sud agency will be set up under this project. Specifically, 

the composition of the PIU includes the following staff: (i) a national coordinator; (ii) an agribusiness 

engineer ; (iii) a monitoring/evaluation specialist; (iv) a procurement specialist; (v) an administrative and 

financial officer; (vi) an investment and finance specialist ; (vii) a regional coordinator; (viii) an infrastructure 

engineer (regional); (ix) an agronomist specialised in agricultural sectors (regional); (x) and environmental 

safeguards specialist; (xi) a social safeguards specialist; (xii) 3 accountants (including one regional); (xiii) 3 

assistants (procurement, administration, monitoring/evaluation); and (xiv) support staff. The baseline survey, 

midterm surveys and the final evaluation of project outcomes and impacts will be conducted by consultants 

to be recruited (in conjunction with MEPC, BOS and ANSD). 

4.1.2  Procurement Arrangements 

4.1.2.1 All Bank-financed procurement of works, goods and consultants services under this project shall be 

carried out in accordance with the Procurement Policy for Bank Group-Funded Operations ("AfDB 

Procurement Policy"), October 2015 edition, and the provisions of the financing agreement. Pursuant to this 

policy and following the various evaluations conducted, all procurement listed in paragraph B.6.3.1 will be 

carried out  in accordance with the country's procurement system ("National System") enshrined in Decree 

No. 2014-1212 of 22 September 2014 on the Public Procurement Code (CMP), while all other procurement 

listed in paragraph B.6.3.2 will be carried out in accordance with the Bank Procurement Methods and 

Procedures (BPM), October 2015 edition, using the Bank's bidding documents (BDs). The use of the National 

System improves efficiency through the following actions, among others: i) better ownership of the 

procurement system to be used by the executing agency; ii) time saving with the absence of a second audit 

(after that of the national entities), namely the Bank’s ex-ante review. However, the Bank reserves the right 

to request the Borrower to revert to the use of the Bank System if: a) the legal framework of Senegalese public 

procurement system changes and becomes unsatisfactory to the Bank; b) the provisions in force were not 

respected by the Executing Agency; or c) the appropriate risk mitigation measures featuring in the Risk 

Assessment Action Plan were not observed. 

4.1.2.3 Advance contracting (AC): during the appraisal mission, the Government informed the Bank of 

its intention to request authorisation to use advance contracting for the selection of: (i) a firm specialised in 

human resources to be charged with recruiting the project team staff; and (ii) a technical assistance firm to 

support PIU. A request accompanied with a procurement plan shall be submitted to the Bank for opinion 



 

18 

before the project is presented to the Bank’s Board of Directors. 

4.1.2.4 Procurement Risk and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): to take project specificities into account, the 

Bank assessed: (i) risks at the national, sector and project level; and (ii) the capacity of the executing agencies. 

The findings of these assessments led to the conclusion that the procurement risk level was moderate and 

determined, subject to the application of the mitigation measures proposed in paragraph 5.9 of Annex B.6, 

the group of procurement to be carried out according to the Bank’s system and that likely to be carried out, 

without major risk, according to the National System. The planned contracts for works amount to 

approximately UA 27.307 million, for the various goods UA 5.162 million, and for consultancy services UA 

8.355 million. Details of these procurement arrangements are available in Annex B.3 of the appraisal report.  

4.1.3  Financial Management Arrangements  

4.1.3.1  In accordance with the provisions of the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, the Bank, like most 

other TFPs, has agreed to maximise the use of country systems for project and programme management as 

far as possible. An assessment of the existing country financial and accounting management system was 

made during the appraisal mission and the required mechanism specified for the project. Thus, the financial 

management of the project will be carried out by the Project Implementation Unit (PIU), to be put in place by 

the MDIMPI in its capacity as the Project Executing Agency. The PIU personnel, which will be recruited on 

a competitive basis, will include among others a coordinator, an administrative and financial manager, an 

accountant and an accounting assistant. The current accounting system is accrual accounting on software 

enabling the recording of project operations. The software has the potential to handle multiple projects with 

budgeting, analytics and general modules, up to the production of financial statements. The project’s internal 

control will be formalised in an administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual to be drawn up 

once the project is put into effect by a consultant. PZTA-Sud will produce quarterly project monitoring and 

annual financial statements and submit them to the Bank after approval by the Project Steering Committee. 

The project financial and accounting audit will be conducted by an independent firm registered on the role 

of a national or regional order of Bank member countries. The audit firm will be recruited by Project 

Coordination for three years based on terms of reference approved by the Bank, and paid out of AfDB funds.   

 

4.1.4 Disbursement Arrangements  

4.1.3.1 Disbursements will be made in accordance with Bank rules and procedures. A special account will 

be opened in the books of a commercial bank to keep a portion of the loan resources. Three disbursement 

methods will be used: (i) the special account method for training, operating and other minor project expenses; 

(ii) the direct payment method for settling contracts and agreements for goods, works and services; and (iii) 

the reimbursement method for expenses chargeable to AfDB but settled with the resources from counterpart 

funding, with the Bank’s prior approval. Bank advances in the Special Account will be made based on the 

Annual Work Programme and Budget (AWPB) previously approved by the Bank. The State’s counterpart 

funding will be provided for in the State budget. 

4.2 Project Monitoring/Evaluation  

4.2.1 Technical and financial monitoring: the PIU will be responsible for collecting, analysing and 

compiling information on physical achievements and financial execution. To this end, it will have a scorecard 

with technical and financial indicators on the progress of the project. Such monitoring will serve to obtain 

the following information for each activity and with a half-yearly periodicity: physical target, level of 

achievement, expected costs, actual costs, gaps and explanations of any gaps. This information will be used 

for preparing the half-yearly project progress reports. Furthermore, in addition to the review work of the 

Steering Committee, the Bank will field two supervision missions per year, to which should be added a mid-

term review mission. 



 

19 

 

4.2.2  Impact assessment: the project impact assessment will be conducted through participatory surveys 

under the supervision of BOS/PSE. The baseline survey will determine the level of the following indicators 

in project year zero: (i) current average household income; (ii) annual production of key crops; (iv) industrial 

processing rate; (v) access to inputs, agricultural services and farmer financing; (vi) marketing performance; 

and (vii) volume of financing mobilised by SMEs/SMIs. The same survey will be conducted at project 

completion. 

4.3  Governance  

4.3.1  Senegal has enjoyed long-standing political stability supported by solid democratic institutions and 

demonstrated by the three peaceful democratic regime changes. Senegal ranks 66th out of 180 countries on 

Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index 2018 and 8th in Africa in the indicators "Safety and Rule 

of Law", "Participation and Human Rights" and "Transparency and Accountability" of the Mo Ibrahim Index of 

African Governance (IIAG) 2017. This good performance reflects the efforts of the various regimes towards 

establishing or strengthening key institutions such as the Court of Auditors, the State General Inspectorate (IGIE), the 

National Financial Information Processing Unit (CENTIF), the National Bureau for the Fight against Fraud and 

Corruption (OFNAC) and the Public Procurement Regulatory Authority (ARMP), and the introduction of a 

requirement that senior officials must declare assets (2014). The business environment has improved significantly as 

reflected by its 18-place jump in the Doing Business 2020 rankings. However, progress is needed in terms of 

registering property, paying taxes, trading across borders and ease of access to these facilities outside of the capital.  

4.3.2  In view of the project area’s sensitivity and the project’s complexity, the governance of the South Agricultural 

Hub is of special interest to the Bank and the Senegalese authorities, both in its design/ development and operation 

phases. While promoting private sector interest in the area, such sensitivity to the low-intensity conflict that has affected 

Casamance1 is important. Therefore, the project design adopted a highly participatory process in line with the strategic 

thrusts of PSE. Applying the Big Fast Results (BFR) methodology enabled the involvement of all project stakeholders, 

including private companies, financing institutions, research centres, civil society and the administration, to agree on 

partnership arrangements for successful its implementation. 

4.3.3  This process resulted in the selection of the following options (technical annex): 

 The management of the agricultural hub is entrusted to a dedicated company. After an in-depth analysis of different 

PPP approaches, it was decided that a mandate will be granted to FONSIS to create a Construction and Operation 

Company (SCE). The composition of the capital of SCE will unify the stakeholders’ commitment and will include 

a public sector minority (FONSIS, regional authorities, etc.), and a private sector majority (strategic and financial 

investors, including major agribusinesses and producer federations).  

 The establishment of an ecosystem enabling the agricultural hub to have access to all the administrative and 

facilitation services in the South zone. In this regard, the project will establish close collaboration with the 

Ziguinchor Regional Investment Platform (PRI) so that its services can meet the needs of the hub’s investors. The 

Adeane central module will also include a specific one-stop shop for the agricultural hub, offering high-end 

services, complementary to those of the South PRI.   

4.4  Sustainability  

4.4.1 The project was designed in a participatory and integrated manner to ensure sustainability, thanks 

to the active involvement of the relevant State services in project implementation (ISRA, ITA, ANCAR, 

DRDR, FNDASP, etc.). Besides, the sectors identified by an analysis of the market potential were confirmed 

during stakeholder consultations (surveys, missions, workshops, Labs, etc.) among which, the private sector, 

producer organisations (POs) and the technical services of the State. In addition, the project was designed to 

                                                 
1  Rather than exacerbating the underlying causes of conflict, this should contribute towards consolidating the factors that foster peace and the economic and 

social inclusion of all parties. 



 

20 

consolidate the State in its facilitation role, the private sector in investment and POs in sustainably increasing 

agricultural productivity. Lastly, the project’s design takes into account the requisite conditions to ensure its 

sustainability, through the following measures : (i) inclusion of measures to improve the agro-industrial 

sector’s business ecosystem at the project area level (one-stop shop, support services, quality control services, 

financial services, agricultural insurance, etc.); (ii) establishment of basic infrastructure (site development, 

administrative buildings, social services, common areas, etc.) in the central module (acting as an agro-

industrial park), the three (3) regional modules and the five (5) aggregation platforms and services; (iii) the 

involvement of the private sector (leader) once the project is formulated, thus ensuring easier access to 

markets (domestic, regional and international), technologies and financing (particularly for POs and SMEs); 

(iv) support for the structuring and professionalisation of agro-industrial sectors by strengthening the 

technical and business management capacity of beneficiary groups (including those run by women and 

youth); (v) facilitating access to efficient plant material for the sustainable increase in productivity and 

agricultural production of the main sectors (mango, cashew and maize). 

4.5  Risk Management  

4.5.1 Potential risks and mitigation measures have been identified and taken into consideration (see table 

and logical framework). They will be refined and finalised during the appraisal mission. 

Risks Risk Level Mitigation Measures/Actions  

Risk 1: Lack of interest by the 

private sector could limit 

investment  

  

High Mitigation 1: (i) the private sector will be regularly consulted; 

(ii) the PIU will put in place basic infrastructure (including one-

stop shop); (iii) SCE will facilitate the implementation of 

private sub-projects; (iv) access to credit facilities will be put 

in place; and (v) non-tariff barriers will be applied as needed.  

Risk 2: Climate change, discharges 

from industrial units and harmful 

practices of the population may 

degrade natural resources  

Moderate Mitigation 2: The use of resilient technologies, planned 

environmental and social safeguards, access to markets and 

agricultural insurance will mitigate climate change impacts and 

industrial risks. 

Risk 3: The expected benefits 

(including land) could be hijacked 

by a minority 

Moderate Mitigation 3: The measures included in the SESA (including 

the ESFMP), the ESFMP/RAP, and the project’s IEC 

programme should mitigate this risk. 

Risk 4: Delays in project 

implementation due to inadequate 

understanding of Bank procedures 

High Mitigation 4: Institutional support and regular training will be 

provided to the PIU, AGEX, and the Borrower (Ministries of 

Finance, Economy)  

 

4.6  Knowledge Building  

4.6.1 PZTA-Sud differs from the value chain projects usually financed by the Bank in the country, mainly 

in view of the following innovations: the targeting of value chains with market potential, the promotion of 

private investment in agribusiness (facilities, incentives, etc.), and support to actors in targeted sectors. These 

innovations will be subject to documented monitoring/evaluation and leveraged to determine the lessons 

learned by the State, the private sector and other priority sector actors. The State and the Bank will take into 

account the lessons learned during the exchange of experiences with regional member countries. The lessons 

learned will be consolidated in the project completion report. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

21 

V. LEGAL FRAMEWORK  

5.1  Legal Instrument  

5.1.1  To finance the project, an agreement will be signed between the Bank and the Republic of Senegal.  

5.2  Conditions Associated with the Bank's Intervention  

The extension of the ADB loan is subject to the following conditions:  

5.2.1 Conditions Precedent to Effectiveness 

The effectiveness of ADB loan agreement shall be subject to the Borrower’s fulfilment of the conditions set 

out in Section 12.01 of the General Conditions Applicable to Loan Agreements and Guarantee Agreements 

of the Bank (Sovereign Entities), to the Bank’s satisfaction.  

5.2.2 Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement  

In addition to effectiveness of the ADB loan agreement, the disbursement of loan resources shall be subject to 

the Borrower’s fulfilment of the following condition, to the Bank’s satisfaction:  

i) Provide to the Bank evidence of recruiting the key staff of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU), 

namely the national coordinator, the regional coordinator, the procurement specialist, the financial 

management specialist, the monitoring/evaluation specialist and the accountant.  

5.2.3 Special Conditions Precedent to Disbursement of ADB Loan Resources for Works  involving 

Involuntary Resettlement of the Population  

In addition to effectiveness of the ADB loan agreement and fulfilment of conditions precedent to first 

disbursement of resources, the disbursement of loan resources for works involving involuntary resettlement of 

the population shall be subject to the Borrower’s fulfilment of the following additional conditions, to the Bank’s 

satisfaction: 

(a) Submit a works and compensation schedule that is consistent with the abbreviated resettlement plan(s) 
(RAP) and satisfactory in substance and form to the Bank, specifying: (i) each project work area; and 

(ii) the time frame for compensation and/or resettlement of all project-affected persons (PAPs) for each 

area; 

(b) Provide satisfactory evidence that all project-affected persons (PAPs) in the works area have been 
compensated and/or relocated in accordance with the Resettlement Action Plan (“RAP”) and/or the 

works and compensation schedule, as agreed, prior to commencement of such works and in any event 

prior to the displacement and/or acquisition of the land and/or related assets of the PAP before the actual 

commencement of works; or 

(c) In lieu of paragraph (b) above, provide satisfactory evidence that the resources allocated for the 
compensation and/or relocation of PAPs have been deposited in a special account in a bank acceptable 

to the Bank, if the Borrower can prove, to the satisfaction of the Bank, that the compensation and/or 

relocation of the PAPs, in accordance with paragraph (b) above, could not be completed in whole or in 

part, for the following reasons: 

(i) identification of the PAPs by the Borrower is not feasible or possible; 
(ii) there are ongoing disputes and/or additional useful steps involving PAPs and/or affecting the 

compensation and/or resettlement exercise; or 

(iii) any other reason beyond the Borrower's control, as discussed and agreed with the Bank.  
 



 

22 

5.2.4 Other Conditions.  

The Borrower undertakes to act as follows, to the Bank’s satisfaction:     

(i) Prepare and forward to the Bank the administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual 
covering all management cycles, latest four (4) months following the effectiveness of the loan 

agreement;   

(ii) Set up a multi-project and multi-chapter integrated management system on which the project’s 
budgetary, analytic and general accounting modules shall be kept, at most 6 (six) months following 

first disbursement of the loan; 

(iii) Register, in the name of the Sovereign Fund for Strategic Investment (FONSIS), the land set aside for 
the central module at most 3 (three) months after loan effectiveness and that set aside for the regional 

modules as well as the aggregation and service platforms at most 6 (six) months after loan 

effectiveness;  

(iv) Submit the partnership agreements concluded with the Food Technology Institute, the Senegalese 
Institute of Agronomic Research (ISRA) and the Upgrading Office (BMN) to the Bank for opinion, at 

most 3 (three) months following effectiveness; and  

(v) Provide the Bank with half-yearly reports on the implementation of the ESMFP, including weaknesses 
and remedial action taken or scheduled, as needed, and any document deemed reasonably necessary 

for monitoring the project implementation.  

Undertaking. Environmental and Social Safeguards 

(a) The Borrower undertakes to ensure that the Executing Agency and each of its contractors, 
subcontractors and agents: 

i). implement the project in accordance with the ESMP, RAP and/or works and compensation schedule, 
the Bank’s Safeguard Policies and the national law as enforced in substance and in form satisfactory 

to the Bank; 

ii). prepare and submit to the Bank, within the Project Report mentioned in Section 7.01 of the Loan 
Agreement, the quarterly ESMP and RAP implementation reports, including any shortcomings 

identified and the relevant corrective measures taken; and 

iii). refrain from any action likely to prevent or block implementation of the ESMP or RAP, including 
any modification, suspension, renunciation and/or cancellation of any provision of the ESMP or 

RAP, in whole or in part, without the prior written consent of the Bank. 

(b) The Borrower undertakes to ensure that the Executing Agency and each of its contractors, subcontractors 
and agents start works in areas affected by project implementation only after all PAPs present in the area 

have been compensated/resettled in keeping with the RAP and/or the works and compensation schedule. 

5.3  Compliance with Bank Policies  

5.3.1 The Project complies with all applicable Bank policies. 

 

VI. RECOMMENDATION  

Bank Management recommends that the Board of Directors approve the proposal to grant an ADB loan of 

EUR 43.1 million to the Republic of Senegal for the purpose and under the conditions set forth in this 

report.   



 


























































 

 

 

 

PROJECT:  AGRICULTURAL MARKETS, VALUE ADDITION AND TRADE 

DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (AMVAT) 

 

 

COUNTRY: REPUBLIC OF SOUTH SUDAN  

 

 

PROJECT APPRAISAL REPORT 

Date: November 2020 

  

 

  

  

 

 

 

Grant Information 

Client information 

 

RECIPIENT:    Republic of South Sudan  

 

EXECUTING AGENCY:   Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security 

 

IMPLEMENTING AGENCY:  Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the UN 

 

 

Financing plan 

 

Source Amount 

(UA million) 

Amount 

(USD Million) 

Instrument 

ADF-15 5.53 7.80 Grant 

TSF Pillar I 4.47 6.30 Grant 

FAO 0.20 0.28 Grant 

GoSS 0.59 0.83 Counterpart Contribution 

    

TOTAL COST 10.79 15.21  
 

  

 

 

 

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected)  

 
 

Concept Note approval  

 

September 2020 

Project Board Consideration December 2020 

Effectiveness February 2021 

Last Disbursement  September 2025 

Completion  December 2025 

 

 

 

  



 

 v 

Project Summary 
 

Project Overview:  
The Agricultural Markets, Value Addition and Trade Development Project (AMVAT) uses an 

agricultural value chain approach with emphasis on the development of producer associations. 

The development goal of AMVAT is to contribute to reduced food insecurity, poverty 

reduction and building of community and household resilience. Specific objectives include: (i) 

increased agricultural productivity, (ii) increased agro-processing, aggregation and marketing 

of agricultural produce, and (iii) trade and export of agricultural products and merchandise. 

This will be achieved through four components: (i) increase agricultural productivity and 

production; (ii) improve market-place economic and social infrastructure; (iii) enhance market 

and trade enabling environment; and (iv) project management and coordination. The project 

will be implemented over a five-year period (2020-2024). The total project cost is UA 10.79 

million from an African Development Fund (ADF-15) grant of UA 5.53 million performance-

based country allocation, Transition Support Facility Pillar I (TSF-I) grant of UA 4.47 million, 

a Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) grant of UA 0.20 million and UA 0.59 million as 

counterpart contribution (in-kind land for the market in Juba) from the Government of South 

Sudan. Due to capacity limitations in the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security, the Food 

and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations will implement the project on behalf 

of the Government.   

 

Beneficiaries: The Project will support 20,000 farming households (about 120,000 individuals) 

to increase agricultural productivity and incomes, in the three states of Central Equatoria, 

Eastern Equatoria and Jonglei. The project will target households that have been receiving food 

aid over the past several years (many of them IDP returnees) but are now ready to graduate into 

agricultural market development activities to produce agricultural commodities for food and 

marketing for increased incomes. About fifty percent of these households are women headed 

households. The project will establish 20 Aggregation Business Centres (ABCs), 100 Business 

Producer Associations (BPAs) and 10 Seed Enterprise Groups (SEGs) to provide improved 
seeds to the BPAs and outside markets. Women and youth will be targeted to participate in the 

management and activities of the ABCs, BPAs and SEGs and will also be beneficiaries in the agro-

processing activities at the urban market. The project will also provide food safety training for 

laboratory technicians and other stakeholders in the food chain market system which will provide safer 

and more healthy food for over 500,000 people.  

 

Needs Assessment: South Sudan has a largely unrealised agricultural potential. Over 95% of 

the total area (658,842 km2) is considered suitable for agriculture, 50% of which is prime 

agricultural land where soil and climatic conditions are conducive for production of a variety 

of crops and livestock. However, the periodic armed conflicts in South Sudan have had serious 
negative effects on food production and security and this has resulted in a huge food import bill (43% 

of total imports in 2017), despite the country being well-endowed with natural resources that are good 

for agriculture to thrive. According to the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification issued in June 

2019, 6.35 million people (over 50% of the population) were facing crisis (IPC Phase 3 and above) 

of food insecurity. Despite the extensive agricultural potential, agricultural and food products 

rarely find their way into markets and thus are not traded on a significant scale as such, they 

have not been able to generate the much-needed foreign exchange for the country. In addition, 
South Sudan has high levels of malnutrition: 33 percent of boys and 29 percent of girls are stunted. The 

Government’s agenda for economic diversification is anchored on the agriculture sector, which is vital 

for economic activities. The agriculture sector contributes about ten percent (10%) of GDP but employs 

seventy-eight percent (78%) of the population – there is therefore considerable room for improvement 

of the sector. The AMVAT project will provide much needed skills and inputs for farmers to increase 

productivity, aggregation capacity and post-harvest agro-processing equipment to improve value 

addition. It will also provide capacity building to improve the marketing and trade environment for 

agricultural products to increase incomes and create jobs. 

 

 

 



 

 vi 

Bank’s Value Added: The Bank has considerable experience and expertise across the 

continent working with partners to increase agricultural productivity, add value and develop 

markets. This is demonstrated by the Bank’s Technologies for African Agricultural 

Transformation (TAAT) flagship whose objectives are to expand access of smallholder 

farmers, majority being women, to high yielding agricultural technologies to improve their 

food production, assure food security, raise rural incomes and scaling up agricultural 

technologies across similar agro-ecological zones. The Bank has also successfully 

implemented the Markets and Agricultural Trade Improvement Project (MATIP) in Uganda 

which established over 20 markets across the country and increase trade in agricultural products 

significantly. A second phase of the MATIP is currently being implemented. In South Sudan, 

the Bank has implemented the Short-Term Regional Emergency Response Project (STRERP - 

UA 31.5 million) under the Bank’s Say No to Famine Framework, with highly favourable 

outcomes. In addition, the Bank has supported the water and sanitation sector, power 

transmission and distribution systems, good governance and non-oil revenue mobilization and 

accountability projects in South Sudan. Implementation of projects in the country portfolio 

continued even during the period of conflict and the COVID-19 pandemic and this effort has 

been instrumental in helping to improve the lives of the people of South Sudan. 

 

Knowledge Management: The ability for farmers to enhance productivity and trade depends 

highly on access to suitable technologies, markets and other allied services whereby famers’ 

linkage with other actors in the value chains remains essential and requires support. The Project 

will therefore generate critical knowledge for supporting farmers to move from subsistence to 

commercial agriculture in the selected states, which will build up lessons for the design and 

management of similar interventions, to be scaled in other states, as well as in other Regional 

Member Countries (RMCs). A series of training and coaching activities for different categories 

of farmers and traders has been embedded in the project and a number of agricultural 

commodity studies planned. In line with the Bank’s Knowledge Management Strategy (2015-

2020), the knowledge obtained will be captured through regular supervision, progress reporting 

and mid-term review, and as part of project completion report (PCR) preparation process, 

documented and shared within the Bank and with other development partners (DPs) and RMCs. 

Given that the project covers four selected crops in three different states, with varying 

opportunities and challenges, there is potential to generate useful lessons. 



 

 vii 

 

 R E S U L T S - B A S E D  L O G I C A L  F R A M E W O R K    
A  PROJECT INFORMATION 

❚ PROJECT NAME AND SAP CODE: Agricultural Markets, Value Addition and Trade 
Development Project (AMVAT), P-SS-AAZ-001 

❚ COUNTRY/REGION: South Sudan/ Eastern Africa 

❚ PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE: Contribute to reduced food insecurity, poverty reduction and building of community and household resilience. 

❚ PROJECT ALIGNMENT:  

a) Country/region strategy: South Sudan’s National Development Strategy (NDS) (2018-2021) & Bank’s Interim Country Strategy Paper (2019-2021) 
for South Sudan 

b) Bank’s priority/sector strategy: Aligned to the Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy , Feed Africa Strategy, Improve the Life of the People of Africa and the 
Bank’s Strategy for Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience in Africa. 

c) Alignment indicators: Prevalence of food insecurity  in targeted areas 

B  RESULTS MATRIX 
RESULTS CHAIN AND INDICATOR 

DESCRIPTION 

RMF or ADOA 

INDICATOR 

UNIT OF 

MEASUREMENT 
BASELINE (2020) 

TARGET AT 

COMPLETION (2025) 

MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

FREQUENCY OF 

REPORTING 

❚ OUTCOME 1: Increased agricultural productivity and income of households (disaggregated by female headed households) 

INDICATOR 1:  Average yield 

(T/Hectare) for target crops 

 
□ Tons per hectare 

Maize: 1.9 

Sorghum: 1.7 

Groundnuts: 0.95 

Sesame: 0.48 

Maize: 2.4 

Sorghum: 2.0 

Groundnuts: 1.2 

Sesame: 0.72 

National Crop 

Census, 

FAO/WFP- Annual 

CFSAM report, 

Project M&E 

Reports 

Annual 

INDICATOR 2: Average household 

income per 1.5 ha farm  USD $422  $673 Annual 

❚ OUTCOME 2:  Increased agricultural products marketed through formal markets 

INDICATOR 3: Annual volume of 

agricultural farm produce marketed 

through formal markets in the target 

states 

□ Tons TBD by baseline study 
TBD (30% increase of 

baseline) 

Market Centre 

monitoring reports, 

ABC performance 

reports 

Annual   

❚ OUTCOME 3:  Improved capacity of stakeholders in applying food safety & quality standards (SPS, CODEX, etc.) 

INDICATOR 4: Annual volume of 

food products tested and certified in 

laboratories in the project area  
 Tons 0.5 100 

Reports from 

SSNBS 

Report from the 

Mini-Labs 

Annual 

❚ OUTPUT 1: Enhanced farmers’ knowledge for better production, aggregation and marketing   

INDICATOR 5: Farmer leaders 

trained in selected themes as 

Trainers of Trainers (ToTs) 

(disaggregated by gender) 

□ Number  0 500 ToTs (250 women) 
Project monitoring 

reports  

State Performance 

reports  

Annual 



 

 viii 

INDICATOR 6: Farmers trained in 

selected themes (GAP, Farming as a 

business, IPM, etc.) (disaggregated 

by gender) 

 Number 0 
7,500 farmers (3250 

women) 

MAFS reports 

Annual 

❚ OUTPUT 2: Established and strengthened Aggregation Business Centers (ABCs) mainstreaming youth and women 

INDICATOR 7: Aggregation 

Business centers (ABC) established □ Number 0 20 
Project monitoring 

reports, 

ABC progress 

reports 

Annual 
INDICATOR 8: Women and youth 

in ABC leadership positions   Percentage 0 
50% women and 50% 

youth  

OUTPUT 3: Strengthened capacities for the production and dissemination of improved seeds  

INDICATOR 9: Seed Enterprise 

Groups (SEGs) established 

(mainstreaming  women and youth) 
 Number  0 

10 (with 2 women and 2 

youth groups) 
Project monitoring 

reports ABC 

progress reports 

Annual 

INDICATOR 10: No. of hectares 

planted with improved seeds □ Number 0 20,000 
Annual 

OUTPUT 4: Adequate infrastructure set up for better for better aggregation and marketing 

INDICATOR 11: Modern markets 

constructed  Number 0 1 
Market management 

report Project 

monitoring reports 

Annual 

INDICATOR 12: Traders using 

post-harvest and value addition 

equipment at markets (disaggregated 

by gender) 

□ Number 0 TBD 
Annual 

OUTPUT 5: Enhanced capacity development and trade environment in the application and management of CODEX Standards  
INDICATOR 13: CODEX trading 

standards developed for cereals and 

oils seeds 
 Number 0 2  

SSNBS Reports for 

SPS  

Project monitoring 

reports 

Ministry of Industry 

and Trade reports 

Annual 

INDICATOR 14: Custom officers, 

traders and stakeholders  trained to 

apply CODEX standards on oilseeds 

and cereals (disaggregated by 

gender)  

 Number  0 130 (65 women) 

Annual 

INDICATOR 15: Food testing mini 

laboratories  (General chemistry, 
aflatoxin lab) and testing service 

facilities equipped 

 Number 0 2 
Annual 

OUTPUT 6: Strengthened value chain development and market linkages among actors 

INDICATOR 16: Multi stakeholder 

platforms (MSPs) for cereals and oil 

seeds established 
 

Number 

0 2 

Project monitoring 

reports  

Ministry of Industry 

and Trade reports 

Annual 



 

 ix 

OUTPUT 7: Enhanced project coordination and management 

INDICATOR 17: Annual work plans 

developed and approved  Number 0 5 
Project monitoring 

reports 
Annual 

INDICATOR 18: Supervision and 

progress reports conducted 

(technical and financial) 
 Number 0 10 

Project monitoring 

reports Annual 

INDICATOR 19: Capacity 

development fiduciary clinics for 

GoSS conducted  
 Number 0 2 

Project monitoring 

reports Annual 

       
 

 
  



 

 x 

PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE  

Year 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 

Quarter 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 

Initial Activities                      

Signature of loan agreement and Disbursement effectivness                      

Finalise the setting up of project implementation unit and project governance structures                     

Project Launching                     

Baseline study                      

Component 1:                       

Establish Aggregation Business Centers (ABCs), their training and provision of equipment                     

Establishment of 100 Business Producer Associations (BPAs) and their training                     

Train and coach ToTs in Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs)                     

Establish Seed Enterprise Groups (SEGs), their training and provision of equipment                     

Provide equipment for seed testing laboratory and training for the laboratory technicians                     

Support MAFS to develop the seed sector framework                     

Component 2:                        

Preparation of feasibility study and detailed design for modern market infrastructure                     

Developing Marketing Management Guidelines and Manual                      

Constructoin of the market infrastructure                     

Provide primary value addition equipment for the market                     

Component 3:                        

Develop CODEX standards and guidelines including capacity building and dissemination                     

Equip 2 food testing mini laboratories for aflatoxin and general chemistry and training of technicians                     

Setting up platforms for cereals and oil seed sectors                     

Capacity development for stakeholders (customs officers, traders, chamber of commerce, etc.) on food 

safety and quality systems and export market linkages 
          

 
   

 
   

 
 

Component 4:                        

Project management, M&E and reporting (quarterly progress and supervision reports)                     

Undertake thematic studies                     

Implementation of ESMP                      

Capacity development, training and equipment for MAFS and MTI                     

Mid-term review (MTR)                     

Project Completion Report (PCR)                     



 

1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE MANAGEMENT OF THE AFDB GROUP TO THE BOARD OF 

DIRECTORS ON THE PROPOSED ADF-15 AND TSF PILLAR-I GRANTS TO THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH 

SUDAN FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AGRICULTURAL MARKETS, VALUE 

ADDITION, AND TRADE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (AMVAT). 

 

Management hereby submits the following report and its recommendation concerning a proposed 

African Development Fund (ADF-15) grant of UA 5.53 million (USD 7.80 million) performance-based 

country allocation and  Transition Support Facility Pillar I (TSF-I)  grant of UA 4.47 million (USD 6.30 

million)  to the Republic of South Sudan to finance activities to support the Agricultural Markets, Value 

Addition and Trade Development Project (AMVAT) in South Sudan. 

 

I – STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 

1.1. Project linkages with country strategy and objectives  

 

1.1.1 AMVAT is fully aligned with and supported by South Sudan’s National Development Strategy 

(NDS) (2018-2021) whose overarching objective is to Consolidate Peace and Stabilize the Economy and 

in particular, its strategic priority no. 3 Ensuring Secure Access to Adequate and Nutritious Food. The 

NDS is divided into Clusters and the priority actions of the Economic Cluster includes to expedite 

economic infrastructure development (including agricultural infrastructure) and to fast-track 

development of legal, regulatory and institutional frameworks – activities that are integrated in the 

AMVAT components. Furthermore, AMVAT will provide gender-sensitive capacity development to the 

Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security, Ministry of Trade and Industry and other stakeholders, 

including the development of multi-stakeholder platforms for cereals and oil seeds. AMVAT is also 

aligned to the Government of South Sudan’s climate change adaptation plans for the agriculture sector 

as outlined in the country’s Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) and National Adaptation 

Programme of Action (NAPA), which include promoting climate smart agricultural (CSA) technologies 

and enhancing agricultural productivity through development of infrastructure and improved crop and 

livestock varieties. 

 

1.1.2 Moreover, AMVAT is aligned to the Bank’s South Sudan Interim Country Strategy Paper (I-

CSP) 2012-2018) extended to December 2021 by supporting the single pillar of State Building through 

Capacity Building and Infrastructure Development and specifically by developing market and 

aggregation infrastructure. The project is included in the I-CSP pipeline. The Project is aligned with the 

Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy on aspects of infrastructure development, skills and technology, agriculture 

and food security and gender. It is also aligned to the Bank’s Feed Africa Strategy, in particular the 

flagships of Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) whose objective is to 

increase agricultural productivity and value addition as well as the Special Agro-industrial Processing 

Zones (SAPZ) whose objective is to increase investment for enabling rural infrastructure for agro-

processing and value addition. It is also aligned to the High 5 on Improving the Quality of Life for the 

People of African by improving the health and nutrition of the communities through increased 

productivity of nutritious food crops. Furthermore, the project is aligned to the Bank’s Jobs for Youth in 

Africa Strategy (2016-2025) and in particular the Enable Youth flagship that emphasizes inclusive 

employment for youth in agribusiness. Furthermore, the project is aligned to the Bank’s Strategy for 

Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience in Africa (2014-2019).   

 

 



 

2 

 

1.2. Rationale for Bank’s involvement 
  

1.2.1. South Sudan’s vast agricultural potential is largely unrealised. Over 95% of the total area 
(658,842 km2) is considered suitable for agriculture, 50% of which is prime agricultural land 

where soil and climatic conditions are conducive for production of a variety of crops and 

livestock. A large part of the country, particularly the southern part, has high rainfall for 8-9 

months a year, ranging from 500-600 mm/year to more than 1,500 mm/year. However, the 

periodic armed conflicts in South Sudan have had a serious negative effect on food production 

and security and this has resulted in a huge food import bill (43% of total imports in 2017), 

despite being well well-endowed with natural resources that are good for agriculture to prosper. 

According to the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification issued in June 2019, 6.35 million 

people (just over 50% of the population) were facing a food insecurity crisis (IPC Phase 3 and 

above). Despite the huge agricultural potential, agricultural and food products rarely find their 

way into markets and thus are not traded on a significant scale and have not been able to generate 

much needed foreign exchange for the country. In addition, South Sudan has high levels of 

malnutrition: 33 percent of boys and 29 percent of girls are stunted. Similarly, 30 percent of boys 

and 24.5 percent of girls are underweight. The Government’s agenda for diversification of South 

Sudan’s economy is anchored on the agriculture sector, which plays a vital role in economic 

activities. The agriculture sector contributes about ten percent (10%) of GDP but employs 

seventy-eight percent (78%) of the population. Most agricultural products that are exported are 

in the form of primary products and are later imported as value-added products. This situation 

leads to losses in foreign currency, employment opportunities and opportunities for customized 

value-added products. 

 

1.2.2. Both agricultural input and product markets in South Sudan are not well developed. No effective 
investment can be made in scaling up production without first strengthening markets. The present 

system of fresh supplies to retail markets in urban areas is dominated by imports – in the case of 

Juba by supplies from Uganda. Three types of food markets currently exist in South Sudan: rural 

primary markets located in villages and small towns and often held on a periodic basis; rural 

assembly markets located in agricultural surplus areas; and urban retail markets serving 

consumers in main towns and cities. Terminal wholesale markets within or near major cities have 

yet to evolve. As a result of the underdeveloped marketing arrangements, post-harvest losses at 

the farm level and within markets are very high, as are food prices.  

 

1.2.3 The AMVAT activities are informed by several studies that support the development of 
agricultural economic infrastructure and trade development. The 2020 report “Conflict, Mobility 

and Markets - Changing food systems in South Sudan” notes that the post-independence conflict 

has made South Sudan’s markets volatile. This has increased risks and liabilities for bigger 

traders, but also offers opportunities for smaller ones.  

 

1.2.4 The World Bank’s 2019 diagnostic study “South Sudan: Linking the Agriculture and Food Sector 
to the Job Creation Agenda” is emphatic that with the implementation of the peace deal, South 

Sudan could start a trajectory of recovery and growth, which ushers in an opportunity for 

investments in the food sector by applying a value chain lens that does only address food security 

needs, but also, generates income and lays the foundation for livelihoods and job creation. 

Among other important enablers to begin to facilitate agribusiness transformation, the flagship 

study refers to rural assembly markets located in agricultural surplus areas, as well as urban retail 

markets serving consumers in main town and cities as being vital for beginning to strengthen the 

distribution and marketing channels. 



 

3 

 

 

1.2.5 A 2019 study “Moving towards markets: cash, commodificaton and conflict in South Sudan” 
notes that while food insecurity is linked to South Sudan’s conflicts, a less visible factor is the 

move towards markets. Producing food for markets rather than for home consumption, turning 

food into a commodity and turning farmers into wage workers – all these shifts appear to be 

implicated in the country’s hunger crisis. On a positive note the report claims that South Sudanese 

food producers and consumers are moving towards markets. 

  

1.2.6 UNDP’s 2012 study “Investing in Agriculture for Food Security and Economic Transformation” 
cautioned that short, medium and long term actions focusing on rural sector activities including 

ensuring adequate supplies from agriculture and efficient functioning markets, storage and 

transportation are important to stabilize and improve the food security situation in South Sudan. 

 

1.2.7 Other studies that form an anchor for this project vis a vis developing agricultural market 
infrastructure include the Bank’s South Sudan: An Infrastructure Action Plan (2011); the 

Government’s Comprehensive Agricultural Development Master Plan (CAMP, 2015-2020); and 

the Bank’s South Sudan: A Study on Competitiveness and Cross Border Trade with 

Neighbouring Countries (2013). 

 

1.2.8 Why the Bank should Intervene:  Imported agricultural commodities play a dominant role in 
many large marketplaces in South Sudan. However, there remains high potential for domestic 

agricultural commodities to take a larger share of the overall market, and as domestic production 

remains an important component given the rapid expansion of the urban population which has 

created large consumer markets. Agricultural commodity markets are critical drivers to 

agricultural development and the achievement of food security in the country, especially if 

complemented by actions that reduce macroeconomic distortions, lower high market transaction 

costs and increase value addition through an agricultural value chain approach. Markets open 

opportunities for increased intra-urban and cross-border trade between rural and urban areas, 

while serving as wholesale centres and hubs for commodities trade, especially for agricultural 

commodities. This improves the supply and availability of basic goods, improved agricultural 

inputs, as well as contributes to stabilizing commodity prices, thus positively impacting 

households’ ability to access basic food and non-food items to support their livelihoods. 

Operationalizing the markets and aggregation centres will thus benefit smallholder farmers by 

making improved agricultural inputs available to vulnerable households, improving price 

margins, and eventually increasing rural incomes. The Juba market will also improve the 

hygienic environment, help reduce post-harvest losses and install facilities to meet demand, for 

example cold storage units for fish storage. Furthermore, an improved information management 

system for market intelligence and data collection and distribution will help farmers access the 

most updated information on commodity prices and help decision makers widen the evidence 

base and develop a deeper understanding of the complex market dynamics in South Sudan. 

Markets also are key sites of public spaces for social interaction, connection, social inclusion, the 

mingling of different cultures and the building of a sense of local community and social cohesion, 

which are key for sustainable peacebuilding and post conflict reconstruction efforts. 

 

1.2.9 The AMVAT project provides the opportunity to address some of the fundamental constraints to 
agricultural growth in South Sudan, listed above. As such, it has the potential to be truly 

transformational in its scope. The rationale for bank involvement in the proposed project is 

underpinned by: (a) the Bank’s own strong experience and expertise in increased agricultural 



 

4 

 

productivity; (b) a strong commitment and ownership of the South Sudan authorities of the 

project; and (c) the specific request for this project from the Government for Bank support. 

 

 

 

1.3. Donor coordination 

1.3.1 Development partners working in the agriculture sector are guided by the Comprehensive 

Agricultural Development Master Plan (CAMP) 2015-20 and work within the Agriculture and 

Livelihoods Development Working Group (ALDWG) of which the Bank is a member, as well as the 

Partnership for Recovery and Resilience (PfRR) Framework. Apart from the Bank, the other key 

development partners (DPs) active in the sector include DFID, FAO, WFP, EU, Netherlands, Canada, 

JICA, BMZ, SDC, USAID and the World Bank. The DP’s agriculture sector interventions focus on the 

following broad areas: (i) Improved management and equitable access to water sources for livelihood 

activities; (ii) Food production and improved income generation for women and youth; (iii) Livelihood 

diversification (e.g., animal production groups, cereal marketing groups); (iv) Construction of feeder 

roads; and (v) Peace building and conflict resolution. In addition, the Bank is also a member of the donor 

Public Finance Management (PFM) group.  the Heads of Development Cooperation (HoC) group and 

the United Nations Country Team (UNCT).   

1.3.2 During project design, the Bank held discussions with various development partners in the 

agriculture sector on possible collaboration. The HoC was also informed of the AMVAT. The Bank 

agreed to collaborate with JICA on joint support for capacity development to the Ministry of Agriculture 

and Food Security. In addition, the Bank held discussions with IFAD, to collaborate with its project, the 

South Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP), which is being prepared. The two institutions 

agreed to implement activities in common states and counties and to design activities that are 

complementary – effectively resulting in parallel co-financing in an amount of approximately USD 3 

million. This demonstrates the strengthening of synergies, bolstering aid coordination and deepening 

value added for the Bank and IFAD. Several development partners are also providing infrastructure such 

as rural roads (the Netherlands) which will complement the proposed market infrastructure of AMVAT 

by making needed farm gate linkages.   

 

Table 1.1 Development Partner Support for Agriculture and Resilience in South Sudan 

No. Development Partner  

Development Partner 

Support (USD) 

% of Total DP 

Support 

1 United State of America                   63,079,419  31% 

2 United Kingdom                   45,131,820  22% 

3 European Union                   38,376,880  19% 

4 Norway                   24,606,522  12% 

5 Netherlands                   15,874,324  8% 

 
 

II – PROJECT DESCRIPTION  

2.1. Project Goal 

 
2.1.1 The development goal of AMVAT is to contribute to reduced food insecurity, poverty reduction 

and building of community and household resilience. Specific objectives include to: (i) increase 



 

5 

 

agricultural productivity, (ii) increase agro-processing, aggregation and marketing of agricultural 

produce, and (iii) increase trade in agricultural products.  

 

 

 

 

Project Description 
 

2.1.2 AMVAT takes an Agricultural Value Chain Approach including supporting the development of 

producer associations. The project will support and complement the entire value chain by supporting 

farmer households engaged in the identified value chains of maize, sorghum, groundnuts and sesame. 

The Aggregation Business Centres will serve as growth hubs in the local areas and will include post-

harvest agro-processing facilities to support and provide value addition to agricultural produce and 

provide extension services to the surrounding areas. These activities will widen the livelihood options 

and income sources of farmers as well as increasing their resilience to climate change impacts through 

improved varieties and reduced post-harvest losses. Vendors and farmers will be organized into producer 

and trader associations to enhance protection and leverage collective bargaining positions and lower 

purchasing and marketing costs through service sharing. Considering the COVID threat, safety measures 

for social distancing will be incorporated within the project to ensure safety during project 

implementation.   
 

Table 2.1: Project components 
No Component Name Cost (UA 

Million) 

Component Description 

1 Increase agricultural 

productivity and 

production 

3.07 

 

Sub-component 1.1: Establish 20 Aggregation Business Centres (ABCs) 

(8 in CES, 8 in EES and 4 in Jonglei)  

 Train and coach ABC leaders (with a 50% target of women) on 
aggregation, value addition/post-harvest technologies, business 

management, access to credit, food safety and quality management, 

marketing, financial literacy, etc. 

 Facilitate the ABCs to provide extensions services to the Business 
Producer Associations (BPAs)  

 Equip the ABCs with post-harvest handling equipment (including 
shellers, threshers, winnowers, tarpaulins, weighing machines, 

aflatoxin testing kits, moisture meters, small mills, oil press for 

groundnuts/sesame) and Market Information System (MIS). 

Sub-component 1.2: Establish 100 Business Producer Associations 

(BPAs) (5 BPAs associated with each ABC)  

 Train 500 Trainer of Trainers and 7,500 farmers (including 50% 
women) in Farmer Institution Development, Farming as a Business, 

Good and Climate Smart Agricultural Practices, Integrated Pest 

Management, Financial literacy, etc. 

 Facilitate the BPAs to access improved and drought resistant seeds. 
The seeds will be subsidized at the beginning, but this will be reduced 

over the life of the project to zero subsidy.   

Sub-component 1.3: Establish 10 Seed Enterprise Groups (SEGs) (1 SEG 

to serve 2 ABCs) 

 Train and coach the SEG management on seed multiplication process, 
seed quality control, commercialization, enterprise development, etc.  

 Provide seed production equipment for the SEGs. 



 

6 

 

 Facilitate the SEGs to provide improved seeds to the BPAs. This 
support will gradually reduce over the life of the project to zero so that 

they can become sustainable.   

Subcomponent 1.4: Support the seed eco-system in the country. 

 Support MAFS to develop the seed sector framework. 

 Provide equipment for the seed testing laboratory to improve its 
capacity – the facilities are already established at MAFS HQ. 

 Provide training of technicians for the seed testing laboratories. 

 Technical Assistance on seed varieties through the Technologies for 
African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT)  

 Undertake value chain studies on Sorghum, Groundnuts and Sesame.  

2 Improve market-place 

economic and social 

infrastructure 

4.95 Sub-component 2.1: The project will support the construction of a modern 

market in Juba (about 8,000 m2). The exact size and type will be 

determined based on the outcomes of the feasibility study. In addition, a 

space of about 130 m2 will be provided for housing the proposed value 

addition equipment and will also provide mini-storage facilities for the 

market. 

 Preparation of feasibility study and detailed designs of the market 
which will include economic and social amenities (including lock-up 

stalls, mini-storage facilities, use renewable/green energy sources 

such as solar power, water including roof catchment harvesting 

facilities, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), child care services, access 

and grounds, sustainable waste management systems such as 

processing bio-wastes to biogas, etc.). The consultancy will include 

preparation of tender documents and construction and supervision of 

the civil works implemented by the project. As an alternative, the 

consulting firm as part of its assignment will review the Juba 

Wholesale Market design and advise the executing agency on the 

feasibility of partially implementing the proposed Juba Market by the 

project. 

 Developing Market Management Guidelines and Manual.  
Subcomponent 2.2: Agro-processing and Trade Facilitation 

 Provide equipment for first level value addition equipment e.g. 
cleaning, grading/sorting and de-stoning for maize, sorghum, 

groundnut and sesame; equipment for quality control, management, 

grading and standardization systems; establish and promote use of 

market information systems (MIS) to facilitate trade building on 

existing systems such as REACH and JMMI.  

3 Enhance Market and 

Trade Enabling 

Environment 

0.98 Sub-component 3.1: Support the Ministry of Trade and Industry and other 

stakeholders on food safety and standards, including Sanitary and 

Phytosanitary (SPS) aspects. 

 Support the national Bureau of Standards (NBS) to develop CODEX 
standards and guidelines, including gender-sensitive SPS capacity 

building and dissemination and gender-responsive customs 

management 

 Equip 2 mini food testing laboratories for aflatoxin and general 
chemistry (Juba and Torit). 

 Training of laboratory technicians on food safety. 

 Establish Monitoring and Evaluation mechanism for Non-Tariff 
Barriers (NTB) and Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT). 

 Support development of SME policy.  



 

7 

 

 Feasibility study for Gum Arabic and study on Markets and 
Marketing. 

Subcomponent 3.2: Establish two viable multi- stakeholder platforms 

 Setting up Platforms for cereals and oil seeds sectors 
 Gender-sensitive capacity development for stakeholders (customs officer, 

chamber of commerce, traders, etc.) on food safety and quality systems and 

export market linkages. Capacity development on gender and trade 

regulations related to agricultural products and Sanitary and Phytosanitary 

measures as well as measures to improve food safety in informal markets. 

4 Project Management 

and Coordination 

1.09  Plan, design, manage and implement project activities, including 
ESMP implementation. 

 Conduct monitoring and prepare quarterly progress and supervision 
reports together with MAFS. 

 Conduct Medium Term Review and Project Completion Report 
missions. 

 Undertake baseline study and value chain studies.  

 Capacity development/training and equipment for MAFS and MTI: 
capacity on procurement and financial management, equipment for 

project focal point (computer/printer, furniture, consumables, etc.).  

 Conduct annual audits. 

  0.70 Third Party Implementation Agency Fee 

 TOTAL 10.79  

 
 

2.2. Technical solutions retained and other alternatives explored  
 

Table 2.2: Project Alternatives Considered and Reasons for Rejection 

Alternative  Brief description Reasons for rejection 

Establishment of a 

seed certification 

body 

 Setting up minimum 

standards for genetic purity 

and recommend minimum 

standards for the classes of 

certified seed, and standardize 

seed certification regulations 

and procedures 

The Government of South Sudan is not currently ready to set 

up the body. Instead of setting up a certification body, the 

project is proposing: i) to develop a seed policy framework 

which will guide the overall seed system in the country until 

the seed policy is adopted, and ii) strengthening the existing 

seed system by expanding the number of seed producers and 

enhance capacities of both seed producers and inspectors.  

 Support research 
institutions to 

release new 

varieties including 

hybrids and 

biofortified seeds 

To ensure that new resistant 

and high yield varieties are 

released to farmers to increase 

their productivity 

Due to project budget constraints and the cost of new variety 

release requirements, it was not possible to pursue this idea 

under the AMVAT. The project will therefore support the 

Seed Enterprise Groups to produce Quality Declared Seed 

(QDS), which is the quality of seed being produced and 

marketed by the seed companies in South Sudan. These are 

improved seeds but not up to the quality of foundation seed.   

Establish large 

rural market 

infrastructure  

Establishing large markets in 

the rural areas where 

production takes place.  

Due to poor road infrastructure one cannot establish large 

markets in the rural areas. The project will therefore support 

the establishment of aggregation centres in the rural areas and 

a modern market in Juba.  

 

2.3. Project type  
The Agricultural Markets, Value Addition and Trade Development Project (AMVAT) is supported under 

the ADF-15 and TSF Pillar-I of the Bank as a standalone investment project.  
 



 

8 

 

2.4. Project cost and financing arrangements  
2.4.1 The cost for the project activities, excluding taxes and duties, is estimated at UA 10.79 million 

including physical and price contingencies. The costs are composed of UA 4.78 million (44%) in foreign 

currency and UA 6.01 million (56%) in local currency costs. The combined physical and price 

contingencies have been estimated at 14% of the total baseline costs. The tables below provide the 

summary of the Project costs which are based on analysis of unit prices obtained from the ministries of 

Agriculture and Food Security, other ministries  and other local institutions and traders. 

 

 

 

Table 2.3: Project Cost Estimates by Component (UA million) 

 

 
 

2.4.2  The project will be financed by an ADF-15 Grant of UA 5.53 million, TSF-I grant of UA 4.47 

million, FAO grant of UA 0.20 million and the Government will contribute UA 0.59 million (5.6% of 

project cost) as in-kind counterpart contribution for the land of the market in Juba. South Sudan’s 

economy is still confronted with a high fiscal deficit (6.4% of GDP in 2019), lack of competitiveness, 

limited foreign reserves and high public debt. These macroeconomic imbalances have been exacerbated 

by the Government’s shift from spending on social services to military expenditure as well as the adverse 

impact of COVID-19 pandemic. Due to high dependence on oil (accounts for 90% of total revenue and 

95% of export earnings), falling oil prices and reduced global demand have negatively impacted budget 

execution due to revenue loses. In this context, the Bank’s Country Financing Parametres recommends 

100% financing by the Bank Group, however the Government will contribute in-kind.    

 

Table 2.4: Sources of Financing (UA Million) 

 

 Foreign Local Total Percent 

 Government of South Sudan 0.00  590.07 590.07 5.5 

 ADF-15 3,288.69 2,241.31 5,530.00 51.3 

TSF-I 1,313.87 3,156.12 4,470.00 41.4 

FAO 177.24 22.75 200.00 1.9 

Total Project Cost 4,779.81 6,010.26 10,790.07 100.0 

 

 

Table 2.5: Project Cost by Category of Expenditure (UA million) 

 

(SSP '000) (UA '000) % Foreign % Base

Component Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total Exchange Costs

1. Increase Agricultural Productivity and 

Production 326,189.69     289,518.44     615,708.13     1,406.23   1,248.14   2,654.37    47             28         

2. Improve Marketplace Economic and 

Social Infrastructure 559,516.89     430,425.07     989,941.95     2,412.13   1,855.60   4,267.73    43             45         

3. Enhance Market and Trade Enabling 

Environment 103,457.78     103,092.86     206,550.64     446.02      444.44      890.46       50             9           

4. Project Coordination and 

Management 171,546.37     204,541.75     376,088.11     739.55      881.80      1,621.35    54             17         

Total Baseline Costs 1,160,710.72  1,027,578.11  2,188,288.84  5,003.93   4,429.98   9,433.91    47             100       

Physical Contingencies 46,323.41       46,323.41       92,646.82       199.70      199.70      399.41       50             4           

Price Contingencies 187,105.16     34,823.36       221,928.53     806.63      150.13      956.75       16             10         

Total Project Costs 1,394,139.29  1,108,724.89  2,502,864.18  6,010.26   4,779.81   10,790.07  44             114       



 

9 

 

 
 

Table 2.6: Expenditure Schedule by Component (UA million) 

 

 
 

2.5. Project’s target area and population  
2.5.1 The Project will support 20,000 farming households (about 120,000 individuals) in the three 

states of Central Equatoria, Eastern Equatoria and Jonglei. The project will target households that have 

been receiving food aid over the past several years (many of them IDP returnees) but are now ready to 

graduate into agricultural development activities to produce crops for food and marketing for increased 

incomes. About fifty percent of these households are women headed households. The baseline study will 

identify the households that will be assisted to form the Business Producer Associations (BPAs) through 

which they will receive support. The project will establish 20 Aggregation Business Centres (ABCs) in 

the three states, 100 Business Producer Associations (BPAs) – each ABC will serve 5 BPAs, and 10 

Seed Enterprise Groups (SEGs) to provide improved seeds to the BPAs and external markets. If one 

considers the impact of the market in the Juba urban area, total population that will be impacted by this 

project will be about 500,000 people. The project will also provide food safety training for laboratory 

technicians and other stakeholders in the food chain market system which will provide safer and more 

healthy food for over 500,000 people. The hub of development will be the ABCs which will serve as 

growth hubs to serve the BPAs and SEGs. The project will identify existing aggregation centres and 

build on those rather than develop completely new ones – there are many aggregation centres already 

run by UN agencies such as FAO and WFP and some private ones. The project will enter into agreements 

with these aggregation centres for the provision of required services.      

 

2.5.2 The selection of the states was informed by the following criteria: (i) key states for food security 

crops and potential for commercial crops; (ii) key states for high value crops with prospects for value 

addition and external trade; (iii) states with policies and support for the proposed project interventions 

including private sector participation; (iv) high percentage of the population likely to directly benefit 

(SSP million) (UA million) % Foreign % Base

Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total Exchange Costs

 I. Investment Costs

A. Civil Works 627.74 496.14 1,123.88 2.71 2.14 4.85 44 51

B. Goods 43.94 163.42 207.36 0.19 0.70 0.89 79 9

C. Services 338.19 353.30 691.48 1.46 1.52 2.98 51 32

Total Investment Costs 1,009.87 1,012.85 2,022.72 4.35 4.37 8.72 50 92

II. Total Recurrent Costs 150.84 14.73 165.57 0.65 0.06 0.71 9 8

Total Baseline Costs 1,160.71 1,027.58 2,188.29 5.00 4.43 9.43 47 100

Physical Contingencies 46.32 46.32 92.65 0.20 0.20 0.40 50 4

Price Contingencies 187.11 34.82 221.93 0.81 0.15 0.96 16 10

Total Project Costs 1,394.14 1,108.72 2,502.86 6.01 4.78 10.79 44 114

Totals Including Contingencies

Components 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Total

1. Increase Agricultural Productivity and 

Production 0.60 0.85 0.63 0.53 0.46 3.07

2. Improve Marketplace Economic and Social 

Infrastructure 1.53 2.03 1.34 0.03 0.03 4.95

3. Enhance Market and Trade Enabling 

Environment 0.04 0.49 0.43 0.02 - 0.98

4. Project Coordination and Management 1.00        0.19 0.19 0.20 0.22 1.79

Total Project Costs 3.16 3.56 2.59 0.78 0.70 10.79



 

10 

 

from investment of the project; (v) states where potential development partners are currently located or 

planning to work on upcoming projects to provide complementarity to AMVAT project, e.g IFAD’s 

SSLRP project; (vi) development stage of the population in the state as well as peace and security.  The 

Project will focus on five counties in total so as not to be spread too thinly. In Central Equatoria State, 

the project will focus on Juba and Terekeka counties, in Eastern Equatoria State it will focus on Magwi 

and Torit counties and in Jonglei it will focus on Bor county. These counties were selected because they 

already have several existing aggregation centres and will also allow this project to synergize with the 

upcoming IFAD SSLRP project that will operate in these counties.  

 

2.6. Participatory process for project identification, design and implementation  
2.6.1 The project appraisal was conducted virtually, however the Bank managed to get a lot of the 

required information. The Bank undertook in-depth consultations with relevant government ministries, 

as well as development partners, Civil Society Organisations and farmer groups (e.g. Seed Trade 

Association of South Sudan, South Sudan Agricultural Producers’ Association, Chamber of Commerce, 

etc.) during project identification, preparation and appraisal. The consultations were held with key 

ministries, including Finance and Planning, Agriculture and Food Security, Trade and Industry, 

Livestock, Physical Infrastructure in order to identify and review priorities and areas where Bank 

resources would add value. In addition, consultative meetings were held with key stakeholders involved 

in the agricultural and rural development. These included JICA, USAID, the World Bank, FAO, the 

Netherlands, European Union, etc. The Bank made a presentation of the project to the Agriculture and 

Livelihoods Development Working Group (ALDWG) in the country. The Bank also held meetings with 

the South Sudan Agricultural Producers Union and the South Sudan Seed Trade Association among 

others. 

2.6.2 The consultations significantly informed the project design, especially the project components 

and implementation arrangements. For instance, consultations during project preparation indicated that 

it is still advisable to use a third-party implementation agency due to the low government capacity in the 

ministries to implements such projects. During implementation, there will be further engagement with 

key stakeholders in the agriculture sector through the multi-stakeholders’ project National Advisory 

Committee (NAC) and National Technical Committee (NTC) and the ALDWG. 

2.7. Bank Group experience, lessons reflected in project design 

Portfolio Performance and Lessons Learnt: As at 30th September 2020, the Bank’s active portfolio for 

South Sudan comprised eleven (11) sovereign operations, financed mainly using ADF grants and loans, 

with commitments amounting to UA 84.7 million. In terms of sectoral distribution, the power sector has 

the largest allocation (33%), followed by water supply and sanitation (27%), social sector (16%), multi-

sector/governance (15%), finance (6%) and health (3%). The operations are consistent with the sole 

Pillar of the National Development Plan, South Sudan’s CSP and the Bank’s strategic priorities, 

underpinned by the High 5’s vision for Africa’s economic transformation. The country’s portfolio 

performance is satisfactory, with an overall score of 3.8 on a scale of 1 to 4.  The total cumulative 

disbursement rate was 46.8% by 30th September 2020, while the average portfolio age stood at 3.4 years. 

However, critical issues of fragility, particularly insecurity and violence, still affect portfolio 

performance, as well as government’s low absorption capacity stemming from institutional and human 

capital weaknesses. The Bank has adopted the use of third-party implementation arrangements for all 

projects with high fiduciary risks, low capacity and implemented outside Juba. This is to mitigate the 

risks associated with weak institutional capacity (systems and human capital), insecurity outside Juba, 

limited knowledge of Bank rules, procedures and procurement regulations by the Project Implementation 

Unit officials, delays in the implementation of procurement plans and submission of audit reports. The 



 

11 

 

use of a third party such as the FAO mitigates all of these risks as the Bank has already assessed the 

organization and signed a Fiduciary Principles Agreement (FPA) with it to implement Bank projects.   
 

2.8. Key performance indicators 
 2.8.1 The results-based logical framework outlines key project performance indicators. The 

development outcomes envisaged under the project are: (i) the increased average yield (t/ha) and 

household income per ha for target crops,  (ii) 30% increase in farm produce marketed through formal 

markets,  (iv) increase in volume of food products tested and certified in laboratories in the project areas 

from 0.5 t/year to 100 t/year. All of these will lead to increased agricultural productivity and income of 

households. The main indicators defined for monitoring the project outputs are: (i) number of ToTs and 

farmers trained on selected topics; (ii) number of ABCs and SEGs established; (iii) number of youth and 

women in both ABC and SEG management; (iv) number of hectares planted with improve seeds; (v) 

number of modern markets constructed; (vi) annual value of commodities marketed through markets; 

(vii) number of CODEX trading standards and guidelines established and disseminated for cereals and 

oil seeds; (viii) number of new laboratories set up and operating, and (ix) number of technicians and staff 

trained on selected themes. The FAO team in collaboration with the ministry of agriculture will carry 

out internal project monitoring and evaluation in collaboration with the national technical committee to 

monitor the performance of the project. Regular implementation progress will be measured through 

Quarterly Progress Reports and annual technical and financial audits. Disaggregated data will be 

captured at every level and where applicable.  The overall effectiveness of the project at implementation 

will be monitored through the Bank’s bi-annual supervision missions (field and desk). The Mid-Term 

Review will be undertaken in year three, while the Project Completion Report will be prepared during 

the last six months of the project. 

 

III – PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1. Economic and financial performance 

 

FIRR (base case) 21% 

EIRR (base case) 25% 

 

NPV, USD 13.60 million at 12% 

 

3.1.1 The project is financially and economically viable, as evidenced by the Project’s Financial 

Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of 21% and Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 25%. At the 

enterprise level, a typical 1.5 Ha farm model shows that as a result of the project, annual net margin is 

expected to increase by 60%, from USD 422 per farm to USD 673 per farm at full development. This 

demonstrates that at the enterprise level, the project is financially feasible.  

 

3.1.2 The analysis has considered the following assumptions for the market: (i) project life period of 

25 years; (ii) infrastructure operating cost of 2% per year of capex during the project life and 7% capex 

infrastructure investment at year 10; and (iii) implementation schedule of investment built from the 

expenditure schedule of activities. The assumptions for crop production were an increase in productivity 

of the four selected crops ranging from 18% to 100%. The key costs that are considered for the analysis 

include the capital investment costs for the market infrastructure, incremental operational and 

maintenance costs and the increased input costs for the crops. 

 



 

12 

 

3.1.3 The initial focus crops include maize, sorghum, groundnuts and sesame due to the fact that: (i) 

these are food security crops with high nutritive value; (ii) have great commercial potential through agro-

processing and value addition into various products; (iii) they perform very well in these states; and (iv) 

the population in these states is already familiar with the crops. However, other crops and commodities 

will also be considered should they be requested by the communities.   
 

3.1.4 The benefits considered in the analysis are those derived from increased productivity of crops 

due to improved seeds, farmer training, use of modern technologies and the ability to aggregate, store 

and market crops. This increase in productivity and marketing of crops translates directly into increased 

incomes at the household level. The project includes other benefits which have not been factored in the 

EIRR analysis above such as increase in off-farm activities due to better training and enhanced nutrition. 

In addition, the project will include benefits such as innovation, safeguards, policy advice, knowledge 

work, capacity building for government, etc. If all of these benefits are incorporated in the analysis, the 

EIRR would be even higher.    

 

3.1.5  Sensitivity analysis was conducted on the EIRR for various scenarios and as presented in the 

table below, it demonstrates that the project is quite robust and would remain viable under a range of 

alternatives.  

 

Results of the Sensitivity Analysis on the EIRR 

Scenario EIRR NPV (USD million, 12%) 

20% decrease in income from crops 21% 8.44 million 

20% increase in investment costs  22% 11.21 million 

 

3.2. Environmental and Social Impacts 
3.2.1 Environmental and Social: Based on the proposed project scope and structure, the 

environmental and social (E&S) classification for this project is Category 2 in accordance with the 

African Development Bank’s Integrated Safeguards System/Environmental and Social Assessment 

Procedures (ESAP). Taking into account that the project will finance multiple sub-projects (construction 

of several markets and development of agro-processing facilities) whose locations will be in a number 

of counties in the three states of Central Equatoria, Eastern Equatoria and Jonglei that have not been 

pinpointed, the implementation of the project will be guided by an Environmental and Social 

Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF was prepared by the Government of the Republic of South 

Sudan, approved by the Ministry of Environment and the Bank. As required by the Bank, the ESMF 

summary was disclosed on the Bank website on 12th October 2020. The EMSF clearly mandates the 

Project Implementation Unit to prepare Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) once the 

specific project locations have been identified. During the preparation of the ESMF, the capacity of the 

implementing agency to implement the ESMF framework was assessed and found to be satisfactory. The 

PIU will include an E&S Expert as a member of the core team of the project. A provisional sum of USD 

100,000 has been included in the project budget to cater for E&S related activities.   
 

3.2.2 Climate Change and Green Growth: The project has been screened for climate risks and 

evaluated as category 2, meaning that it is vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. Foreseen climate 

risks include droughts, increased temperatures and outbreak of crop and livestock pests and diseases that 

may affect crop production and reduce supply of produce to the envisaged Aggregation Business Centres 

and produce markets. However, the project components will contribute to addressing these climate 

impacts in several ways. First, development and marketing of improved seeds will enhance farmers’ 



 

13 

 

access to and adoption of crop varieties that are resistant to droughts and pests. Training of farmers on 

good and climate smart agricultural practices will also enable them to implement improved farm 

management practices that will enhance their resilience to the impacts of climate change. Second, 

provision of market centres in the three states will provide an avenue for farmers to market their produce. 

This will ensure that they have markets during periods of bumper harvest and hence build resilience against 
post-harvest loses that are normally experienced during such periods. Cold storage rooms will also enable the 

prolonged preservation of produce as increased temperatures tend to cause accelerated food deterioration and 

contamination. Third, development and marketing of new crops varieties will ensure availability of drought- and 

pest-resistant varieties. Moreover, the project will implement green measures including providing renewable 

energy (solar) to light the market, installing water harvesting systems, and facilities for managing waste. 

 

3.2.3 Gender: Significant challenges to the attainment of gender equality exist in South Sudan. 

Cultural norms discourage female education, support early marriage and early childbearing. High levels 

of gender-based violence have been witnessed during the transition period particularly in areas affected 

by conflict. Indicators related to these outputs are sex-disaggregated or gender-relevant. The project’s 

preliminary environmental and social assessment has identified numerous socio-economic benefits to 

women that will arise from the implementation of the project and being in leadership positions of the 

ABCs and BPAs. Details of the benefits will be elaborated in the ESMF report. Project design has 

proposed involvement of women and the youth from the launch of the project hence eliminating 

possibilities of exclusion of the two groups in the implementation of the project and its accruing socio-

economic benefits. The initial assessment also estimates that close to 500,000 people (50% women) are 

likely to benefit from the project hence the project is likely to have significant socio-economic impact 

overall. 

3.2.4  The Project is categorized as GEN II according to the Bank’s Gender Marker System where the 

gender assessment identified four key entry points to improve socio-economic benefits to women 

brought about by the Project through: (i) providing adequate training in good agricultural practices; (ii) 

ensuring equitable access to leadership positions of the ABCs and SMCs; (iii) improving market place 

economic and social infrastructure with inclusion of gender sensitive social amenities such as child care 

and adequate WASH; (iv) and strengthening the capacity of key stakeholders to address the gender 

concerns of the Project. 

3.2.5 These activities are designed to address the gender inequalities and accelerate opportunities for 

women in the agricultural sector. Evidence shows that women in South Sudan lack opportunities for 

economic growth and development, particularly in the agricultural sector. Most of them are involved in 

the informal sector, which is underdeveloped and uncoordinated, and in subsistence farming. Women’s 

involvement in the formal sector is limited due to high levels of illiteracy, lack of access to productive 

and economic assets such as land, finance, credit facilities, agricultural inputs, extension services, and 

low business skills and management capacity. Women represent close to 80% of farm labour, 50% of 

the farmers in the irrigated sector and 57% in the rainfed traditional sector in South Sudan. Although 

women play a crucial role in agriculture, contributing to both the GDP and to household food security, 

their contribution to agriculture and the overall economic development process continues to be 

undervalued. Women carry out a major portion of agricultural activities and bear almost the entire burden 

of household work, including water and fuelwood collection and food processing and preparation. As 

one of the key driving factors of the economy in South Sudan, agriculture and food security greatly 

influence the gender factors especially those that affect women. Farmers, especially women, are faced 

with several challenges including, limited access to fertile land and seeds, lack of modern tools, limited 

access to markets and storage facilities. 
 



 

14 

 

3.3 Fragility and resilience  

3.3.1 Context. According to the United Nations Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 

(OCHA), in December 2019, there were 7.5 million South Sudanese in need of assistance. The challenge 

compounds just as several states of South Sudan experienced one of the worst floods in recent years. In 

addition, the agricultural sector that is so critical for food security and poverty reduction was also 

negatively impacted by the floods. Preliminary forecasts showed that 75,000 hectares of cultivated land 

have been damaged due to flooding in affected areas, with an estimated loss of 73,000 metric tons of 

cereals. This represents approximately 15 percent loss in production in the affected areas. Consequently, 

about 7,000 metric tons of food commodities were distributed to some 700,000 flood-affected people 

across the country as of November 2019, with distributions continuing into other priority locations. 

 

3.3.2 Fragility in the agriculture sector. The agricultural sector in South Sudan is affected by a 

combination of various complex factors summarized in table 3.1 below. Agricultural output (i.e. crop 

and vegetables) in South Sudan is low due, inter alia, to emigration and displacement; conflict and 

insecurity; limited availability and access to quality seeds; heavy reliance on (erratic) rains and 

vulnerability to drought, which all lead to food insecurity. Demand for agricultural commodities on the 

other hand, has been constrained by frequent economic shocks and insecurity. Limited clarity of the land 

laws, limits the participation of women, displaced and returnee people in certain community as well as 

long term and large-scale investments. Weak institutional capacity coupled with competition for land 

among powerful foreign powers (i.e. countries from the Middle East) and insecurity, exacerbate the 

power-relations among the main stakeholders in the sector. Moreover, limited penetration of social and 

economic infrastructure (i.e. roads, electricity)  and availability of working tools for farmers, as well as 

low quality, quantity and adherence to strict phytosanitary measures limits the distribution and export 

potential for farmers which could represent a potential source of revenue and income. Limited funding 

of the agricultural sector also limits the outreach and capacity of extension services; organization of 

farmers and the sector in general. 

 

Table 3.1 Main challenges in the agricultural sector in South Sudan 
Key issues 

 Land ownership and access 
 Food insecurity 
 Low institutional capacity; 
 Low productivity; 
 Competitions among key stakeholders; 
 Insecurity; 
 Climate change 
 Poor infrastructure 

 

3.3.3 The AMVAT project and fragility in South Sudan. The Agricultural Markets, Value-Chains 

and Trade Development (AMVAT) project seeks to address challenges related to (i) agricultural 

productivity and production; (ii) infrastructure and (iii) farmer organization. As indicated in the table 

below, this focus of the project is consistent with addressing some drivers of fragility in the country as 

well as at the agriculture sector level.   
 

Table 1.2 Fragility sensitiveness analysis of the AMVAT project 
Project 

activity/Component 

Agriculture sector driver of fragility to 

be addressed 

Country level driver of fragility to be 

addressed 

Agricultural 

productivity and 

production 

Low productivity and output Food insecurity 



 

15 

 

Social and economic 

Infrastructure 

development 

High transaction costs Poverty; limited diversification of 

the economy 

Farmer’s organization Low sector and institutional capacity Limited institutional capacity 

 

The focus and components of the AMVAT project greatly contribute to addressing key drivers of 

fragility in the agriculture sector as well as at the country level as described above. However, the project 

still leaves room to addressing key issues such as the land access and ownership by women, the land 

regulatory framework and climate change. Therefore, it is recommended that the project seeks to mainstream 
those issues in its design. Furthermore, the project needs to pay attention to political economy considerations 

among the main stakeholders to avoid unwanted negative effects between them that could harm the successful 

implementation of the project. 

 

IV – IMPLEMENTATION 

 

4.1. Implementation arrangements 
 

4.1.1 The Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security and the Ministry of Trade and Industry shall be 

the executing agencies for the Project. Due to the low capacity of the Ministries to implement such 

projects, the Bank will engage a third-party implementing agency (TPIA) for the project. The 

Government requested that the Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN (FAO) implement the 

project on its behalf. The Bank has already signed a Fiduciary Principles Agreement (FPA) with the 

FAO that describes the procurement and financial management arrangements and will receive an 

administrative fee of seven percent (7%) of the project costs for implementation. The Government will 

assign counterpart focal officers to coordinate implementation with the TPIA.  

4.1.2 The governance of the project will comprise the National Advisory Committee (NAC) which 

will be chaired by the Undersecretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security. The NAC will 

also include the Undersecretary of the Ministry of Trade and Industry and of Finance and Planning, as 

well as high-level leaders from the 3 states of CES, EES and Jonglei and the TPIA. The NAC meets 

quarterly to review the project performance, provide oversight and guidance on policy issues and identify 

potential linkages to enhance synergy and increase impact.  

4.1.3 The governance of the project also includes the National Technical Committee (NTC) which 

provides technical advice and recommendations to the NAC on all technical aspects related to project 

implementation. The NTC is chaired by the Director General in the Ministry of Agriculture and Food 

Security and includes relevant directors from the ministries Trade and Industry and Finance and 

Planning, the TPIA, representatives of the SSAPU, STASS, NBSS and representatives from the 3 states 

and other stakeholders that will be identified. The AMVAT project coordinator will serve as the NTC 

Secretary and the NTC will meet quarterly.  

4.1.4 FAO South Sudan will oversee overall coordination and implementation of project activities 

under the respective components through its field staff and subcontracts with local implementation 

partners (NGOs) through its Letter of Agreement (LoA) collaboration instrument. FAO South Sudan, 

under the leadership of the FAO Representative in South Sudan, will provide oversight and quality 

assurance to ensure successful implementation of the project, including all fiduciary aspects, safeguards, 

monitoring, and reporting of the project’s progress. Under the TPIA arrangements, the FAO will use its 

existing FM, procurement and administrative staff to implement the project. In addition, the FAO will 



 

16 

 

recruit a project coordinator, M&E officer, civil engineer, seed expert, value chain expert and 3 extension 

agents (1 per project state) to be part of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within the FAO. 

4.1.5 This project will be implemented in close collaboration with the MAFS at the national level and 

the relevant government institutions at the State and County levels. MAFS has a strong technical team 

at the national level that has contributed to design of the project and approved the technical aspects of 

the project. The project is designed to engage with stakeholders, transfer knowledge, and build capacity 

at State and County levels to ensure sustainability. 

 

 

Procurement and financial management 
 

Procurement 

4.16 Procurement of goods (including non-consultancy services), works and acquisition of consulting 

services, financed by the Bank will be carried out in accordance with the “Procurement Policy for Bank 

Group Funded Operations”, dated October 2015 and following the provisions stated in the Financing 

Agreement.  

4.1.7 The assessment of procurement risks at the Country, Sector, and Project levels has informed the 

decisions on the procurement regimes applicable for specific transactions or groups of similar 

transactions under the project. Accordingly, considering the substantial procurement risks involved 

coupled with the limited capacity of the Government, the project will be implemented through Third 

Party Implementation arrangements with the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United 

Nations acting as Implementing Agency.  

4.1.8 In March 2018, the Bank and FAO signed a Fiduciary Principles Agreement (FPA) that sets out 

the framework of cooperation between these institutions. This agreement will form the basis for 

implementation of the project in accordance with paragraph 5.3(e) of the Bank’s Procurement Policy. 

Under this arrangement, as part of implementation of this operation, FAO will provide fiduciary 

oversight of the implementation of the entire project, including those relating to the procurement policies 

and procedures.  

4.1.9 For the purpose of implementation of the Project, following the approval of the financing of the 

project by the Bank’s Board of Directors, a Tripartite Funding and Implementation Agreement (TFIA) 

will be signed between the Bank, the Government, and the FAO to put in place a framework that aims 

to deliver the full scope of the project with FAO playing a central role in the execution of the related 

components. The Procurement Technical Annex B5 provides details on the project’s proposed 

procurement arrangements.  

Financial Management 

4.1.10 The Financial management capacity of the Executing Agency, the Ministry of Agriculture and 

Food Security (MAFS) was not assessed during appraisal since the Government wrote an official letter 

to the Bank expressing preference that the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (UN-FAO) to 

implements the project as Third-Party Implementing Agency (TPIA). The FAO will work in close 

cooperation with the MAFS for the smooth implement of the project. The financial management capacity 

of Third-Party Implementing Agency (TPIA), FAO South Sudan was assessed virtually. The FAO 

already has an FPA with the Bank that will govern the Tripartite Agreement to be signed by the Host 



 

17 

 

government, FAO and the Bank. The selected TPIA will maintain sound financial management systems 

and arrangements to ensure that funds are used for the purposes intended.  The FAO will use its systems 

and procedures to ensure sound control of the use of project resources with due considerations to the 

economy, efficiency and value for money. The TPIA will also maintain a project account for the project 

financed activities in accordance with sound international accounting practices. In addition, FAO will 

ensure reliability of financial information by monitoring project implementation, resources and 

expenditures by project component and activities. The Project will be subject to six- monthly Unaudited 

Interim Financial reports and annual financial reporting on project performance and status in conformity 

with FAO’s procedures. 

4.1.11 Financial Reports: The Bank requires FAO to prepare and submit to the Bank a Six-monthly 

and annual interim financial reports certified by an authorized signatory delegated by FAO.  

4.1.12 Disbursement: Disbursements will be done in accordance with the Disbursement Rules and 

Procedures of the Bank, as set out in the Bank’s Disbursement Handbook; and on the basis of the 

Tripartite Project Implementation Agreement(TPIA) to be signed by government, the Fund and FAO.  

The Special Account method will be used, as the disbursements in tranches will be made to FAO 

depending on the nature of the activities and the annual approved work plans. For purpose of the project 

and in line with the annual work plan, the TPIA will provide a Foreign Currency Account to receive 

funds designated for financing project implementation activities. The size of the initial tranche and 

subsequent tranches to FAO shall be based on annual work plans as per the Bank’s disbursement rules. 

The disbursement will be in four (4) tranches (30% for the first three tranches and 10% for the last 

tranche).  

The Bank will issue a Disbursement Letter stipulating key disbursement procedures and practices for the 

project. The Bank will have the right, as reflected in the General Conditions, to suspend disbursement 

of the funds, if reporting requirements and other financing agreements are not complied with. 

4.1.13 Audit: The project audit will not be undertaken separately. The Bank requires annual financial 

audit reports of FAO at the end of each financial year (31st December) in the years the fund was utilized, 

to be submitted to the Fund and to the government within 30 days after the audit report is submitted to 

the General Assembly of the FAO by the Independent Auditors of the FAO. The audit procedures will 

follow the agreement reached in the FPA and TPIA signed by the three parties: government, the Fund 

and the FAO.  

4.2. Monitoring 
 

4.2.1 The AMVAT project will be monitored using KPIs at input, output and outcome levels reflected 

in the RBLF and in the project monitoring matrix presented in annex V. Overall responsibility for M&E 

will rest with the implementation agency, who will put in place an adequate M&E system and monitor 

all the activities and prepare periodic reports, highlighting implementation progress, fiduciary and 

procurement status, stakeholder participation with major focus to the Ministry of Agriculture and Food 

Security, beneficiaries involvement, and risks and mitigation measures. The Project Implementation Unit 

(PIU) within the FAO will prepare semi-annual progress reports which include Unaudited Interim 

Financial Reports (IFRs) certified by an authorized officer of the FAO. The six-month period starts from 

the date of receipt of the first disbursement by FAO. The monitoring will ensure data is disaggregated 

by gender and age at every level where possible. The project will make use of national data sets (e.g. 

National Statistics Office, Youth employment statistics, Household surveys) and Project reports 

whenever possible.  The Bank through its East Africa Regional Development and Business Delivery 

Office and the South Sudan country office will closely monitor day-to-day implementation of the project 



 

18 

 

and carry out at least two (2) supervision missions (in country or virtually) annually, including FM and 

procurement assessments reviews. In addition, the Bank will carry out a mid-term review of the project 

and a project completion report will be prepared at the end of the project.  

 

Table 4.1: Project Monitoring Activities  

 

Activity  Responsible Entity  Timeframe  

Appraisal  Bank  October 2020 

Negotiations  Government/Bank November 2020  

Project Approval Bank December 2020 

Signature of Grant Agreement 

and effectiveness 

Government/Bank/FAO January 2021 

Fulfilment of 1st Disbursement 

Conditions 

Bank February 2021 

Project Launch Bank/ Government/ FAO March 2021 

Service Delivery  FAO/Ministry of 

Agriculture  

March 2021/ December 2025 

Mid-term Review   Bank/Government/FAO June 2023 

Project Completion Report  Bank/ Government/ FAO September 2025  

Auditing  FAO Annual 

4.3. Governance 

4.3.1 South Sudan’s independence is 9 years old, but since 2013 the country has experienced civil war 
leading to weakened administrative and financial management structures. Increasing conflict in 

the country for 6 years before the peace deal signed in August 2018 meant that accountability in 

government funds degenerated to such a level that substantial amount of government funding 

could easily be allocated for military expenditures or other unprogrammed use without due regard 

to approved budget commitments. The expenditure on security for example was 21% of the total 

budget in 2017/2018, a decline from 26.9% in 2016/2017, compared to less than 10% for 

agriculture. Development partners have therefore been concerned about weaknesses in 

governance including: (i) risk and costs associated with conflict escalation; (ii) limited 

implementing capacity of the public service; (iii) social and economic marginalization of mainly 

rural populations that threaten the stability of the country; and (iv) weak institutional capacity.   

 

4.3.2 The risk of poor governance on this project is mainly fiduciary in nature, in addition to the 
capacity to effectively implement the project outside Juba, due to security challenges. This risk 

will be mitigated by engaging FAO as the third-party project implementing agency. FAO South 

Sudan continues to have strong operational, procurement and logistics capacities, enabling the 

effective management and monitoring of large and complex programmes in an insecure context. 

FAO is active in all states of South Sudan, with a main office in Juba and extensive field presence 

through a network of field offices with over 320 staff and engages with over 90 Non-

governmental Organizations (NGO’s), Co-operatives and Community Based Organizations 

(CBO) to secure and deliver its mandate. FAO has a track record of implementing development 

activities right through the insurgency periods which is also strengthened by their strong field 

presence where they have staff in their monitoring offices. Although the project will use third 

party implementation arrangements, the government will support and monitor the actions of the 

implementing agency through joint supervision missions. This will ensure that clear governance 

structures are maintained throughout the project. In addition, the Bank will monitor the project 

through regular desk reviews of project reports provided by FAO and field supervision missions 



 

19 

 

to keep track of the utilization of project funds for approved activities in addition to day-to-day 

contact with the FAO leadership in Juba by the Bank’s Country Manager. 

4.4. Sustainability 

4.4.1 Previous experiences and success stories revealed that strong community-based institutions at all 
levels are the backbone of all activities to ensure sustainable and reliable production and 

marketing. As the AMVAT Project will focus on farmer groups as an entry point and train them 

with specific skills, the Project will actively be involved in organizing communities and 

strengthening grassroots institutions to instil their ownership for effective production, 

aggregation, marketing and trade.   
 

 
4.4.2 The AMVAT project’s focus is on establishing an Aggregation Business Centre model. The ABC 

is designed as a growth-hub for the local area and provides the required facilities and capacity 

building to enhance both the quality and quantity of agricultural produce of targeted crops during 

and long after the Project. Farmers groups as the project foundation will be equipped with 

improved seeds, skills and knowledge, facilities and post-harvest handling equipment to expand 

their production and marketing knowledge and thus, increase their incomes. On the other hand, 

with the establishment of laboratories for food testing and CODEX standards for the cereals and 

oil seeds, and capacity building of relevant staff, it is anticipated that food quality and standards 

will be enhanced and maintained during and after the project. The training and coaching 

instruments will continue to capacitate farmers in the long-term. In addition, the experience of 

the FAO as in implementation agency in planning, delivery, and monitoring of agriculture 

programs will provide the necessary knowledge, experience, and ownership to the MAFS and 

beneficiaries to successfully manage key project activities beyond the Project lifespan. Another 

key area of the Project is the focus on knowledge generation and policy development support. 

The Project will also develop a seed policy framework to help the seed system to thrive further.  
 

4.4.3 Stakeholder consultations undertaken during the identification, preparation and appraisal 
confirmed the commitment of the GoSS and the farmer organizations. The ownership of the 

project shall be maintained through the multi-sectoral Project Steering Committee (PSC) 

consisting of key stakeholders who are committed to seeing agriculture development thrive in 

the long run in South Sudan and to contribute to the country’s inclusive growth. 
 

4.4.4 The Municipal Councils will ultimately own the market facilities and take overall responsibility 
for the management of the market. However, they will recruit a private management company 

competitively for the day today management of the market.  

 

4.4.5 The vendors who occupy these facilities will be selected on a competitive basis. The project will 
facilitate the establishment of vendors association and assist the association to be legally 

established following the country’s registration system. The association will be represented in all 

the decisions regarding the management of the market. The project will also provide the resources 

for capacity building for the owner of the market and the vendors association related to the 

management of the market. Accordingly, a training needs assessment will be carried out.  

4.5 Risk analysis and management matrix 

 



 

20 

 

RISK CATEGORY RISK DESCRIPTION RATING MITIGATION MEASURE 
RISK 

OWNER 

COUNTRY’S 

POLITICAL 

SITUATION AND 

GOVERNANCE 

CONTEXT 

Breakdown of peace 

agreement/ conflict 

Moderate  Continuous dialogue among 

different parties  

GoSS 

EXTERNAL AND 

DOMESTIC 

ECONOMIC RISKS 

Currency devaluation   Substantial  Sound public financial 

management  

GoSS 

SECTOR OF THE 

OPERATION 

Dependency syndrome of 

aid/relief to IDPs/farmers 

Moderate Training farmers on agriculture 

as a business 

GoSS, 

Project 

TECHNICAL ASPECTS 

OF THE OPERATION’S 

DESIGN 

Low educational and literacy 

level of farmers 

Low Training modules use 

approaches that can be 

understood even with low 

literacy   

Project 

FIDUCIARY AND 

VALUE FOR MONEY 

Agreement on fee for 3rd 

party implement-ing agency 

Low Develop and sign Tripartite 

Funding and Implementation 

Agreement 

Goss, 

Bank, 

FAO 

ENVIRONMENTAL 

AND SOCIAL RISKS 

Agro-climatic shocks such as 

drought, floods, etc. 

Moderate Practice climate smart 

agriculture e.g. use drought 

resilient seeds, diligent 

implementation of ESMP 

Project 

CAPACITY OF 

IMPLEMENTING 

ENTITY 

Capacity to reach remote 

rural areas for 

implementation  

Low Project will hire a focal staff for 

each state and FAO will use its 

320 staff throughout the country 

GoSS, 

FAO, 

Bank 
 

4.6. Knowledge building 

The ability for farmers to enhance productivity and trade depends on access and knowledge to 

technologies, markets and services whereby their linkage with other actors in the value chains remains 

essential and requires project support. The Project will therefore generate critical knowledge for 

supporting farmers to move from subsistence to commercial agriculture in the selected states, which will 

build up lessons for the design and management of similar interventions, to be scaled in other states, as 

well as in other RMCs. Series of training and coaching to different categories has been embedded in this 

project to ensure ownership and sustainability of planned activities. In line with Knowledge Management 

Strategy (2015-2020), the knowledge obtained will be captured through regular supervision, progress 

reporting and mid-term review, and as part of program completion report (PCR) preparation process, 

documented and shared within the Bank and with other DPs and RMCs. Given that the program covers 

four selected crops in three different states with varying opportunities and challenges, there is potential 

to generate useful lessons. 
 

 

V – LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

  

5.1. Legal instrument  
5.1.1 The financing instruments to be used for this operation will be:  

a. a Tripartite Funding and Implementation Agreement amongst the African Development Fund, 

the Republic of South Sudan and the FAO for a grant of UA5.53 Million from the ADF-15 

resources; and  

b. a Tripartite Funding and Implementation Agreement amongst the African Development Bank 

and the African Development Fund (as administrators of the Transition Support Facility), the 

Republic of South Sudan and the FAO for a grant of UA 4.47 Million from the TSF Pillar I 

resources; 



 

21 

 

 

the above agreements are hereinafter jointly referred to as the “Tripartite Funding and Implementation 

Agreements”.  

  

5.2. Conditions associated with Bank’s intervention 
 

5.2.1 Condition Precedent to Entry into Force.  The Tripartite Funding and Implementation 

Agreements shall enter into force upon signature by the parties.    

 

5.2.2 Condition Precedent to First Disbursement The obligation of the Bank/ Fund to make the first 

disbursement of the grants under each Tripartite Funding and Implementation Agreement shall be 

conditional upon entry into force of the Agreements. 

 

5.2.3 Other Conditions 

The Recipient shall within three (3) months of the first disbursement of the Grants establish:  

a) a National Advisory Committee (NAC) which will be chaired by the Undersecretary of the Ministry 

of Agriculture and Food Security and comprise of representatives of the Undersecretary of the 

Ministry of Trade and Industry, Ministry of Finance and Planning and  high level leaders from the 3 

states of CES, EES and Jonglei; and  

b) a National Technical Committee (NTC) which is chaired by the Director General in the Ministry of 

Agriculture and Food Security and includes relevant directors from the Ministry of Trade and 

Industry and Ministry of Finance and Planning, the TPIA, representatives of the SSAPU, STASS, 

NBSS and representatives from the 3 states and other stakeholders that will be identified. The 

AMVAT project coordinator will serve as the NTC Secretary.  

 5.2.4 Environmental and Social Safeguards.  

The FAO shall cause all its contractors, its sub-contractors and agents to: 

a) carry out the Project in accordance with the Environmental and Social Management Plan 

(“ESMP”), the Fund’s Safeguards Policies and the applicable national legislation in a manner 

and in substance satisfactory to the Fund; 

b) prepare and submit to the Fund, semi-annual reports on the implementation of the ESMP 

including any implementation failures and related remedies thereof; and 

c) refrain from taking any action which would prevent or interfere with the implementation of the 

ESMP including any amendment, suspension, waiver, and/or voidance of any provision thereof, 

whether in whole or in part, without the prior written concurrence of the Fund; and  

d) cooperate fully with the Fund in the event that the implementation of the Project or change in 

Project scope results in hitherto unforeseen displacement and /or resettlement of persons, and 

shall not commence any works in the affected area under the Project, unless all PAPs in such 

areas have been compensated and/or resettled in accordance with a Resettlement Action Plan 

(RAP), to be prepared by the Recipient. 

 

5.2.5 Recipient Counterpart Contribution for ADF-15 Grant.  The Recipient shall within three (3) 

months of the first disbursement of the Grant or such later date as may be approved by the Fund,  make 

available land for the construction of the markets in accordance with agreed specifications and 

requirements acceptable to the Fund, as its in-kind contribution (the “Counterpart Contribution”) towards 



 

22 

 

the costs of the Project.  
 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 
 This project complies with all applicable Bank policies. 
 

VI – RECOMMENDATION  
Management recommends that the Boards of Directors approve the proposed (a) ADF-15 Grant of UA 

5.53 Million and (b) TSF Pillar I Grant of UA 4.47 Million to the Republic of South Sudan for the 

purposes and subject to the conditions stipulated in this report.



 










































 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

PROJECT: TANZANIA AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

COUNTRY : TANZANIA 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT  

 

Loan Information 

Client’s information 

 

BORROWER:   United Republic of Tanzania  

 

EXECUTING AGENCY: Tanzania Agricultural Development Bank 

 

 

Financing Plan 

 

Source UA Million USD Million Instrument 

African Development Fund 67.27 93.51 Loan 

 

 

ADF Key financing information 

     

Interest Rate  None 

Service Charge 0.75%   

Commitment Fee 0.50% 

Tenor 40 years 

Grace Period 10 years  

  

Timeframe - Main Milestones 

 

Project concept note clearance 05 September 2016 

Project approval 14 December 2016 

Signing of loan agreement 31 January 2017 

Last repayment December 2057 

 



 

iii 

Project Summary 

Project Overview: The objective of the present project, which involves a loan from the African 

Development Fund (ADF) to the United Republic of Tanzania (URT) to be on-lent to the Tanzania 

Agricultural Development Bank (TADB), is to contribute to the development of the agriculture sector in 

Tanzania. The agriculture sector provides employment for about 67% of the population of Tanzania and has a 

very big potential for expansion given the abundance of arable land and the availability of inland water 

resources. However, the sector needs to be developed if Tanzania is to achieve sustainable economic 

development and poverty reduction. Specifically, in order for the country to achieve the Sustainable 

Development Goals and the Tanzania Development Vision 2025, the agriculture sector must sustainably grow 

at over 10% per annum. Unfortunately, over the past ten years, the sector has grown at an average of 4.4% per 

annum and contributed an average of 29.3% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). These rates have recently 

declined to 3.2% per annum and 26% of GDP (Q2 2016), respectively. A major problem facing the agriculture 

sector is the unavailability of medium to long-term finance to support, among other things, agricultural 

production, processing and marketing. The TADB is designed to address this through the provision of much-

needed funding to a sector that is key to the country’s development. Indeed, the requested loan from the ADF 

to the URT will be passed on to the TADB as a loan thereby enabling this institution to assist Tanzania in 

achieving its development goals by extending much-needed funding to the agriculture sector. 

Project Beneficiaries: Tanzania is heavily dependent on agriculture which accounts for 26% of GDP and 
35% of foreign currency earnings. The country has a dual agricultural economy, the smallholder farmers and 

the commercial/large-scale farmers. The smallholder farmers dominate the agriculture sector and account for 

most of the food produced in Tanzania. These farmers are expected to be the main beneficiaries of the project. 

The project will also benefit women as they represent the majority of the smallholder farmers in Tanzania. 

Women will benefit from having a portion of the funding specifically dedicated to them as well as from the 

establishment of a mentoring program to build and enhance their skills. The project will thus have positive social 

and gender pay-offs. 

Project Rationale: The project is consistent with the Tanzania Development Vision 2025 which 

emphasizes the following three as national priority goals: i) ensuring basic food security, ii) improving 

household income levels and iii) increasing export earnings. The National Five-Year Development Plan 

(FYDP I and FYDP II) also identifies the agriculture sector as a priority for the country. The specific agriculture 

sector policies and strategies, including the Agriculture Sector Development Strategy (ASDS), the Agriculture 

Sector Development Programme (ASDP), the Kilimo Kwanza Initiative of 2009 and the Southern Agricultural 

Growth Corridor of Tanzania (SAGCOT) initiative, all call for increased commercialization of agriculture. The 

latest national development initiative, the Big Results Now (BRN), identifies three priority crops for the 

agriculture sector which are maize, rice and sugarcane as they contribute to food security and import substitution. 

The project is consistent with a range of Bank Group policies and strategies including: i) the Bank’s Country 

Strategy Paper for Tanzania (CSP, 2016-2020), ii) the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (2013-22), iii) the Bank’s High 

5s, iv) the Bank’s new Strategy for Feed Africa (2016-2025) and v) the Bank’s Gender Strategy (2014-18). 

Bank Value Added: The Bank Group has vast experience in supporting national development finance 

institutions (DFIs) in Africa. Through this operation, the Bank Group will not only provide the United 

Republic of Tanzania with the necessary financial resources to support the TADB, thereby enabling it to expand 

its operations and outreach, but will also contribute to building and enhancing the capacity of this national DFI 

through the proposed technical assistance program (TA Program) which will be funded with a portion of the 

funds that will be made available to the TADB. The Bank Group’s solid expertise and knowledge of DFIs has 

fed into the design of the TA Program which is expected to contribute to ensuring that the TADB is in a position 

to intermediate the funds provided to it in an impactful and sustainable manner. 

Institutional Development and Knowledge Building: The project will add to the body of knowledge 

already acquired within the Bank Group following numerous interventions to support agriculture as well 

as DFIs across Africa. The Bank Group will ensure that knowledge from the operation is captured through 

adequate monitoring and evaluation of its outputs and outcomes, supervision missions, mid-term review, 

stakeholder consultations and project completion reports at the end of the operation. 



 

iv 

Results Based Logical Framework 
Project Goal: To promote financial inclusion and support transformation of agriculture from subsistence to commercial farming in order to effectively and sustainably contribute to economic growth and poverty reduction in Tanzania. 

 RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF VERIFICATION RISKS/MITIGATION MEASURES 

  Indicator  (Including CSI) Baseline Target   

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Enhanced growth rate of the 
agriculture sector and increased 

contribution to GDP. 

Annual growth rate of the of 
agriculture sector. 

 

Contribution of the agriculture 

sector to GDP. 

3.2% (Q2 2016). 

 

 

26% (Q2 2016). 

10% by 2025 (in line with the 
Tanzania Development 

Vision 2025). 

33% by 2025 (in line with the 
Tanzania Development 

Vision 2025). 

IMF’s Article IV Consultation 
Staff Reports. 

IMF’s World and Regional 

Economic Outlook reports. 

National Bureau of Statistics. 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

S
 

Outcome 1. Increased income of 

farmers. 

Mean per capita income of 

farmers in the beneficiary areas. 

USD 466 p.a. USD 600 p.a. by 2020. Household and Economic 

Survey Reports. 

 

National Bureau of Statistics 
and ASDP. 

 

Ministry of Agriculture, 
Livestock and Fisheries. 

 

Tanzania Revenue Authority. 

Risks  

 The proceeds of the ADF loan not deployed successfully thereby 
jeopardizing the financial success of the project and the achievement of 

its development outcomes. 

Mitigation 

 High demand for funding from the agriculture sector in Tanzania. 

 The TADB is committed to the successful implementation of the TA 
Program and enhancing the capacity of its clients. 

 The TADB is expected to finance viable borrowers as a result of its TA-
enhanced lending operations. 

Outcome 2. Increased agricultural 

production and productivity 

(yields) of the targeted agriculture 
value chains. 

 

Note that the basis of the 
estimates are the baseline 

numbers and targets outlined in 

Tanzania’s Agricultural Sector 
Development Program (ASDP). 

Average annual productivity of 

maize (Metric tons per hectare, 

MT/ha). 

Yield of 1.6 of MT/ha in 

2014. 

Increase of 40% by 2020. 

Total annual production of maize 

(MT). 

Annual production of 

6,734,438 MT in 2014. 

Increase of 20% by 2020. 

Average annual productivity of 

paddy (MT/ha). 

Yield of 1.8 MT/ha in 

2014. 

Increase of 50% by 2020. 

Total annual production of paddy 

(MT). 

Annual production of 

1,681,125 MT in 2014. 

Increase of 20% by 2020. 

Average annual yield of 

sunflower (MT/ha) 

Yield of 1.6 MT/ha in 

2014. 

Increase of 25% by 2020. 

Outcome 3. Increased exports. Volume of exported maize in 

metric tons. 

1,056,559 metric tons in 

2014 

Increase of 15% by 2020. 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

Output 1. Funding extended to 

the agriculture sector from the 
proceeds of the ADF loan. 

Total volume of funding 

disbursed to the agriculture sector 
including the proportion 

benefitting women. 

NA At least UA 67.27 million 

disbursed including 20% 
specifically to women in 

agriculture. 

The financial statements and 

operational reports of the 
TADB. 

 

Bank Group regular supervision 
and monitoring reports. 

Risks 

 Insufficient demand for funding from the agriculture sector. 

 Consultants not recruited and TA Program not implemented. 

 Mentoring program not established and lack of interest from TADB’s 
larger clients to mentor women. 

Mitigation 

 High demand for funding from the agriculture sector in Tanzania. 

 The TADB is committed to strengthening its own capacity with the 
disbursement of the second tranche of the ADF loan conditional on the 

implementation of 2 of the 3 components of the TA Program. 

 The TADB is committed to building the capacity of its clients including 
through the proposed mentoring program for women. 

 TADB’s larger clients will be incentivized to mentor women. 

Output 2. Implementation of the 

TA Program for building the 

capacity of the TADB. 

Number of components of the TA 

Program implemented by the 

TADB. 

NA Full implementation of the 

TA Program including 

training of at least 50 staff. 

Output 3. Implementation of the 

mentoring program for women. 

Number of women benefitting 

from the mentoring program. 

NA At least 880 women 

benefitting from the 
mentoring program. 



 

v 

Project Goal: To promote financial inclusion and support transformation of agriculture from subsistence to commercial farming in order to effectively and sustainably contribute to economic growth and poverty reduction in Tanzania. 

 RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF VERIFICATION RISKS/MITIGATION MEASURES 

  Indicator  (Including CSI) Baseline Target   

K
E

Y
 

A
C

T
IV

IT
IE

S
  Provision of funding from the African Development Fund to the United Republic of Tanzania to support the Tanzania Agricultural Development Bank. 

 

 Technical assistance program (TA Program) to build and strengthen the capacity of the TADB. 

INPUT: 

Funding from the ADF for an amount of UA 67.27 million to be passed on by 

the United Republic of Tanzania to the TADB as a loan. The terms and 

conditions of the loan from the URT to the TADB will be in line with those 
of the loan from the ADF to the URT except for the loan currency which will 

be Tanzanian Shilling. 



 

1 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE MANAGEMENT TO THE BOARD 

OF DIRECTORS ON A PROPOSED LOAN TO THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF 

TANZANIA TO SUPPORT THE TANZANIA AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT 

BANK 

Management submits the following report and recommendation for a loan from the African 

Development Fund (ADF) to the United Republic of Tanzania (URT) which will be on-lent to 

the Tanzania Agricultural Development Bank (TADB). The loan is for an amount of UA 67.27 

million. The present appraisal report1 focuses principally on assessing the TADB since the 

proceeds of the ADF loan are to be passed on by the URT to this national development finance 

institution (DFI) in the form of a loan. The terms and conditions of the loan from the URT to 

the TADB will be in line with those of the loan from the ADF to the URT except for the loan 

currency which will be Tanzanian Shilling. 

1. STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 

1.1. The agricultural sector provides employment for about 67% of the population of 
Tanzania2 and has a very big potential for expansion given the abundance of arable land3 

and the availability of inland water resources. However, the sector needs to be developed if 

Tanzania is to achieve sustainable economic development and poverty reduction. Specifically, 

in order for the country to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the 

Tanzania Development Vision 2025, the agriculture sector must sustainably grow at over 10% 

per annum. Unfortunately, over the past ten years, the sector has grown at an average of 4.4% 

per annum and contributed an average of 29.3% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). These rates 

have recently declined to 3.2% per annum and 26% of GDP (Q2 2016), respectively. 

1.2. A major problem facing the agricultural sector is the unavailability of medium to 
long-term finance to support, among other things, agricultural production, processing 

and marketing. The TADB is designed to address this through the provision of much-needed 

funding to a sector that is key to the country’s development. Indeed, the requested loan from 

the ADF to the URT will be used to support the TADB thereby enabling this institution to assist 

Tanzania in achieving its development goals and inclusive growth by extending much-needed 

funding to the agricultural sector. 

1.3. The present project is aligned with Tanzania’s key priorities. In highlighting the 
importance of the agriculture sector and to address the challenges facing it, the Tanzania 

Development Vision 2025 emphasizes the following three as national priority goals: i) ensuring 

basic food security, ii) improving household income levels and iii) increasing export earnings. 

                                                 

1 The present report has been prepared based on information provided by the URT and the TADB before, during 

and after the AfDB’s appraisal mission to Tanzania from the 5th to 8th of September 2016. During the mission, a 

series of meetings were held with senior government officials at the Ministry of Finance and Planning, Ministry 

of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries, Office of Treasury Registrar, Agriculture Council of Tanzania and the 

Bank of Tanzania. Extensive discussions were also held with the senior management and technical staff of the 

TADB. Furthermore, the appraisal report is informed by the lessons learnt from supporting similar projects in 

other African countries. 

2 The ongoing portfolio in Tanzania, as of September 2016, comprises 24 operations with total net commitment 

of UA 1.36 billion. The portfolio consists of 20 public sector operations and 4 private sector operations. Public 

sector operations (mostly infrastructure: transport, power and water supply and sanitation) represent 86.45% of 

the portfolio while private sector operations make up the remaining 13.55%. The ongoing operations are financed 

through various instruments. ADF loans account for 52% while AfDB public sector loans represent 27% and 

private sector loans account for 14%. ADF grants and various AfDB administered trust funds account for the 

remaining 7% of the financing. See Appendix II for additional information on the portfolio. 

3 Agricultural Land in Tanzania was last measured at 396,500 sq.km in 2016 (44.8% of total land area) versus 

369,744 sq.km in 2008 representing an increase of 7% over the period. 



 

2 

The National Five-Year Development Plan (FYDP I and FYDP II) also identifies the 

agriculture sector as a priority for the country. The specific agriculture sector policies and 

strategies, including the Agriculture Sector Development Strategy (ASDS), the Agriculture 

Sector Development Programme (ASDP), the Kilimo Kwanza Initiative of 2009 and the 

Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor of Tanzania (SAGCOT) initiative all call for increased 

commercialization of agriculture. The latest national development initiative, the Big Results 

Now (BRN), identifies three priority crops for the agriculture sector which are maize, rice and 

sugarcane as they contribute to food security and import substitution. One of the three “big 

ideas” for agriculture under the BRN is delivery of 25 commercial and out-grower investments, 

16 for sugar and 9 for rice. 

1.4. The present project is consistent with a range of Bank Group policies and 
strategies. These include: i) the Bank’s Country Strategy Paper for Tanzania (CSP, 2016-2020) 

which calls for unlocking the country’s productive capacity to promote various key sectors 

including agriculture, ii) the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (2013-22) particularly its operational 

focus areas (private sector development), areas of special emphasis (agriculture and food 

security) and the promotion of inclusive growth by offering support to smallholder farmers, iii) 

the Bank’s High 5s especially Industrialize Africa, Feed Africa and Improve the quality of life 

for Africans, iv) the Bank’s new Strategy for Feed Africa (2016-2025) and v) the Bank’s 

Gender Strategy (2014-18) for the promotion of gender equality. 

2. COUNTRY CONTEXT 

The Economy 

2.1. Tanzania’s economy is one of the fastest growing among large Sub-Saharan 
African countries (Figure 1). Real GDP growth is expected to remain around 7% in 2016 and 

2017 (in line with 2015), according to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), supported by 

continued investment in infrastructure, manufacturing and tourism. Better availability and 

reliability of power supply, a rapidly expanding services sector and an improvement in the 

country’s terms of trade due to lower oil prices are also factors that are stimulating growth. 

Furthermore, Tanzania holds significant growth potential in every major sector of the economy, 

including agriculture, manufacturing, services, tourism and mining. GDP growth is expected 

to be driven by the construction, transport, communications and financial services sectors. 

Recent offshore natural gas discoveries are projected to expand the country’s export base and 

help to further diversify the economy. 

Figure 1. Real GDP Growth Rate Forecast 

 

Sources: IMF, Tanzania’s National Bureau of Statistics, Moody’s Investors Service. 

2.2. Tanzania has been able to weather recent risk aversion to emerging markets and 
financial market volatility, which led to a 24% depreciation in the local currency against 

the US Dollar in 2015, thanks to its diversified economy and net oil import position. As a 



 

3 

net oil importer, Tanzania is benefitting from the decline in global oil prices, its external 

position has improved and lower pump prices are supporting domestic consumption and 

growth. 

2.3. Relatively low wealth levels and widespread poverty are constraints on economic 
growth. However, while significant infrastructure bottlenecks hamper the country’s full 

growth potential. Tanzania is also less competitive, has lower productivity and provides a less 

favorable business environment than some of its regional peers such as Kenya and Rwanda. 

The Banking Sector 

2.4. With total assets approaching TZS 28.5 trillion at end of 2015 (USD 13.08 billion), 
Tanzania’s banking sector is the seventh largest in sub-Saharan Africa, behind South 

Africa, Nigeria, Angola, Mauritius, Kenya and Ghana. Banking assets rose at an annual rate 

of 21% between 2005 and 2015, compared with average nominal GDP growth of 17% over the 

same period. The banking system, however, remains small in a global and regional context. 

Banking system assets are estimated at around 31.3% of GDP as of December 2015 (Figure 2) 

due to low per capita income, fairly low banking penetration and low transaction volumes. 

Figure 2. Banking System Assets as a Percentage of GDP 

 
Sources: Tanzania’s National Bureau of Statistics, Bank of Tanzania. 

2.5. Lending growth grew at an annual rate of 27% between 2005 and 2015, with 
particularly high loan growth prior to 2009 levelling off to 21% over the past five years 

(Figure 3). The expansion covered most economic sectors, but the agricultural, hunting, 

forestry and fishing sectors have slowed recently to a five-year annual growth rate of 11%. 

Rapid growth continues in trade (25%), building, construction, real estate and leasing (32%), 

education (48%), health (53%), and mining and quarrying (52%). Personal and other services 

grew less aggressively over the past five years (20% annual growth rate), but have recently 

picked up with 46% growth in 2015 alone. 

Figure 3. Lending Growth Rates 

 
Source: Bank of Tanzania. 



 

4 

2.6. Loan books cover a wide range of sectors and segments (Figure 4), a reflection of 
the diversification of the Tanzanian economy. 

Figure 4. Sector Composition as of December 2015 

 
Source: Bank of Tanzania. 

2.7. The banking sector plays a dominant role in the financial system with banks 
having around a 71.3% market share as of the end of March 2016. Pension funds accounted 

for 26.5%, insurance companies for 1.9% and collective investment schemes for 0.5%. Four 

banks account for around half of system assets. These are: CRDB Bank, National Microfinance 

Bank, National Bank of Commerce and Standard Chartered Bank Tanzania. A total of 36 

commercial banks and 12 community banks operate in the country ensuring some level of 

competition. Concentration remains high, however, as smaller banks and community banks 

generally lack extensive branch networks and are unable to compete with larger banks, often 

leading to weaker financial profiles. 

2.8. Non-performing loans (NPLs), defined as 90 days past due, have remained high 
over the past few years, ranging between 6.5% and 9.3% of gross loans since 2011. Despite 

robust growth in the economy since then, NPLs remain elevated and stood at 8.4% of total 

loans as of March 2016. Weaknesses in certain economic sectors are to blame, including the 

inherently volatile agricultural sector which accounts for the highest NPLs. The agricultural 

sector is a top priority for development by the Government of Tanzania but problem loans are 

rife. This is due to the inherent volatility of the sector given its dependence on commodity 

prices and vulnerability to droughts. This, combined with a tendency for the commercial banks 

to extend loans with short-term maturities and high interest rates, results in a higher propensity 

to default in the agriculture sector compared to other sectors. In fact, the little funding that is 

currently offered to the agriculture sector is not considered as suitable given its high interest 

rates and short-term maturities and does not necessarily contribute to the development of the 

sector either as it does not provide the flexibility to accommodate the inherently seasonal and 

cyclical nature of agriculture. 

The Agriculture Sector 

2.9. Agriculture in Tanzania is an important sector of the economy as it accounts for 
26% of the country’s GDP and employs 67% of its population. The sector is also an 

important source of export revenues. Despite its significance to livelihoods and to the overall 

economy, the agriculture sector remains hampered by widespread underinvestment. As a result 

it continues to operate largely at subsistence levels and its potential to bring commercialization 

to scale remains for the most part unrealized. 



 

5 

2.10. A major problem facing the agricultural sector is the unavailability of finance 
(particularly medium to long-term) to support agricultural production, processing and 

marketing. As of December 2015, a mere 8% of commercial banks’ lending went to the sector 

with most of which went to large companies operating in Tanzania. As a result of this 

underinvestment, production in the agriculture sector has not increased significantly over the 

past decades. 

2.11. In Tanzania, there is huge potential to produce both food and non-food crops for 
the domestic and export markets if access to term (medium to long-term) finance is 

improved. The availability of such finance will enable farmers to reduce their exposure to the 

cyclicality and seasonality of agriculture, to make investments in crops with long gestations 

periods and to acquire farm machinery and inputs, irrigation equipment, storage and processing 

facilities thereby transforming the sector and increasing its contribution towards economic 

growth. Access to term finance is critical for the growth of the agriculture sector and the shift 

from subsistence to commercial agricultural production. 

2.12. The commercial banks in Tanzania are reluctant to expand their lending to the 
agriculture sector which they view as risky. This deprives the sector of the much-needed 

funds to boost production, processing and marketing. The commercial banks tend to fund 

themselves with short-term deposits limiting their incentive to extend term finance to a sector 

that they consider as risky although it is not necessarily more risky than other sectors, it is just 

that these banks, having found their niches, have not done enough to adequately structure their 

lending to the sector taking into account risk factors such as seasonal variations which can be 

addressed through the provision of medium to long-term lending. It is against this background, 

and for sustainable economic growth in the country that, the Government of Tanzania has 

decided to establish the TADB so as to address the observed bottlenecks and enhance access 

to credit in the agriculture sector. The TADB has been established as a national DFI with a key 

role of being a catalyst for delivery of credit facilities for the development of agriculture in 

Tanzania. However, the TADB alone cannot satisfy the significant demand for credit of the 

entire sector and this is why it aims to focus on particular actors as well as on a set of high 

potential value chains in which investments can produce results within a short timeframe. The 

TADB will also take a holistic approach and finance the entire value chain namely production, 

processing and marketing. 

2.13. It is worth noting that in 2005, the Government of Tanzania implemented the 
recommendations of the Financial Sector Assessment Programme (FSAP) of the IMF 

which was undertaken in 2003. It was recognized that lack of long-term financing was among 

the stumbling blocks in the growth of the economy. Among the activities that were earmarked 

for implementation was the establishment of development finance institutions to provide long-

term financing to key economic sectors including agriculture. This led to the establishment of 

a number of credit schemes while the Tanzania Investment Bank (TIB) was transformed into a 

development finance institution with an agricultural financing window albeit not sufficient to 

address the needs of the agriculture sector hence the establishment of the TADB. The failure 

of the commercial banks to meet the needs of the agriculture sector in Tanzania provides a 

strong justification for Government intervention particularly through a dedicated DFI whose 

mandate is to specifically serve the agriculture sector. 

3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

3.1. As previously stated, among the major problems facing the agriculture sector in 
Tanzania is the availability and cost of term finance to support agricultural production, 

processing and marketing. As of December 2015, credit to the agriculture sector accounted 

for only 8% of total lending by the commercial banks. Most of this lending was to large 

enterprises operating in the sector. In fact, despite rapid growth of the financial sector in 



 

6 

Tanzania, access to credit and other financial services is a serious constraint to many actors in 

the agriculture sector especially the smallholder farmers for whom funding from the banks is 

simply out of reach. This essentially underlines the rationale for public intervention as the 

financial system has not been able to adequately address gaps in the provision of finance to the 

agriculture sector in Tanzania. 

3.2. The Bank Group is to intervene to provide resources from the African 
Development Fund to the United Republic of Tanzania which will utilize the borrowed 

resources to extend a loan to the TADB which is a state-owned DFI established as part of 

the second pillar of the country’s Kilimo Kwanza Initiative of 2009. The TADB, whose 

design has been informed by an in-depth review of global experiences relating to successful 

national DFIs, is meant to play a critical role in alleviating the financing constraints that hamper 

the growth of Tanzania’s agriculture sector. 

3.3. The TADB was officially launched and started operations in 2015. It is structured 
to deliver medium and long-term funding through wholesale and direct lending as well as 

guarantees and risk-sharing instruments to address the financing gaps in the agriculture value 

chains. 

3.4. The TADB has been focusing on a set of high potential value chains within the 
national priorities. The fourteen value chains of focus fall under eight agriculture sub-sectors 

as follows: cereals (maize and rice), industrial commodities (sugarcane and cashew nuts), 

oilseeds (sunflower and sesame), horticulture (vegetables, fruits and spices), livestock (diary 

and beef), poultry, fisheries and forestry. Overtime, the TADB will support other value chains 

as more funds are made available to it including from the ADF. 

3.5. The TADB will predominantly target smallholder farmers who carry out essential 
agricultural-related economic activities within the value chains of focus (understanding 

that serving the smallholder farmers directly will be challenging, the TADB aims to reach 

them through their farmer organizations). These farmers will be targeted through funding 

as well as technical assistance which the TADB will implement by working closely with 

Business Development Services (BDS) providers across Tanzania. The ultimate objective in 

doing so is to enable these farmers to make the transition from subsistence to commercial 

farming in an effective and sustainable manner. That said, the TADB will also target other 

medium and large scale farmers as well as the agro-processors, among others. Furthermore, the 

TADB will finance infrastructure development for irrigation, storage/warehousing and 

transport. 

3.6. The pricing of TADB’s facilities will take into account its developmental mandate 
as well as the objective of maintaining sustainable operations. This national DFI will aim 

to extend funding with affordable interest rates for agriculture production, processing and value 

addition. As part of its mandate to develop agriculture, it will aim to maintain low interest rates 

for the smallholder farmers based on its cost of funds plus a sufficient margin to cover operating 

expenses and generate a profit to facilitate sustainability of operations. Given that smallholder 

farmers are potentially one of Tanzania’s most powerful sources of economic growth, the 

TADB will thus contribute to inclusive growth as well as sustained poverty alleviation. The 

provision of long-term funding in local currency to the smallholder farmers will also have a 

positive impact on affordability. Extending loan tenors will have a beneficial impact on the 

cash flows of the borrowers, thus allowing them to expand their borrowing capacity and 

businesses. For the larger clients, the TADB will extend financing on market confirming terms, 

nevertheless. This is important as sustainability is paramount and the viability of the products 

that the TADB provides will be crucial to its success. 

 

 



 

7 

3.7. The TADB is currently wholly-owned by the Government of Tanzania and is run 
by a board comprised mostly of independent non-executive directors appointed through 

a competitive process. The board has three committees namely the board business committee, 

the board human resource and administration committee and the board audit, risk and 

compliance committee. Each committee is assigned specific focus areas and specialized 

functions in the operations of the TADB. The managing director is in charge of the TADB’s 

day-to-day affairs supported by a senior management team. The TADB has begun operations 

with 45 staff and expects to continue recruiting staff based on the needs and expansion of 

business operations to reach a total of 150 by 2020. The TADB operates from its head office 

in Dar es Salaam and overtime expects to open a number of offices in relevant areas of the 

country for reaching out to potential customers. Finally, its structure is as follows: 

 

Figure 5. Organization Structure 

 

3.8. The TADB’s authorized share capital is Tanzania Shilling (TZS) 800 billion (USD 
367.16 million). In order to enable the TADB to start carrying out its functions, the 

Government of Tanzania has so far injected TZS 60 billion (USD 27.54 million) as its initial 

capital contribution. However, this limited funding base is hindering the TADB’s ability to 

fully achieve its objectives including extending medium to long-term loans to the agriculture 

sector especially the loans needed for infrastructure development. It is against this background 

that the URT is requesting a loan from the ADF in an amount of UA 67.27 million (USD 93.51 

million, TZS 204.38 billion) whose proceeds will be on-lent to the TADB thereby enabling it 

to expand its operations and outreach. 

 



 

8 

3.9. The borrowed funds are expected to be deployed by the TADB towards funding a 
technical assistance program (TA Program) and supporting complementary activities 

which are expected to have a positive impact on productivity in the agriculture sector in 

Tanzania: 

 Support in the form of medium and long-term funding for agricultural infrastructure 
development (e.g. warehousing facilities and irrigation schemes to provide reliable 

access to water to absorb shocks caused by climatic variability); 

 Support in the form of medium and long-term funding for access to agricultural inputs 
(financing access to quality seeds, fertilizers and pesticides); 

 Support in the form of medium and long-term funding to agro-processing industries; 

 Support in the form of medium and long-term funding for agro-mechanization (e.g. 
tractors, harvesters and irrigation equipment); and 

 Building resilience and capacity to absorb costs by having a portion of the funds 
invested in low risk/high return instruments in order to absorb the high transaction costs 

associated with financing smallholder agriculture at low interest rates. 

3.10. The TADB has been established to promote the transformation of the agriculture 
sector from subsistence to commercial farming by offering loans to the sector at 

affordable interest rates. Affordable interest rates have been identified to be a key driver to 

unlock the potentials of smallholder farmers. The agricultural sector in Tanzania has been 

characterized with low returns and therefore low interest rates for loans are needed to assist in 

enabling start up projects to take off. Lending at low interest rates to the smallholder farmers 

can nevertheless restrict the ability of the TADB to generate profits and can also result into 

operating losses which can deplete capital and endanger the long-term sustainability of the 

institution. To address this issue, the TADB intends to deploy the following measures in order 

to preserve capital and ensure funding sustainability: 

 Adequate pricing of loans to ensure that the overall yields remain positive: The 
TADB intends to recover all costs of financial intermediation (including administrative 

expenses, borrowing costs and provisions against expected losses) and to earn an 

appropriate return on capital. In its pricing policy, the TADB will charge a margin over 

the base rate plus fees and commissions to recover the administrative and operating 

costs incurred in generating, implementing and monitoring a loan as well as the cost of 

capital employed. While the smallholder farmers will be charged low interest rates, the 

TADB expects to compensate for this by charging the larger clients interest rates that 

are essentially market confirming. This cross-subsidization will enable the TADB to 

assist the smallholder farmers while generating positive returns to ensure sustainability. 

In addition, the TADB will diversify its portfolio by placing a small portion of its funds 

in government securities that offer risk free returns. Such diversification will lower the 

risk profile of the TADB’s portfolio while at the same time enhance its return; and 

 Moderating and controlling the issuance of new loans and advances: Issuance of 
new loans and advances will be subject to the availability of funding and compliance 

with existing capital adequacy regulations which require banks not to increase their risk 

weighted assets above the regulatory thresholds in relation to the size of core capital. 

In order to ensure compliance, the TADB’s Asset and Liability Committee (ALCO) 

will continually review its liquidity and capital adequacy and ascertain its ability to 

continue with the issuance of new loans. The TADB may temporarily withhold issuance 

of new loans and advances if liquidity and capital adequacy ratios are breached and if 

other circumstances are deemed necessary such as a deteriorating loan portfolio and 

high level of non-performing loans. 



 

9 

3.11. Furthermore, the TADB’s funding strategy has been developed in order to outline 
the potential sources of funding. While commercial banks mainly rely on short-term customer 

deposits as the key source of funding, the TADB’s funding will come from the main 

shareholder and from concessionary borrowings from international DFIs, at least in the first 

few years of operations. This will contribute to ensuring that the TADB’s funds are low-cost 

putting it in a position to extend affordable loans to its target beneficiaries particularly the 

smallholder farmers to whom funding must be affordable to pursue profitable agriculture 

activities to transform their lives into improved standards. 

Technical Assistance 

3.12. As agreed with the TADB and the Tanzanian authorities during the appraisal 
mission, a portion of the proposed funding of UA 1.0 million (equivalent to USD 1.39 

million) will be utilized to fund a TA Program to further enhance and strengthen the 

capacity of this institution. The Bank Group has vast experience in supporting national 

development finance institutions in Africa. Through this present project, the Bank Group will 

not only provide the United Republic of Tanzania with the necessary financial resources to 

further support the TADB, thereby enabling it to expand its operations and outreach, but will 

also contribute to building and enhancing the capacity of this national DFI through the proposed 

TA Program. The Bank Group’s solid expertise and knowledge of DFIs has fed into the design 

of the TA Program which is expected to contribute to ensuring that the TADB is in a position 

to intermediate the funds provided to it in an impactful and sustainable manner. The main 

components are provided below and are based on a preliminary assessment of the TADB. 

However, once the funds are disbursed, the TADB will be expected to implement the TA 

Program beginning with a thorough needs assessments to further fine-tune the list of areas that 

need to be enhanced and strengthened. That said, the below components will serve as a good 

guide for implementation: 

 Component 1: Process and System Improvements 

This will include support to the TADB in key areas such as asset and liability 

management, risk management, corporate and capital planning, credit underwriting, 

risk based pricing, product development and costing and the enhancement and/or 

development of relevant strategies, procedures, policies and guidelines (especially 

those that relate to internal control systems and audit, code of conduct, financial 

management and accounting and procurement); 

 Component 2: Information Technology (IT) 

This component will cover the IT needs of the TADB in terms of banking software and 

systems in order to enhance outputs and functionalities. It will also cover the TADB’s 

IT infrastructure and management information system (MIS) for portfolio management 

and monitoring including the tracking of the development outcomes of its lending 

activities; and 

 Component 3: Building staff capacity 

This component will entail training staff in key areas such as risk analysis, risk 

management, credit underwriting, asset and liability management, use of new IT/MIS 

and environmental and social risks management. Evidently, the needs assessment will 

provide a more comprehensive list of the needs of the staff of the TADB. Further, to 

ensure maximum impact for this component, the training that will be provided to the 

staff of the TADB will be done primarily on the premises of the TADB or on location 

in Dar es Salaam as to ensure that: i) most of the staff are trained and ii) that the 

resources of this component are not unnecessarily spent on travel. 

 



 

10 

3.13. The TA Program is designed to strengthen the capacity of the TADB. This is 
intended to contribute to building a sound banking business so that this national DFI is not only 

used as an intermediary to channel financing to the agriculture sector in Tanzania, but also to 

build institutional development of a DFI to enable sustainable lending and provide a strong 

demonstration effect. 

Gender Impact 

3.14. Tanzania’s constitution guarantees equality of men and women and supports 
women’s full participation in social, economic and political life. The Government of 

Tanzania has also taken steps to mainstream gender perspectives in sector policies, strategies 

and programs. In agriculture, even though the Kilimo Kwanza Initiative does not specifically 

address gender, pillar 8 of its implementation framework (Science, Technology and Human 

Resources for Kilimo Kwanza) calls for mainstreaming gender in Kilimo Kwanza and 

developing programs to strengthen the position of women in agriculture. 

3.15. Agriculture is a major source of livelihood for most rural populations in Tanzania. 
Women comprise a large proportion of the agricultural labor force yet women farmers are 

consistently found to be less productive than male farmers. There are several barriers that 

hinder their performance. These include limited access to finance as well as inadequate skills 

to run and manage operations and businesses. This project is therefore expected to contribute 

to narrowing the financing gap for women in the agriculture sector while also enhancing their 

skills and capacity. 

3.16. During the appraisal mission, the mission team emphasized the need for the TADB 
to continue targeting and supporting women as beneficiaries considering their critical 

role in the agriculture sector. More concretely, following discussions with the TADB, it has 

been agreed that the project will include the following key actions to support women in 

agriculture: 

 As the TADB scales up support to the agriculture sector in Tanzania through the 
mobilized ADF funds, at least 20% of these resources will be specifically dedicated 

by it towards supporting women in agriculture. This is in addition to the already 

existing access by women to funding from the TADB (i.e. the remaining 80% will still 

go to both men and women); 

 The TADB will put in place a mentoring program for women in agriculture to 
enhance their technical, farming and managerial skills. The mentoring would 

consist of linking women with the TADB’s larger and more experienced clients from 

whom they can benefit and learn. That said, for the mentoring to work, it is critical to 

put in place an effective incentivization scheme for the mentors including, but not 

limited to, small reductions in their cost of borrowing; and 

 At the institutional level, while the TADB has designated a staff member as a 
gender champion, this action is not supported by an institutional policy or 

strategy. During the appraisal mission, it was established that the TADB’s credit policy 

does not explicitly mention women. To address these gaps, the TADB will develop a 

gender policy that will guide how it addresses gender issues internally and externally 

with its clients. Furthermore, the TADB will review its credit policy to reflect its 

commitment to advancing the empowerment of women. The Bank Group will support 

the TADB to develop a Gender Policy which will need to be in place prior to the 

disbursement of the funds. 

 

 



 

11 

Social Issues 

3.17. The funds to be provided to the TADB are expected to contribute towards 
economic empowerment of small scale farmers, entrepreneurship and employment 

creation. These funds are expected to contribute to growth of small businesses, income 

generation, household savings and a surge in value addition activities. The TADB maintains a 

tiered pricing framework whereby it provides funding at low interest rates to the smallholder 

farmers while it charges more to the larger and more established corporate entities in the 

agriculture sector. This cross-subsidization enables the TADB to provide affordable funding to 

the smaller farmers while generating sufficient income to sustain its business. Financial literacy 

among rural farmers and especially women has been identified as a major challenge and the 

TADB is in the process of setting up a technical assistance fund which will focus on capacity 

development for the small farmers. 

Environment Impact 

3.18. The project has been classified as Category FI-B in line with the Bank Group’s 
assessment procedures. The TADB’s portfolio and the proposed investments to be supported 

with financing from the ADF are considered medium risk with limited adverse environmental 

or social impacts that are largely reversible and readily addressed through mitigation measures. 

3.19. At the request of the AfDB and with its guidance and input, the TADB has 
developed and approved an Environmental and Social (E&S) Policy and an 

Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), which will provide the 

procedures and workflow that will be followed for each investment by the institution to 

manage all levels of environmental and social risks. The proposed investments will be 

screened, reviewed and evaluated against national laws and regulations, the Bank Group’s 

Exclusion List and Integrated Safeguard System (ISS) as well as other applicable performance 

standards or safeguard requirements (specifically those pertinent to the agriculture sector 

including land issues, water management, pollution and climate risks). 

Lessons Learned Reflected in Project Design 

3.20. The AfDB has learned numerous lessons from its work with national and regional 
DFIs from across Africa as well as in its experience providing technical assistance 

programs. These lessons, and the manner in which they have been taken into account in the 

current operation, are: 

Lesson How it will be addressed 

National DFIs across Africa face common 

challenges including: 

 Emphasis placed on loan approvals and 
disbursements over loan quality resulting in 

high non-performing loans 

 Weak administrative systems, procedures 
and reporting systems; and 

 Insufficient human resource capacity. 

The proposed technical assistance program is 

expected to contribute to achieving the 

following key objectives: 

 Enhanced credit underwriting processes 
and skills; 

 Improved IT and management information 
systems for portfolio reporting and 

monitoring; and 

 Skilled staff through relevant trainings. 

3.21. In addition to the above, during the appraisal mission, extensive discussions were 
held with the senior management of the TADB as well as with government officials on the 

need to ensure that the institution, which is newly established, is encouraged to operate 

based on internationally recognized good practice principles that are considered as key 

for success and long-term sustainability. These principles have been identified by the AfDB 

as well as sister institutions such as the World Bank and include: 



 

12 

 While the TADB is currently owned by the Government of Tanzania, it was 
favorably noted that the aim of the authorities, over the medium to long-term, is 

to attract reputable investors to be shareholders in the institution. This is important 

as the shareholding structures of DFIs are moving away from 100% state ownership 

towards mixed public-private capital structures. This will be expected to strengthen the 

governance of the TADB. It was also noted that the governance of the TADB has been 

designed with a board of directors that is predominately composed of independent 

directors selected based on a competitive process. Indeed, as per the TADB’s 

memorandum and articles of association (MEMARTS), the board is designed to consist 

of between 7 and 9 directors, the majority of whom meant to be non-executive and non-

government officials. As per the MEMARTS, the directors are also to be selected to be 

qualified and capable individuals with a high degree of skills, expertise, integrity and 

stature. This is key as it contributes to enhancing performance and minimizing political 

interference. The governance of the TADB was thoroughly discussed, including with 

senior government officials, and it was agreed to ensure independence of both the 

management and the board with their recruitment based on merit only; 

 The need to ensure that the TADB is operationally and financially sustainable with 
overall pricing that reflects costs and credit risk. While the smallholder farmers will 

be provided with funding that is concessional, the TADB will make up for this by 

charging its larger borrowers interest rates that will be market-conforming as well as 

funding itself with low cost liabilities which will help in absorbing the high transaction 

costs associated with serving the smallholder farmers; 

 The importance of putting in place strong administrative systems, procedures, 
policies and guidelines and this is what the TA Program will address. The TA 

Program will also address staff capacity and skills; 

 The importance of avoiding credit misallocation and politically motivated lending 
and to this end, it was agreed that the funding to be provided to the TADB will not 

be utilized for onward lending to ineligible persons. Advancing loans to them will 

lead to automatic acceleration of the loan and cancellation of undisbursed amounts4; 

 During the appraisal mission, it was noted that the TADB is subject to prudential 
regulation and supervision by the Bank of Tanzania under its guidelines for 

development finance institutions. This was also viewed positively as independent 

regulation and supervision by the financial sector regulator rather than a line ministry 

with conflicts of interest enforces disciplined management; and 

 In addition, it was agreed that the TADB should aim as much as possible to operate 
as a wholesale lending institution as international experience has shown that 

wholesale-only development finance institutions that provide funding through 

                                                 
4 Ineligible Persons means the following persons who are ineligible to access funding extended with the proceeds of 

the ADF loan: 

a) Politically Exposed Persons defined as: head of state or head of government and their deputies, if any; cabinet 
minister of central or local government; member of a legislature of central or local government; deputy minister 

or equivalent rank; ambassador or attaché or counsellor of an ambassador; military officer with a rank of general 

or above; chief executive officer of a state-owned company or a state-owned bank; head of a government agency; 

judge; and senior official of a political party represented in a central state or local government legislature; 

b) Civil servants with the position of director, or its equivalent, and above employed by central, state or local 
government; 

c) Directors and senior management of the TADB; and 

d) Any related parties of the persons falling under clauses a) through c) above. 



 

13 

eligible financial institutions5 perform better than those that engage in retail 

operations. A wholesale approach is particularly appropriate with respect to financing 

underfunded segments. Retail development finance institutions are also perceived by 

their retail borrowers as entities that do not need to be repaid as they are owned by 

governments. While the TADB has been established to focus principally on wholesale 

lending activities, it is currently carrying out retail lending although it is expected to 

move towards wholesale lending as more funding is provided to it. The TADB is 

committed to this and will ensure that the funding from the ADF is extended through 

eligible financial institutions. It is worth noting that while extending funding through 

wholesale lending, the TADB will work with financial institutions which will be 

incentivized to enter the agriculture sector or expand service to it by augmenting their 

capacity and by providing them with long-term funding combined with technical 

assistance to increase the attractiveness of the agriculture sector and/or make 

commercial bank credit feasible. Thus, rather than replacing markets, the TADB will 

enhance them by providing term financing to financial institutions for on-lending 

(providing maturities that are otherwise unavailable to the financial institutions) and 

technical assistance to strengthen the financial institutions’ capacity to serve the 

agriculture sector. Furthermore, by working with such financial institutions, the 

TADB’s capital will essentially be protected as the capital of the financial institutions 

will stand between the TADB and any credit losses6.  

3.22. It is worth highlighting that the TADB has been incorporated as a public limited 
company under the Companies Act no. 2 of 2002 and not through an act of parliament. 
This is key for avoiding political interference since the key reporting relationship will be with 

the shareholders and not with the national assembly and the presidency as is the case when the 

establishment of a company is through an Act of Parliament. Furthermore, as stated earlier, 

while the Government of Tanzania is currently the sole shareholder, their intention is to bring 

in additional equity investors overtime so that the shareholding structure of the TADB moves 

away from 100% state ownership towards a mixed public-private capital structure. If this is 

achieved, the governance of the institution will be further strengthened. 

4. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 

Procurement Arrangements 

4.1. All procurement of goods, works and services will be carried out in accordance 
with the Procurement Policy for Bank Group Funded Operations and Methodology for 

its Implementation, dated October 2015. The various activities under the TA Program of the 

equivalent of UA 1 million involve the procurement of both goods and consultancy services. 

In the case of consultancy services, the procurement will be carried out on the basis of the 

                                                 
5 The following are minimum eligibility criteria for the financial institutions: i) must be duly licensed and at least 

two years in operation, ii) owners and board of directors should be “fit and proper”, iii) must have qualified and 

experienced management, adequate organization and institutional capacity for its specific risk profile, iv) must be 

in “good standing” with its supervisory authority and remain in compliance at all times, v) must have well defined 

policies and written procedures for management of all types of financial risks, vi) x) must have adequate internal 

audits and controls for its specific risk profile and vii) must have adequate management information systems. 

6 While extending funding through financial institutions, the TADB will need to ensure that the end beneficiaries 

(especially the smallholder farmers) are able to gain access to funding that is affordable in addition to having long 

tenors. To this end, the TADB will explore various mechanisms including auctioning credit to the financial 

institutions especially those serving the smallholder farmers. In order to put competitive pressure on the spreads 

offered by the financial institutions to the final borrowers, the TADB’s interest rates will be determined by an 

auction process under which the financial institutions will compete on the basis of the spreads they propose to 

offer to their borrowers. This innovative approach will ensure that the affordability of the funds being extended 

by the TADB. 



 

14 

Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS) method. In particular, the TADB will be required to 

select and engage consultant(s) based on a transparent and competitive process, including well 

developed terms of reference, international advertising, short-listing and a robust evaluation 

process. An evaluation report prepared by the TADB will have to be accepted by the Bank 

Group within 14 calendar days, before recruiting the consultant(s). The procurement of goods, 

related to the IT upgrades component of the TA Program, will need to conform to established 

commercial practices acceptable to the Bank Group so that such procedures result in 

competitive market prices for the goods. The TADB will need to ensure adherence to 

appropriate procurement procedures which will be periodically reviewed for compliance. For 

the rest of the funding, the procurement of goods, works and services by the TADB’s target 

beneficiaries will need to conform to established commercial practices acceptable to the Bank 

Group so that such procedures result in competitive market prices for the goods, works and 

services and meet the needs of the TADB’s beneficiaries. The TADB will ensure adherence to 

appropriate procurement procedures and the Bank Group will periodically review the TADB’s 

compliance in ensuring that such procedures are followed by its target beneficiaries. 

Monitoring, Financial Management and Audit Arrangements 

4.2. The Bank Group conducted an assessment on the adequacy of the financial 
management systems of the TADB, the Executing Agency, based on the Bank’s 2014 

Financial Management Implementation Guidelines and concluded that the overall risk is 

Moderate. The TADB will be monitored, supervised and evaluated regularly by the Bank 

Group. It will prepare annual financial statements in accordance with International Financial 

Reporting Standards (IFRS). The financial statements will include in the notes to the accounts 

the disbursement of the proceeds of the ADF loan by the URT to the TADB and will be audited 

by the Controller and Auditor General (CAG) or a private audit firm appointed by the CAG in 

accordance with the United Republic of Tanzania statutory requirements by applying 

International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions which are acceptable by the Bank. 

Within six months after the end of each financial year, the TADB will be required to submit a 

copy of its audited financial statements together with the management letter on the weaknesses 

identified by the auditors and the TADB’s management responses and implementation plan of 

the auditor’s recommendations. Furthermore, the TADB is licensed and supervised by the 

central bank and required to meet prudential requirements as regards to capital adequacy, loan 

provisioning and recognition of loan losses as well as other relevant regulations. These will be 

regularly verified by the Bank Group. Relevant to this, the URT should ensure that the TADB 

at all times maintains in full force and effect an operating license from the central bank and all 

such other consents, licenses, approvals, authorizations and exemptions required under the laws 

of Tanzania for the TADB to carry out its business and perform its obligations under this 

present project.  

Sustainability 

4.3. The TADB’s viability is viewed positively for a number of reasons including its 
sound corporate governance and prudent lending strategy. Also, as an institution that is 

expected to focus principally on wholesale lending, this will contribute to preserving the quality 

of its assets and capital. Further, the TADB will be subject to limited liquidity risk as it funds 

itself through long-term funding and not through short-term deposits. In addition, the TADB 

will be subject to prudential regulation and supervision by the central bank, which will enforce 

requirements similar to those applied to commercial banks. Furthermore, the proposed 

technical assistance program will play a key role in strengthening the capacity and enhancing 

the performance of the institution. 

 

 



 

15 

4.4. The long-term sustainability and success of the TADB hinge on its ability to 
mobilize additional capital from the Government7 and other investors as well as low-cost 

debt liabilities from international DFIs. To fund itself, the TADB will also explore the 

possibility of issuing bonds in the local capital market after building a track record of operations 

and thoroughly assessing the market conditions to establish the depth of liquidity as these will 

influence the success rates and costs of the bonds. The importance of mobilizing low cost 

funding is fully recognized by the TADB as articulated in its funding strategy. This, combined 

with its determination to generate positive returns from its lending activities, should ensure that 

any advantage that may accrue to the TADB in being able to fund itself with low cost liabilities 

be accrued by it as a contribution to its equity. 

Risk Management 

4.5. Potential risks are rated as mostly Medium and are expected to be mitigated as 
outlined below: 

 

Potential Risk Rating Mitigation Measures 

High operational costs 

associated with reaching 

out to smallholder 

farmers. 

Medium The TADB will implement measures to minimize costs including reaching smallholder 

farmers through wholesale lending by working with eligible financial institutions and 

developing innovative products and services such as mobile banking. 

Impact of lending at low 

interest rates on financial 

sustainability. 

Medium The TADB is fully aware of the importance of sustainability and while the smallholder 

farmers will be supported with affordable loans, the institution will aim to balance its 

portfolio by also targeting larger clients to whom the funds will be priced based on market 

confirming terms. Additionally, the TADB will invest a portion of its funds in low 

risk/high return government securities to further support the cross subsidization of the 

smallholder farmers. Finally, the TADB expects to continue funding itself through the 

mobilization of low-cost funds. 

The TADB unable to 

effectively intermediate 

the funds extended to it. 

Medium The proceeds of the ADF loan will be made available to the TADB in two equal tranches 

to ensure that it is able to absorb the resources made available to it and effectively 

intermediate them. 

The TA Program is not 

implemented properly by 

the TADB. 

Low to 

Medium 

The proceeds of the ADF loan will be made available to the TADB in two tranches and 

the disbursement of the second tranche will be conditional on the TADB having 

successfully implemented two of the three components of the TA Program. The TADB is 

also strongly committed to ensuring that the TA Program is successfully implemented. 

Funds extended to 

ineligible persons. 

Low to 

Medium 

The TADB will be required to ensure that the funds are not on-lent to ineligible persons. 

Lending to such persons will result in the accelerated repayment of the ADF loan. 

Political capture of the 

TADB.  

Medium 

to High 

This risk is primarily managed with an innovative governance structure. While the TADB 

will be majority government-owned, its MEMARTS provides that the majority of 

directors should be non-executive and non-government officials chosen based on a 

competitive and transparent process. Cognizant that governance failures contributed to 

thwarting the effectiveness of existing DFIs across Africa, the Tanzanian authorities are 

fully committed to a robust governance structure for the TADB. In addition to providing 

comfort as regards the strategic direction of the TADB, the MEMARTS requires that the 

directors should be qualified and capable individuals with a high degree of skills, 

expertise, integrity and stature. The TADB will also be subject to regulation, licensing 

and supervision by the central bank, thus further strengthening the governance 

arrangements as well as due diligence as regards to its operational and financial capacity. 

Finally, the Bank Group will ensure continuous supervision of all key operational aspects 

to ensure good governance.  

                                                 
7 While the Government is committed to injecting additional equity into the TADB, it must scale up its efforts. 

The TADB’s MEMARTS provides that the initial paid-up capital of the institution is TZS 100 billion to be raised 

gradually to TZS 800 billion. The Government will need to significantly scale up its efforts to mobilize additional 

equity for the TADB to ensure that it complies with the MEMARTS. 



 

16 

Knowledge Building 

4.6. The present operation is expected to generate considerable knowledge and 
experience that will add value and build up lessons for the design and management of 

similar projects across Africa. The lessons learnt will be documented including those on 

supporting smallholder farmers especially women. Bank supervision missions, quarterly and 

annual progress reports, mid-term review, audit and completion reports will also provide an 

opportunity to capture knowledge on relevant aspects of this project. As a new institution, the 

TADB will benefit from working with the Bank Group to learn about its procedures and 

safeguards which it can incorporate to enhance itself. The Bank Group will share the lessons 

learnt from the experience of implementing this project in Tanzania. 

5. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

5.1. The proceeds of the loan from the African Development Fund to be provided to 
the United Republic of Tanzania will be made available to the TADB by way of a loan in 

accordance with the Bank Group’s On-Lending Policy (ADB/BD/WP/90/36; 

ADF/BD/WP/90/38). The terms and conditions of the loan from the URT to the TADB will 

be in line with those of the loan from the ADF to the URT except for the loan currency which 

will be Tanzanian Shilling. This structure is essentially innovative as it enables the Bank Group 

to support a national development finance institution without being exposed to the risks that 

would be associated with direct lending to such an institution. Plus, it is deploying a debt 

instrument to a country whose credit rating is much better than the rating that would be 

applicable to a direct loan to the beneficiary institution. 

5.2. The legal instrument to be used for this project is a loan agreement between the 
United Republic of Tanzania and the African Development Fund. This loan agreement will 

enter into force subject to fulfilment by the United Republic of Tanzania of the provisions of 

section 12.01 of the General Conditions Applicable to the African Development Fund Loan 

Agreements and Guarantee Agreements. 

5.3. The ADF loan will be extended to the URT and its proceeds transferred by the 
URT to the TADB as a loan on the same terms and conditions (except for the loan 

currency). The URT will sign a loan agreement with the ADF while the URT and the TADB 

will sign an on-lending agreement. 

5.4. The proceeds of the ADF loan will be disbursed in two equal tranches upon 
fulfillment of agreed disbursement triggers. The obligation of the African Development Fund 

to make the disbursement of the first tranche will be conditional upon entry into force of the loan 

agreement and the submission by the URT and the TADB of evidence of the fulfillment of the 

following conditions, each in form and substance satisfactory to the African Development Fund: 

 The opening by the United Republic of Tanzania of a special United States Dollar 
denominated account at the central bank of Tanzania for the deposit of the proceeds of the 

ADF loan. The opening of the account will be evidenced by a letter from the central bank 

confirming that the said account has been opened and providing the account numbers; 

 The opening by the TADB of a special Tanzanian Shilling denominated account at the 
central bank of Tanzania for the deposit by the URT of the proceeds of its loan to the TADB 

(the loan from the URT to the TADB will be in local currency meaning that the URT will 

take on the foreign exchange risk to which the TADB will not be exposed). The opening of 

the account will be evidenced by a letter from the central bank confirming that the said 

account has been opened and providing the account numbers; 

 An on-lending agreement between the URT and the TADB, relating to the loan from 
the URT to the TADB whose amount is equal to the loan from the ADF to the URT, in 

form and substance acceptable to the ADF, has been duly executed by the parties thereto. 



 

17 

The execution of the on-lending agreement shall be supported by a legal opinion issued to 

the ADF by a legal counsel acceptable to the ADF confirming that the on-lending 

agreement between the TADB and the URT, has been duly authorized, ratified and 

executed on behalf of the URT and the TADB and constitutes legal, valid and binding 

obligation of such parties; and 

 The TADB has adopted a Gender Policy in form and substance acceptable to the 
African Development Fund. 

5.5. The obligation of the ADF to disburse the second tranche of the ADF loan will be 
conditional on the following conditions: 

 Submission by the TADB of evidence, in form and substance satisfactory to the AfDB 
Group, that it has successfully implemented components 1 and 2 of the TA Program (noting 

that component 3 involves training staff which is a continuous activity). By linking the 

disbursement of the second tranche to the implementation of the TA Program, the Bank 

Group will be in a position to exercise due diligence as regards to progress; and 

 Supervision by the Bank Group of the utilization of the first tranche of the ADF loan 
and satisfaction that the funds were effectively deployed including towards supporting 

women through funding and the proposed mentoring program. 

5.6. In addition, for the disbursement of the two tranches of the ADF loan, the United 
Republic of Tanzania will be required to ensure that the funds are passed on to the TADB 

within a maximum of 14 calendar days of the URT receiving the funds from the ADF. 
Any delays will result in calls for potential suspension or accelerated repayment of the ADF 

loan. Additional events that may call for potential suspension or accelerated repayment of the 

ADF loan will include the following: i) violation of signed agreements or regulations affecting 

the ability of the TADB to fulfill its mandate or that affect its financial sustainability, ii) the 

TADB’s license has been withdrawn, revoked, amended or suspended, or its renewal has been 

withheld, so as to materially and adversely affect the ability of the TADB to carry out its 

functions and iii) extension of funding to ineligible persons. 

5.7. Finally, this present project complies with all the applicable AfDB Group policies 
including the On-Lending Policy (ADB/BD/WP/90/36; ADF/BD/WP/90/38) referred to 

earlier in paragraph 5.1. 

6. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION 

6.1. The proposed loan from the ADF to the United Republic of Tanzania, to be utilized 
by the URT to support the TADB, will contribute to enabling this national DFI to scale 

up support to the agriculture sector in Tanzania. This institution is expected to play a key 

role in facilitating attainment of sustainable food self-sufficiency and food security in Tanzania 

and in promoting and supporting the transformation of agriculture from subsistence to 

commercial farming in order to effectively and sustainably contribute to inclusive economic 

growth and poverty reduction. 

6.2. The Government of Tanzania is fully committed to the success of the TADB and has 
demonstrated this through the capital that it has injected so far from its own budget and its 

current efforts to mobilize additional funding from new sources including the ADF. The failure 

of the commercial banks to meet the funding needs of the agriculture sector provides a strong 

justification for Government intervention through the proposed borrowing from the ADF. This 

outside funding will enable the Government of Tanzania to support the TADB while providing 

it with the fiscal space for more spending in sectors and projects critical to the country’s 

development (including infrastructure projects planned to facilitate trade and industrialization). 

6.3. In the light of the foregoing, Management recommends that, for the purposes stipulated 



 

18 

in this report, the Board of Directors of the African Development Fund approves the proposed 

ADF loan of UA 67.27 million (equivalent to USD 93.51 million) to the United Republic of 

Tanzania. 




























































  

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PROGRAMME  : GOVERNANCE AND AGRIBUSINESS PROMOTION 
     SUPPORT PROGRAMME - (PAGPA) 

 
COUNTRY    : REPUBLIC OF TOGO  

 

APPRAISAL REPORT  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
PROGRAMME INFORMATION 

 

INSTRUMENT :    General Budget Support 

PBO MODEL DESIGN:                                    Programme Support Operation 

 

GRANT INFORMATION 

Client Information  

BORROWER:       Togolese Republic 

EXECUTING AGENCY:  Ministry of Economy and Finance 

Permanent Secretariat for Reform Policy and 

Programmes Monitoring 

FINANCING PLAN  

 

Source Amount  Instrument 

 

ADF 

 

9.53 Million 

 

GRANT 

FMI 

BM 

UE 

59,67 Million DTS 

50 Million USD                

19 Millions Euros 

 

LOAN 

GRANT 

GRANT 

 

  
Key ADF Financing Information 

 

 

GRANT Currency  

 

UA 

Commitment Fee 0.0%  

Other fees (services) 0.00%  

Maturity  

 

 

Implementation Schedule – Milestones (expected) 

 

Concept Note Approval 

 

June  2017 

Appraisal July  2017 

PAGPA Programme Approval  29 November 2017  

Effectiveness November  2017 

Last Disbursement  June  2018 

Completion December 2018 

 



iv  

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 

Programme 

overview  

 

Country: TOGO. 

Programme Name: Governance and Agribusiness Support Programme (PAGPA) 

Overall Implementation Schedule: November 2017 – December 2018 

Operational Instrument: General Budget Support  

Programme Cost: UA 9.53 million disbursed in a single tranche in 2017 

Sector: Economic Governance and Agro-industry  

Programme 

Outcomes 
The main expected outcomes under Component A are: (i) a shorter ownership 

transfer timeframe from 283 days in 2016 to 60 days (WAEMU zone recorded 

average); (ii) a reduced agricultural trade deficit from CFAF 64 billion to 40 

billion, (iii) Togo's enhanced resilience to spatial and gender inequality-related 

fragility factors through the promotion of regional development around Agropoles 

and (iv) land tenure security on developed sites. Regarding Component B: (i) 

increased tax pressure from 17.9% in 2016 to 19.1% in 2018; (ii) optimized 

investment management, with the PI-11 rating moving from D to at least C in 2018; 

(iii) improved local tax governance through effective skills transfer and enhanced 

technical capabilities of local and regional authorities. 

Alignment with  

Bank  

Priorities 

 

PAGPA is aligned with the national development programme, SCAPE 2013-2017, 

notably Pillar (I) development of sectors with strong growth potential and Pillar 

(IV) strengthening governance. It is also aligned with the two pillars of the Bank's 

CSP (2016-2020), namely: (i) Development of inclusive growth and agribusiness 

competitiveness poles and (ii) Support for financial, sector and local governance 

and the Bank's 2013-2022 Ten-year Strategy as well as the Bank's Governance 

Action Plan (GAP II 2014-2018), more specifically, it contributes to the 

achievement of three of the Bank's five key strategic priorities (i) "Feed Africa," 

(ii) "Industrialize Africa" through agro-industry promotion measures, and (iii) 

"Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa" by supporting reforms seeking 

improved budget management and public action effectiveness through enhanced 

economic and financial governance. 

 

Needs  

Assessment and  

Programme  

Rationale 

 

The encouraging socio-economic performance notwithstanding, Togo remains in 

fragile situation due mainly to the wide spatial disparities in wealth generation and 

distribution. Economic activity remains mainly concentrated in the maritime 

region which generates on average 97% of the tax revenues collected by the OTR, 

against merely 2% for the other regions representing 89% of the territory and 57% 

of the population. To boost its resilience and accelerate its exit from fragility, Togo 

is banking on the structural transformation of the agricultural sector, notably 

through the establishment of agriculture hubs (Agropoles) for economic as well as 

social inclusion reasons. The effective implementation of this strategy requires 

mobilizing substantial investments, both public and private. The total cost estimate 

for the 2016-2020 phase is CFAF 3,791 billion, with an average financing ratio of 

46% from the State budget and 56% from the private sector. PAGPA, by 

concomitantly supporting substantial increase in internal resources, improving the 

private investment climate and strengthening agricultural sector governance, will 

provide Togo with the required financial and technical capabilities to implement 

its agricultural policy, a vehicle for sustainable and inclusive growth. Additionally, 

budget support resources will cover some of the financing requirements of the 

2017 budget, amounting to CFAF 400.6 billion. 

Harmonization Efforts are still required to coordinate the interventions of technical and financial 

partners (TFPs), in particular those engaging in budget support. The budget support 

consultation framework (COAB) set up since 2010, remains inoperative. The TFPs 

are yet to develop a joint matrix of their interventions, for which agreement with 

the government is awaited regarding its orientation, but they are working to 



v  

strengthen the complementarity of their actions in terms of dialogue and reforms 

monitoring. 
 

Bank’s Value  

Added 

 

The Bank has acquired proven expertise in strengthening economic and financial 

governance in Africa, notably in the sub-region (WAEMU). More specifically, the 

Bank has a comparative advantage in Togo for dialogue on reforms, having been 

the first development partner to re-engage after more than 15 years of dialogue 

with the international community; and on account of the results obtained in highly 

strategic areas such as revenue mobilization. Indeed, the Bank lent its full support 

to Togo in its vast and ambitious tax transition project that led to the establishment 

of OTR. PAGPA supports complementary measures to complete reforms seeking 

to optimize this structure, and diversify the economy by creating an enabling 

environment for the establishment of Agropoles. 

Contribution to 

Gender Equality 

and Women’s 

Empowerment  

Increased domestic resources mobilization and greater efficiency in public finance 

management will help improve the living conditions of the people in general and 

women in particular. PAGPA measures will lay the groundwork for a structural 

transformation of the economy, particularly at the local and regional level. The 

numerous opportunities that will open up around major Agropole projects will 

benefit women. In particular, that of the Kara region, the first pilot Agropole to be 

established with the support of this programme should, by 2020, help create 2,500 

jobs, 30% for women and 65% for the youth.  

 

Dialogue on 

Policies and  

Associated 

Technical 

Assistance  

 

 

PAGPA will help reinforce dialogue with the Government on public policies to 

support Togo’s economic transformation. The dialogue will focus on conditions 

for the effective implementation of the agricultural policy, with special focus on 

issues related to broadening the tax base to maximize domestic resources 

mobilization, thus strengthening macro-stability and creating a private investment-

friendly environment. Through ongoing capacity-building projects, the Resource 

Mobilization and institutional capacity building support project (PAMOCI) and 

the Fiscal Governance Support Project (PAGFI), Togo will continue to benefit 

from the assistance of national and international experts in revenue mobilization. 

The implementation of the agribusiness reforms will be supported by the 

investment project being prepared by the department in charge of agriculture in the 

Bank, which is aimed at establishing the Kara Agropole. The submission of this 

project to the Bank's Board of Directors is scheduled for December 2017. 



 

vi 

EXPECTED RESULTS - BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 

 

Country and Project Name: TOGO: Governance and Agribusiness Promotion Support Programme (PAGPA) 

Project Goal: Contribute towards creating conditions for strong and inclusive growth supported by agribusiness.  
 

RESULTS CHAIN   PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICATI

ON 

RISKS/MITIGATION 

MEASURES  

Indicator (including CSIs)  
 

Baseline Situation Target   

IM
P

A
C

T
 Growth is 

sustained and 

more inclusive 

 

Economic Growth Rate   

5,1% in 2016 

 

5.6% in 2020 

INS  

HDI adjusted to inequalities 0.332 in 2015  0.400 in 2020 UNDP 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

Outcome 1 :  

The 

agricultural 

sector’s added 

value in the 

economy is 

increased 

1.1Number of taxes per year 

 
49 in 2016 At most 39 in 2018. DB-WB 

Report 

Risk 1: Political 

instability: strong 

tensions related to the 

claims  

concerning the 

limitation of the 

number of presidential 

mandates 

 

Mitigation 

measures1: The 

Government is 

committed to revising 

the constitution in 

order to limit the 

number of presidential 

terms to two. The 

dialogue between the 

political actors 

continues 

 

Risk 2: 

Macroeconomic 

instability linked to 

the country's 

economic 

vulnerability to 

exogenous shocks 

Mitigation measures 

2: The Government is 

committed to 

strengthening the 

country's resilience by 

implementing a 

genuine policy of 

structural 

transformation of the 

economy and 

pursuing reforms 

agreed with the IMF 

and other partners. 

Risk 3: Fiduciary 

Risks due to 

weaknesses in the 

public finance 

management system 

Mitigation measures 

3: The effective 

implementation of the 

PA- GFP and the 

measures provided for 

in the PAGPA 1 will 

contribute towards 

consolidating the 

1.2  

Property transfer timeframes 
283 2016 90 days in 2018 

2.3 

 Agricultural trade balance deficit 
-44% in 2015 -38% in 2018 INS/ MEF/ 

Agriculture 

Outcome 2:  

Internal 

resources 

mobilization 

and public 

investment 

management 

are  improved 

1.1 Improved Tax burden  17.9%  en 2016 18.3% in 2017 and 19,1% in 

2018 

OTR SP-PRPF 

MEF 

1.2 Improved investment 

management 
PI.11 D in 2016 PI.11= C in 2018 PEFA/ 

Auto 

A) Support for improved private investment environment and agribusiness promotion 
 

A.1) 

Improving the 

private 

investment 

environment 

a.1.1) Adoption of land code by 

Council of Ministers  

 

Draft Code prepared; 

Transfer timeframe 283 

days in 2016 

Land code and rural registry 

adopted in Ministerial 

Council in 2017 

DADC 

a.1.2) Review and adoption of the 

investment code 

2012 Code in force very 

unfavourable to the 

cross-cutting objective 

of rationalization of 

exemptions, promotion 

of agribusiness and job 

creation 

The Investment and Free 

Zones Promotion Agency 

Operational in 2018 

 

Min industry/ 

Commerce/ 

Agriculture 

a.1.3) Adoption of the revised 

simplified tax code  

Preliminary draft code 

in the validation process 

Simplified tax code 

validated in 2018 

 

a.1.4) Adoption by the Council of 

Ministers of a National Strategy 

for Private Sector Development 

A draft Strategy already 

exists  

Private Sector Development 

Strategy adopted in 2018 

Ministry of 

Commerce and 

Private Sector 

MEF/SP-PRFP a.1.5) Creation of the Business 

Climate Unit 

No unit for the actions 

coordination 

Decree adopted by the 

Council of Ministers in 

2017 

A.2) 

Strengthening  

of the legal and 

institutional 

framework for  

agribusiness 

development 

 

 

 

 

 

 

a.2.1) Adoption by Council of 

Ministers of the National Strategy 

for Agropoles Development  

 

Preliminary draft 

strategy 

National Agropoles 

development strategy 

adopted in 20170 

Min industry/ 

Agriculture 

a.2.2) Rural roads  built in the area 

of the Kara agropole  

0 Km Km of rural roads built in 

2017 and 35 km in 2018 in 

the area of Kara Agropole 

a.2.3 Agricultural lands 

developed in the area of the Kara 

agropole 

0 Ha 

 
 500 ha in 2017 and 300 ha 

in 2018 of agricultural land 

developed in  the area of 

Kara Agropole, of which at 

least 30% for women's 

and/or mostly women's 

organizations 
a.2.4 Adoption by Council of 

Ministers of the National 

No industrial policy or 

agro-industry strategy  

The national 

industrialization policy and 



vii  

Industrialization Policy and  

National Agro-Industry Strategy 

the national agro-industry 

strategy are adopted in 2018 

gains and accelerating 

improved integrity of 

the public finance 

management system. 

Risk 4: 

 Weak human 

capacity to implement 

the reforms identified 

in general, and those 

related to Agropoles 

development, in 

particular. Mitigation 

measures 4: High-

level technical 

assistance to the 

Government on the 

design and 

deployment of 

Agropoles will be 

provided and financed 

by the Bank's Project 

Preparation Fund.  

 

Risk 5: Weakness of 

arrangements for co-

ordination of budget 

support 

 

 

Mitigation measures 

5 
the authorities are 

committed to 

strengthening 

arrangements for 

coordination and 

monitoring of budget 

support to make them 

more operational.  
 

 

 

 

a.2.5) Operationalization of the 

High Authority for Quality and 

technical Quality Structures  

The High Authority 

created is not 

operational 

. Director General is 

appointed and his team  set 

up 
   

B) Support for internal resources mobilization and optimal management of public 
investment 

 

B.1) Improved 

revenue 

mobilization 

 

 

 

 

b.1.1) Adoption by Council of 

Ministers of the new National 

Customs Code 

 Draft code 

 

 

Code adopted in 2017 

Code adopted in 2017 

 

SP-PRPF 

OTR 

SP-PRPF 

b.1.2) Establishment of the Fiscal 

Policy Unit by the MEF 

Draft establishment 

instrument 

Establishment in 2017 

b.1.3) Implementation of the 

Lomé tax registry 

 Study conducted The decree establishing  the 

Lomé region tax registry is 

adopted in 2017 

b.1.4) Adoption by Council of 

Ministers of the bill on the 

transfer of powers and resources 

to local and regional authorities 

Bill prepared  Bill adopted in 2017  

b.1.5) Study on gender 

mainstreaming in tax policy 

No analytical paper on 

the issue 

Study and adoption of an 

action plan for the 

implementation of 

recommendations validated 

in 2017 
b.1.6) Adoption of the national 

gender strategy in 2018 by 

Council of Ministers 

 No strategy National gender strategy 

adopted in 2018 

B.2)Enhanced 

investment 

management 

b.2.1Development of a public 

investments planning, selection 

and programming manual 

No manual or formal 

procedures 

 

Manual approved in 2017, 

PIP revised, 100% of the 

projects registered for 2018 

are validated by the 

selection committee 

 

SP-PRPF/DP 

b.2.2 Creation of Agency for 

government participation 

 

Poor performance  in the 

monitoring of investments 

Decree adopted in 2017 ; unit to 

be operational in 2018. 

b.2.3  adoption by the Minister a 

decree related on  reorganization 

and functioning of regional 

monitoring committees of 

investment project 

No coordinated 

monitoring of project 

implementation at local 

level 

 

The committees are set up 

in 2017 and 100% of 

investment projects in 

region have been supervised 

in 2018 

b.2.4) Finalization of the 

adaptation of SIGFIP to the 

technical requirements of the 

implementation of programme 

budgets (2019 Budget Policy 

Debate follows programme 

budget) 

BPD does not follow 

programme budget 

format  

Holding of the DOB in 2018 

at the National Assembly 

according to the programme 

budget format  

 

b.2.5) Deconcentration of 

financial control and duties, 

organization and functioning of 

financial control 

 

Centralized financial 

control 

Decree adopted in 2017; 

The controllers of the 5 

regions and the Ministry of 

Agriculture are appointed 

and installed in 2018 

SP-PRPF/DCF 

 

b.2.6) Conduct and regular 

publication of public procurement 

audits 

 

Audits of 2013 

conducted and 

published 

 Public Procurement Audit 

Reports 2014 and 2015 

published in 2017 

Components Funding 

Component A: Support for the promotion of Agropoles 

and strengthening of local governance 

 

AfDB : UA 9.53 million in 2017  

External financing of the funding requirement 2017 

Bank: UA 9.53 million 

IMF: SDR 50.4 million 

EU: EUR 19 million  

WB: USD 50 million 

Component B: Support for internal resources 

mobilization and optimal management of public 

investments 
 



1  

I. INTRODUCTION - THE PROPOSAL. 

1.1 Management submits the following proposal and recommendation for a grant of 

UA 7.21 million from Transition Support Facility (TSF) resources, and a grant of UA 2.32 

million from African Development Fund (ADF) resources, to the Republic of Togo to 

finance the Governance and Agribusiness Promotion Support Programme (PAGBA). 

PAGPA supports reforms aimed at creating a private and public investment environment 

conducive to agribusiness promotion, and improving revenue mobilization notably for capital 

investment purposes. It is designed as a reform operation funded by a budget support of 

total amount of UA 9.53 million to be disbursed in a single tranche in 2017. 

1.2 Single tranche disbursement, was justify by the particularity of 2017 fiscal year 

situation, which presents a high level of need for concessional financing mainly due to Togo's 

limited access to borrowing resources;  this is in accordance to the Government commitments 

under the framework of the economic program (2017-2019) supported by the IMF's Extended 

Credit Facility approved in May 2017. It also emerges from the revised budget prepared 

following the conclusion of the program with IMF, an overall need for financing gap of 280.8 

CFAF billions excluding grants, part of which will be financed by the ADF and TAF grant 

resources. On account of this financial support for Togo's budget, social sector allocations will 

be maintained, thus minimizing risks of the social climate deteriorating at this crucial 

transitional phase towards exiting fragility. With the programme spanning the November 2017 

to December 2018 period, the Bank will maintain sustained dialogue with the Togolese 

authorities for the effective implementation of the reforms scheduled for 2018. These reforms 

will be monitored in close collaboration with the IMF, World Bank and European Union whose 

programmes cover the 2017-2019 period. 

1.3 Despite the favourable outlook, Togo remains confronted with a number of socio-

economic challenges, including inadequate internal resources and an underperforming 

economy with low and non-inclusive value added creation. Despite efforts by GoT and the 

structural reforms implemented in recent years, including the creation of the OTR and the 

adoption of a new customs code, internal resources mobilization remains low compared to the 

financing requirements of the Accelerated Growth and Employment Promotion Strategy 

(SCAPE). The operationalization of the OTR, which is strongly supported by the Bank, has 

definitely yielded encouraging results, with a tax burden of 17.9% in 2016 that is expected to 

reach 18.3% in 2017 and 19.1% in 2018. However, despite this positive trend, on account of 

Togo's weak capacity to create value-added with one of Africa’s lowest GDPs, the absolute 

value of domestic revenues collected falls far short of the budget’s funding requirements. The 

average coverage rate of budgetary spending by tax revenue is about 60%, hence its heavy 

dependence on external financing and public borrowing both internally and externally. Indeed 

since 2016, Togo's debt risk is considered high with a debt ratio of 80.8% of GDP. In this regard, 

GoT has committed, under the new programme with the IMF, to lowering this rate to not more 

than 73% by 2019. 

 

 



2  

1.4 In a bid to maintain medium and long-term viability of the macro-fiscal 

framework, Togo is banking on the structural transformation of the agricultural sector 

to give sustained and inclusive impetus to accelerated economic growth. To leverage this 

sector as a prime mover of economic growth and social inclusion, the country has formulated 

and adopted an agricultural policy (2015-2030) aimed at achieving "a modern, sustainable and 

high value-added agriculture to support a strong, inclusive, competitive economy generating 

decent and stable employment by 2030". The country’s agriculture sector employs 60-70% of 

the working population and accounts for up to 38% of GDP. This sector has significant potential 

with 3.4 million hectares of arable land, of which only 45% is currently under cultivation 

yielding less than 50% of the optimum level. Furthermore, the industrial processing of 

agricultural products is in its infancy, as is the Togolese industrial sector as a whole. Over the 

last three years, the industrial sector, which is not well developed and is poorly integrated with 

the rest of the economy, contributed an average of 17.8% to GDP, with an average annual 

growth rate of 1.3%. PAGPA is a continuation of the Bank's previous PARG-II budget support 

and will allow more in-depth reforms focusing on strengthening public finance management 

and creating conditions conducive to agro-industry development. 

1.5 PAGPA is aligned with Togo's national development policies and contributes 

towards implementing the Bank's intervention strategies in Togo. PAGPA is in line with 

the national development agenda, SCAPE 2013-2017, particularly Pillar (I) "development of 

sectors with strong growth potential" and Pillar (IV) "strengthening governance". It is also 

aligned with the two pillars of the Bank's CSP (2016-2020), namely: “Development of inclusive 

growth and agribusiness competitiveness poles” and (ii) “Support for financial, sector and local 

governance”. It is also consistent with the Bank's ten-year strategy 2013-2022 and the 

Governance Action Plan (GAP II 2014-2018). More specifically, it is aimed at contributing to 

the achievement of three of the Bank's High-5s: (i) "Feed Africa", (ii) "Industrialize Africa" 

and (iii) "Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa". 

1.6 In accordance with the Bank's Policy on Budget Support Operations, this proposed 

operation is subject to consideration by the Board following the implementation of the agreed 

prior actions, which are fully consistent with the reform programme of the Government of Togo 

(GoT), designed in consultation with civil society and the country's technical and financial 

partners. 

II. COUNTRY CONTEXT 

2.1 Political Situation and Governance Context 

2.1.1 Political Situation: The 2015 presidential election which was won by the Presidential 

Party, and intensified dialogue between the ruling party and the opposition, contributed towards 

easing the political climate up to the end of the first half of 2017. This relative political stability 

has been conducive to the implementation of structural reforms for a progressive exit from the 

situation of fragility. However, the August 2017 political demonstrations, with sporadic 

violence, indicate that the dialogue during the budget support programme period could unfold 

in the context marked by tension arising from the holding of the legislative elections in 2018, 

local elections in 2019 and the presidential election in 2020. 



3  

2.1.2 Fragility Situation: Despite the progress achieved in recent years, particularly in 

economic terms, Togo remains in a fragile situation. Its average score in the Bank's and World 

Bank's Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) is 3.2 out of 6. The reconstruction 

process following the political-democratic crisis is still ongoing. The North-South ethnic and 

regional divide continues to fuel the radicalization of the divergent positions among the political 

class and recurrent social tensions. The ownershipof sustainable mechanisms of socio-political 

dialogue, that is courteous, inclusive and constructive among the political class and the elite as 

well as the strengthening of institutions, constitute major challenges that Togo will face in terms 

of political governance. Moreover, the economy’s extremely heavy dependence on the 

phosphate sub-sector (over 40% of export earnings), and on revenues from port and airport 

traffic, also constitutes a source of fragility, as do the persistent spatial socio-economic 

development and gender disparities. The new development-oriented national agricultural policy 

has the dual objective of diversifying the economy and reducing inequalities in opportunities 

between the maritime region and other regions; and between men and women, by facilitating 

women's access to land through the provisions of the new land code that is in the process of 

adoption. 

2.1.3 Governance: According to the 2016 Mo Ibrahim report on the assessment of global 

governance in Africa, Togo ranks 33rd among 54 countries evaluated with a score of 48.5 out 

of 100. Notwithstanding its poor overall ranking, Togo, with an average change of +9.7 points,  

ranks 2nd  best governance reformer over the period 2006-2015, behind Côte d'Ivoire (13.1), the 

same as Zimbabwe (+9.7) and ahead of Liberia (+8.7), and Rwanda (+8.4). It is the only country 

whose overall governance has improved steadily with progress in each of the 14 sub-categories 

of the IIAG. The 2016 report by Transparency International ranks Togo 116th  out of 176 with 

a Corruption Perception Index (CPI) of 32 against 29 in 2014, on a scale of 0 (high corruption) 

to 100 (very low corruption). 

2.2 Recent Economic Developments, Macroeconomic and Fiscal Analysis 

2.2.1 The country is characterized by limited transformation of its economy, which is 

dominated by agriculture with 47.6% of GDP, followed by services (36.2%) and industry 

(16.2%)with merely 6.4% for manufacturing. However, despite a challenging external 

environment, the Togolese authorities were able to maintain a positive trend of economic 

activity. Indeed, the GDP growth rate, which was 6.1% in 2013, remained at an average of 5.4% 

over the period 2014-2016 due to the good performance of the agriculture and infrastructure 

investment sectors. This trend is expected to continue in 2017, with a growth rate of about 5.0% 

which could reach 5.3% by 2018, due to the combined effects of fairly good rainfall and 

increased productivity arising from the agricultural sector’s transformation and the improved 

transportation system. Inflation is also contained through the stabilization of food, energy and 

transport prices. It dropped from 1.8% in 2015 to 0.9% in 2016 and is projected to be negative 

at -0.1% for 2017. An analysis conducted in 2016 by the IMF and World Bank shows that Togo 

is at high overall debt risk. 

 

 



4  

2.2.2 The country's debt risk level is deemed extremely worrying. The public debt stock 

rose sharply from 48.8% at end- 2010 to 80.8% of GDP at end- 2016, above the Community 

norm of 70%. This increase is due mainly to infrastructure investments in 2015 and 2016. 

Togo's new programme (2017-2019) under the Extended Credit Facility (ECF) with the IMF 

seeks mainly to create conditions conducive to a substantial public debt level reduction from 

80.8% of GDP in 2016 to 67.8% by 2020.1 

TOGO – Macroeconomic indicators 2013 2014 2015 2016 
2017(e) 

2018 (p) 
2019 

(p) 

GDP Growth 6,1 5,9 5,3 5,1 5,0 5,3 5,6 

 population  growth 2,8 2,8 2,8 2,6 2,6 2,6 2,6 

Real GDP growth rate per inhabitant 3,3 3,1 2,5 2,5 2,4 2,7 3,0 

Inflation 1,8% 0,2% 1,8% 0,9% -0,1% 1,2% 1,4 

Budget balance (commitment base incl. grants)  (% GDP) -4,6 -3,4 -6,3 -3,2 -2,3 -2,5 0,2 

Budget balance (cash base)  (% GDP) -5,8 -7,9 -7,8 -9,6 -4,9 -4,7 -0,7 

Current account  (% GDP) -13,9 -10,2 -11,3 -10,1 -9,0 -8,3 -7,6 

Tax burden rate (% GDP) 

 
15,9 16,2 17,4 17,9 18,3 19,1 19,3 

Source : National administrations; calculations by the authors & IMF staff report article IV May 2017 

2.2.3 The budget deficit (cash basis) deteriorated progressively over the period 2013-

2016. It reached a record 9.6% of GDP in 2016,2 against 5.8%, 7.9% and 7.8% of GDP 

respectively in 2013, 2014 and 2015. Such deterioration in the budget balance is due mainly to 

a sharp increase in the aforementioned infrastructure spendings, and high cost of commitments 

under the "pre-financing" method used by the country to finance them. This deficit is projected 

at 4.9% in 2017 and should improve slightly to 4.7% in 2018 with the discontinuation of the 

pre-financing practice at end- 2016 and the renegotiation of the terms of the related 

commitments in 2017. The external current account balance is structurally in deficit, standing 

at CFAF 142.5 billion in 2016. It could rise to CFAF -140.5 billion in 2017, representing an 

improvement of CFAF 2 billion, attributable to an increased services balance (+ CFAF 4.1 

billion) and secondary revenues (+ CFAF 1.2 billion), which is cushioned by the decrease in 

the goods trade balance (CFAF -4.0 billion). 

2.2.4 The outlook is deemed favourable. The combined effects of support for the 

modernization of agro-industry, including Agropoles and extractive industries, and the 

envisaged reforms to strengthen competition rules in the hospitality, electricity, banking and 

telecommunications sectors, should help achieve an average growth rate of 5.3% over the 

period 2017-2019. Additionally, lessons learned from the implementation of budgets (2012-

2016) and the implementation of the programme with the IMF under the Extended Credit 

Facility (2017-2019) should lead to improved budget credibility and stability. 

2.2.5 Competitiveness of the Economy    

The Togolese economy’s competitiveness is structurally constrained by low overall 

productivity and high production costs. In the report Doing Business 2018 Togo loses two 
places compared to 2017 and ranks the 156th. Similarly, although the labour force has grown 

through improved education, physical capital accumulation has stagnated since the 1990s, 

contributing to a steady decline in overall factor productivity. However, significant progress is 

                                                 
1  Togo : Staff Report for the 2016 Article IV Consultation and Request for a Three-Year Arrangement Under 

the Extended Credit Facility, May 2017 
2  Data from IMF staff report Article IV, Table1. Togo: Selected Economic and Financial Indicators, 2013 – 21, page 25, May 2017. 



5  

being made by Togo in the international transport sector, which is crucial to improving its 

competitiveness. Mention can be made of (i) the 700 km trans-Togo road, (ii) the coastal back 

road (54 km), (iii) the modernization and extension of the port of Lomé, whose capacity has 

increased from 0.5 to 2 million containers per year, and (iv) the construction of a new airport 

in line with international standards. These impactful infrastructures, as well as their 

geographical position, represent opportunities that reinforce Togo's objective of becoming, in 

the medium term, one of the best performing logistics hubs in the region, given its current 

comparative advantage in that domain. In that regard, the World Bank's 2016 report on the 

logistics performance index (published every two years) shows that Togo has climbed 47 

positions, from 139th out of 160 to 92nd, and remarkably 64 positions on the "Speed" indicator, 

measured by shipment forwarding to freight forwarder times or  expected goods to port delivery 

times. 

2.3 Public Finance Management   

2.3.1 Since 2010, the Government has had a National Finance Reform Strategy with a 

Public Finance Management Reform Plan (PA-RGFP), the implementation of which is 

considered generally satisfactory although subject to improvement. Following the PEFA and 

PEMFAR conducted in 2008-2009, which revealed Togo’s extremely weak public finance 

management system, GoT in September 2010 adopted a public finance management reform 

strategy for the period 2010-2020, with an action plan (PA-RGFP) implemented on a sliding 

triennial basis. The PEFA and PEMFAR evaluations conducted in 2016 show that Togo has 

made significant efforts to put in place budget management tools and procedures that are 

good enough to restore public finance sustainability. 

2.3.2 Regarding budget preparation, the budget nomenclature in force (former WAEMU 

1998 standards) is considered adequate to ensure budgetary transparency. The new 

nomenclature, which complies with the new WAEMU guidelines, is being finalized and should 

enter into force for the 2019 budget at the latest. The budget programming process has also 

improved considerably since PEFA 2008, with an increased focus on short- and medium-term 

financial balances in conjunction with medium-term macro-economic and budgetary 

frameworks, debt sustainability analyses and cash flow plans. PEFA 2016 also noted an 

increased involvement of Parliament in the budget debate. 

2.3.3 In terms of budget execution and control, developments are also deemed positive, 

with noted improvement in revenue collection and the means used to ensure better tax base 

control, as well as enhanced taxpayer monitoring. Additionally, the national government 

procurement system has been assessed by the Bank as overall satisfactory, with a moderate 

level of risk. Similarly, financial control has been strengthened and is governed by general 

regulations that are aligned with good practices in terms of segregation of duties in public 

finance management. The national procurement system was assessed in accordance with 

accepted transparency and competition standards. 

 

 

 



6  

2.3.4 However, despite the above-mentioned progress, there are lingering weaknesses, 

although overall fiduciary risk has been assessed as moderate (see Technical Annex 1 on 

Fiduciary Risk Assessment). Accrual accounting is yet to enter into force, and still depends 

on the effective establishment of stock accounting. Similarly, the process of setting up the 

Single Treasury Account, initiated in 2013, has made no notable progress since the State’s 

accounts census stage. Through the Resource Mobilization and institutional capacity building 

support project (PAMOCI) project, the Bank is supporting the implementation of WAEMU 

directives and the Single Treasury Account. Furthermore, the adoption of the legal framework 

governing the financial regime of local and regional authorities has been delayed; the 

completion and publication of public procurement audits are not regular, and PIMA 2016 

reports that "public investment efficiency in Togo is low" with a gap of almost 70% against 

the most efficient countries, which would represent an efficiency loss of approximately 2/3 of 

the potential impact. These weaknesses have been taken into account in the design of the 

PAGPA. At the end of the last PEFA, PEMFAR and PIMA exercises conducted in 2016, the 

PA-RGFP was updated to take into account the findings and recommendations. The 

implementation of this plan should be accelerated, with a view to improving the overall 

performance of public finance management, in particular PI-11 "Investment Management." 

2.4 Inclusive Growth, Poverty and Social Context 

2.4.1 While the social indicators have improved slightly, Togo remains in the bottom 

quintile of the Human Development Index (HDI). The net enrollment ratio (NER) in primary 

education improved overall to 94.3% by 2015. The poverty incidence declined from 61.7% in 

2006 to 55.1% in 2015, but far short of the target of 27.6% expected in 2030 (SDG 1.2) and the 

extreme poverty rate has virtually remained unchanged , moving from 28.6% in 2006 to 28.7% 

in 2015. The Gini index improved from 0.393 to 0.380 between 2011 and 2015 (ODD 10), but 

growth is not yet pro-poor. Despite the progress of the last five years, spatial and gender 

inequalities persist. In rural areas, almost 7 out of 10 Togolese are poor and the availability of 

curative care decreased from 41% in 2014 to 37.7% in 2015, and more than a third of the 

population has to travel at least 5 km to a health centre. Only 50% of women are literate 

compared to 77% of men, and 25 women per 100 men own land, with their average areas 50% 

smaller than for men (CWIQ 2015). As a result, the Human Development Index 2016 remains 

low with a score of 0.487 ranking it 166th out of 188 countries. 

III. GOVERNMENT’S DEVELOPMENT AGENDA 

3.1 Governmental development strategy and medium-term reform priorities 

3.1.1 The Accelerated Growth and Employment Promotion Strategy (SCAPE) is the single 

reference framework for interventions under the Government's development agenda for the 

medium term. In 2013, GoT adopted SCAPE for 2013-2017; it is the reference framework for 

governmental action and comprises five strategic Pillars: (i) development of sectors with high 

growth potential; (ii) strengthening economic infrastructure; (iii) development of human 

capital, social protection and employment; (iv) strengthening governance and (v) promoting 

participatory development. The National Development Programme (PND 2018 - 2022), which 

is being prepared, will replace SCAPE. The transformation of the agriculture sector into a strong 

and inclusive growth sector is at the core of the Government's priorities. Furthermore, Togo is 



7  

working to strengthen financial management by continuing, in particular, with reforms fostering 

increased tax revenues, optimal management of public investments as well as public debt 

reduction.  The proposed PAGPA supports the implementation of these reforms through its 

Component (A), which aims to create a public and private investment framework conducive to 

agribusiness promotion; and component (B) which supports reforms aimed at increasing 

internal resources and improving their predictability in order to facilitate the capital expenditure 

necessary for the agriculture sector’s development. 

3.2  Obstacles to Implementing the National/Sector Development Agenda 

3.2.1  Togo has made remarkable progress which certainly places it on the road to lasting 

resilience. These gains must be consolidated in order to firmly lay the foundations of social 

peace and sustainable and equitable development. Progress is noted in the following areas: 

strengthening of security and stability, economic recovery with average growth rates of 5% 

over a ten-year period, implementation of major institutional and economic reforms, and 

strengthening of regional cooperation. However, the persistent ethnic and regional divide could 

constitute a setback to political stability, thus posing a severe threat to social peace and to exit 

from fragility. These challenges, if not addressed speedily, could impede economic progress. 

Moreover, the effective implementation of the SCAPE is severely constrained by inadequate 

financial resources. It is indeed clear from the last review of SCAPE, ahead of the development 

of the new NDP 2018-2022, that during the period 2013-2015 a total amount of merely CFAF 

516 billion, or 68%, was mobilized for the implementation of the scheduled priority action 

programmes against a requirement of CFAF 2.228 billion. Furthermore, the unsuitability of the 

business environment also constitutes a major obstacle to the emergence of a dynamic private 

sector, capable of driving the transformation of economic activity which remains unstructured 

and over 90% dominated by the informal sector.  

3.3 Consultation and Participation Process 

3.3.1  SCAPE 2013-2017 was developed in a participatory manner to ensure a 

comprehensive consideration of the different concerns of political and socio-economic 

stakeholders countrywide. SCAPE was prepared in consultation with all central and regional 

level stakeholders (central government, local authorities, civil society, private sector, political 

parties, traditional and religious leaders, etc.). Moreover, Togo's technical and financial partners 

were involved throughout the preparatory process.  

3.3.2 The design of the proposed PAGPA benefitted from broad consultations with key 

stakeholders. In particular, detailed discussions were held with the Permanent Secretariat for 

the Monitoring of Reform Policies and Financial Programmes (SP-PRPF) the Togolese 

Revenue Authority (OTR), the budget directorate and the Ministries of Agriculture, Commerce 

and Industry, Livestock, Rural Development, Environment and Gender. These discussions were 

followed by broader consultations with civil society (ONGs and producer associations). These 

exchanges led to agreement with the authorities on the need to involve the Togolese rural 

organizations and farmers’ associations in the framework for follow up and monitoring of 

implementation of the reforms.         



8  

IV. BANK SUPPORT FOR GOVERNMENT’S STRATEGY 

4.1 Linkages with Bank's Strategy 

The reforms under PAGPA support the implementation of the Bank's Togo CSP (2016-

2020). The programme’s first component supports reforms within the framework of Pillar (I) 

of the CSP, which aims at "Development of inclusive growth and agribusiness competitiveness 

poles”, and its second component largely contributes to the implementation of the Pillar (2) 

"Support for financial sector and local governance ". The proposed PAGPA, envisaged in the 

CSP, also contributes to the implementation of the Bank's 2013-2022 ten-year strategy and the 

Governance Action Plan (GAP II 2014-2018 ); more specifically, it contributes to three of the 

Bank's High Five strategic priorities: (i) "Feed Africa"; (ii) "Industrialize Africa" through 

measures to promote agro-industry and (iii) "Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa" 

by supporting reforms aimed at improving budget management and public action effectiveness 

through strengthening economic and financial governance and the key sector of agriculture. 

4.2  Compliance with Eligibility Criteria 

Togo fulfills the pre-requisites for budget support operations, as defined in the Bank's policy 

on reform programme support operations (see Technical Annex 3). However, efforts are still 

required in terms of coordination. The budget support consultation framework (COAB) is not 

optimal; there is no joint policy matrix of budget support interventions. Additionally, delays are 

noted in the implementation of a number of public finance reforms, translating into 

unsatisfactory results in the PEFA 2016 evaluation, where 28 out of 30 indicators are rated "C" 

or "D". Similarly, PIMA 2016 assessed the management of weak-efficiency investments. 

However, in view of the consistency of the measures of institutional reform being implemented 

and the level of integration of the national framework of the public finance management (see 

technical annex 1), global fiduciary risk has been rated moderate. In addition it should be 

minimized if the reforms planned in the PAGPA and others being finalised in the different 

departments concerned were diligently implemented. Furthermore, the Government is 

determined to accelerate the implementation of the national public finance reforms plan of 

PEFA, PEMFAR and PIMA, updated at the end of the 2016 fiscal year. 

4.3 Collaboration and Coordination with other Partners 

In designing the proposed programme, the Bank met with key technical and financial partners 

(TFPs) intervening through budget support, namely the IMF, WB, and EU. The AFD and 

UNDP also participated in the discussions. The operations in progress, or under preparation for 

the period 2017-2019, are: (i) the IMF's ECF of USD 241.5 million; (ii) the WB’s reform 

programme of USD 75 million and (iii) the EU’s budget support of EUR 54 million. Although 

thus far there is no joint intervention matrix, which awaits agreement with the government on 

its orientation, all partners, including the Bank, are strongly committed to harmonizing their 

actions in terms of dialogue and monitoring reforms. The areas of intervention of the TFPs are 

presented in Technical Annex No. 10. 



9  

4.4 Linkages with other Bank Operations 

4.4.1 Bank’s Active Portfolio in Togo: The active portfolio at April 2017 consists of ten 

operations for a total net commitment of UA117 

million (USD 160 million). It comprises eight 

national operations of UA 41.7 million (USD 57 

million) or 36% of the overall envelope. It also 

includes 64% for two multinational operations of UA 

75.3 million (USD 103 million). A high 75% of the 

portfolio is financed by grants. The sector 

distribution of the portfolio indicates the 

predominance of transport infrastructure with about 

64%, followed by economic and financial governance (17%), the social sector (16%), the water 

and sanitation sector (1%) and agriculture (1%). 

4.4.2  The March 2016 Portfolio Review assessed the portfolio performance as overall 

satisfactory, with a score of 3 out of 4 according to the rating of the latest Implementation Status 

and Results Report (ISRR). The portfolio’s performance is considered satisfactory with an 

overall disbursement rate of 42%, for an average age of 2.3 years. The portfolio is fairly young, 

with 50% of the projects approved between 2015 and 2016. The key challenges concern the 

mobilization of the national counterpart funds (particularly for transport projects) and the 

administrative red tape for disbursement and procurement. Special attention should be paid to 

the release of the national counterpart funds for the Togo-Burkina road rehabilitation and 

transport facilitation project, which is scheduled to close at end- 2017. The government will 

also take steps to accelerate the construction of the Togo-Benin juxtaposed checkpoint financed 

by the Lomé-Cotonou road rehabilitation project and transport facilitation on the Abidjan-

Lagos Corridor, Phase 1. 

4.4.3 Complementarity with Previous Operations: PAGPA is a continuation of the Bank's 

previous PARG-II budget support through the strengthening of public finance management and 

improvement of the business environment (see technical annex 7 on the achievements of 

PARGII). The implementation of the first component reforms will create the appropriate legal 

and institutional framework for the investment project under preparation by the department in 

charge of agriculture in the Bank, aimed at establishment of the Kara Agropole. The 

presentation this project to the Board is scheduled for December 2017. Furthermore, the second 

component reforms will benefit particularly from the capacity building activities under PAGFI 

(2016-2020), which is institutional support for the modernization of the OTR for optimized 

revenue collection. Additionally, the programme budget and the deconcentration of payment 

authorization and financial control will be further facilitated as the Integrated Public Finance 

Management System (SIGFIP) will be fully deployed and adapted to the new the new budget 

framework. The technical assistance and equipment needs for its deployment are fully covered 

by PAMOCI (2015-2018). Lastly, PAGPA is in complete synergy with the project to support 

markets reconstruction and traders in Kara and Lomé (2014-2018); the project to support youth 

employability and integration (2015-2020) and the project to support the financial inclusion of 

vulnerable women (PAIFFV 2016-2018). 

Water & 
sanitation

1%

Agric
1%

Gov
17%

Social
16%

Finance
1%

Transport
64%



10  

4.4.4 Lessons Learned from Previous Operations:The completion reports for PARCI I and 

II, and PARG II, indicate the following lessons: (i) the match between the scope of the reform 

programmes and the implementation capabilities of the structures involved; and (ii) the need to 

underpin reform programmes with institutional support. These lessons are taken into account 

in the design of PAGPA. The programme focuses on a limited number of reforms, but is 

strategic and aligned with the national objectives of the SCAPE. Furthermore, the programme 

will be supported by capacity building projects (PAMOCI and PAGFI), and the monitoring and 

evaluation mechanism will involve civil society in periodic reviews.  

4.4.5 Analyses Underlying the Operation: Analyses conducted by GoT, the Bank and other 

technical and financial partners (TFPs) served as the basis for the preparation of the budget 

support programme. The foremost among them are: (i) Public Expenditure Management and 

Financial Accountability Review (2016 PIMA, PEFA and PEMFAR), at the end of which the 

PA-RGFP action plan was updated; (ii) the WB's 2018 Doing Business report; (iii) the IMF's 

Article IV consultations report in November 2016; and (iv) the report of the Dutch Consultancy 

Kadaster on the reform of the Directorate of State Land and Cadastral Affairs (DADC). The 

main recommendations of these studies concern (i) strengthening budget credibility and 

accelerating the fiscal transition, (ii) improving land management, and (iii) the need for 

economic transformation to drive strong and more inclusive growth. 

V. THE  ENVISAGED PROGRAMME  

5.1 Programme Goal and Objective  

5.1.1 The programme’s principal objective is to contribute towards creating conditions 

conducive to inclusive economic growth. Its specific objectives are to support the development 

of an investment climate conducive to agribusiness development in a context of improved 

internal resource mobilization capacity to support the required public investment. The 

programme addresses Togo’s major persistent challenges in terms of exiting fragility and 

reducing its vulnerability to social crises. Furthermore, the programme will extend the Bank's 

interventions to reforms geared towards gender mainstreaming in government actions, 

particularly in the agriculture sector. 

5.1.2 The programme comprises two components: A) Support for improved private 

investment environment and agribusiness promotion: this component supports implementing 

reform measures aimed at setting up efficient mechanisms and a business environment 

conducive to agribusiness development; (B) Support for enhanced internal resource 

mobilization and optimization of public investment management: This component aims to 

strengthen the mobilization of internal resources, and streamline the management of public 

investments, in order to offset the agricultural sector’s infrastructure deficit and attract more 

private investors to agribusiness. 

 



11  

5.2 Component A: Support for improved private investment environment and 

agribusiness promotion 

Sub-component A.1: Improving the private investment environment 

5.2.1 Context, Constraints & Challenges. The private sector’s contribution to the national 

economy remains relatively low. It contributes merely15% to GDP and remains dominated by 

the informal sector. The formal industrial private sector contributes only 4 to 6% to GDP, which 

is well below the country’s potential. The agricultural sector offers the greatest potential in 

terms of job and wealth creation. However, formal private sector investment is undermined by 

the constraints of this sector. The main constraints on private sector development, particularly 

in  agribusiness, include: (i) predominance of the informal sector; (ii) lack of competitiveness 

due to the high cost of inputs (water, energy, transport, the Internet, etc.); tax policy not aligned 

with private sector development, in particular the need to create more synergy between the 

Investment Code incentives and the Free Zone regime; (iii) insecurity of land tenure; (iv) a 

dispersed institutional framework based on a multitude of entities dedicated to the same 

investment promotion functions (Togo's Presidential Investment Council, Togo-Invest, 

Ministry of Trade, Ministry of Industry, Investment Promotion Agency and non-operational 

free zones, etc.); (v) limited capacity of management structures to support SME/SMI enterprises 

in developing business plans for access to markets and technology; (vi) mismatch between 

training and employment in relation to the actual needs of the Private Sector; and (vii) 

inadequacy of the regulatory framework for management of Public-Private Partnership (PPP) 

Contracts (the revision of framework and establishment of the PPP Unit is envisaged after the 

adoption of the pertinent UEMOA directives). 

5.2.2  Government’s Achievements & Strategies: In response to these constraints, the 

Government of Togo has adopted national and sector strategy papers focusing on the private 

sector as the prime mover of economic growth, jobs and wealth creation. The establishment of 

structures, such as the One-Stop Shop and the Presidential Council for Investment in Togo 

(CPIT), which is a framework for dialogue between the Government and the Private Sector at 

the highest level, has been beneficial. The CPIT helped identify the major constraints on the 

Togolese Private Sector’s attractiveness and competitiveness, and made recommendations that 

enabled the country to climb from 164th to 149th position, moving up 15 places in one year in 

the Doing Business 2015 ranking. But this ranking has deteriorated in successive reports by 

2016, 2017 and 2018 with respective ranks of 154th and 156ieme on 190 ranked economies. 

However, the country has made progress compared to the year 2016, notably in the following 

areas: Starting a business (+7 points); Getting electricity (+1 point); Trading across borders 

(+10 points); and Resolving insolvency (+3 points). Togo must not only consolidate the above 

gains by pursuing structural reforms, but also make efforts to improve its ranking in the 

following areas: lengthy timeframes for: (i) ownership transfer (283 days against an average of 

60 days in WAEMU) and (ii) obtaining a building permit (163 days against 156 days in the 

WAEMU), and the multiplicity of taxes paid per year (49 against an average of 39 in the 

WAEMU). Furthermore, the government has established DOSI. This structure, supported by 

the bank under PAMOCI, is aimed at supporting informal sector operators to gradually 

formalize their activities. The government has also supported the setting up of recognized 

management centres in line with the directive of UEMOA. In addition, the government is 



12  

committed, under the FMI programme and the World Bank operation under preparation, to 

implement structural measures to improve the competitiveness of the sectors of energy and 

telecommunications with a view to reducing production costs.    

5.2.3  Reforms envisaged: Creating a business environment conducive to private sector 

development in Togo requires removing the above constraints through administrative and 

institutional reforms. These include: (i) updating the Investment Code to attract foreign and 

domestic investment and strengthen it, with a view to employment creation under SCAPE; (ii) 

operationalizing the Investment and Free Zone Promotion Agency by appointing the Director 

General and his team; (iii) adopting a National Strategy; (iv) adoption of a new tax code aimed 

at simplifying the tax structure and procedures; and (v) the creation of a Business Climate Unit 

dedicated to strengthened monitoring and improvement of indicators of performance relating 

to the business environment. 

Sub-component A.2: Strengthening the legal and institutional framework for agribusiness 

development  

5.2.4 Context and Challenges: Since the 1960s, the State of Togo has demonstrated its 

willingness to promote the industrial sector, through the transformation of a substantial part of 

agricultural and mineral commodities successively through a State model based on imports 

substitution until the late 1980s and then through liberalization policies granting the private 

sector an increased role. Despite these efforts, it is clear that the industrial sector remains poorly 

developed and weakly integrated with the rest of the economy. Embryonic and sparse, Togo’s 

industrial fabric comprises around ten large companies, a hundred medium-sized industries and 

a relatively large number of very small industrial units. The industrial sector's contribution to 

GDP over the last three years averaged 17.8%, with an average growth of 1.3% per year. Togo 

has opted for the transformation of the agricultural sector as the basis for the structural 

transformation of its economy. Togo’s agricultural sector employs 60-70% of the working 

population and accounts for 38% of GDP. This sector has significant potential, with 3.4 million 

hectares of arable land, of which, only 45% are currently under cultivation with low yields of 

below 50% of the optimum level. It is characterized by a very low level of mechanization and 

professional expertise, with 89% of the cultivated land sown manually (hoes and machetes). To 

leverage this sector as an engine of economic growth and social inclusion, the country has 

formulated and adopted an agricultural policy (2015-2030) aimed at achieving "modern, 

sustainable and high value-added agriculture ". The promotion of agro-industry and Agropoles 

is pivotal in this policy, which will enable the creation of integrated development zones around 

agricultural activity in order to support the promotion of industrial and services clusters and 

stimulate growth. The Agropoles pilot programme covers three of the country’s five regions 

that have been selected on the basis of their comparative advantages, as well as inclusion and 

poverty reduction criteria. The priority target products are rice, soybean, cashew nuts and 

sesame, sorghum, millet, maize and livestock. The objective is to enhance food security through 

import-substitution and exporting surpluses in the regional markets of WAEMU and 

ECOWAS, given Togo's age-old trade tradition, the opportunities offered by its geographical 

position and the expected increase in regional demand due to population growth, urbanization, 

income growth and diet diversification. 



13  

5.2.5 Major constraints on the promotion of Agropoles and agro-industry in Togo are: (i) 

lack of industrial policy and lack of serviced industrial sites; (ii) weak integration of the 

industrial sector with other sectors of the economy in general and the agricultural sector in 

particular, due mainly to supply difficulties and the lack of organization of the sectors; (iii) 

inadequacy of quality infrastructure and production support that hamper the development of the 

industrial fabric and agribusiness in particular; (iii) weak competitiveness of industrial 

products, due notably to the high cost of production factors (energy, transport, communications, 

etc.), non-conformity of industrial products with international standards, unfair competition 

from some industrial products imported fraudulently, and absence of legal instruments and an 

institutional quality control system for consumer products marketing in Togo; (v) credit access 

difficulties, notably for the agricultural sector which represents on average 1-2% of the bank’s 

portfolio, due particularly to the poor organization and professionalization of agricultural value 

chains and land tenure insecurity, especially for women; (vi) weaknesses in the institutional 

framework for industrial support, due mainly to strategic, organizational and institutional 

weaknesses at the level of the Ministry of Industry and industrial support services3; (vii) lack 

of accredited laboratories and inspection bodies capable of carrying out physical/chemical and 

microbiological analyses of industrial and agro-industrial products, testing and calibration in 

metrology and certifications to international standards for local marketing and export; (viii) 

territorial imbalance between the maritime region, which hosts nearly all the industrial units, 

and the country’s other regions which are agriculture-oriented and under-industrialized due 

mainly to the lack of appropriate infrastructure.      

5.2.6 Government’s Achievements & Strategies: In response to these constraints, the 

Government of Togo has adopted a number of reforms with special focus on industrial 

development. These include the Framework Law of 12 August 2009 on the organization of the 

national harmonization scheme for standardization, accreditation, certification, metrology, 

environment and promotion of quality in Togo; Decree of 27 December 2013 issued pursuant 

to Law No. 2011-018 of 24 June 2011 on the status of the industrial free zone; Law of 20 

January 2012 on the Investment Code in the Togolese Republic; Decree of 27 December 2013 

issued pursuant to Law No. 2012-001 of 20 January 2012 on the Investment Code in the 

Togolese Republic; Decree of 27 December 2013 on the allocation, organization and operation 

of the National Agency for the Promotion of Investments and the Free Zone and the Accelerated 

Growth and Employment Promotion Strategy (SCAPE) 2013-2017, under which industrial 

development and the transformation of agriculture are major pillars. More recently in 2016, the 

Agricultural Policy, together with the Strategic Plan for the Transformation of Agriculture in 

Togo by 2030, was also adopted.  

5.2.7 Several measures have also been implemented with a view to facilitating access to 

financing, in particular the creation of the National Agency for the Promotion and Guarantee 

of Financing of SMEs and SMIs (ANPGF). Additionally, the WAEMU Directive on public 

procurement and the delegation of services was made internal in 2014. This instrument, which 

did not take into account partnership contracts, nevertheless provided for the development of a 

PPP strategy and the setting up of a PPP management unit. These two reforms are suspended 

                                                 
3  In particular the quality management infrastructure: Metrology-Standards-Quality Control (MSQC) 

 



14  

pending a new institutional framework by WAEMU, which more clearly separates delegation 

and partnership contracts, on the one hand, from public procurement, on the other. Lastly, the 

finalization of the National Industrialization Policy is underway and will be followed by an 

Industrialization Strategy, which will be prepared in collaboration with the Bank and UNIDO. 

To this end, the authorities sent a request for technical assistance to the Bank aimed at making 

Togo a pilot experiment for the implementation of the strategic pillar relating to the 

industrialization of Africa. 

5.2.8 Reforms envisaged: Accelerating industrial development in Togo requires 

implementing a number of reforms aimed at removing the above constraints, particularly 

through measures such as: (i) adoption of a National Industrialization Policy; (ii) 

operationalization of the High Authority for Quality and Technical Quality Structures (the Fund 

and the Agencies) through the appointment of the Director General and his team and the 

allocation of the necessary resources for its start up in the 2018 budget; (iii) the adoption of a 

National Agropoles Strategy; (iv) adoption of instruments governing the national Agropoles 

development structure; (v) adoption of a new Land Code governing the land registry which 

would foster agribusiness development and loan access. 

5.2.9 The main expected outcomes of Component A are: (i) improving the agricultural trade 

balance deficit, (ii) strengthening Togo's resilience to fragility factors related to spatial and 

gender inequalities; (iii) improving the competitiveness of the agricultural sector; (iv) securing 

land for the development of agribusiness and facilitating access to financing; and (v) improving 

the business environment for domestic and foreign private investment. 

5.2.10 Component B: Support for internal resources mobilization and optimal 

management of public investments: 

Sub-component B.1: Improved Revenue Mobilization 

5.2.11 Context Constraints and Challenges: Togo has committed, under the programme with 

the IMF, to substantially reducing the level of public debt by prohibiting any new external non-

concessional loan and by capping the volume of concessional commitments. Against this 

backdrop, and faced with the urgent need to pursue investment spending that is crucial to 

achieving the development objectives of SCAPE, maximizing internal resources mobilization 

in the short term is essential as the main factor for macroeconomic stability and the 

sustainability of the budget framework. The establishment of the OTR in 2014, coupled with 

the modernization and extension of the Lome Port Authority, has definitely helped to enhance 

Togo’s revenue mobilization capabilities. The ratio of tax revenues (cash basis) to GDP 

increased from 15.9% in 2013 to 17.9% in 2016 and could reach 19% in 2018, nearly the 20% 

WAEMU standard. However, recent economic developments in the sub-region have 

highlighted the great sensitivity of OTR's performance to customs duties; with OTR’s, results 

for 2016 falling below target for the first time. This underperformance, though minimal (-1.1%), 

is mainly due to the sluggish economic conditions in the country's key trading partners (Nigeria, 

Ghana). In this regard, the major challenge for the country is to optimize domestic taxation by 

broadening the tax base through the exploitation of the land niche in particular. Additionally, 

simplification of customs and tax procedures should be pursued to attract private investment 

and accelerate added value creation. 



15  

5.2.12 Government’s Achievements & Strategies: In response to the challenge of improving 

internal revenue mobilization, the Government, with the Bank's support, initiated structural 

reforms that culminated in the establishment in 2012 of the Togolese revenue authority (OTR), 

which incorporates the two State financial administrations (taxes and customs) into a single 

entity with administrative and financial management autonomy. The operationalization of the 

OTR has enabled Togo to increase its budgetary revenues substantially; they increased from 

CFAF 403.6 billion in 2013 to 568.5 billion in 2016, representing a 40.8% rise. The average 

growth rate of tax revenues over the period 2013-2016 is 12.7%. Furthermore, the country 

adopted a new Customs Code which entered into force in 2014 (Law No. 2014 - 003 of 28 April 

2014) replacing the old instrument dating from 1966. A new revision of the Customs Code is 

underway to, among other things, further clarify the division of powers and responsibilities 

between the OTR and the Ministry in charge of finance and fiscal policy. In addition, the draft 

text of the new Customs Code will take into account recent developments in international trade 

regarding trade facilitation and improved customs procedures. Similarly, the GoT initiated the 

revision of the tax code with a view to simplifying the tax system to make it more attractive to 

investors and also more accessible to tax administration and taxpayers. Lastly, the GoT in 2016 

committed to a feasibility study for the establishment of a tax registry for an optimized property 

tax base. 

5.2.13 Reforms Envisaged: To accelerate enhanced internal resources mobilization, PAGPA 

will support the adoption by the Council of Ministers of the: (i) Lomé Tax Registry Decree, (ii) 

new national Customs Code; (iii) decree establishing the fiscal policy unit by the MEF; and (iv) 

bill on the transfer of powers and resources to local and regional authorities. 

Sub-component B.2: Strengthening Public Investment Management 

5.2.14 Context, Constraints and Challenges: Investment management was assessed as very 

unsatisfactory by the PIMA, PEFA and PEMFAR exercises conducted in 2016. The PIMA 

report shows that "public investment efficiency in Togo is low" with a nearly 70% gap 

compared to the best performing countries. This represents a loss of approximately 2/3 of the 

effectiveness of the potential impact. The Public Investment Program (PIP) is not aligned with 

the budget. An absolute gap of 15% between the 2016 PIP component and the draft budget for 

2016 transmitted to Parliament was noted. Inadequacies have been identified at all levels of the 

process (multi-year programming, ex ante evaluation, project selection, public procurement 

performance monitoring, and availability of investment credits). PEMFAR4 noted the absence 

of "national guidelines defining the principles and conditions for the economic and financial 

evaluation of projects". Economic evaluations of cost-benefit and cost-effectiveness are not 

always conducted, and whenever this is done no review mechanism for results review by an 

independent structure of the contracting authority is in place. Additionally, project recurrent 

costs are poorly estimated and only the operating costs of a project as an administrative unit are 

included in the budget. This partly accounts for the shortcomings noted in the public 

investments monitoring with irregular implementation monitoring activities and incomplete or 

non-existent data bases on physical and financial implementation of investments. The 

investment management situation in Togo deteriorated further with the so-called "pre-

                                                 
4  PEMFAR 2017 Report 



16  

financing"5 practice that the GoT applied between 2011 and 2016. Under this mechanism, 

besides the shortcomings of the basic financial package, pre-financing agreements were 

concluded and executed outside the public expenditure circuit and to the total exclusion of the 

internal control and external audit bodies. State reimbursements to banks thus faced high risks 

of fictitious progress payment claims and/or poor quality work. Lastly, investment management 

and, in general, the implementation of public policies in Togo are also handicapped by the lack 

of programme budgets, weak results-based budgeting practices and the centralization of 

financial control. PEMFAR 2016 noted that "in Togo, the centralization of authorizing officer 

and financial controller functions are veritable sources of delays and inefficiency in the 

expenditure circuit". Indeed, having no local or regional delegations, all vote holders in local 

authorities must travel to Lomé to submit their commitment and validation files. 

5.2.15 Government’s Achievements & Strategies: As part of its IMF- backed programme, 

the government stopped the pre-financing practice in the latter half of 2016. The government 

also pledged not to undertake new pre-financed investments, to validate all existing pre-

financed investments and to include pre-financing debt in the outstanding public debt. The 

authorities have also decided to follow in future the budgetary and procurement procedures for 

all new public investments. Besides the effective abandonment of pre-financing, it is crucial to 

establish an efficient investment management system, systematize programme budgets and 

decentralize financial control speedily in order to ensure an optimal framework for future 

investments, notably those required for the implementation of the national Agropoles 

development strategy. 

5.2.16 Reforms envisaged: PAGPA will support (i) the development of a public investments 

planning, selection and programming manual; (ii) adoption of the ministerial order on the 

framework for regional monitoring of investment projects execution; (iii) finalization of the 

adaptation of SIGFIP to the technical requirements for the implementation of programme 

budgets; (iv) adoption by the Council of the Ministers of the decree on the deconcentration of 

financial control and powers, organization and functioning of financial control; (v) publication 

of the 2014 and 2015 public procurement audit reports; and (vi) the creation of Unit for 

government participation with a view to strengthening the monitoring of public investments 

and the management of state assets. 

5.2.17 The main results of Component B are: (i) sustained revenue growth, (ii) improved 

PIP implementation rate; (iii) improved local fiscal governance; and (iv) enhanced financial 

and technical capabilities of local and regional authorities. 

5.3   Policy Dialogue 

5.3.1 PAGPA will strengthen dialogue with the Government and consultation with other 

TFPs, mainly in the following areas: (i) internal resources mobilization, where discussions will 

focus on the need to broaden the tax base; and (ii) transformation of the Togolese economy with 

special focus on the conditions for effective implementation of the agricultural policy. In this 

regard, and relying on its country office, the Bank will continue support for improved land 

                                                 
5  PEMFAR 2017 Report: This mechanism consists in awarding a public contract to one or more contractors to carry out a public investment. 

Successful bidders are financed by commercial banks to perform the work with guarantees from the Togolese State. The State in its 

capacity as contracting authority reimburses the former as and when the works/services are performed, in principle after acceptance of 

progress payment claims submitted by the operators. 



17  

management in order to speed up the establishment of a reliable registry to secure land tenure, 

a prerequisite for attracting private investors. In addition, PAGPA will enable the Bank to raise 

the level of dialogue with Togo on issues of gender promotion and civil society’s participatory 

role. Lastly, ongoing discussions will be continued with the Togolese government towards 

operationalizing the joint framework for the monitoring and evaluation of the performance of 

budget support and reform program. 

5.4 Grant Conditions  
 

Table 2. PAGPA Preliminary Measures 

 

5.5 Application of Good Practice Principles on Conditionality 

In accordance with the 14 March 2012 Bank policy on budget support operations, the design of 

the proposed PAGPA applied good practice principles on conditionalities. Eight conditions 

precedent have been agreed with the Country and these are in line with the country's priorities. 

They are drawn from national reform documents, in this case the agricultural policy and PR-

GFP. The programme’s Pillars and the results-based logical framework were discussed, and 

agreed, with the Government and all stakeholders, including other TFPs and civil society. The 

disbursement schedule is aligned with the budget cycle. 

5.6 Financing Requirements and Terms 

The macroeconomic framework was updated as part of the supplementary budget approved by 

the Cabinet in November 2017 in order to take into account the commitments made under the 

IMF program which aims to reduce Togo's indebtedness risk. This revised budget 2017 projects 

a level of revenues (excluding grants) of CFAF 560.4 billion against expenditures of CFAF 

841.23 billion (including arrears payments). The resulting financing gap of CFAF 280.83 

billion is entirely covered by internal financing and external resources from technical and 

financial partners including the Bank.  

Preliminary Measures 

General Prerequisite – Maintaining a stable macroeconomic  framework, as reflected by IMF reports or evaluations 

Component A – Support for  Agribusiness Promotion  
Component B –  Support for Internal Resources Mobilization and Optimal 

Management of Public Investment 

 

Action 1: Adoption by the Council of Ministers of the 

National Agropoles Development Strategy 

Evidence 1: Decree of adoption by the Council of 

Ministers of the National Strategy for Agropoles 
Development Strategy  

Action4: Establishment of the Tax Policy Unit. 

Evidence 4: MEF Order establishing the Tax Policy Unit  

Action 2 : Creation of the Business Climate Unit   

Evidence 2 : Decree adopted by the Council of Ministers  

Action 5: Adoption of the new national Customs Code 

Evidence 5: Release of adoption by the Council of Ministers of the bill on the new 

customs code.  

Action 3: Adoption of the National Private Sector 

Development Strategy, 

Evidence 3: Decree of adoption by the Council of 

Ministers of the national private sector development 

strategy 

Action 6: Deconcentration of financial control, powers, organization and functioning 

of financial control 

Evidence 6: Decree of the Council of Ministers on the deconcentration of financial 

control, powers, organization and functioning of financial control 

 Action 7 : Creation  of Agency for government participation 

Evidence 7 : Decree of adoption by the Council of Ministers of the creation of Agency for 
government participation  



18  

Table 3 – Estimated Financial Requirements and Sources in CFAF Bln 

  Rubriques 2017 (Bln CFAF) 

 

A Total revenues and grants 707,1 

                   Of which : tax revenues 503 

B                 Of which : grant 146,7 

C Total net expenditures and loans  771,23 

   Of which: interest payments  58,7 

   Of which :capital expenditures 313,5 

D Overall balance (base settlement excl. grants) (A -B-C) -210,83 

E Accumulation of arrears -70 

F Overall balance (cash basis) ( D+E) -280,83 

G External financing net (less Bank contribution ) 259,78 

H Bank contribution  7,95 

I Internal financing (net) 13,1 

J Financing (F + G+H) 280,83 

K Financing gap  (J+F)  0 

 Source: Ministry of Finance and Economy – Report’s Authors 

 

5.7 Application of Bank Group Policy on Non-Concessional Debts Accumulation 

The proposed PAGPA is financed by a grant and thus not governed by the Bank Group Policy 

on non-concessional debt accumulation. 

 

VI. IMPLEMENTATION  

6.1 Programme Beneficiaries 

The direct beneficiary of the programme is the Ministry of economy and finance through 

the financing of the national budget. In an indirect way the program will benefit to the 

whole Togolese population. PAGPA will help lay the groundwork for a structural 

transformation of the local economy and regions around major Agropole projects, as a source 

of resilience to address fragility concerns in the rural areas (about 62% of Togolese population) 

and on the outskirts of Lomé and the regional capitals. In particular, the development of the 

Agropole in the Kara region should enable the creation of 2,500 jobs by 2020, of which 30% 

for women and 65% for youth, an electricity access rate of 43% (against 16% in 2015) and 55% 

access to drinking water (against 25% in 2015). 

6.2 Impact on Gender, the Poor and Vulnerable Groups 

Despite the progress made over the past five years, gender discrimination persists. In 2011, 

Togo adopted a National Policy on Gender Equity and Equality. In 2014, the Code of Persons 

and Family was also revised, thus enabling legislation on major discriminations that existed in 

marriage and inheritance. In particular, Article 99, which provided that "The man shall be the 

family head" has become "The family shall be run by the spouses". However, in the absence of 

a clear intervention strategy, exclusionary practices identified in the National Policy remain 

topical, including difficulty of access to farmland for women. In addition to the family code, 

PAGPA will support the adoption of the law on gender parity in elective and appointive 

positions, the effectiveness of which will do more to further raise the required awareness among 

opinion leaders. Moreover, the programme will support a study to explore equitable gender 

mainstreaming in tax policy without altering the impersonal nature of taxation. The 

recommendations of this study will form an integral part of the national gender strategy also 

supported by the programme. 



19  

6.3 Impact on the Environment and Climate Change  

PAGPA is classified as Category III in accordance with the Bank's environmental and 

social impact assessment procedures. PAGPA has no negative environmental impact. 

However, the country is faced with the adverse effects of climate change and environmental 

challenges, particularly in the agricultural, forestry, energy, mining and water resources sectors 

and in coastal zone management. The GoT demonstrates a strong commitment to providing 

lasting solutions to the environmental degradation problems and considering climate change in 

public policy. Since 29 December 1998, Togo has adopted its National Environment Policy in 

accordance with international environmental agreements (the Vienna Convention and the 

Montreal Protocol, the Rio Conventions and their respective Protocols, Rotterdam Convention, 

Stockholm Convention)6. Furthermore, SCAPE 2013-2017 lays special emphasis on the 

environment and community resilience to climate change, with the intensification of actions 

provided for under initiatives such as: (i) National Adaptation Plan (PANA); (ii) National 

Programme for Reduced Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD + 2010-

2050); (iii) National Action Plan for the Management of Marine and Coastal Environmental 

Resources; and (iv) Environmental Management Capacity Building Programme (PRCGE). 

6.4 Macroeconomic Impacts 

The proposed PAGPA will contribute to macroeconomic stability by improving the agricultural 

sector’s performance and reducing the trade deficit. Furthermore, according to a study by the 

Dutch firm Kadaster on the reform of State lands and Cadastral Affairs Directorate (DADC), 

the potential yield of property tax (Land Taxes on built-on estates, land ownership registration 

duties) at the national level, based on a computerized cadastre on only the 400 000 plots already 

identified, would be over CFAF 100 billion against CFAF 1.4 billion of revenue collected in 

2016. PAGPA would help generate the budgetary resources required to make impactful 

investments, notably those needed for the Agropoles, which represent sources of new business 

and employment opportunities. 

 

6.5 Implementation, Monitoring and Evaluation 

The Programme’s executing agency is the Permanent Secretariat for the Monitoring of Reform 

Policies and Financial Programmes (SP-PRPF) within the Ministry of Economy and Finance. 

The implementation of PAGPA will be monitored through semi-annual and annual 

implementation reports, prepared by the SP-PRPF on the basis of a joint review with the 

programme’s participating structures as well as members of civil society, in particular the 

Coordination of Togolese farmer organizations and agricultural producers. The Togolese 

authorities will also transmit to the Bank the compliance report on the 2017 budget review law 

no later than 31 December 2018, drawn up by the Audit Court. The Bank will monitor the 

Programme in coordination with the group of TFPs acting through budgetary support. The Bank 

will undertake at least two programme supervision missions per year, and ensure that it interacts 

with all Programme stakeholders, including civil society. 

 

                                                 
6  CSP 2016-2020 
 



20  

6.6 Financial Management and Disbursement 

 

6.6.1 Disbursement: The resources of the proposed operation comprise as follows:  

 An amount of UA 2.32 million (ADF) that will be disbursed in a single instalment in 2017, 

upon entry into force of the ADF Grant Agreement between the Republic of Togo and the 

African Development Fund and the fulfillment of the conditions precedent set out for the 

disbursement in section 7.2.3 below; and 

 An amount of UA 7.21 million, from the Transitional States Facility (TSF), that will be 

disbursed in a single instalment in 2017, upon entry into force of the TSF Grant Agreement 

between the Republic of Togo, African Development Fund and African Development Bank 

and the fulfillment of the conditions precedent set out for the disbursement in section 7.2.3 

below. 

 

6.6.2 Financial Management and Audit: The assessment of the fiduciary framework of the 

public finance management system shows moderate fiduciary risks (see technical annex 1). In 

accordance with the fiduciary strategy for the CSP 2016-2020 period, PAGPA will be entirely 

managed within the national public finance management system. The effective payment of 

budget support resources into the State budget will be monitored through the Audit Court’s 

General Compliance Report on fiscal 2017, which will be transmitted to the Bank and the 

National Assembly of Togo at the same time. In addition, the Audit Court will audit the 

financial flows of the Special Account opened in the name of the Treasury and intended for the 

deposit of the grant resources. This report must be sent to the Bank no later than 3 months after 

the disbursement. 

 

6.6.3 Goods and Services Procurement: The grant will be in the form of general budget 

support. Accordingly, its implementation does not directly entail any goods and services 

procurement issues. It is clear from the fiduciary risk assessment that the legal and institutional 

framework for public procurement in Togo is overall operational, and that public procurement 

is conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Public Procurement Code. However, some 

shortcomings are noted, particularly, the regular absence of: (i) annual audit reports; (ii) post-

auditing of contracts below the review threshold of the National Procurement Audit Department 

(DNCMP); and (iii) capacity constraints of the contracting authorities. The reform measures 

identified under the proposed PAGPA, and the political dialogue on the continued need to 

improve the procurement system, will help address these shortcomings. Furthermore, the 

revision of the public procurement code and its implementing instruments initiated since 2011 

is being finalized, and should lead to the adoption before end- 2017 of a new legislative and 

regulatory framework. 

 

 



21  

VII. LEGAL FRAMEWORK 

7.1 Legal Instrument 

The Programme will be financed through two Grant Agreements between the African 

Development Fund (ADF) and the Togolese Republic, for the ADF grant and the African 

Development Fund, the African Development Bank and the Togolese Republic for the TSF 

grant. 

7.2 Conditions related to the Bank’s Intervention 

7.2.1 Conditions precedent to the entry into force of the Grant Agreement: The entry into 

force of the Grant Agreements is conditional upon signature (i) by African Development Fund and the 

Republic of Togo of the ADF grant, and (ii) by African Development Fund, African Development Bank 

and the Republic of Togo of the TSF grant.  

7.2.2 Conditions Precedent to Board Presentation of the Programme: Presentation of the 
Programme to the Board of Directors of the Fund shall be subject to evidence, provided by the 

Republic of Togo, of the implementation of all preliminary measures agreed with the Fund as 

specified in Table 2 in para: 5.4. 

7.2.3 Conditions Precedent to Disbursement: The disbursement of the resources of the grants 
is conditional upon realisation, by the Republic of Togo, to the satisfaction of ADF, of the following 

condition: Submit to the Bank the details of the Treasury bank account into which the resources of  the grant will 
be deposited 

7.3 Compliance with Bank Group Policies 

The proposed PAGPA is in line with the Bank Group policies and guidelines on reform support 

operations (2012). 
 

 

 

Table 4 – Risks and Mitigation Measures 
 

Risks 
Significanc

e of risk 
Mitigation Measures 

Political instability related to demands 
for Presidential term limits 

Substantial The government is committed to revising the constitution to limit presidential terms 
to two mandates.  Dialogue on this issue is ongoing with political parties. 

Macroeconomic instability due to 

the country's economic 
vulnerability to exogenous shocks 

Moderate The Government is committed to strengthening the country's resilience by 

implementing a genuine policy of structural transformation of the economy 
and pursuing the reforms agreed with the IMF and other partners. 

Fiduciary risks due to weaknesses 

in the public finance management 

system 

Moderate The effective implementation of the PA-GFP and the measures provided for 

under PAGPA I will contribute towards consolidating the gains and 

accelerating the improvement of the integrity of the public finance 
management system. 

Weak human capacities to 

implement the reforms identified in 

general, and those linked to the 
development of Agropoles, in 

particular 

Moderate High-level technical assistance to the Government on the design and 

deployment of the Agropoles will be established and financed by the Bank's 

project preparation fund. Other institutional and technical assistance funded 
by the Bank and other technical and financial partners is aimed at enhancing 

public administration capacity both at central and decentralized levels. 
Weakness of the budget support 
coordination mechanism 

Moderate The authorities have undertaken to strengthen the institutional arrangements 
for coordinating and monitoring budget support for make it more operational 

 

IX. RECOMMENDATION 

 

In light of the foregoing, it is recommended that the Boards of Directors approve a TSF grant 

not exceeding UA 7.21 million and an ADF grant not exceeding UA 2.32 million for the Republic of 

Togo, to finance the governance and agribusiness promotion support programme (PAGPA) in 

accordance with the conditions set forth in this report.
















































 

 

 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 

 
 

 

PROJECT TO DEVELOP AND PROMOTE AGRICULTURAL 

SUBSECTORS IN ZAGHOUAN GOVERNORATE - (PDPFA-GZ) 

P-TN-A00-009 

 

COUNTRY:  TUNISIA 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT 

 


PROJECT INFORMATION SHEET 

Client Information Sheet 
 

BORROWER : Republic of Tunisia 
   

EXECUTING AGENCY : Zaghouan Regional Office for Agricultural Development 

(CRDA/Zaghouan) 
 

 

Financing Plan 

Source of 

Financing 

Amount 

(EUR million) 

Amount 

(UA million) 
Instrument 

AfDB  25.21 20.67 AfDB Loan 

Government            17.24 (FOSDA EUR 3.71 million, Nat. Prog. EUR 4.09 million, Taxes EUR 6.07 million, Land cost EUR 3.36 million  
Beneficiaries  2.42   

 

TOTAL COST 
EUR 44.84 million  

 

 

 

Key AfDB Financing Information 

 

Loan currency 
 

Euro (EUR) 

Type of loan Fully flexible loan 

Maturity 

Grace period 

20 years 

6,5 years 

Tenor 

Reimbursement 

12.57 

Payments according to the amortization table at the end 

of the grace period 

Type of Interest Base rate + financing cost marging + loan margin + 

maturity premium. This interest rate shall be above or 

equal to zero. 

Floating base rate Floating (6-month EURIBOR reviewed on 1 February 

and 1 August or any other acceptable rate), with a free 

base rate fixing option.  

Financing cost margin Bank’s financing cost margin to 6-month EURIBOR, 

reviewed on 1 February and 1 August. 

Lending margin 0.80% (80 basis points) 

Maturity premium 0% 

Commitment charge 0.25% (25 basis points) per annum on the undisbursed 

amount, effective 60 days following the loan signature 

date and due on interest payment dates 

Front-end fee 0.25% (25 basis points) of the loan amount  

Base rate conversion 

option* 

Besides the free-fixing option, the Borrower may revert 

to the floating rate or set the rate on all or part of the 

disbursed amount of its loan. Transaction fees apply 

Rate cap or collar option** The Borrower may cap or collar the base rate for all or 

part of the disbursed amount of its loan. Transaction fees 

apply. 



 

iv 

 

Loan currency conversion 

option 

The Borrower may change the currency of all or part of 

its loan, whether disbursed or not, into another loan 

currency of the Bank. Transaction fees apply 

ERR (baseline scenario) 18.8% 

IRR (baseline scenario) 15.6% 

NPV (baseline scenario) TND 47.9 million 
 

 

* The related conversion options and transaction costs are governed by the Bank’s Directives on conversion available on the website 

https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/document/guidelines-for-conversion-of-loan-terms-july-2014-87643/ 

** A weighted average maturity calculator is available on the website https://www.afdb.org/en/projects-and-operations/financial-

products/african-development-bank/loans/ 

 

 

Timeframe – Main Milestones (expected) 

Preparation April 2014 – Nov. 2018 

Concept Note Approval  February 2019 

Project Appraisal March – April 2019 

Project Approval July 2019 

Effectiveness November 2019 

Completion December 2025 

Last Disbursement March 2026 

https://www.afdb.org/en/documents/document/guidelines-for-conversion-of-loan-terms-july-2014-87643/
https://www.afdb.org/en/projects-and-operations/financial-products/african-development-bank/loans/
https://www.afdb.org/en/projects-and-operations/financial-products/african-development-bank/loans/


 

v 

 

Project Executive Summary 

Overview: the Project to Develop and Promote Agricultural Sub-sectors (PDPFA) will be 

implemented in the Zaghouan Governorate, which covers a surface area of 282 000 hectares 

and has a population of 186 210 (INS, 2018). This region has an average poverty rate of 20% 

(15.2% nationwide), an illiteracy rate of 26.4% (18.8% nationwide) and a rural poverty rate of 

34.2%. The unemployment rate is 16.9% compared with 14.8% nationwide. Women are more 

vulnerable as they lack access to resources and formal employment. 

After the 2011 revolution, Tunisia adopted a Strategic Development Plan (PSD 2016-2020) to 

revive and enhance the attractiveness of its economy and incorporate it into global value chains 

in order to address the challenge of achieving sustainable and inclusive development. This 

vision is reflected in the country’s resolve to increase investments (25% of GDP by 2020) in 

specific niches with competitive advantages and where there is a growing international market 

that offers more opportunities for the generation of value-added. In this regard, agricultural 

subsectors have been identified according to agro-ecological zones and their potential to 

increase high value-added agricultural exports. The Project to Develop and Promote 

Agricultural Sub-sectors in Zaghouan Governorate (PDPFA-GZ) falls within this framework. 

It seeks to promote agricultural subsectors whose development requires significant public and 

private investments to enhance production and productivity, and increase opportunities in terms 

of product development (processing, packaging, certification, etc.). Besides improving their 

competitiveness, the subsectors selected will have an overall impact on economic recovery and 

the reduction of unemployment, poverty and inequalities. 

PDPFA-GZ was prepared under a UA 412 000 Middle-Income Countries Technical Assistance 

Fund (MIC-TAF) grant awarded by the Bank in 2014. The grant resources were used to design 

the related technical studies and evaluate the Integrated Agricultural Development Project 

(PDAI) in Tunisia. It complements the first phase of the Integrated Agricultural Development 

Programme in Zaghouan Governorate financed by the International Fund for Agricultural 

Development (IFAD) to the tune of USD 16.05 million. PDPFA-GZ, whose total estimated cost 

is EUR 43.86 million, of which EUR 25.21 million provided the African Development Bank 

(AfDB), aims to develop priority agricultural subsectors (olive oil, tomato, dairy and other local 

organic products) selected in conjunction with regional authorities based on their economic, 

social and environmental impact. The project comprising three components will be 

implemented over five years. The components are: (i) Rural Infrastructure Support; (ii) 

Sustainable Agricultural Development and Promotion of Agricultural Value Chains; and (iii) 

Project Coordination and Management. It will benefit more than 90 650 people (12 500 

directly), 50.2% of them women, in the project impact area (PIA). 

Needs Assessment: the financing needs of the agricultural sector in Tunisia for the 2016-2020 

period are estimated at about TND 9 000 million or UA 2 000 million (Strategic Development 

Plan 2016-2020). This investment will contribute to achieving the objectives of the Strategic 

Development Plan (SDP) in terms of reducing unemployment and social/regional inequalities. 

Agricultural investments during the first three years of the Plan amounted to TND 4 400 million 

(TND 1 870 million in public investments), representing a financing gap of more than TND 2 

500 million. AfDB resources of about TND 86.24 million will help to reduce the financing gap 

in Zaghouan Governorate. 

Value-added for the African Development Bank: the agricultural sector plays a vital role in 

the national economy and the Bank contributes to its development within the framework of the 

Country Strategy. The Bank’s active portfolio comprises seven operations (UA 69.804 million), 

representing 6% of the portfolio whose performance is deemed satisfactory with a score of 3.5 



 

vi 

 

on 4 (2017/2018 Country Portfolio Performance Review). The Bank has also acquired 

considerable experience in financing integrated agricultural development projects (IADPs) in 

similar areas such as Gafsa and Kairouan. The evaluation of IADPs conducted within the 

framework of the Middle-Income Countries Technical Assistance Fund (MIC-TAF) grant 

confirmed that the Bank has a strong comparative advantage by participating in financing the 

Project to Develop and Promote Agricultural Sub-sectors in Zaghouan Governorate (PDPFA-

GZ). It has developed skills and technical expertise in the design and formulation of agricultural 

projects, particularly the development of irrigation schemes and catchment ponds, the proper 

targeting of vulnerable areas and environmental and social protection. It has also acquired 

experience in Tunisia and other countries by promoting subsectors and value chains, youth and 

women’s entrepreneurship, and building national capacity for more effective official 

development aid  (ODA) in terms of alignment and ownership. 

Knowledge Management: a baseline situation based on field surveys (including value chains) 

was established during project preparation. The project will provide the agricultural map of 

Tunisia with geo-referenced data on the sites of the schemes and infrastructure developed. It 

will also support training and strengthen the knowledge of various local actors, particularly 

farmers in irrigation schemes and women involved in agri-food product marketing. The project 

will disseminate best practice, particularly in organic agricultural product certification and the 

development of local expertise. The same will apply to the socio-economic and environmental 

impacts of the organic production system (OPS) to be promoted by the project by ensuring that 

producers (upstream and downstream of subsectors) introduce and adopt good agricultural 

practices. 

  



 

vii 

 

RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 

COUNTRY AND PROJECT NAME: Tunisia: Project to Develop and Promote Agricultural Sub-sectors in Zaghouan Governorate (PDPFA-GZ) 

PROJECT GOAL: Contribute to reducing poverty, unemployment and inequalities in Zaghouan region. The project’s specific objective is to create more value added through the promotion of priority agricultural sub-sectors: 

olive oil, tomato, dairy and other organic products from the region. 

RESULTS CHAIN 
PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 
RISKS/MITIGATION MEASURES 

Indicator  (Including ISC) Baseline Situation Target 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Long Term  2018 Beyond 2025 
ANETI reports 

 

- Reduced incidence of poverty and 
regional disparities  

- Improved women’s employability/ 
economic empowerment  

Percentage of poor people in the PIA 20% 18% (2023), 15% 

Number of jobs for women created in the PIA 2 800 10 300 INS and ONAGRI statistics  

Average unemployment rate in the PIA 16.9% 13%  / 11.5% (2025) INS and ONAGRI statistics 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

Medium Term  2018 2023 - 2025  Risk 1: 

 Land issues that are not clarified can 
lead to difficulties in operating in the 
sites to be developed and compromise 

the attainment of objectives. 

Mitigation measures: 

 This risk will be mitigated by improving 
local land governance through the re-
parcelling of land, land regularisation 

and the issuing of land titles, including 

for women and youths.  

1. Increased agricultural production  

Volume of production of organic products marketed annually 

(T) 
15270 9 000 - 18 300 

 Agricultural statistics 

 Periodic project 
monitoring reports 

 Midterm review report 
and project completion 

report 

Volume of olive production/olive oil produced annually (T) 51 365/8 510 25000-4500 / 56 100/9 400 

Volume of production of tomato marketed annually (T) 57 650 35000 - 76 150 

Volume of milk produced annually (T) 10 316 800 - 1800 

2. Improved income   

Income/year per olive farm (5 ha) managed by men/women 

(TND) 
8 148/8 148 15 500/15 500 

Income/year per dairy farm (5 v) managed by men/women 

(TND) 
 8 090 /8 090 

Income/year per hectare of tomato for men/women (TND)  2 479 5 696/5 696 

3. Sustainable jobs created Number of stable jobs generated for men/women and youths  7 500/7 500 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

Short Term  2018 2023 - 2025  Risk 2: 

 Climatic hazards that can exacerbate 
ecosystem degradation (erosion, CC, 

etc.) and render the population more 

vulnerable. 

Mitigation measure: 

 This risk will be mitigated by carrying 
out drip irrigation, protecting vulnerable 

areas, opening up production areas, and 

mainstreaming climate information into 
the design of structures  

I. RURAL INFRASTRUCTURE SUPPORT 

1.1 Development of irrigation schemes 

and boreholes/wells 

Area of former irrigation schemes rehabilitated (ha) 0 1000- 1158 CRDA report 

Area of new public schemes developed for irrigation (ha) 0 300-350 

 CRDA report 

 Contracts signed with 
companies 

 Reports of control firms 

 Project progress reports 

1.2 Water and soil conservation (WSC) 

Area protected with dry stone berms and cords (ha) 0 6000-9430 

Water collection structures (catchment ponds and water filling 

structures) developed (number) 
0 

 

5-80 / 8-120 

Length of wadis cleaned and reprofiled (km) 0 35-47 

1.3 Forest management 
Area of land cleaned (ha) 0 10000-13000 

Length of firewall and forest tracks created and maintained 0 250-345 

1.4 Feeder roads Feeder roads developed (km) 0 50- 60 

II. SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT AND PROMOTION OF AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS 

Agricultural intensification rate (%) 74 > 100 CRDA reports  Risk 3: 

Area cultivated with olive, citrus fruit and peach trees (ha)  3600/150/150-5900/200/200 



 

viii 

 

2.1 Sustainable agricultural 
development and technological 

innovations 

Percentage of women with access to public irrigation schemes 

(PIPs) developed (%) 
10-15 40-45 

Agreements signed 

Project progress reports 

APIA and FOSDA reports 

 

PMU report 
 

Procurement Plan (PP) 

  
Early Warning System 

(EWS) 

 

Audit report 

 
Progress reports 

 

Mission aide-memoire 

 Lack of transparency in the selection of 
micro-project beneficiaries 

 Poor monitoring of technological 
innovations by communities 

 Procurement delays, weak capacity of 
technical services and companies 

Mitigation measures: 

 Defining criteria for selecting 
beneficiaries in a transparent manner 

 Participatory, inclusive and committed 
partnership approach, and involvement 

of local actors 

 Financing of a programme to build the 
capacity of actors 

Risks 4:  

 Limited access to financial resources by 
agricultural entrepreneurs 

Mitigation measures: 

 This risk will be mitigated by setting up 
a partial guarantee fund and establishing 
partnerships with microfinance 

institutions (MFIs) for rural financing. 

Number of farmers trained in resilient technologies: M/W ND 950/950 - 1275 / 1275 

2.2 Promotion of agricultural value 
chains 

Olive subsector: number of batches of upgrading equipment 

intended for SMSA, GDA and women's groups (batches) 

 2 sets of collection tools/ 1 
organic oil mill, 2 multipurpose 

centres in 2023 

Tomato subsector: number of drying and packaging materials 

(batch) 
 

1 transfer and vacuum 

packaging in 2023 

Local organic products: number of upgrading equipment 

(batch) 
 

1 composting, 1 honey and wax 

in 2023 

Milk subsector: number of milk collection and cooling 

equipment (batch) 
 

1 green forage chopper, 

extruder, 2 equipped centres in 

2023 

Number of GDAs/SMSAs strengthened 0/0 8/4 - 10/5 

Number of groups formed comprising M/W members 0 4 (1 000 M/1 000 W) in 2025 

Women and Youth Support Fund (TND '000): W/Youth 0 
1 000 women/1 000 youths 

(500 W/500 M) 

Number of young entrepreneurs trained in incubation centres: 

M/W 
0/0 100 /100 

MFI resources mobilised for rural financing (TND '000): 
M/W 

0 1 500/1 500 

2.3 Building the capacity of 
stakeholders 

Members of irrigation scheme and infrastructure management 

committees trained: M/W 

0 100/100 

Person days of training in strategy, processing, marketing and 

post-harvest losses: M/W (150/2 days/3 years: 1 500 people) 
0/0 500 men/1 000 women 

Persons-day training of specialised technicians, agricultural 
extension officers: M/W (50/3 days/3 years: 450 people) 

0/0 200/250 

III. PROJECT COORDINATION 
AND MANAGEMENT 

Number of technicians trained in monitoring/evaluation and 
various workshops: M/W 

0c 65/35 

Number of steering committee meetings held 0 10 

Number of supervision missions fielded by the Supervisory 
Authority / Bank 

0/0 20/10 

Number of mid-term review/completion reports produced 0/0 1/1 

 Number of impact assessments produced 0/0 1  Report 

K
E

Y
 

A
C

T
IV

IT
IE

S
 COMPONENTS INPUTS 

Component 1: Rural Infrastructure Support  : EUR 30.33 million (67%) Total Project Cost:   EUR 44.84 million 

AfDB Loan            :   EUR 25.21 million (56.2%) 

Beneficiaries          :   EUR 02.39 million (5.3%) 

Tunisian Gvt.        :    EUR 17.24 million (38.4%) 

Component 2: Sustainable Agricultural Development and Promotion of Agricultural Value Chains   : EUR 11.41 million (26%) 

Component 3: Project Coordination and Management   : EUR 3.10 million (7%) 

TOTAL     : EUR 44.84 million (100 %) 

(**) M/W: Men / Women 
  



 

ix 

 

 

Project Implementation Schedule 

 

Loan Negotiations 

Loan Approval 

Signature of Loan Agreement 

Establishment of the PMU 

Fulfilment of Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement 

START-UP ACTIVITIES 

Publication of the General Procurement Notice 

Signing of Agreements with Partners 

Procurement of Goods for the PMU 

INFRASTRUCTURE SUPPORT 

Updating of the Final Design 

Award of Contracts 

PIP and IA, Collection Pond, Borehole and Feeder Road Works 

WSC Works 

Forest Management 

AGRIC. DEVELOPMENT/ PROMOTION OF AVCs 

Agricultural Development 

Promotion of Agricultural Value Chains 

Market Access 

Agricultural Entrepreneurship 

Capacity Building 

PROJECT MANAGEMENT 

Project Coordination 

Setting Up of Accounting and Monitoring and Evaluation Systems 

Management, Monitoring/Evaluation, and Communication Activities 

Mid-Term Review 

Completion Report 

 



 

1 

 

TUNISIA 

PROJECT TO DEVELOP AND PROMOTE AGRICULTURAL SUBSECTORS IN 

ZAGHOUAN GOVERNORATE  

APPRAISAL REPORT 

Management hereby submits the following appraisal report and recommendation concerning a proposal 

to grant a EUR 25.21 million AfDB loan to the Republic of Tunisia to finance the Project to Develop 

and Promote Agricultural Sub-sectors in Zaghouan Governorate (PDPFA-GZ). 

I. Strategic Thrust and Rationale 

1.1. Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives 

1.1.1 The project is consistent with Tunisia’s Strategic Development Plan (PSD) 2016-2020, which 

hinges on five pillars: (i) public administrative reform and fight against corruption for improved 

governance; (ii) human development and social inclusion; (iii) higher value-added activities; (iv) reduction 

of regional disparities; and (v) development of a green economy. The PSD seeks to achieve a 5% growth 

rate to reduce the unemployment rate to 12.2% in 2020. In this regard, the strategy envisages an increase 

in the investment rate to 25% of GDP, driven by a significant growth in public investment and a build-up 

of public-private partnerships (PPPs). The overall objectives of the PSD in the agricultural sector are to 

promote competitive and sustainable farming by creating value added, ensuring the judicious and 

sustainable exploitation of natural resources, and securing decent income for farmers. 

1.1.2 The project will also contribute to the implementation of the Zaghouan Governorate Planning 

and Development Master Plan 2030. Besides making substantial investments in the development of 

irrigation and water-saving infrastructure, it will help to promote and enhance the competitiveness of 

priority agricultural subsectors (olive oil, tomato, milk and other local organic products). The project will 

promote the conservation and development of natural resources by ensuring their sustainability and 

minimising the effects of climate change; improving land tenure entities, combating the fragmentation of 

landholdings and developing farmlands; develop a regional green economy and promote gender-based 

human development and social inclusion by strengthening women’s empowerment. The project will help 

Tunisia to honour its low-carbon sustainable development commitments (nationally determined 

contribution target of reducing carbon intensity by 41% by 2030 compared with 2010) by launching a 

large-scale tree planting operation, water and soil conservation (WSC) works, and to achieve the 

sustainable development goals (SDOs), particularly poverty reduction, the elimination of inequalities, the 

promotion of gender equality, the empowerment of women, and the creation of decent jobs. 

1.2. Rationale for Bank Involvement 

1.2.1 The agricultural sector plays a major role in Tunisia’s economy. Over the last decade, the 

Tunisian olive oil sub-sector has been one of the country’s leading foreign exchange earners, generating 

TND 2 billion, i.e. 10% of all exports in 2017-2018 (ONH, 2018). Consequently, the country is the 

second olive oil producer after Spain and the world’s leading exporter of olive oil, with about 200 000 

tonnes of olive oil in 2017. Similarly, it ranks among the world’s ten largest tomato processing countries 

and is Africa’s leading exporter of organic products. Agriculture accounts for 10% of GDP, 16.9% of 

employment and about 10% of export earnings. Despite the progress made, the overall performance of 

the agricultural sector remains inadequate in view of its potential. Agricultural productivity remains low 

and the high inter-annual variability of production greatly impedes steady supply. Agricultural products 

are not sufficiently competitive and developed. Consequently, investment in the agricultural sector has 

dropped. The outcome has been a decline in farmers’ income, which does not exceed 50% of the national 

average income. As a result, the sector is increasingly less attractive to youths (43% of farmers are aged 

above 60). 



 

2 

 

1.2.2 The Bank’s intervention targets disadvantaged areas in Zaghouan Governorate, a region with a 

high agricultural potential and one eligible for various government investment incentives. In this region, 

the project will contribute to developing irrigation and water-saving infrastructure, promoting transition 

to organic agriculture and expanding agricultural entrepreneurship in order to boost the value chains of 

promising agricultural subsectors. Therefore, the Bank’s intervention will help to render the regional 

and national economy more attractive, thus contributing towards achieving inclusive growth, reducing 

unemployment, poverty and inequalities. It will also build the resilience of agro-ecological systems and 

improve the region’s agri-food positioning in local and global value chains.  

1.2.3 The subsectors targeted by the Bank’s intervention (see detailed analysis in Annex C3) were 

selected given their strategic importance in terms of food security, their potential to generate more value 

added and the constraints identified. In Tunisia, olive growing is the main agricultural activity and plays 

a key socio-economic role in terms of the area under cultivation (1.8 million hectares) and the number 

of farmers (309 000 farmers) employed in the different olive oil subsector chains (mechanisation, 

pruning, harvesting, transportation, crushing, storage, marketing, etc.). It is a source of direct or indirect 

income for more than one million people and generates 34 million days of work per annum, which is 

equivalent to more than 20% of employability in the agricultural sector. However, olive oil production 

fluctuates significantly from year to year due to the alternate bearing of olive trees and very irregular 

climatic conditions. In addition, 90% of olive oil exports consist of bulk oil, 70% of which is extra-

virgin olive oil. This provides the country with a significant head room in the packaging value chain to 

create more value added and ensure product traceability. In the tomato subsector, the dried product 

constitutes a growth niche in terms of employment and exports, and can generate foreign exchange 

earnings for the country. Exports could be better leveraged by shifting from the current stage of supplier 

of semi-finished bulk products to another stage as supplier of finished products delivered directly to the 

final consumer. In the dairy sub-sector, there is a deficit in the feed balance with limited quantity and 

quality of feed resources and a partial and inadequate use of agricultural and agro-industrial by-products 

upstream. There is a shortage of collection centres and chillers, as well as inadequate promotion of 

traditional dairy products downstream. Organic farming is now the engine of regional development in 

view of its linkages with agri-food industries, environmental tourism, handicrafts and renewable energy. 

However, the cumbersome process of converting and certifying organic products continues to impede 

its full development. 

1.2.4 The project plugs into the Bank’s Ten-year Strategy (2013-2022) by aligning with the High 5s. 

It is consistent with the Bank’s Strategy to Address Fragility and Build Resilience in Africa (2014-2019) 

since it strengthens the role of communities in building resilience and raising awareness among all 

stakeholders on inequality and fragility issues. It is in keeping with the main thrusts of the Bank’s 

Climate Change Action Plan and Gender Strategy for 2014-2018 (extended to 2019), by promoting 

women’s right to land and resources (in irrigation schemes) and economic empowerment through 

income-generating activities, management and entrepreneurship capacity building. At the national level, 

the project is consistent with Tunisia’s Country Strategy Paper (CSP) 2017-2021, particularly Pillar 2 

“Improve the quality of life for the people of the priority regions”. In this respect, the project will ensure 

the qualitative and quantitative transformation of regional agriculture by developing irrigation schemes 

(PIP); supporting targeted agricultural subsectors and certifying organic products to promote their 

export; supporting agricultural entrepreneurship (MSME), especially for women and youths; developing 

a regional green economy; and building local capacity and governance in land tenure and water resource 

management. By addressing the critical feeder road link under Pillar 1 “Industrialisation and local value 

chains development”, the project will ease the movement of people and goods in this region, which is a 

transitional space between the country’s coast and hinterland. 

1.3. Aid Coordination 

1.3.1 In Tunisia, official development aid reached USD 5.5 billion during the 2011-2017 period, 

representing an increase of 128% compared with the pre-revolution period (2004-2010) (WB, 2019; 



 

3 

 

oecd.org/dac/stats/idsonline). The Ministry of Development, Investment and International Cooperation 

(MDICI) is responsible for coordination. The African Development Bank is contributing to this process 

through the country dialogue spearheaded by its North Africa Regional Development and Business 

Delivery Office (RDGN). Therefore, the Bank harmonises its operations with the World Bank and the 

European Union within the framework of budget support based on the same matrix of measures and 

identical disbursement conditions. It has also concluded mutual trust and confidence agreements, 

particularly with the European Investment Bank, to use the procurement procedures of a single donor 

during co-financing. Lastly, it participates in the Agricultural Sector Working Group set up by Tunisia’s 

technical and financial partners. At State level, the Ministry of Agriculture, Water Resources and 

Fisheries (MARHP) is responsible for the technical coordination of agricultural projects. Similarly, the 

Ministry of Development, Investment and International Cooperation (MDICI) coordinates and monitors 

the activities of development partners. The table below presents the main amounts by source of financing 

committed in the agricultural sector in Tunisia. 

Table 1.1: Main Amounts Committed in the Agricultural Sector 

Sector or Subsector 
Size 

GDP Exports Labour 

Agriculture 10% (2017) 10% 16.9% labour force 

Stakeholders – Public Expenditure (ongoing programmes or projects) 

Government Donors Amounts (EUR million) Period 

 MARHP budget: TND 4.4 billion 
from 2016 to 2018  

 

 In 2017, the agricultural sector 
represented 17.6% of the State 

budget 

 

 

AFD 

ADB 

IsDB 

WB 

EU 

Abu Dhabi Fund 

AFESD 

KFW  

IFAD 

SDF 

JICA 

KDF  

190.00 

162.06 

137.97 

93.10 

10.00 

20.82 

235.79 

329.4 

58.32 

17.77 

492.33 

64.71 

2017-2024 

2016-2021 

2014-2021 

2017-2022 

2014-2019 

2005-2018 

2015-2020 

2013-2024 

2014-2021 

2009-2018 

2008-2021 

2015-2022 

Total  1 812.27  

Aid Coordination Level 

Existence of thematic working groups Yes 

Existence of a comprehensive sector programme No 

II. Project Description 

2.1 Project Components 

2.1.1 The overall objective of PDPFA-GZ is to contribute to reducing poverty, unemployment 

and inequalities (gender, socio-economic and rural/urban) in Zaghouan Governorate. The project’s 

specific objective is to create more value added by promoting priority1 agricultural sub-sectors such 

as “olive oil”, “tomato”, “dairy” and “other local organic products”, which are niches with a high 

potential in terms of employment, revenue generation and foreign exchange earnings for the 

country. In this regard, the project will carry out major irrigation, water resource mobilisation 

(boreholes, shallow wells and catchment ponds), and natural resource protection works (water, soil 

and forests) in order to improve production and productivity as part of efforts to accelerate transition 

to organic farming. An “agricultural value chains (AVCs)” approach will be used as guideline for 

the project to address the challenges of linking various chains in the targeted agricultural subsectors, 

                                                 
1 Priority subsectors were defined in a concerted manner based on environmental (soil conservation, water use and biodiversity), social (local job 

creation and improvement of the status of rural women) and economic criteria (level of value added, stability of income and adaptability to 

growth markets). 



 

4 

 

creating value added and building resilience of the people’s agro-ecological and socio-economic 

systems. The “aggregation2” model will be adopted to remove constraints on MSME financing, 

promote agricultural entrepreneurship especially for women and youths, and open access to markets 

at remunerative prices, while complying with new requirements regarding hygiene, food safety, the 

environment, and social equity. 

2.1.2 The project will be implemented over five years and will comprise three components: (A) 

Rural Infrastructure Support; (B) Sustainable Agricultural Development and Promotion of 

Agricultural Value Chains; and (C) Project Coordination and Management. The project activities 

are summarised in the table below. 

Table 2.1: Project Components 

No. COMPONENTS 
ESTIMATED 

COST 
COMPONENT DESCRIPTION  

A 
Rural Infrastructure 

Support 
EUR 30.33 million  

A1. Development of irrigation schemes: (i) rehabilitation and 

equipping of 1 158 hectares of former public irrigation schemes (PIPs) 

with 4 000 ml of asbestos cement pipes replaced by others made of 

high-density polyethylene (HDPE); (ii) development of 350 hectares 

of new irrigation schemes (IAs). A2 Sinking of boreholes and 

drilling of shallow wells: (i) sinking of 12 boreholes (150 metres – 

200 metres); (ii) drilling of 50 new shallow wells equipped with clean 

(solar) energy sources; (iii) study to update groundwater exploitation 

balances; (iv) strengthening of the piezometric measuring network for 

monitoring and controlling groundwater levels. A3 Soil and water 

conservation (SWC): (i) preparation and reinforcement of 9 430 

hectares of mechanical and manual terraces, and 570 hectares of dry 

stone bunds, correction of 600 hectares of gullies, construction of 25 

protection pier units in wadis; (ii) construction of 8 collection ponds 

and 120 fill structures; (iii) cleaning and reprofiling of 47 kilometres 

of wadis and drainage of 600 hectares of plains.  

A4 Forest management and biodiversity conservation: (i) forestry 

and livestock development on 200 hectares of land, drainage of 13 

000 hectares of land; (ii) construction and maintenance of 345 

kilometres of forest tracks and firewalls; (iii) development of the 

Djebel Zaghouan National Park and its Eco museum.  

A5 Feeder roads: (i) development of 60 kilometres of feeder roads. 

B 

Sustainable 

Agricultural 

Development and 

Promotion of 

Agricultural Value 

Chains  

EUR 11.41 million  

B1. Sustainable agricultural development: (i) development of plot 

irrigation: procurement of water-saving equipment (drip irrigation) 

per 1000 hectares of public irrigation schemes; (ii) development of 

arboriculture: planting of 5 900 hectares of olive and almond trees, 

procurement of seedlings and towed tanks; (iii) procurement of seeds 

for fodder crop rotation and Médicago and Sulla seeds for 1000 

hectares; (iv) procurement of equipment for the CRDA soil 

laboratory; (v) dissemination of technological packages, resilient and 

organic techniques, relevant quality standards, training of agricultural 

extension workers in the maintenance of structures. 

B2 Promotion of gender-based agricultural value chains: olive oil 

subsector: (i) procurement of equipment for SMSAs, GDAs and 

women’s groups (olive harvesting tools, olive tree branch shredders 

and sprayers; (ii) procurement of an organic olive oil extraction unit; 

and (iii) support for the construction of two multipurpose centres to 

house organic olive oil agro-industrial units. Tomato subsector: (i) 

                                                 
2 Aggregation is an innovative organisational model comprising a group of producers (aggregates) linked to an aggregator (usually an agri-food 

business) and maintaining market relationships with other suppliers. The businesses participating in an aggregation focus on the same market, 
use the same inputs, share the same territory and infrastructure, and belong to the same social community with the same values, traditions and 

production culture. 

 

 



 

5 

 

No. COMPONENTS 
ESTIMATED 

COST 
COMPONENT DESCRIPTION  

support for the establishment of a complete tomato drying unit 

comprising 1 washer, 1 sorter, 1 slitter, fruit and vegetable dryers, and 

1 vacuum packaging machine. Local organic products: (i) support to 

SMSAs for switching to organic farming and product certification; 

(ii) procurement of composting equipment (shredders, diverters and 

compost spreaders); (iii) procurement of equipment for women 

(honey extractors, organic wax, distillers, grain and spice crushers, 

and essential oil extractors and dryers). Dairy subsector: (i) 

construction of 2 milk conservation units; (ii) procurement of a batch 

of equipment for the production and conservation of organic fodder, 

and manure spreading; (iii) acquisition of 2 batches of milk collection 

and cooling equipment; (iv) development of best practice and 

hygienic standards; (iv) training in ranch management and fodder 

production. 

B3. Market access: (i) promotion of auto-aggregation around 

SMSAs and GDAs, and aggregation around private agricultural 

businesses; (ii) promotion of agricultural product competitiveness: 

quality, compliance with standards, traceability, certification, and 

logo; (iii) study on a market access strategy for local and organic 

products.  

B4. Agricultural entrepreneurship, women and youth 

employability: specific support for women: (i) incubation and 

installation of 200 women agripreneurs; (ii) construction of 200 rain 

water cisterns; (iii) supply of inputs for market gardening or 

arboriculture; (iv) procurement of handicraft equipment and brier rose  

plants; (vii) training in the extraction and distillation of aromatic and 

medicinal plants; (viii) setting up of product sales points; and (ix) 

training in marketing and commercialisation. Support for innovative 

women's MSME initiatives; and (x) provision of incubation and 

advisory services. Support to 50 groups of young agricultural 

entrepreneurs (50% of them girls): (i) support for the preparation of 

business plans; (ii) training in incubation centres (Zaghouan Business 

Centre, Mograne School Nursery, etc.); (iii) allocation and 

development of registered parcels of land in new irrigation schemes; 

(iv) intermediation with local financing entities.  

B5. Building stakeholder capacity: (i) equipping the technical 

services involved in project implementation (Zaghouan CRDA, 

Mograne School, etc.); (ii) training in results-based management, 

value chain approach, gender, climate change and resilience, market 

access mechanisms, product standards and quality, etc.; (iii) 

consolidation of participatory development plans (PDPs); (iv) 

organisational and management support for GDAs, SMSAs and 

women’s organisations, and establishment of regional networks and 

unions; (v) development of partnerships (contractualization) with 

financial institutions, private businesses, employer and trade union 

organisations (UTAP), inter-trade groups, training, research, and 

advisory support institutions. 

C 

Project 

Coordination and 

Management 

EUR 3.10 million 

C1. Project Management Unit: planning, coordination of project 

activities, administrative, accounting and financial management, 

procurement of goods, works and services, establishment of a 

communication plan, project implementation monitoring and 

evaluation, and gender-based impact analysis. 

 

 TOTAL EUR 44.84 million 



 

6 

 

2.2 Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Explored 

2.2.1  The technical solutions adopted are based on lessons from the Bank and IFAD’s 

experience, particularly in financing integrated agricultural projects (IAPs) in Tunisia. The region’s 

technical services, local businesses and communities have acquired experience in the development 

of irrigation, water and soil conservation facilities that are easy to design. The subsectors to be 

supported were selected in consultation with the regional authorities and communities based on 

their potential to create more value added and ensure the sustainability of investments as well as 

agro-ecological considerations. Thus, the promotion of a watermelon sub-sector, which was 

initially envisaged, was abandoned because of its negative impact on water resources. Similarly, in 

the tomato subsector already established in the region, the project will ensure water saving on the 

parcels of land under cultivation in order to economise water, while intensifying production in a 

bid to improve the downstream production sub-sector, particularly tomato drying, packaging and 

export. Resilience measures are based on vulnerability analysis and strategies to reduce factors of 

fragility. Lastly, the “aggregator” approach has yielded positive results in other public-private 

partnership (PPP) operations, opening up access to financing and guaranteeing higher producer 

prices. 

Table 2.2: Alternatives Explored and Reasons for their Rejection 

Alternative Brief Description Reasons for Rejection 

Extension of the 

areas devoted to 

tomato cultivation 

and promotion of a 

watermelon 

subsector 

The option considered was 

to increase the areas 

devoted to tomato 

cultivation and to promote 

a watermelon subsector. 

The project will not promote a watermelon subsector in the 

region because of the high water consumption of these two 

plants. Concerning the tomato subsector already established and 

for which the regional authorities are requesting support, project 

activities will focus on measures to save water and improve the 

downstream sub-sector, particularly the drying, packaging and 

export of tomatoes. 

2.3 Project Type 

2.3.1. PDPFA-GZ is an investment project in a key sector of the Tunisian economy. Its approach 
guarantees the achievement of outcomes and the efficient use of the resources allocated. 

2.4 Project Cost and Financing Arrangements 

2.4.1 Project cost: the total project cost, taxes included, is estimated at TND 153.38 million 
(EUR 44.84 million). The cost was estimated based on the prices prevailing in April 2019. This 

cost includes the cost of land that will be occupied by the project for the construction of facilities 

planned. Provisions equivalent to 5% and 7% of the base cost have been made respectively for 

physical contingencies and price escalation, based on local and global inflation trends. Tables 2.3, 

2.4 and 2.5 below present a summary of the estimated project cost by component, expenditure 

category and year, while details are presented in Technical Annex B2 of the project appraisal report. 

 

Furthermore, the cost sharing (borne 56.2% by AfDB, 5.3% by the beneficiaries and 38.5% by the 

State) is in line with the financing parametres for Tunisia as approved by the Board in 2017, 

according to which the Bank could finance 60% of the cost of social projects (education, health, 

employment, gender, etc.), with limited and/or gradual economic benefits. The social nature of 

PDPFA is reflected in: (1) the importance of activities dedicated to women, especially the 

development of women’s entrepreneurship; and (2) the emphasis on the development of 

employment and self-employment in the project area by targeting youths and smallholders. 

Moreover, the gradual profitability of the project resides in the the very nature of tree cultivation 

(mostly olive trees), which requires nearly ten years to reach maturity. 



 

7 

 

Table 2.3: Summary of Estimated Project Cost by Component 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Table 2.4: Summary of Estimated Project Cost by Expenditure Category 

EXPENDITURE CATEGORIES 
(TND Million) (EUR Million) %  % 

Loc. Cur. For. Exc. Total Loc. Cur. For. Exc. Total For. Exc. B.C. 

 I. Investment Cost 

  A. WORKS 26.30 69.76 96.07 7.69 20.40 28.08 73% 69% 

  B. GOODS 3.37 13.67 17.05 0.99 4.00 4.98 80% 12% 

  C. SERVICES 2.21 3.93 6.13 0.65 1.15 1.79 64% 4% 

  D. MISCELLANEOUS 13.30 4.19 17.50 3.89 1.23 5.11 24% 13% 

TOTAL BASE COST 45.18 91.56 136.75 13.21 26.77 39.98     

  Physical contingencies (5%) 2.26 4.58 6.85 0.66 1.34 2.00     

  
Financial contingencies 
Financiers (7%) 

3.16 6.41 9.57 0.89 1.84 2.79     

  Front-end fee 0.00 0.22 0.22 0.00 0.06 0.06     

TOTAL PROJECT COST 50.60 102.76 153.38 14.77 30.02 44.84     

 

Table 2.5: Expenditure Schedule by Component (EUR thousand) 

COMPONENTS 
COST BY PROJECT YEAR (EUR Million) 

Total 
2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 

A. SUPPORT TO RURAL INFRASTRUCTURE 7.73 8.75 8.97 3.51 1.37 30.33 

  Irrigation development 0.64 1.94 2.15 1.12 0.00 5,85 

  Drilling of boreholes and sinking of shallow wells  0.41 1.40 1.14 0.32 0.00 3,27 
  Water and soil conservation (WSC) 2.41 2.51 2.77 1.61 1.15 10,46 

  Forest management and biodiversity 0.64 0.54 0.55 0.45 0.22 2,40 

  Construction of feeder roads 3.64 2.36 2.36 0.00 0.00 8,35 

B. SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURAL AND VALUE CHAIN 
DEVELOPMENT 

2.40 3.08 2.92 1.80 1.22 11.41 

  Sustainable agricultural development  1.35 1.21 1.13 1.08 0.84 5,61 

  Promotion of agricultural value chains 0.52 1.38 1.30 0.22 0.01 3,43 

  
Women and youth agricultural entrepreneurship and 
employment  

0.40 0.37 0.37 0.37 0.24 1,74 

  Capacity building 0.13 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.12 0,63 

C. PROJECT MANAGEMENT 0.91 0.92 0.51 0.38 0.37 3.10 

TOTAL PROJECT COST (EUR Million)  11.03 12.75 12.40 5.69 2.96 44.84 

 

COMPONENTS 
(TND Million) (EUR Million) %  % 

Loc. Cur. For. Exc. Total Loc. Cur. For. Exc. Total For. Exc. B.C. 

A. SUPPORT TO RURAL INFRASTRUCTURE 37,33 55,30 92,62 10,91 16,17 27,08 60% 68% 

  Irrigation development 6.01 11.81 17.82 1.76 3.45 5.21 66% 13% 

  Drilling of boreholes and sinking of shallow wells  3.58 6.34 9.92 1.05 1.85 2.90 64% 7% 

  Water and soil conservation (WSC) 12.44 19.50 31.94 3.64 5.70 9.34 61% 23% 

  Forest management and biodiversity 3.62 3.82 7.44 1.06 1.12 2.18 51% 5% 

  Construction of feeder roads 11.67 13.83 25.50 3.41 4.04 7.46 54% 19% 

B. SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURAL AND VALUE 
CHAIN DEVELOPMENT  

11,41 23.43 34.84 3.34 6.85 10.19 67% 25% 

  Sustainable agricultural development  4.95 11.95 16.90 1.45 3.49 4.94 71% 12% 

  Promotion of agricultural value chains 3.63 7.18 10.81 1.06 2.10 3.16 66% 8% 

  
Women and youth agricultural entrepreneurship 
and employment  

1.97 3.23 5.20 0.58 0.94 1.52 62% 4% 

  Capacity building 0.86 1.06 1.92 0.25 0.31 0.56 55% 1% 

C. PROJECT COORDINATION AND MANAGEMENT 3,26 6.03 9.29 0.95 1.76 2.72 65% 7% 

TOTAL BASE COST 51,99 84.75 136.75 15.20 24.78 39.98 62%   

  Physical contingencies (5%) 2.60 4.25 6.85 0.76 1.24 2.00 62% 5% 

  Financial contingencies (7%) 3.64 5.93 9.57 1.03 1.70 2.79 61% 7% 

  Front-end fee  0.00 0.22 0.22 0.00 0.06 0.06 100% 0% 

TOTAL PROJECT COST 58,23 95.15 153.38 16.99 27.78 44.84 62%   



 

8 

 

2.4.2  Financing arrangements: the project will be financed by the AfDB to the tune of TND 

86.22 million (EUR 25.21 million) and counterpart contributions by the Government and 

beneficiaries amounting to about TND 58.95 million (EUR 17.24 million). Contribution by the 

beneficiaries will mainly involve the direct financing of activities to be implemented. Table 2.6 

below presents the project cost breakdown by source of financing.  

Table 2.6: Project Financing Plan 

SOURCES OF FINANCING 

(TND Million) (EUR Million) 

% Loc. 
Cur. 

For. 
Exc. 

Total 
Loc. 
Cur. 

For. 
Exc. 

Total 

AfDB 22.10 64.12 86.22 6.46 18.75 25.21 56.22% 

Tunisian Government               

  
National 
Programme 

4.15 9.84 13.99 1.21 2.88 4.09 9.12% 

  
FOSDA’s 
Contribution 

2.76 9.93 12.68 0.81 2.90 3.71 8.27% 

  Taxes 20.67 0.00 20.75 6.04 0.00 6.07 13.53% 

  Cost of land  11.53 0.00 11.53 3.37 0.00 3.36 7.49% 

Beneficiaries   2.10 6.08 8.18 0.61 1.78 2.40 5.36% 

Total   63.31 89.97 153.38 18.51 26.33 44.84   

2.5 Project Target Area and Beneficiaries 

2.5.1 The project impact area (PIA) covers Zaghouan Governorate, particularly the vulnerable 

areas of the 6 delegations (Zaghouan, Zriba, Saouef, Nadhour, El Fahs and Bir Mchargua), which 

make up 44 out of the 47 administrative sectors of the Governorate. Despite its enormous 

agricultural potential (272 000 hectares of arable land), the region’s agro-ecological systems are 

highly vulnerable to climate change: water resources are decreasing and soil erosion is severe, 

affecting nearly 52 000 hectares of arable land and taking various forms ranging from topsoil 

stripping to gullying of varying intensity. In addition, extreme weather events such as floods and 

droughts are increasing, resulting in an average poverty rate of 20% and an unemployment rate of 

16.9% compared with the national rate of 14.8%. Women are more affected by illiteracy (37% of 

rural women) and generally by precariousness since only 19% of them own resources. The 

Governorate is among the regions eligible for various investment incentives intended to reduce the 

factors of environmental and social fragility as well as intra-regional inequalities. Despite the 

fragility of its specific mountain ecosystems, this Governorate has a multitude of major agro-

environmental functions and a considerable ecotourism, cultural and local product production 

potential. 

2.5.2 PDPFA-GZ will benefit more than 90 650 people (12 500 directly), 50.2% of them women. 

The people will be supported to improve production and productivity through successful land 

consolidation and conversion to organic farming. Special attention will be paid to women 

(particularly women heads of households) and youths who constitute the bulk of vulnerable groups. 

They will benefit from about 40% to 45% of newly developed PIPs and 75% of actions related to 

product processing and marketing, particularly organic products. Direct beneficiaries will be 

selected in close collaboration with the CRDA, SMSAs, GDAs and UTAP through a participatory, 

inclusive and collaborative approach. Financing in the form of subsidies to agricultural cooperatives 

(SMSAs) will be based on eligibility criteria set out in the project procedures manual and validated 

by the National Coordination Committee (CNC). 

2.6 Participatory Approach for Project Identification, Design and Implementation 

2.6.1  The Bank adopted a participatory, inclusive and collaborative approach throughout the 

project preparation process, which helped to involve all stakeholders in the identification of major 

issues and appropriate solutions. The stakeholders are representatives of the population, the 



 

9 

 

decentralised technical services of the CRDA, other public institutions, producer organisations and 

civil society, including gender-focused organisations, the private sector and TFPs. This approach 

also made helped to achieve a broad consensus on the “agricultural value chains (AVCs)” approach 

to address the challenge of incorporating the different links of the subsectors selected. Furthermore, 

the “aggregation” model has been adopted to remove constraints on local financing, promote 

agricultural entrepreneurship and open access to remunerative markets amid increasingly strict 

quality, environmental, social, hygiene and food safety requirements. Against this backdrop, 

farmers underscored the need for them to switch to organic farming and for land consolidation with 

the issuance of titles for their plots. One of the challenges to be addressed is the improvement of 

access to land and financing by rural women and youths. This will promote their settlement as 

agripreneurs targeting growth markets. During project implementation, this participatory approach 

will be maintained to enable stakeholders to own project activities and ensure the sustainability of 

investments. For the various development and WSC works, the participatory development plans 

(PDPs) that are being prepared will underpin all project interventions in each territorial unit. 

2.7 Bank Group Experience and Lessons Reflected in Project Design 

2.7.1 In April 2019, the Bank’s portfolio in Tunisia comprised 43 operations, of which 19 loans 

and 24 grants totalling UA 1 057 million (EUR 1 148 million). The agricultural sector has seven 

(7) operations (UA 69.804 million or EUR 82.251 million), representing 6.8% of the portfolio, 

implemented in similar regions such as Gafsa and Gabès. The performance of the national public 

portfolio is deemed satisfactory with a score of 3.4 (3.5 for agriculture) on 4 (CPPR 2017/2018). 

However, specific weaknesses were noted in procurement, late submission of audit reports and 

difficulties in evaluating the impact of projects. In addition, the Bank has had a rich experience in 

financing integrated agricultural development projects (IADPs). The evaluation of this experience 

conducted in 2018 (January 2019 Summary Report) within the framework of the MIC-TAF grant 

highlighted the following points: (i) the need to better organise agricultural sub-sectors, particularly 

the downstream subsector; (ii) the need to build the institutional capacity of CRDAs and clarify 

partnerships; (iii) the need to define an exit strategy; and (iv) the need to strengthen ADPs and 

establish a baseline situation. In addition, there is lack of innovative mechanisms for financing 

agricultural entrepreneurship, particularly for rural women. 

2.7.2 PDAPF-GZ design took into account lessons from the Bank’s experiences and those of its 

key partners such as IFAD, IBRD, SFD and FAO. A Project Management Unit (PMU) set up within 

the Zaghouan CRDA will oversee the implementation of project activities. PMU staff will be 

selected from the CRDA and will be trained “in situ” by Bank experts on allotments to reduce the 

number of contracts and cut transaction and financial management costs, in order to accelerate the 

preparation of financial statements. The CRDA and the PMU will be provided with equipment, 

logistics and other teaching aids for technical training, agricultural advisory schemes and extension 

services. Similarly, clear agreements will be concluded with its key partners (AVFA, OEP, CTAB, 

INRAT, Mograne School, the Chott Mariem Horticulture and Organic Agriculture Research Centre 

- CRHAB). The project will promote agricultural subsectors that constitute important niches. It will 

finance training, stakeholder organisation, and product processing, packaging and marketing 

activities, thus helping to incorporate various subsector links, generate value added and create the 

desired jobs. The MIC grant mobilised by the Bank was tapped to conduct engineering studies (APS 

and APD), particularly those on irrigation schemes, collection ponds and rural roads, establish the 

project’s baseline situation and guarantee project quality at entry assessment. Support for the 

development of SMEs and income-generating activities as well as pursuit of the “aggregator” 

approach will help to fund training and incubation programmes in support of financial resource 

mobilisation for the development of agricultural entrepreneurship. 



 

10 

 

2.8 Key Performance Indicators 

2.8.1 The key performance indicators monitored based on the baseline situation are presented in 

the results-based logical framework. In terms of facilities, monitoring will concern the number and 

areas of PIPs developed or rehabilitated (and property owned by men and women, to track the 

gender gap), boreholes and collection ponds developed, acreage planted with fruit trees, fodder 

species, water and soil conservation works. The main production and marketing indicators relate to 

additional production (tonnes), yields (t/ha), the number of farmers by type of gender-disaggregated 

development works, increase in income, including those of men and women in order to monitor 

gender gaps, the number and quality of jobs for youths and women created through entrepreneurial 

initiatives, the number of producers, processors and traders trained and organised, as well as the 

number of producers who have adopted best agricultural and production practice that comply with 

environmental, hygienic and food safety rules and standards. The project will also monitor the level 

of women’s participation in decision-making bodies and access to land after development, the 

amount of rural financing mobilised and the rate of increase in gender-disaggregated gross margins. 

III. Project Feasibility 

3.1 Economic and Financial Performance 

3.1.1 Project financial and economic outcomes were determined based on an analysis of 

expected project costs and benefits over a 20-year investment lifespan using the reference pricing 

method, comparing the project and no project situations from the financial standpoint (impact on 

farmers and the various project direct beneficiaries) and from the community standpoint by 

considering socio-economic benefits generated by the project. The expected project benefits will 

stem from improved productivity of existing farm areas and additional production of crops, 

livestock, fodder and income-generating activities. At full development, the project will enable the 

production of 18 000 tonnes of olives, 4 000 tonnes of peaches, 6 000 tonnes of citrus fruits, 26 600 

tonnes of tomatoes, 1 000 tonnes of market garden products, 1 800 000 litres of milk, 21 000 bales 

of fodder, and the establishment of 200 micro and small projects. Profitability analysis was 

conducted based on investment costs plus physical contingencies, and covered irrigation facilities, 

boreholes, plantations, water and soil conservation (WSC) measures, value chains promotion, a 5-

year project implementation period and a 20-year service life. It took into account periodic 

replacement and regular maintenance of equipment. Calculation assumptions took into account 

recent agricultural product prices, yields and production costs. Financial profitability analysis was 

carried out for all types of farms and for each agricultural subsector and income-generating activity. 

Economic profitability was calculated using the elements of financial profitability after deducting 

financial transfers and assessing costs and benefits in relation to their economic value. Based on 

these assumptions, the financial and economic rates of return presented in detail as annex are 

summarised in Table 3.1 below. 

Table 3.1: Key Economic and Financial Data 

NPV (baseline scenario) TND 30.6 million 

IRR (baseline scenario) 15.6 % 

Economic NPV (baseline scenario) TND 47.9 million 

ERR (baseline scenario) 18.8 % 

3.1.2  Financial performance:  the financial rate of return is higher than project financing costs, 

which justifies the implementation of operations in various subsectors selected with variable 

margins according to the type of farm. Additional project income broken down by type of farm and 

activity will mainly come from improved yield of existing olive plantations, new plantations and 

other crops, livestock production and income-generating activities. Additional income in a peak 



 

11 

 

year are estimated by subsector and in TND million as follows: olive (22.9); peach (1.037); citrus 

fruit (1.170); tomato (1.29); dairy (0.486); market gardening (2.36); fodder (0.85); and income-

generating activities (1.00).  

3.1.3 Economic performance: based on a 12% opportunity cost of capital, the economic rate of 

return and the net present value stand at 18.8% and TND 47.9 million, respectively. These values 

would be higher if it were possible to quantify benefits such as improved standard and quality of 

life of the beneficiary population, impact on women and their integration into the development 

process, job creation, reduction of rural exodus, reduction of greenhouse gas emissions through 

new plantations, development of organic farming and building of the capacity of the units and 

bodies involved at various stages of project implementation and operation.    

3.1.4 Sensitivity analysis: an analysis of project sensitivity to potential risks of variation in 

yields, production costs and farm prices was carried out. Simulations based on a 10% increase in 

investment costs reduced the ERR to 17.2% and the NPV to TND 39.5 million. A 10% decrease in 

income reduced the ERR to 16.3% and the NPV to TND 29.4 million. A combination of the two 

events reduced the ERR to 14.2% and the NPV to TND 16.3 million. The outcomes of the financial 

and economic analysis show that the PDPFA-GZ is financially justified, and is viable socio-

economically and environmentally. 

3.2 Environmental and Social Impact 

3.2.1. Environment:  based on the Bank's Integrated Safeguards System (ISS), the PDPFA-GZ 
is classified under Environmental Category 2 because the negative environmental and social 

impacts were deemed moderate to low. Therefore, in accordance with national and Bank 

procedures, the Regional Office for Agricultural Development (CRDA) prepared and submitted an 

Environmental and Social Impact Notice (ESIN). The Environmental and Social Management Plan 

(ESMP) prepared in 2014 was also updated and submitted. The summary of the ESMP has been 

posted on the Bank's website.  

3.2.2. The main project positive environmental and social impacts identified include: (i) land 
consolidation in several irrigation schemes, which will allow for better agricultural development; 

(ii) promotion of income-generating activities (IGAs), which will diversify income sources and 

support small farms, especially those run by women and youths. This will also raise the income of 

rural dwellers, increase job supply and reduce rural exodus; (iii) facilitation of access to micro-

project financing through the assistance that the project will provide to beneficiaries (studying their 

projects, monitoring project implementation and training in the activities to be promoted); (iv) 

development of organic farming, which reduces the use of fertilisers compared with conventional 

farming techniques. Chemical pollution that affects the quality of groundwater will be mitigated 

through the implementation of organic farming projects; (v) study on sylvicultural and pastoral 

development, which will aim to improve the profitability of the livestock sub-sector, while ensuring 

better management of resources and preventing their degradation: (vi) enhancement of the role of 

the Zaghouan National Park in the dissemination and entrenchment of the environmental culture 

among the population and improvement of the living environment; and (vii) improvement of the 

service quality of the soil laboratory, which will contribute to preventing soil degradation to allow 

for optimal use of the soil.  

3.2.3. The negative impacts on biophysical environments are of various forms, including: (i) 
natural and anthropogenic degradation of irrigation schemes and their infrastructure; (ii) upsurge in 

the loss of water distributed in the canals; (iii) reduced fertility of farmland and agricultural 

production; (iv) sharp drop in groundwater level leading to reduced availability of irrigation water; 

(v) land degradation and erosion with silting, gullying and glacis formation, and appearance of crust 



 

12 

 

soils; (vi) gully slopes, shoreline erosion and silting of temporary streams and wadis; and (vii) 

relative pressure of livestock on crops, in the absence of open spaces and pasture areas. 

3.2.4. The ESMP submitted includes: (i) a waste management plan; (ii) a risk management 
programme; (iii) an environmental surveillance and monitoring programme; and (iv) an institution-

building plan. 

3.2.5. The main mitigation measures recommended for implementation by works contractors 
under the responsibility of CRDA are: (i) protection of soil and groundwater resources; (ii) 

preservation of soil stability, prevention of uncontrolled rainwater run-offs and protection of 

drainage networks; (iii) protection and restoration of existing infrastructure; (iv) protection of 

dwellings and other personal property; (v) protection of the archaeological heritage; (vi) solid waste 

management; (vii) prevention and reduction of atmospheric emissions of gaseous pollutants and 

dusts; (viii) prevention and reduction of sound levels and vibrations; and (ix) reduction of 

vegetation destruction areas and restoration of the landscape after works. The estimated overall cost 

of the ESMP (excluding the resettlement action plan) is USD 355 000. It will be fully funded by 

the project. 

3.2.6. The project will also protect and sustain water resources by: (i) mobilizing surface water 
through catchment ponds and the cleaning of river beds; (ii) ensuring the integrated recharge and 

management of groundwater; (iii) improving the water cycle through soil stabilization; and (iv) 

providing support for water saving through the development of drip irrigation and the improvement 

of on-farm management. In addition, it should be noted that the Bank, through the ongoing Water 

2050 Project, is involved in the improvement of water governance in Tunisia. This project will help 

to prepare a national strategy by 2020, the thrusts of which will be taken into account during the 

implementation of PDPFA-GZ activities.  

3.2.7. The environmental and social surveillance and monitoring programme will focus 
respectively on: (i) the monitoring of construction site activities during the construction phase by 

the Consulting Engineer; (ii) environmental monitoring, which will notably concern ambient air 

quality, groundwater and receiving environment water quality, as well as noise and vibration. 

Monitoring will cover the construction and operation phases.  

3.2.8. The recommendations and measures ensuing from the environmental and social 
assessment should be set out and inserted: (i) for contractors, in the bidding documents (BDs) 

through environmental clauses, obligations, responsibilities and penalties, in the Climate Change 

Action Plan (CCAP) as well as in the price schedule (PS) and the bill of quantities (BoQ); (ii) for 

the Consulting Engineer, who shall ensure the presence of two environmental and social/gender 

development experts. 

3.2.9. Climate change: the project is classified under Environmental Category 2 following the 
assessment of the Climate Safeguards System (CSS), in accordance with the Adaptation Review 

and Evaluation Procedures (AREP). In Zaghouan region, climate parameters are highly variable in 

time and space. Rainfall is moderate and very irregular (245 to 625 mm/year). Owing to torrential 

rains, exacerbated by extensive overgrazing, deforestation and poor conduct of agricultural works, 

water erosion is one of the major factors of soil degradation that has reached worrying levels. 

Climate change results in increased average annual temperature and a decrease in average rainfall, 

which affect water resources, ecosystems, agriculture, infrastructure and the occurrence of extreme 

weather events such as floods, snow and hailstorm. Thanks to its activities, PDPFA-GZ is a project 

for climate change adaptation and risk mitigation. It will enhance the climate change resilience of 

vulnerable groups, especially women and youths, as well as production systems. The project will 

significantly reduce water erosion, improve land production capacity and preserve biodiversity. It 

will confine farmers to the irrigation schemes developed, thus reducing their relocation from 



 

13 

 

farming areas in the south to the north of the Governorate. The PMU and CRDA will work to 

incorporate climate information into participatory development plans (PDPs) and encourage 

farmers to take into account climate information in the agricultural calendar. 

3.2.10. Gender issues: the project is classified under Category II of the Gender Marker (existence 
of gender effects and need for an action plan and budget to ensure gender action). In Zaghouan 

Governorate, women are massively involved in agricultural activities. They represent 46% to 51% 

of the family farm labour force, 25% of the permanent paid labour force and 51% of the casual paid 

labour force. They play a particularly important role in livestock production-related activities, 

especially milk production which employs 43% of working women. However, there are gender 

inequalities regarding decent and sustainable jobs, access to land and credit, and differences in 

wages. Women are also poorly represented in professional organisations and rarely access decision-

making bodies. The project will implement special measures for women (and other vulnerable 

groups) to ensure that they benefit from the positive impacts of the project in terms of developing 

their economic activities, creating jobs, reducing the workload and economic empowerment. Thus, 

the project will promote rural activities for which women have proven expertise (olive oil, market 

gardening, aromatic and medicinal plants, organic and local products, etc.) and from which they 

can earn decent income.  

3.2.11. Specifically, the project will ensure that women have access to 40% - 45% of plots with 
land titles in the new public irrigation schemes (PIPs), against 10% -15% currently. The training 

and coaching programme for agricultural entrepreneurship, viable business incubation and support 

for settlement in the new PIPs will concern at least 200 women entrepreneurs who will benefit from 

funding worth about TND 1.5 million set up. It will target women-owned micro-, small- and 

medium-size enterprises (MSMEs) with high growth potential organised within mutual agricultural 

service companies (SMSAs) and agricultural development groups (GDAs). In addition, there will 

be intermediation with local financing entities to enable the greatest number of women (at least 

60%) and vulnerable people to benefit from credit facilities to develop a business. Furthermore, the 

project will support the marketing and commercialisation of women’s products through the 

development of product sales points. In addition to this specific support, the project will closely 

monitor the inclusive and equitable participation of women and youths in implementing all 

activities, sharing the benefits and enhancing their economic empowerment and decision-making 

power. This will give women better social visibility and strengthen their socio-economic status. 

3.2.12. Social issues: one of the objectives of PDPFA-GZ is to reduce inequalities within 
Zaghouan Governorate and raise the region to align with the level of national economic and social 

development indicators. As a result, it will promote social cohesion in the Governorate. The 

strengthening of associations (GDAs) and cooperatives (SMSAs) promotes consultation and the 

development of a solidarity-based economy. There will be a remarkable impact on food and 

nutrition security. The expected outcomes in terms of employment are significant. The project will 

strengthen the employability of women and young people through vocational training. The 

combination of irrigation facility development works, technical training, access to means of 

production for the poorest, financing of IGAs and entrepreneurship, WSC works, promotion of 

local organic subsectors and products will generate additional income for the population (estimated 

to be at least 50% of current income). This will encourage the consumption of social services such 

as education and health, and thus enhance the value of social capital. 

3.2.13. Youth employment and promotion of agricultural entrepreneurship: access to credit 
is one of the major constraints facing rural MSMEs in the region. Investment in agriculture is a 

risky activity that requires risk sharing by all stakeholders in the value chain. The project will 

promote agricultural entrepreneurship among young people (men and women) and initiators of 

innovative projects by providing more flexible financing adapted to the constraints of each operator 



 

14 

 

involved in the value chain through the establishment of a strategic partnership with financial 

institutions. In this connection, 300 young people (girls and boys) will be trained in agricultural 

entrepreneurship and set up in all the lin ks of the value chain, namely: production in the developed 

PIPs, processing, trade and services. This initiative ultimately seeks to reach nearly 1500 people 

through its multiplier effect. In terms of support and to optimise project sustainability and the 

conquest of new markets, the project will build the capacity of promoters and enhance aspects 

related to the improvement of development and sales techniques, marketing conditions, required 

quality standards, facilitation of the “organic” certification process, visibility and access to 

profitable markets. Incubation centres (Mograne School Nursery, the Zaghouan Business Centre, 

etc.) will also be solicited for training in entrepreneurship and development of business plans to 

foster easy access to available financial resources. Lastly, the project will support the constitution 

of potential aggregators (SMSAs, private companies, etc.).  

3.2.14. Involuntary resettlement: considering that the engineering studies carried out with Bank 

financial support did not take into account the aspects related to the freeing of the rights-of-way for 

the execution of works planned and the possible risks of expropriation, the Bank requires the review 

of the said studies to take these aspects and risk mitigation into account (selecting the appropriate 

variant and clearly defining the indemnification/compensation measures envisaged in such a case). 

Meanwhile, the CRDA has with Bank assistance submitted a Comprehensive Resettlement Action 

Plan (CRAP) outlining the general principles that will guide all expropriation operations under 

PDPFA-GZ. It defines the procedures to be followed for prior recognition of expropriation and 

indemnification/compensation rights. It specifies the indemnification/compensation mechanism 

and the redress mechanism, and identifies the institutional arrangement and capacity building for 

the implementation of expropriation and complaint processing procedures. CRAP is a contractual 

document by which the Tunisian Government, in collaboration with the local authorities and in 

accordance with SO2 requirements and procedures, formally undertakes to respect the 

indemnification/compensation rights of any potential project affected person or entity. The cost of 

implementing CRAP (RAP implementation, indemnification/compensation, operation, capacity 

building, implementation monitoring, etc.) will be fully funded by the Borrower. 

3.2.15. CRAP will be set out as a resettlement action plan (RAP) latest prior to project launching, 
for implementation by the CRDA. The submission of the final RAP will be the subject of a specific 

disbursement condition precedent to financing the specified works. 

IV. Project Implementation 

4.1. Implementation Arrangements 

4.1.1. Implementation arrangements: the Zaghouan Regional Office for Agricultural 
Development (CRDA) will manage and coordinate the project. It will set up a Project Management 

Unit (PMU) comprising a Project Coordinator, an Administrative and Financial Officer assisted by 

an Accountant, a Procurement Specialist, a Monitoring and Evaluation Officer and a team of 

consultant facilitators. The PMU will be responsible for coordination and planning, monitoring and 

evaluation, preparation of annual programmes and budgets, financial management, procurement 

and preparation of project progress and audit reports. It will rely on the various technical 

directorates and sub-departments of the CRDA for technical supervision, extension services, works 

control/monitoring, and regular evaluation of ESMP implementation. It will also rely on dedicated 

facilitators to be deployed routinely at the local level closest to beneficiaries (GDAs, farmers, 

women and youths). In addition to equipment and logistics, the PMU will benefit from technical 

support, training and capacity building in environmental and social management and monitoring as 

provided for in the ESMP. 



 

15 

 

4.1.2. Based on agreements to be concluded for some activities, the PMU will use specialised 
institutions and NGOs, notably the Chott-Mariem Organic Agriculture Centre (CTAB) for organic 

agricultural support, the Chott-Mariem Horticulture and Organic Agriculture Research Centre 

(CRRHAB) for the development of rosehip cultivation, the Office of Livestock and Pasture (OEP) 

for the development of the dairy sub-sector, genetic improvement, creation of an insemination 

circuit, training and supervision of stock breeders, the National Institute of Agronomic Research, 

Tunis (INRAT) for the development of fodder crops and improvement of nutritive value, and the 

Mograne School and AVFA for the supervision of farmers, CRDA technicians and business 

incubation.  

4.1.3. The project will be coordinated at the national level by the National Projects Coordination 
Committee (CNC) chaired by the Minister of Agriculture, Water and Fishery Resources or his/her 

representative and comprising representatives of the general directorates of the Ministry of 

Agriculture, representatives of the Ministry of Development, Investment and International 

Cooperation, the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Equipment and Housing, and the Ministry 

of Local Affairs and Environment, among others. Project activities will be coordinated at the 

regional level by the Regional Development Board (CRD) chaired by the Governor and comprising 

elected representatives of the region as well as regional government representatives.  

4.1.4. Procurement arrangements: all procurement of Bank-financed works, goods and 
consultancy services will be in accordance with the Procurement Framework for Bank Group-

Funded Operations (“AfDB Procurement Policy”), October 2015 edition, and with the provisions 

set forth in the Financing Agreement. Pursuant to this policy and considering the various 

assessments conducted, the following groups of transactions have been identified for 

implementation using the various systems below: 

(a) Bank Procurement Methods and Procedures (BPMPs): all selections of consultants will be 
in accordance with the Bank’s procurement system (AfDB System) using Bank bidding 

documents (BDs). The use of the Bank system for such procurement is attributable to the 

weaknesses identified in the national system, including the inappropriate mechanism for 

opening consultants’ bids, the absence of a minimum technical qualification score in some 

methods, etc. 

(b) Tunisia’s Procurement System (TPS):  the procurement of works and goods will be done in 
accordance with Tunisia’s procurement system (National System) embodied by Decree No. 

2014-1039 of 13 March 2014 regulating public procurement ("DMP"), via bidding 

documents (BDs) commonly used in Tunisia.  

4.1.5. Details on this procurement and related control mechanisms are presented in Annex B.5 

4.1.6. Procurement risk and capacity assessment: the country, sector and project procurement 
risks were assessed and the outcomes used to guide the selection of the procurement system 

(Borrower or Bank) to be used for specific activities or group of similar activities under the project. 

The assessment of the Executing Agency’s procurement capacity was carried out. Appropriate risk 

mitigation measures have been included in the action plan presented in paragraph B5.9 of Annex 

B5. 

4.1.7. Advance contracting:  considering the Borrower's tight schedule, and to address the issue 
of accelerating project implementation pursuant to PD 02/2015, studies prior to the procurement of 

works planned for the first year of the project may, at Government’s request, be implemented 

through advance contracting, in accordance with the provisions of Article 11.2 of the AfDB 

Procurement Policy. The procedures and methods to be used for these advance actions will be the 

same as those chosen for the project. In this regard, a request stating the reasons (indicating the 



 

16 

 

procurement concerned), together with a procurement plan, will be submitted to the Bank. In turn, 

the Bank will analyse the reasons mentioned and take a decision. 

4.1.8. Specific conditions arising from the use of the National Procurement System - Additional 
Waiver on Eligibility: 

(i) Eligibility-related waiver: the Bank’s resources for financing the project will come from the 
AfDB window. As a result, the eligibility rules specific to the window are a priori 

applicable. Following the assessment of procurement risks and capacity, it was decided that 

the National Procurement System will be used for part of this project. Given that the 

eligibility rules for public procurement under Tunisian law are not the same as those of the 

AfDB window, it is necessary to avoid any practical incompatibility. To this end, and for 

the component implemented using the national public procurement system, PDPFA-GZ will 

benefit from a partial waiver (only contracts of a specified size are concerned) granted by 

the Bank's Board of Directors (“the Board”) in March 2017 (see Document 

AfDB/BD/WP/2016/184/ Rev.(2) for the non-application of the rule of origin of the AfDB 

window (as provided for in Article 17.1.d: “Operational Principles” of the Agreement 

Establishing the African Development Bank (so-called Rule of Origin) for all goods 

contracts of up to UA 1 million, all consultancy contracts up to UA 300 000 and all works 

contracts below or equal to UA 6 million financed by AfDB window resources and 

concluded in accordance with a national procurement system. Given that no contract 

exceeding the above thresholds is provided for under PDPFA-GZ, no additional waiver will 

be required. Thus, the eligibility rules applicable to all contracts concluded under this project 

according to the Tunisian public procurement system will be the national eligibility rules, 

in addition to the provisions of paragraphs 5.2 to 5.10 of the AfDB Eligibility Policy. 

Consequently and for information purposes, even if the national system is used, Bank loan 

resources would not be used to finance a contract awarded to a bidder under AfDB Group 

sanctions. In the event where, these provisions notwithstanding, a contract is concluded with 

a bidder under Bank Group sanction, the contract will not be financed by AfDB loan 

resources. The list of companies under sanction can be consulted at 

http://www.afdb.org/debarred. 

(ii) Other specific conditions proposed: to be able to perform its fiduciary obligations in 
connection with the use of the National System, the Bank has agreed with the Borrower on 

a series of measures the reasons, objectives and details of which are presented in paragraph 

B.5.7.2 of Annex B5.  

4.1.9. Financial management:  the Zaghouan CRDA will ensure project financial management 
through the Project Management Unit (PMU) to be created within it. Financial execution will be 

based on the budgetary system, the public expenditure execution and control system in force at the 

CRDA governed by the Code of Public Accounts, and the circulars on public fund management. In 

this regard, the PMU will benefit from the technical support of the subdivisions of the 

Administrative and Financial Division, the collaboration of the subdivisions of CRDA’s Technical 

Divisions, the Pay Accountant (Comptable Payeur) under the authority of the Regional Treasurer, 

and the Regional Controller of Public Expenditure under the supervision of the Head of 

Government. The project's financial management staff will comprise a Project Manager and an 

Administrative and Financial Officer assisted by an Accountant, all appointed from among CRDA 

staff. The PMU will be responsible for preparing annual work programmes and budgets (AWPBs), 

implementing the AWPB and preparing interim financial reports and annual financial statements. 

To better incorporate the PMU into the CRDA management system, the duties of its members 

should be clearly defined. 



 

17 

 

4.1.10. Disbursements:  the loan will be disbursed in accordance with Bank rules and procedures. 
The special account method and the direct payment method defined in the disbursement manual 

will be used to withdraw loan funds. The use of the special account method will be subject to the 

opening of a special account in the name of the project at the Central Bank of Tunisia (BCT). This 

account will only receive loan resources. During negotiations, a draft disbursement letter will be 

presented and agreed upon by the Bank and the Borrower. It will be sent to the Borrower’s 

representative upon loan approval by the Bank’s Board of Directors. In accordance with the 

provisions of the disbursement manual, and subject to prior Bank approval, it is possible, during 

project implementation, to change the disbursement methods adopted.  

4.1.11.  Auditing: the General Finance Control (CGF) will conduct the external audit based on the 

terms of reference approved by the Bank. The Borrower will transmit the audit report to the Bank 

within six (6) months following the end of the financial year audited. The PMU will be responsible 

for implementing audit recommendations aimed at improving sound project financial execution. 

An annual procurement audit will be conducted for contracts awarded in accordance with the 

national system. 

4.2. Monitoring 

4.2.1. Monitoring mechanisms: the project monitoring and evaluation mechanism will be 
designed taking into consideration the specific project objectives and the expected outcomes of the 

Strategic Development Plan (SDP) for the agricultural sector, and aligned with the public projects 

monitoring system (“INJEZ”) currently used by the Ministry of Agriculture, Water Resources and 

Fishery (MARHP). A participatory monitoring and citizen control mechanism provided by the 

SMSA and GDA will also be set up in line with the principle of accountability now recommended 

within the context of results-based management.  

4.2.2. Internal monitoring and evaluation will be carried out by the PMU and will cover project 
physical (overall and component implementation rate) and financial (commitment rate and 

disbursement rate) monitoring, gender mainstreaming in activities and inputs, and their adequacy 

with projections.  The project monitoring/evaluation officer will collect and compile information 

on the physical and financial outcomes. This information will be used to prepare the project 

progress reports. The key reports that will be prepared during the project implementation phase 

are indicated in Table 4.1 below.  

Table 4.1: Key Reports 

Subject Responsibility Date 

Project physical and financial progress report with 

procurement tables 

CRDA Each semester: 30th of the month 

following the end of the semester 

Financial audit reports for each fiscal year (1 January 

to 31 December). 

MDICI Latest 30th June of the next fiscal year 

Annual and budget programme CRDA 30 November of the preceding year 

Mid-term review MARHP June of the Project Year 3 

Completion report MARHP and 

AfDB 

Project completion. 

4.2.3. External monitoring and evaluation seeks to measure the effectiveness and efficiency of 
project outputs, and their contribution to achieving development outcomes (i.e. project outputs and 

impacts). It will be carried out by the National Coordination Committee (CNC) and the Regional 

Development Board (CRD), in addition to the two annual supervision missions fielded by the 

Bank. The mid-term review will be conducted in Year 3. At project closure, the Bank and the 

Government will produce a completion report within the prescribed deadline. The main project 

implementation phases are summarised below. 



 

18 

 

Table 4.2: Project Implementation Schedule 

No. ACTIVITY RESPONSIBILITY TIMEFRAME 

1 Appraisal BANK Mid-April 2019 

2 Negotiations GVT/BANK May-June 2019 

3 Project Presentation to the Bank Board of Directors  BANK July 2019 

4 Signing of Loan Agreement  GVT/BANK Mid-September 2019 

5 Fulfilment of Conditions GVT Mid-November 2019 

6 Authorisation of 1st Disbursement BANK December 2019 

7 Project Launching  GVT/BANK January 2020 

8 Project Implementation 
GVT/PMU/ Service 

Providers 

January 2020 - 

December 2025 

9 Midterm Review GVT/BANK June 2023 

10 Completion of Activities GVT/BANK December 2025 

11 Completion Report   GVT/BANK December 2025 

12 Auditing GVT Annually 

4.3. Governance 

4.3.1. Tunisia is making significant progress in governance. With a score of 63.5 against an 
African average of 49.9, the country occupies the 9th position out of 54 countries in the Mo Ibrahim 

Index of African Governance (IIAG-2018). Similarly, with Bank assistance, the country embarked 

on the implementation of a public procurement reform action plan that resulted in the adoption in 

2014 of a new decree on the regulation of more transparent public procurement. The country 

fiduciary risk assessment (CFRA) carried out showed that the internal public finance management 

control system is appropriate. Generally, economic governance has improved and competition 

enhanced. Under the PDPFA-GZ specifically, land tenure governance will be promoted through 

land consolidation support and the issuance of land titles to farmers (both men and women) in the 

new public irrigation schemes. Transparency measures will also be applied in the selection of 

beneficiaries with the full participation of farmers’ representatives. Likewise, a participatory 

monitoring and citizen control mechanism will be set up in line with the principle of accountability 

recommended within the context of results-based management. 

4.4. Sustainability  

4.4.1. The project has adopted the participatory approach, which enables greater ownership of 
development activities by project beneficiaries who will contribute significantly (about 30%) to 

infrastructure financing and management (PIPs, boreholes, catchment ponds, product development 

units, etc.). Sustainability also relies on water and soil conservation (WSC) and water-saving 

measures, including groundwater recharge, sealing of the entire water transport and drip irrigation 

system to save water and control flow rates recorded. The PMU will conclude collaboration 

agreements with specialised institutions for organic agricultural support, rosehip research and 

development, development of the diary sub-sector and genetic improvement, fodder crop 

development and supervision of farmers and CRDA technicians. To enable these entities to play 

their role fully, they will be supported through specific training in agricultural advisory schemes, 

farmers’ organisation, management, monitoring and evaluation. The use of the “value chain” 

approach with the mainstreaming of product processing, storage and marketing aspects will help to 

incorporate all subsector links and further connect production to markets. Thus, setting up small 

economically, financially and ecologically viable product processing units will guarantee the 

sustainability of project achievements. Furthermore, the project will ensure crosscutting integration 

and mainstreaming of environmental and social aspects, hygiene and food safety, in line with the 

Bank's environmental and social safeguards, and the standards and requirements of profitable 

markets. The sustainability of project operations will also be guaranteed through the effective 

involvement of the local private sector, financial institutions and enterprises in the “aggregation” 



 

19 

 

model to ensure the sustainable establishment of young agricultural entrepreneurs and their access 

to financing and markets. 

4.5. Risk Management 

Table 4.3: Risks and Mitigation Measures 

Risks Level Mitigation Measure 

Unclarified land and public property issues can 

create difficulties in improving the PIPs to be 

developed and compromise project objectives   

Moderate Improving local land governance through land 

consolidation, settlement of land tenure issues 

and the issuance of land titles, following an 

inclusive process, will mitigate this risk.  

Climatic hazards that can worsen the degradation 

of ecosystems and property, increase natural 

disasters and render the population more 

vulnerable 

Moderate Drip irrigation, protection of vulnerable areas, 

opening up of roads and incorporation of climate 

information into the design of facilities will 

mitigate this risk.  

Lack of transparency in the selection of 

beneficiaries, weak monitoring of technological 

innovations by the communities and weak 

capacity of technical services and companies 

Low The definition of beneficiary selection criteria 

with the active participation of farmers’ 

representatives, the adoption of a participatory, 

inclusive and collaborative approach, and the 

building of the capacity of all stakeholders will 

mitigate this risk 

Limited access of farmers to financial resources 

that can annihilate project efforts to create 

sustainable jobs and generate decent income 

Moderate Training in agricultural entrepreneurship and 

forging of partnerships with MFIs for rural 

financing will mitigate this risk. 

4.6. Knowledge Building  

4.6.1. The project will finance a study to update groundwater balances. It will support the 
strengthening of the piezometric measuring network for groundwater level monitoring and control. 

The findings of these studies and measurements will feed a database at the CRDA to enable 

appropriate programming of future agricultural development operations, especially irrigation. The 

project will also build CRDA's capacity to make an optimal use of all the knowledge acquired 

mainly from experts, and finance stakeholder exchange sessions for better sharing of information 

collected. The PMU and CRDA will work to incorporate climate information into participatory 

development plans (PDPs) and encourage farmers to include climate information in the agricultural 

calendar. Such information will also be shared with the weather monitoring networks to identify 

risks of natural disasters and contribute to the rational and predictive management of such risks. In 

addition, gender-based monitoring and evaluation will contribute to the development of knowledge 

in this sector and help to advance gender considerations in other bank operations in the agricultural 

sector. Lastly, the project will establish an integrated system for managing and sharing knowledge 

on project activities through regular dissemination on MARHP’s website, in order to build on and 

manage the knowledge and experience acquired. 

V. LEGAL FRAMEWORK 

5.1 Legal Instrument  

5.1.1 The project will be financed through an ADB loan granted to the Republic of Tunisia.  

5.2  Conditions for Bank Intervention  

5.2.1 The granting of the ADB loan shall be subject to fulfilment of the following conditions:  

 

  



 

20 

 

Conditions Precedent to Loan Effectiveness  

Effectiveness of the Loan Agreement shall be subject to the Borrower’s fulfilment, to the Bank’s 

satisfaction, of the conditions set forth in Section 12.01 of the General Conditions Applicable to 

Bank Loan and Guarantee Agreements.  

Condition Precedent to First Disbursement of Loan Resources  

In addition to effectiveness of the Loan Agreement, the first disbursement of loan resources shall 

be subject to the Borrower’s fulfilment, to the Bank’s satisfaction, of the following conditions:  

(i) Provide evidence of establishing the Project Management Unit (PMU) and 
appointing its key members, namely the project coordinator, the administrative and 

financial officer, an accountant, a procurement specialist, and a monitoring and 

evaluation officer, whose qualifications and professional experience would been 

have been approved beforehand by the Bank (paragraph 4.1.1). 

Special Conditions Precedent to Disbursement for Works Involving Resettlement  

In addition to effectiveness of the Loan Agreement and fulfilment of the condition precedent to 

loan disbursement, the disbursement of loan resources to finance works contracts involving 

resettlement shall be subject to the Borrower’s fulfilment of the following conditions, to the Bank’s 

satisfaction: 

(i) Submit a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and a Land Acquisition Plan prepared in accordance 
with the Bank’s safeguards policies, updated as necessary and detailing: (a) each project works 

area; and (b) the deadline for compensating and/or resettling all project-affected persons (PAPs) 

in each area;  

(ii) Provide satisfactory evidence that all PAPs on the area or areas concerned by works have been 
resettled or compensated in line with the Bank’s safeguards policies, the RAP, the Land 

Acquisition Plan and/or the works and compensation schedule, before the start of works in areas 

concerned and, in any event, prior to the displacement of PAPs and/or the takeover of their land 

and/or related property. Where such resettlement or compensation is not possible: 

(iii) Provide satisfactory evidence indicating that the resources allocated for the compensation 
and/or resettlement of PAPs have been transferred to a public treasury account set aside for that 

compensation and/or resettlement. When the Borrower can prove, to the Bank’s satisfaction, 

that the compensation and/or resettlement of PAPs as set forth under paragraph (ii) above could 

not be effected in full or in part, for reasons beyond the Borrower’s will, as follows: 

(a) The identification of PAPs by the Borrower is not feasible or possible; 

(b) There is ongoing dispute involving PAPs and/or affecting the compensation and/or 
resettlement exercise; or  

(c) Any other reason independent of the Borrower’s will, as discussed with and acceptable 
to the Bank. 

Environmental and Social Safeguards Undertaking 

The Borrower undertakes to do as follows, to the Bank’s satisfaction:  

(i) Implement the project and have it implemented by its contractors, in accordance with: the 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), the RAP and/or the works and 



 

21 

 

compensation schedule, the Environmental and Social Impact Notice (ESIN), the Bank’s 

safeguards policies and applicable national legislation in form and substance, to the Bank’s 

satisfaction;   

(ii) Refrain from all action that would prevent or hamper the implementation of the ESMP and 
RAP, including all modification, suspension, renunciation and/or cancellation in full or in 

part of any related provision, without the Bank’s prior agreement;  

(iii) Not commence works on project areas until: (a) all PAPs in the project area are compensated 
and/or resettled in line with the RAP and/or the works and compensation schedule, subject 

to the the application of clauses related to the impossibility of proceeding with the 

resettlement or the compensation; and  

(iv) Prepare and submit reports each semester to the Bank on: (a) the implementation of the 
ESMP and the RAP (environmental and social monitoring), notably comprising information 

on issues identified and corrective measures taken, and (b) compensation of persons based 

on models agreed by the Bank and the Borrower. 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies  

5.3.1  The project is consistent with applicable Bank's policies, especially its environmental and 

social management policies, guidelines and procedures.  

VI. RECOMMENDATION 

6.1 Management recommends that the Board of Directors approve the proposal to grant an 
ADB loan not exceeding EUR 25.21 million to the Republic of Tunisia for the purpose and under 

the conditions set forth in this report.



 

















































AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND 

 

 
 
 

UGANDA 

 

 

 

AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAIN DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME 

(AVCP) – PROJECT 1 
 

 

 

 

 

Loan and Grant Information 
 

Client’s information 

 

BORROWER   : Republic of Uganda 

 

EXECUTING AGENCY : Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF)  

 

Financing plan 

 

 

Source Amount (UA Million) 

 

Instrument 

ADF  

 

 57.00  Loan  

Government  

 

7.41 Not applicable  

TOTAL COST 

 

64.41  

 

 Key financing information 

 

Loan  currency 

 

UA 

Interest Type* Note Applicable  

Interest rate spread * Note Applicable  

Commitment Fee 0.5% 

Other fees* 0.75% Service Charge   

Tenor 600 months  

Grace period 120 months  

FIRR 

NPV (USD base case ) 

20%  

2.127 Million  

EIRR (base case) 23% 

*if applicable 

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected) 
Concept Note approval 22 January, 2017 

Project approval 11 December 2017 

Effectiveness March , 2018 

Completion December ,2022  

Closing Date  June,  2023  

Last repayment 50 years; December, 2068  

 

      

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

iv 

 

Project Summary 

 
1. Project Overview: 

1.1 The Agricultural Value Chain Development Programme (AVCP) – Project 1 is designed within 
the context of the National Development Plan II (NDP II) 2015/16-2019/20, which has been designated 

by Government of Uganda (GoU) as the second of a series of six 5-year NDPs to translate the country’s 

Vision 2040 into action. The NDP’s core objectives are to increase household income; generate 

employment; develop the infrastructure; increase access to quality social services; promote science and 

technology; and develop human capital taking gender equality as prerequisite for accelerating 

socioeconomic transformation which AVCP is consistent with. The Project’s activities, notably, 

construction of irrigation infrastructure, value chains development, and export promotion to enhance 

household incomes, are also consistent with the Government’s Agricultural Sector Strategic Plan 

(ASSP) 2015/16-2019/20, Gender Policy Brief for Uganda’s Agriculture Sector (2012), the Local 

Government Sector Strategic Plan (LGSSP) (2013-2023), and, the Uganda Climate Change Policy 2015.  

 

AVCP will be implemented along commodity value chain framework, with considerable attention to 

regulatory reforms. In agreement with Government, the project will focus on three commodity value 

chains, namely: Rice, Maize and Dairy/Beef value chains; and will comprise of three (3) operational 

and one (1) management components namely: i) Production and Productivity Enhancement, ii) 

Infrastructure Development, iii) Market Development and Trade Facilitation; and (iv) Project 

Management and Coordination. 

 
1.2 According to Uganda National Household Survey 2013, about 19.7%, of the total population 

representing 6.7 million people, are unable to meet their basic needs and are living below absolute 

poverty line. The incidence of poverty is highest among food-crop growing category in the rural areas 

due to low income. The project seeks to increase farmer incomes through improvements in Production 

and Productivity Enhancement, Infrastructure Development and Market Development and Trade 

Facilitation.  

 

1.3  The project will be implemented over a five-year period in various Districts across Uganda, 

according to the value chain selected, viz: Maize: Districts of Kyegegwa, Kamwenge, Masindi, 

Kiryandongo, Kasese, Buhweju, Mitooma, Nakaseke, Mukono, Luwero, Mityana, Kiboga, Buikwe, 

Wakiso, Buyende, Mayuge, Gulu, Oyam, Amolatar, Pader, Iganga, Kamuli, Mbale, Jinja, Kapchorwa; 

Rice: Locations where the Bank and Government have developed large irrigation schemes, Sironko-

Acomai irrigation scheme, and the districts of Bulambuli, Bukedea, Kamuli, Gulu, Oyam, Amolatar and 

Pader. The soft components including training, input delivery, extension service delivery and capacity 

building would be extended to all irrigation schemes undertaken with support of the Bank under FIEFOC 

1 & 2 (Nebbi, Oyam, Kween, Butaleja, Kasese, and Kitgum Districts); Dairy: This will mainly focus on 

the cattle corridor districts (from West to North corridors) with the livestock breeding centre in Mbarara 

district as the springboard. The target population in those districts is about 1,816,756 of which 51.7% 

are women and comprising 386,543.8 households. It is envisaged that the Project would lead to increase 

in yields of major crops by 50% and incomes of the target population specifically women by an average 

of 10%. In particular a greater percentage (50%) of the start-up enterprises and  income generating 

activities from natural resources, capacity building  and service delivery of the project would specifically 

target women and youth whose incomes are expected to increase by an average of 30%; thus enhancing 

their socio economic status through improved  yields and incomes. Moreover, the project is expected to 

provide technical skills in conservation and other farming practices through targeted training that 

promote environmental management and thus increasing agricultural productivity in the proposed 

project area. It will also assist in the formulation and implementation of measures that reduce 

deforestation and promote agro-forestry through introduction of economic trees which will lead to 

emission reductions and the protection of carbon reservoirs as part of the Reduction of Emissions from 



 

v 

 

Deforestation and Degradation (REDD+) agenda. The carbon dioxide (CO2) sequestered as a result of 

tree planting by the project is estimated at 245, 000 tons of over 20 years. Training under the project 

will provide an opportunity for special attention to be given to intensification of climate-smart farming 

operations. 

 

2. Needs Assessment:  

2.1 AVCP has been identified as a flagship project under NDPII that will contribute to achievement 

of Uganda’s national objectives to increase household income; generate employment; develop the 

infrastructure; and increase access to quality social services. This Appraisal Report is in response to a 

request from the Government of Uganda to provide assistance for the transformation of agriculture in 

Uganda from subsistence to a more commercially oriented one. The Bank had initially fielded a Country 

Dialogue, Identification and Preparation Missions to Uganda in March, July and September, 2016 

respectively.  The missions were to understand the extent of implementation of the ASSP and the general 

context of agriculture in the country with a view to designing a support package from the Bank to achieve 

the goal of agricultural transformation; and supporting processing and marketing activities in this sector. 

The feasibility study and preliminary designs of the Achomai irrigation scheme in Bukedia/Bulambuli 

Districts was developed by JICA. In the course of the development of this project, the project team also 

held several consultation meetings with various stakeholders of the project; including civil society and 

development partners. 

 

2.2 Hence the project is demand driven by farmers, local governments, various stakeholders and the 

GoU to address requirements of increased agricultural production and enhancement of household 

incomes.  The project will build on Uganda’s relatively strong record in improving gender equity 

through deliberate inclusion and promotion of project activities with farms and agribusiness activities 

owned, operated, and managed by women. The project will aim to empower more women and youth to 

make decisions, invest in agriculture, and improve their social and economic status for the family’s 

overall wellbeing. 

 

2.3 In keeping with the Bank’s new strategy on addressing fragility and building resilience, the project 

has also been developed with the goal of building resilience in mind. Food security is critical to 

community resilience, and agribusiness provides value addition, creating agro-industries, and export 

promotion.  By helping the development of agribusiness and cottage industries, the Bank will contribute 

to more stable sources of income, greater food security, boosts youth employment, and expand economic 

opportunities for the communities. 

 

3. Bank’s Added Value: 

3.1 The proposed project is anchored on the Country Strategy for Uganda (2017-2021) which is 

articulated around two strategic pillars, namely: (i) Infrastructure development for value addition and 

industrialization, and (ii) Skills and Capacity Development for poverty reduction. This is in line with 

the Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy (2013-2022) and the High Five (h5s) Initiatives which prioritizes 

agriculture and food security as one of the key areas for the Bank’s future assistance. The Bank has 

considerable experience in implementing agriculture and infrastructure projects in Uganda, including 

the Area-based Agricultural Modernization Programme (AAMP), the Northwest Smallholder 

Agricultural Development Project (NSADP),  the Community Agricultural Infrastructure Improvement 

Programme – Project 1, 2 and 3 (CAIIP-1, 2, 3) - that won the 2013 USA Department of the Treasury 

MDB Awards, the Market and Agriculture Trade Improvement Project, and Farm Income Enhancement 

and Forestry Conservation Project (FIEFOC). The proposed project draws extensively from lessons 

learned from the Completion Reports and Impact Studies of the completed Projects. The most pertinent 

lessons include (i) the enhancement of agricultural commodity trade, including establishment of linkages 

between Bank financed projects; (ii) integration of the value addition activities involving the private 

sector; iii) Adopting integrated watershed development and alternative livelihood; and iv) Building the 



 

vi 

 

capacity of Water Users’ Associations (WUAs)  to ensure maintenance of the infrastructure and project 

sustainability. These lessons have been taken into consideration in the design of this project 

 

4. Knowledge Management:  

4.1 Knowledge gained from implementation of the above projects, particularly on the need to build 

country capacity for project implementation, has been duly applied in designing this project. In the same 

pattern, the knowledge that will be generated by the project will be instrumental in designing and 

managing similar Bank-financed projects in the future. Provisions made for knowledge and information 

management include on web-based technology for natural resources data collection, ICT platform to 

network value chain actors, compilation and presentation, the market Information System (MIS) that 

will generate data pertaining to prices, sources and volumes of commodities to be shared with all 

stakeholders and the gender sensitive value chain analysis and development that allow women and youth 

to design and manage sustainable SMEs.



 

vii 

 

AVCP RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 

Country and project name: UGANDA: Agricultural Value Chain Development Programme 

Purpose of the project :  To improve farm incomes, rural livelihoods, food security and contribute to poverty reduction through irrigated agriculture, sustainable natural resources management and agricultural 

enterprise development. 

 

RESULTS CHAIN INDICATOR  BASELINE TARGET  
MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 
RISK/MITICATION MEASURES 

IM
P

A
C

T
  

1.1 Farm incomes increased, food 
security improved and poverty reduced  

 

1.1: Average household farm income (USD per year) 

 
 

1.2:  Reduction in Poverty Level (%) 

 

2017 

1.1: 672 
(2016) 

1.2: 26 

 

2022 

1.1 730 
 

1.2: 14.2 

Household survey, 

Bureau of 
Statistics (UBOS) 

reports, 

 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

 

 

2.1. Improved rice and maize 
production, and livestock genetic 

breed  

 
 

 

 
 

2.2 Improved integrated natural 

resources management 
 

 

2.3 Improved rural employment 
(30%youth and women) 

 

 

 

2.1.1  Number of hectares under improve rice production 
 

2.1.2  Number of hectares under improve maize production 

 
2.1.3 Number of farmers accessing improved livestock genetic breeds 

by dairy and beef farmers  

 
 

2.2: % change in tree cover (ha) in selected catchments 

 
 

 

2.3: Number of  skilled/semi-skilled jobs created (of which women and 
youth)  

2017 

 

2.1:  0 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

2.2: 0 

 
 

 

2.3: 0 
 

2022 

 

2.1.1: 7,750;  
 

2.1.2 6700;  

 
2.1.3 500,000 

 

 
 

2.2: 30% 

 
 

 

2.3: 40,000 
 

 

 

 

Crop forecasting 
survey. 

Market surveys. 

 
. 

  

 

Risk 1: Private sector may not be 
motivated to participate in value addition 

activities. 

Mitigation 1: Provision of Business 
Development Support Services to 

potential SMEs actors will motivate 

them to participate in the project 

O
U

T
P
U

T
S
 

3.0 Components   

 
3.1 Irrigation infrastructure developed  

3.2 Access road construction 

3.3 Support ongoing consolidation of 
a central database for Ugandan 

farmers 
3.4 Establishment of an efficient input 

distribution system based upon the e-

wallet platform,  
35.Selection of best varieties of maize, 

rice, and dairy cattle for dissemination 

to farmers  
3.6 Improved breeds of dairy and beef 

cattle developed 

3.7 Farmer organization of the 
irrigation scheme established and 

trained 

 

 

 
3.1: Acreage of new irrigated area (Ha) 

3.2: Number of kms of access road constructed 

3.3 Number of farmers profiled in the central database for Ugandan 
farmers  

3.4. Number of farmers purchasing quality controlled maize seed  
       Number of farmers purchasing quality controlled rice seed  

 

3.5.1: Yield per hectare for maize, (MT)  
3.5.2: Yield per Hectare for Rice (MT)  

 

3.6.1 Change in productivity of  livestock developed through AI 
3.6.2 Change in litres of milk produced in the project area.  

 

3.7: Formation and registration of farmer organizations in the project 
areas. Number of farmers utilizing the services of the farmer 

organization 

 

2017 

 
3.1:  0 

3.2:0 

 
3.3: 0 

3.4: 0 
 

 

3.5.1: 0 
3.5.2: 0  

 

3.6.1:0 
3.6.2:0 

 

3.7:0 
 

 

 

2020 

 

3.1:  1608 
3.2: 20 

 

3.3 700,000 

3.4 450,000 

200,000 
 

3.5.1:5 

3.5.2: 4 
 

3.6.1: 20% 

3.6.2: 30% 
 

3.7  +35% 

 
 

 

 

Quarterly and 
Annual Project 

reports 

 
Crop surveys 

records 
Bureau of 

Statistics (UBOS) 

reports 
 

 

 
 

 

 
 

Quarterly reports; 

 

 

Risk 2: Poor sustainability of 
infrastructure. 

Mitigation 2: Establish and support 

management entity for O&M. 
 

Risk 3: Private sector may not be 
motivated to participate in value 

addition activities. 

Mitigation 3: Provision of Business 
Development Support Services 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Risk 4: political willingness 

Mitigation 4: The design will be 



 

viii 

 

RESULTS CHAIN INDICATOR  BASELINE TARGET  
MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 
RISK/MITICATION MEASURES 

3.8 Watershed management activities 
implemented 

 

3.9 Volume of value added 
commodities traded 

 

3.8: Number of tree seedlings planted in the water-shed managed 
 

 

3.9.1 Volume of Maize exported (MT) 
 

3.9.2 Volume of Rice exported (MT) 

3.8 
 

 

3.9.1: 
 

3.9.2: 

3.8: 18,500 
 

 

3.9.1: 4,000,000 
 

3.9.2: 404,000 

 
 

Credit Surveys by 
intermediaries 

 

participatory and stakeholder 
consultations 

 

4.  Project Management and 

Coordination 

4.1: National Project Coordination 

Unit fully constituted 

 
4.2 Disbursement of ADF loan 

 

 

 
4.1: Establishment of NPCU  

 

 
4.2: Percentage of ADF Loan disbursed 

 

 

2017 

 
4.1:  2 (40%)

  

 
4.2: 0% 

2022 

 
4.1: 5 (100%) 

 

 
4.2: 100% 

Progress reports, 

M&E reports, 
Audit reports, 

Supervision 

Mission reports 
 

Risk 7: Delayed fulfillment of loan 

conditions. 
Mitigation 7: UGFO will work and 

follow up closely with Government  

K
E

Y
 

A
C

T
IV

IT
IE

S
 Components Inputs 

Component 1: Production and Productivity Enhancement:  

Component 2: Infrastructure Development:  

Component 3: Market Development and Trade Facilitation:  
Component 4: Programme Coordination and Management. 

 

Total Project Cost:  UA 64.41  

ADF Loan:  UA 57.00 million 

Government: UA 7.41 million 
 

 



 

ix 

 

Project Timeframe  

 

 

Year 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 

Quarter 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 

Initial Activities                            

Internal Processing of Appraisal                            

Loan negotiations                            

Signature of loan agreement and Disbursement effectivness                            

Recruitment of project staff                           

Project Launching                           

Component 1: Production and Productivity Enhancement                           

Award of contract to ICT companies                           

Genetic improvement of of Dairy/Beef cows                           

Production of required quality/quantity of seeds                            

Development of a central data base for farmers                           

Component 2: Infrastructure Development                           

Award of contracts for the project supervision                            

Bidding documents (BDs) preparation and award of contracts for the construction of the scheme                           

Construction of the irrigation infrastructure                           

Establishment of WUA and capacity building                           

Implementation of watershed management activities                           

Construction of a bridge and access road                           

Market Development and Trade Facilitation                            

Provide postharvest facilities and services                           

Develop database of village agents, processors, large offtakers of maize, rice, and dairy                            

Develop Market Information System (MIS)                           

Strengthening Sanitary and Phytosanitary (SPS) and quality infrastructure                            

Establishment of food safety laboratory building                           

Project Mangement And Capacity Building                           

Stakeholders sensitization and mobilization                            

Establishment of the baseline situation                           

Project Management, monitoring and evaluation and communication activities                           

Capcity building interventions                             

Coordinate Financial Management and Annual financial auditing                            

Procurement of Goods                           

Environmental monitoring                           

Mid Term Review                            

Project Completion report                            



 

1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OFMANAGEMENT TO THE BOARD 

OF DIRECTORS ON A PROPOSED ADF LOAN TO THE REPUBLIC OF 

UGANDA FOR THE AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAIN DEVELOPMENT 

PROGRAMME (AVCP) 
 

Management hereby submits this Report and Recommendation for an ADF loan of UA 57 million, 

under ADF terms to finance the Agricultural Value Chain Development Programme activities in 

Uganda.   

I. STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 

1.1. Project linkages with country strategy and objectives 

1.1.1 The Agricultural Value Chain Development Programme (AVCP) – Project 1 is designed 

within the context of the National Development Plan II (NDP II) 2015/16-2019/20, which has been 

designated by Government of Uganda (GoU) as the second of a series of six 5-year NDPs to translate 

the country’s Vision 2040 into action. The NDP’s core objectives are to increase household income; 

generate employment; develop the infrastructure; increase access to quality social services; promote 

science and technology; and develop human capital taking gender equality as prerequisite for 

accelerating socioeconomic transformation which AVCP is consistent with. The Project’s activities, 

notably, construction of irrigation infrastructure, value chains development, and export promotion to 

enhance household incomes, are also consistent with the Government’s Agricultural Sector Strategic 

Plan (ASSP) 2015/16-2019/2020, Gender Policy Brief for Uganda’s Agriculture Sector (2012), the 

Local Government Sector Strategic Plan (LGSSP) and, the Uganda Climate Change Policy 2015.  

 

1.1.2 AVCP has been identified as a flagship project under NDPII that will contribute to 
achievement of Uganda’s national objectives to increase household income; generate employment; 

develop the infrastructure; and increase access to quality social services. This Appraisal Report is in 

response to a request from the Government of Uganda, to provide assistance for the transformation 

of agriculture in Uganda from subsistence to a more commercially oriented one. The Bank had 

initially fielded a Country Dialogue, Identification and Preparation Missions to Uganda in March, 

July and September, 2016 respectively. The missions were to understand the extent of 

implementation of the Agriculture Sector Strategic Plan (ASSP) and the general context of 

agriculture in the country with a view to designing a support package from the Bank to assist the 

Government in achieving the goal of agricultural transformation; and supporting the development of 

financing arrangements that can support commercial production, value addition and marketing 

activities in this sector. 

 

1.1.3 The Project’s key outputs, notably, development of irrigation infrastructure, promotion and 

development of agribusiness, and trade facilitation to enhance household incomes are consistent with 

the country’s ASSP which operationalizes agricultural priority investments programme under the 

NDPII.  The ASSP prioritizes investment in water for production, value addition and value chains 

development, and, promotes investment in sustainable natural resource use. The Project is also 

consistent with the National Agriculture Policy (2013) of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal 

Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF), and the Irrigation Master Plan of the Ministry of Water and 

Environment (MoWE). Further, the project activities are also in line with the Gender Policy Brief for 

Uganda’s Agriculture Sector (2012), the Uganda Forestry Policy, the Uganda Climate Change Policy 

and Uganda’s Ministry of Gender’s revised Gender Policy 2007.  

 

1.1.4 The sector and the project area face varying degrees of fragility. Food insecurity, lack of rural 

infrastructure, lack of economic opportunities for women and youth etc. are key elements of fragility. 

The project is designed to address these challenges and build resilient institutions and societies.   



 

2 

 

 

1.1.5 Regionally, the project is consistent with Pillar 2 of the NEPAD’s Comprehensive African 

Agricultural Development Programme (CAADP), which focuses on improvement of agricultural 

infrastructure and related capacities for enhanced food security; and with the Sustainable 

Development Goals. 

 

1.1.6 The Project was programmed to be financed under the ADF 14 window and the new CSP for 

Uganda (2017-2021). The Government of Uganda is committed to operationalizing its National 

Development Plan (NDP) but remains with the challenges of fully financing all activities using the 

limited budgetary resources available. 

1.2. Rationale for Bank’s involvement 

1.2.1 The proposed project is anchored on the Country Strategy for Uganda (2017-2021) which is 

articulated around two strategic pillars, namely: (i) Infrastructure development for value addition and 

industrialization, and (ii) Skills and Capacity Development for poverty reduction. This is in line with 

the Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy (2013-2022) and the High Five (h5s) Initiatives which prioritizes 

agriculture and food security as one of the key areas for the Bank’s future assistance. The Bank has 

considerable experience in implementing agriculture and infrastructure projects in Uganda, including 

the Area-based Agricultural Modernization Programme (AAMP), the Northwest Smallholder 

Agricultural Development Project (NSADP), the Community Agricultural Infrastructure 

Improvement Programme – Project 1, 2 and 3 (CAIIP-1, 2, 3) - that won the 2013 USA Department 

of the Treasury MDB Awards the Market and Agriculture Trade Improvement Project, and Farm 

Income Enhancement and Forestry Conservation Project (FIEFOC). The proposed project draws 

extensively from lessons learned from the Completion Reports and Impact Studies of completed 

Projects and from other small scale irrigation, natural resources, watershed management, and 

community driven development projects in Uganda and other countries. The most pertinent lessons 

include (i) the enhancement of agricultural commodity trade, including establishment of linkages 

between Bank financed projects ; (ii) integration of the value addition activities involving the private 

sector; iii) Adopting integrated watershed development and alternative livelihood; and iv) Building 

the capacity of Water Users’ Associations (WUAs)  to ensure maintenance of the infrastructure and 

project sustainability. These lessons have been taken into consideration in the design of this project. 

 

1.2.2. With effects of climate change and the increasingly unreliable rainfall pattern, the need for 

investment in irrigation has become of paramount importance. Only about 5% of the irrigation 

potential of Uganda has been exploited so far and the GoU requested the Bank to support its renewed 

efforts to expand its irrigation investments. The GoU has developed an Irrigation Master Plan for the 

period 2010-2035 which targets to expand irrigation infrastructure to cover at least 70% of surface 

water irrigation potential by 2035. This will increase the total agricultural land under irrigation from 

the current 14,418ha to about 420,000ha by 2035. As a result, the GoU has ranked irrigation as the 

third most important infrastructural investment that will facilitate economic transformation of the 

country as envisaged under Vision 2040. 

1.2.3 The Project is in line with the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (TYS) as it relates to inclusive growth 
and food security through the involvement of youth and women in skills development and 

entrepreneurship. Further, the Project is consistent with Bank’s High 5s for transforming Africa and 

the recently approved Bank Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa 2016-2025. The 

Project is also consistent with the Bank’s CSP (2017-2021) which aligns with the High 5s mainly in 

agricultural and industrial development. Bank interventions under this pillar will focus on the 

following three critical infrastructure sub-sectors: (i) Transport infrastructure to foster trade and 

market integration; (ii) Agricultural infrastructure to promote transformation of the agriculture sector 

in respect of improved production and productivity, value addition, and trade; (iii) Water and 

Sanitation to widen access to water and sanitation services, improve livelihoods as well as boost 



 

3 

 

value-adding and manufacturing activities, especially in small underserved towns all of which are 

well aligned to the NDPII. This Project is identified by the new CSP as one of the key investment 

projects to be supported by the Bank under its pillar mentioned above. In addition, the Project is 

aligned with the Bank's Gender Strategy (2014-2018) by enhancing the regulatory framework to 

create enabling environment for women’s participation in the agriculture sector and supporting 

women’s economic empowerment along the agriculture value chains.  

1.2.4 The Bank Group is financing a number of on-going agriculture sector projects in Uganda. The 

Bank has gained good experiences under FIEFOC-1 in implementation of irrigated agriculture and 

has also accumulated vast experience through the implementation of other agricultural infrastructure 

projects. The first phase of FIEFOC has rehabilitated three irrigation schemes Mubuku, Doho, and 

Agoro irrigation scheme with a total area of about 3000ha now benefiting more than 6,800 farm 

families. It has also supported communities and households to work together to manage watersheds, 

enabled households to participate in tree planting and beekeeping activities. The Second FIEFOC 

project approved by the Board in January 2016 will further increase the coverage of irrigable area in 

Uganda and also increase productivity for rice and maize whose value chains will be developed under 

this proposed project. Further, the Bank has experience in primary value addition activities under the 

completed and ongoing CAIIP projects.  

With interventions indicated above and the bottom-up approach that Bank projects are being 

implemented there are clear indication that in these areas poverty rates have dropped significantly, 

from 31.1% in 2006 to 19.7% in 2013, to which the Banks’ projects contributed in this reduction. 

During implementation of AVCP, linkage and synergies with these agricultural infrastructure 

projects and others will be ensured to avoid duplication and maximize synergies among projects 

implemented by the Bank. 

1.3. Donors coordination 

  
Sector or 

subsector* 

Size   

  GDP Exports 

Labor 

Force   

  Agricultural Sector 23.7% 57.2% 85%   

  
Players - Public Annual Expenditure (average 2010/2011 to 

2014/2015)**   

  Government Donors  
 

   

UA m UA 33.7 m UA 48.9 m 
  

          AfDB 21.5%   

% 40.8% 59.2%   IDA 21.6%  

     EC 15.2%   

     IFAD 12.9%  

      USAID 9.4%   

              Danida 5.8%   

             DfiD 5.3%  

             JICA 1.5%  

             Netherlands   3.6%  

             Italy  1.4%  

             FAO 1.8%  

  Level of Donor Coordination   

  Existence of Thematic Working Groups Y   

  Existence of SWAPs or Integrated Sector Approaches Y   

  ADB's Involvement in donors coordination*** M****   



 

4 

 

* as most appropriate; ** Years [yy1 to yy2]; *** for this sector or subsector 

**** L: leader, M: member but not leader, none: no involvement 

 

1.3.1 The Bank is one of the major Development Partners (DPs) in Uganda, providing about 21.5% 

of development assistance in the agriculture and rural development sector. The Bank collaborates 

closely with the other Development Partners, especially the World Bank, IFAD, USAID, JICA, and 

the European Commission for agricultural related projects, within the framework of the Agriculture 

and Rural Development Donor Coordination Group. The Group has been greatly invigorated through 

the Bank’s field presence. In an effort to harmonize Development Partner intervention, the Bank has 

partnered with the other DPs under the umbrella of the Agricultural Sector Development Partners 

Group (ASDPG) to undertake development interventions in the choice of sub-sectors and activities 

where it has a comparative advantage. In regard to this Project, the Bank will work closely with JICA 

who are preparing an irrigation programme, but in particular to tap on their experiences with farmer 

groups development in irrigation activities; the IDA and USAID who are engaged in activities that 

promote agricultural input distribution  using advanced ICT methodologies that link the farmer to 

input dealers; the Netherlands Embassy on crop intensification and marketing; the EU on market 

oriented beef meet subsector development; etc.   

 

1.3.2 The ASDPG is currently chaired by the JICA. The Group is well informed about the project 

through consultations with Bank Teams at preparation/appraisal missions and also continually by 

Uganda Country Office (COUG) through monthly meetings. The Uganda Country Office is an active 

member of this group, which relates with the overall Heads of Missions’ Local Development Partners 

Group (LDPG), currently chaired and coordinated by the World Bank. 
 

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

Project development goal:  The overall goal of the Project is to contribute to poverty reduction and 

economic growth in Uganda through enhanced productivity and commercialization of agriculture.  

 

Specific Project objective: The project objective is to improve household incomes, food security, and 

climate resilience through commercial agricultural practices, sustainable natural resources 

management and agricultural enterprise development.  

 

Project Implementation Modality: (i) The project will be implemented using a Business Service 

Provider, ICT based platform, which will be procured competitively. This model has been tried and 

tested by the Feed the Future project of the United States Agency for International Development 

(USAID).  The model will be replicated and expanded to reach our target Districts in Uganda. The 

platform has already demonstrated a private sector-led input distribution and extension ICT platform, 

that is integrated with the buyers and has successfully delivered to 301,000 farmers certified seeds, 

fertilizer, extension, and other services including mechanization, crop insurance, market, and soil 

testing services.  The ICT platform will be scaled up to reach millions of small holder farmers to raise 

their productivity while linking them to agro processors and other off-takers.  (ii) The GoU will 

nominate a Project Coordinator who will lead the National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU) based 

at MAAIF. The NPCU is charged with securing project implementation according to the relevant 

work- and procurement plans. The NPCU will consist of at least 4 other members (a Senior 

Procurement Officer, a Senior Financial Management Officer, a Senior Monitoring and Evaluation 

Officer, a Senior Value Chains Development Officer, and a Senior Engineer), details are stipulated 

under 4.1 and 5.3 of this report.   

2.1. Project components 

AVCP will be implemented along a commodity value chain framework, with considerable attention 

to regulatory reforms. In agreement with government, the project will comprise of three (3) 

operational and one (1) management components namely: i) Production and Productivity 



 

5 

 

Enhancement, ii) Infrastructure Development, iii) Market Development and Trade Facilitation; and 

iv) Project Management and Coordination. The following key provisions under these components 

have been agreed for implementation under AVCP.  

Table 2.1: project components 
No. Component 

name 

Est. cost 

(UA M) 

Component description 

 

1 Production 

and 

Productivity 

Enhancement  

14.96  Expression of Interest (EOI) for ICT companies interested in developing 
and operating an ICT platform that integrates farmers, village buyer 

agents, off-takers, seed and fertilizer suppliers, extension services and 

other service providers on a single efficient platform. 

 Supporting genetic improvement in Dairy and Beef cows through a robust 
multiplication program of using Artificial Insemination  

 The project will also support the purchase of Liquid Nitrogen containers 
to help preserve Siemen  

 Strengthening Ag Verify and the Uganda Seed Traders Association to 
increase the quantity of certified seeds required to reach millions of 

farmers 

 Support to research to increase production of breeder and foundation seeds 
in consultation with framers  

 Support the formation of Local Seed Businesses among the farmer groups 
that will partner with research institutes to increase the availability of 

quality controlled seed  

 Build the capacity of farmers and farmer groups in sustainable enterprise 
development  

 Support farmers and farmer groups to prepare seasonal action plans and 
Group Action plans  

 Link AVCP to the Technology for African Agricultural Transformation 
(TAAT) for the acquisition of improved technologies 

 Effective regulation of the quality of seeds and other inputs 

 Strengthen the National Seed Service, technical capacity development and 
provision of essential equipment 

 Strengthen the National Fertilizer Board and Bureau of Standards (UNBS) 
with the necessary support facilities,  

 Synchronization of the National policy on seed and fertilizer with that of 
Regional Economic Communities (RECs) 

 Development of leadership skills and capacity building of farmer 
organization 

 Support the ongoing consolidation of a database for Ugandan farmers 

 Deepening of efficient input distribution system based upon the ICT 
platform  

 Increase women’s participation: design strategy to integrate gender in all 
the activities under this component 

 

2 Infrastructure 

Development 

30.96 

 
 Irrigation Infrastructure Development: of Sironko gravity fed irrigation 

scheme with a gross command area of 1608ha. The works will include 

construction of head works, main canal, secondary and tertiary canals, 

drainage system, dykes, and on farm roads.   

 Access Road: construction of a bridge over Sironko River at the intake site 
to connect Bukedea and Bulambuli Districts.  In addition,  10 Km  access 

road will be provided to link the irrigation schemes with the nearest existing 

road network on both sides of the Districts; 

 Support Infrastructure: support infrastructures required within the project site 
for the operation of the scheme such as warehouse (500m2), grain storage 

(1000m2), offices buildings (800m2), workshop (400m2), rice drying yard 

(1320m2), essential O&M equipment will be provided 

 Consultancy services: The project will engage a consulting firm; (i) to review 
and update the designs, and supervise the construction of the irrigation 

infrastructure during implementation 

 Establishment of Water Users Association: formation of water Users’ 
Association (WUAs) with 40% women and youth representation. 



 

6 

 

No. Component 

name 

Est. cost 

(UA M) 

Component description 

 

 Capacity Building: provision of capacity development for farmers, extension 
agents, and relevant government officials. 

 Watershed management: (i) Institutional strengthening through mobilization 
of local structures; (ii) Sustainable development and management of forest 

and tree resources in Mbale, Bududa, Bukedia, Bulambuli; and (iii) 

Integrated soil and water conservation technologies and measures.  
3 Market 

Development 

and Trade 

Facilitation 

13.09  Provide postharvest facilities and services and agri infrastructure to farmers  

 Build the capacity of farmers and farmer groups on post-harvest handling, 
storage and bulking of their produce  

 Network and link farmers to agro-processors and large traders,  markets 
for farmers using innovative and enduring ICT platforms, that includes 

digital payment (see ICT platform in Component 1a)  

 Develop a database of processors, large off-takers of maize, rice, and 

dairy, their village agents and associated farmers for integration onto the 

ICT platform 

 Build capacity of the network of community based village buyer agents to 
provide additional services such as SPS standards, inputs, mechanization,  

crop insurance,  market information requirements  to farmers using 

existing country extension services 

 Develop a robust market information system to inform vendors and 

farmers on commodity prices  

 Link medium to large scale processors and traders to financial institutions 

and AfDB private sector financing windows 

 Trade Facilitation and Quality Infrastructure: Build capacity of 
stakeholders to comply and conform to quality related issues with its 

exportable commodities  

 Strengthen the Sanitary, Phytosanitary (SPS) and Quality Infrastructure to 
meet the export requirements  

 Support Uganda National Bureau of Standards (UNBS) in ensuring 
standardization of quality across commodities 

  Establishment of an appropriate food safety laboratory for conformity 
assessment 

 

4 

Project 

Management 

5.40  Coordinate activities of MAAIF and other Agencies through an 
appropriate Steering Committee.  

 Coordinate Monitoring, Evaluation and Reporting activities. 

 Coordinate Financial Management processes and also ensure preparations 
for External Audits. 

 Facilitate Procurement processes.  

 Mainstream Gender and also facilitate HIV/AIDS Awareness raising. 



 

7 

 

2.2. Technical solutions retained and other alternatives explored 

Table 2.2: project alternatives considered and reasons for rejection  

Alternative  Brief description Reasons for rejection 

Alternative 1 Invest in rain water 

harvesting infrastructure such 

as small water holding 

structures scattered all over 

the selected districts for 

agriculture, livestock and 

domestic use 

Rain water harvesting structures cannot sustain 

the impacts of climate change and their socio-

economic impact will be spread out thinly. In 

addition, it cannot provide food and cash crops 

two to three times a year.  

Alternative 2 Invest in pumped irrigation 

development by lifting water 

mechanically to higher 

ground for crop production 

Pumped irrigation schemes were dropped on 

account of the complex nature of their operation 

and maintenance, costs are high and the capacity 

to maintain at small farm level does not exist. 

Further it contributes to carbon emission.  

Alternative 3 Introduce spate irrigation 

system  

Not sustainable due to variability of rainfall; 

non-efficiency and drudgery. 

Alternative 4 Using government 

institutions to drive the 

extension service and input 

delivery 

Government will do better supervising a 

Business Service Provider recruited to play this 

role based on realities on the ground 

2.3. Project type 

AVCP is a public sector investment project that builds on successful Bank’s investments in Uganda. 

It is designed in the form of a stand-alone Investment Project with the main aim of scaling up 

production and productivity in rice, maize and dairy/beef value chain development, agribusiness 

development, risk sharing facility and capacity building activities funded by ADF 14 Loan resources. 

2.4. Project Cost and financing arrangements  

2.4.1 Project Costs: The total cost of the project is estimated at UA 64.41 Million, net of taxes, 

comprising UA 18.59 million or 34% in local costs and UA 45.82 million or 66% of the total cost in 

foreign cost. This cost is inclusive of physical and price contingencies estimated at 9%.  All project 

costs are exclusive of taxes, and therefore Government should provide budget allocation for VAT in 

each quarter of the financial year in addition to the 12% Government contribution. A summary of 

project cost estimates by components, expenditure categories, and schedule are presented in Tables 

2.3, 2.4 and 2.5 below, while details are provided in the Technical Annexes B2 Volume II of the 

appraisal report. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

8 

 

Table 2.3: Summary Project Cost by Component 

 

F. E local currency Total F. E local currencyTotal

Component 1: Production and Productivity 

Enhancement:       14 391             4 059         18 450       10 659          3 006       13 665 78       23         

Component 2: Infrastructure Development       29 020             9 164 38 184             21 496          6 788       28 284 76       48         

Component 3:  Market Development and 

Trade Facilitation       11 788             4 360 16 148               8 731          3 230       11 961 73       20         

Component 4: Project Management and 

capacity building         2 066             4 599 6 665                 1 531          3 406         4 937 31       9           

Total BASELINE COSTS 57 265     22 182         79 447       42 417     16 430      58 847     72       100       

Physical Contingencies         3 169             1 113 4 282         2 347       825           3 172     74       5           

Price Contingencies         1 418             1 806 3 224         1 052     1 336                2 388 44       4           

Total PROJECT COSTS 61 852     25 101         86 953       45 816     18 591      64 407     71       109       

Components

(UA '000)

% F.E

 % Base 

costs 

(US$ '000)

 

Table 2.4: Summary Project Cost by Expenditure Categories (UA '000') 

 

F.E L.C Total F.E L.C Total Total

Works 24 010        6 960          30 970        30 970        

Goods 10 509        1 078          11 587        879             2 152          3 031          14 618        

Services 7 828          3 875          11 703        2 163          729             2 892          14 595        

Operating costs 145             1 528          1 673          128             1 356          1 484          3 157          

Personnel 154             913             1 067          -             1 067          

Total 42 646        14 354        57 000        3 170          4 237          7 407          64 407        

Categories of expenditures
ADF Government

 

Table 2.5: Summary Project Cost Schedule by Components (UA '000')  

 
Components Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5

Component 1: Production and Productivity 

Enhancement: 10 232           1 763            1 481            173                16                  

Component 2: Infrastructure Development 8 115             17 059          2 773            180                157                

Component 3:  Market Development and 

Trade Facilitation 2 050             3 597            3 306            1 521            1 486            
Component 4: Project management and 

capacity building 1 545             888                877                799                829                
Total base costs 21 942           23 307          8 438            2 673            2 488            

Contingencies 1 892             2 187            820                375                286                
Project total costs 23 834           25 494          9 258            3 048            2 774            

 

2.4.2 Project Financing Arrangement: ADF loan will finance 100% of the agricultural 

infrastructure development component, production and productivity component and non-training 

based component of Market Development and Trade Facilitation, and part of project management 

activities. The Government will mainly finance capacity building activities,  salaries of Government 

staff assigned to the Project both at national and local government levels, compliance certification 

by NEMA, and part of component 3 activities (conservation farming and agro-forestry, forest 

plantation and woodlots, forest resources inventory, training in use of  weather information, and 

expand community radios coverage). The Government of Uganda will also finance some recurrent 



 

9 

 

costs of the National Project Coordination Unit. The beneficiaries will be responsible for the 

operation and maintenance (O&M) of the irrigation infrastructure, and the agricultural enterprises 

will operate with the principles of private sector. The breakdown of financing for the project is 

presented in the Table 2.6 

 

Table 2.6: Financing Plan of the project (UA ‘000) 

 

F.E L.C Total

ADF 41 490         15 510         57 000         88                

Government 3 973           3 434           7 407           12                

Total 45 463         18 944         64 407         

Amount
Sources of funding %

 
 

2.4.3 Counterpart Funds: The Government of Uganda counterpart contribution to the project will be 

12% of the total project cost (equivalent to USD 10.0 million); in addition to 18% VAT contribution 

on all works, goods and services. 

2.5. Project’s target area and population  

2.5.1 The project will be implemented over a five-year period in various District across Uganda, 

according to the value chain selected, viz: Maize: Locations where the Bank has developed irrigation 

schemes, and the Districts of Kyegegwa, Kamwenge, Masindi, Kiryandongo, Kasese, Buhweju, 

Mitooma, Nakaseke, Mukono, Luwero, Mityana, Kiboga, Buikwe, Wakiso, Buyende, Mayuge, Gulu, 

Oyam, Amolatar, Pader, Iganga, Kamuli, Mbale, Jinja, Kapchorwa; Rice: Sironko-Acomai irrigation 

scheme, and the districts of Bulambuli, Bukedea, Kamuli, Gulu, Oyam, Amolatar and Pader. The soft 

components including training, input delivery, extension service delivery and capacity building 

would be extended to all irrigation schemes of the Bank in FIEFOC 1 & 2 (Nebbi, Oyam, Kween, 

Butaleja, Kasese, and Kitgum Districts); Dairy: This will mainly focus on the cattle corridor districts 

(from West to North corridors) with the livestock breeding centre in Mbarara district as the 

springboard.  

 

2.5.2 The population in those districts is about 14,227,201 of which 50.1% are women and 

comprising 3,078,673 households. It is envisaged that the Project would lead to increase in yields of 

major crops by 50% and incomes of the target population specifically women by an average of 10%. 

In particular a greater percentage (50%) of the start-up enterprises and  income generating activities 

from natural resources, capacity building and service delivery of the project would specifically target 

women and youth whose incomes are expected to increase by an average of 30%; thus enhancing 

their socio economic status through improved standard of living. The project will benefit further 

300,000 households of which 20% are female headed outside of irrigation command areas, by 

introducing or improving soil conservation measures in the catchments feeding the irrigation 

schemes. Moreover, the project is expected to provide technical skills in conservation and other 

farming practices that promote environmental management and thus increasing agricultural 

productivity in the proposed project area. 

 

2.6 Participatory Process/Public Consultations: Key stakeholders in the AVCP Project include; 

Government, NGOs; Civil Society,; Farmer cooperatives including women and youth groups; Private 

sector companies; All these stakeholders were consulted in the project design,  etc. Furthermore, a 

stakeholder workshop was organized on September, 2016 which was attended by more than 45 

representatives of stakeholder organizations from national to community levels. During the sessions 

the participants provided valuable input to inform the shaping of the AVCP. A wide range of issues 

were noted for follow-up including among others: access to inputs and microfinance, market 

linkages, mechanization and post-harvest handling, the need for inclusion of value addition to the 



 

10 

 

produce, operations and maintenance of irrigation facilities, strong farmers’ capacity development 

programme, establishment of demonstration centers, consideration to multi-purpose use of water, use 

of existing government structures and the need to complement community initiatives. Stakeholder 

consultation activities will continue during project implementation to ensure their maximum 

participation and ownership of Project activities.    

2.7. Bank Group experience, lessons reflected in project design 

2.7.1 The Country Portfolio Performance Review (CPPR) highlighted some lessons, including: (i) 

role played by project implementation unit in expediting project execution after delay in start-up 

when implementation was entrusted to  Ministries; (ii) lack of project designs and drawings at project 

start-up results in implementation delay; (iii) inadequate consultation with stakeholders in selection 

of sites results in poor utilization of funds and lack of ownership; (iv) weak M&E system results in 

poor project monitoring; and (v) lack of irrigation scheme management entities compromises 

sustainability. Based on said lessons, (i) AVCP will have a PIU due to inadequate technical staff 

within MAAIF, (ii) participatory M&E system will be established in PY1 which will be linked to 

MAAIF M&E system, and (iii) detail designs of the irrigation schemes will be made available before 

the end of 2017 whilst the supervision consulting firm will be brought on board in PY1 through 

advance procurement arrangement to offset the time spent in the parliamentary approval process. 

2.7.2 The Bank Group is financing a number of on-going agriculture sector projects in Uganda. The 

Bank has gained good experiences under AAMP, CAIIP 1, 2 and 3; MATIP 1 and 2, FIEFOC-1 and 

2 in project implementation and in irrigated agriculture and has also accumulated vast experience 

through the implementation of other agricultural infrastructure projects. The first phase of FIEFOC 

has rehabilitated three irrigation schemes Mubuku, Doho, and Agoro irrigation scheme with a total 

area of about 3000ha now benefiting more than 6,800 farm families. The Schemes have supported 

communities and households to work together to manage watersheds, enabled households to 

participate in tree planting and beekeeping activities. The Second FIEFOC project approved by the 

Board in January 2016 will further increase the coverage of irrigable area in Uganda and also increase 

productivity for rice and maize whose value chains will developed under this proposed project. 

Further, the Bank has experience in primary value addition activities under the completed and 

ongoing CAIIP and MATIP projects.  

2.7.3 With interventions indicated above and the bottom-up approach that Bank projects are being 

implemented there are clear indication that in these areas poverty rates have dropped significantly. 

During implementation of AVCP, linkage and synergies with these agricultural infrastructure 

projects and others will be ensured to avoid duplication and maximize the benefits and gainful 

employment. 

2.8. Key performance indicators   

2.8.1 The Results Based Logical Framework contains indicators pertaining to the impact, outcomes 

and outputs of the project.  It includes the Bank’s Core Sector Indicators (CSI) and other institutional 

indicators that will be used to gauge the effectiveness of project management. Monitoring and 

evaluation of the project activities and results based logical framework indicators will be conducted 

by the Monitoring and Evaluation Expert of the National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU), in close 

collaboration with all the partners involved. Special emphasis will be on disaggregation of data to 

capture benefits from the project to gender and the youth. Baseline data will be collected at the 

beginning of project implementation in addition to the baseline information collected during the 

feasibility study to improve measurement of indictors of the project. An experienced M&E expert 

will be put in place from the start of the project. 

 



 

11 

 

2.8.2 The impact and outcome indicators include: (i) income level among farmers, (ii) reduction in 

people living below poverty line, (iii) increase in yield of selected commodity value chains, and (iv) 

number of livelihood activities and businesses developed,  

 

Key output indicators are: (i) area developed under irrigation; (ii) number of farmers adopting 

conservation farming practices and land area protected against erosion; (iii) involvement of women 

and youth in decision-making bodies; (iv) volume of maize, rice and dairy/beef products traded.  

 

2.8.3  Baseline data: Baseline data was collected as part of the socio-economic study and used in 

the RBLF. The baseline data will be further strengthened and gaps filled including collection of 

gender disaggregated data in PY1. Indicators will be used to compare project performance against 

the baseline situations. Various supervision missions and periodic progress reports will reflect the 

level of achievement under each of these indicators. 
 

III. PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1.    Economic and financial performance  

3.1.1 The main economic benefits of the project are increase in rice and maize procutivity and 

production, improvement in livestock parameters , increase in beneficiary incomes and strengthening 

of food security and climate resilience. Other project benefits include jobs generated by business 

developed, reduction in sediment load of rivers resulting from degraded forest rehabilitation and soil 

conservation measures and, improved balance trade of agricultural products as the country exports 

more and import less rice. At farm level, the project will reach out to at least 450,000 maize growers, 

205,000 rice farmers and more than 2 million herders. The project is expected to anually generate an 

additional production of 450,000 MT of maize and 328,000 MT of rice. Support to the development 

of value addition will enhance export of rice and maize milled products. On the average, it is 

estimated that about 200 000 MT of maize and 200 000 MT of rice will be exported annually. 

 

3.1.2 The economic and financial analysis was based on the incremental net benefit arising from the 

project investment. The main assumption underlying the economic and financial analysis is an 

anticipated increase in the productivity of the main crops (maize and rice) and livestock as a result 

of the development of irrigation, increased improved seeds and fertilizer use, and capacity building. 

It is estimated that the production of the basic crops will increase by 50% on the average and 20% 

for the livestock parameters.  The production costs including milling processing costs are derived 

from the results of the similar projects implemented in the country and computed field data from 

Uganda. Prevailing 2016 market prices are used for input and output valuation. Infrastructure 

operating and maintenance costs are estimated at 15% of investment costs. Prevailing 2016 market 

prices were used for input and output valuation. Because no government interventions in terms of 

input subsidies or import restrictions are recorded and, no duty or taxes are leveraged on all 

agricultural inputs, such as fertilizers, semen and agro-chemicals, the market prices are used as the 

shadow prices for tradable goods used in domestic rice and maize production. For economic analysis, 

maize and rice market prices are adjusted to reflect their economic values.  

3.1.3 The FIRR is 20% with a NPV of US$ 2.127 million at a capital opportunity cost of 12%. The 

EIRR is 23% for a NPV of USD 3, 2 million at a capital opportunity cost of 12%. The summary 

result is tabulated below: 

FIRR, NPV (base case) 20%, NPV (12%): US$ 2.127 million 

EIRR, NPV (base case) 23%, NPV (12%): US$ 3.2 million 

 

3.1.4 The economic rate of return (EIRR) and the internal rate of return (FIRR) are sensitive to 

changes in prices and costs. A 10% increase in the prices of agricultural products generates an EIRR 



 

12 

 

of 25% and a FIRR of 22%. Similarly, a 10% increase in production costs decreases the EIRR and 

the FIRR to 21% and 19% respectively. Details of financial and economic analyses are shown in in 

Appendix VI. 

 3.2.   Environmental and Social impacts  

3.2.1 Environment: The project is classified as Environment Category 2 according to the Bank’s 

Environmental and Social Assessment Procedures (ESAP), which implies that the potential negative 

environmental and social impacts are not major and can be mitigated with the application of measures 

specified in ESMFs. An ESMF, with a budgetary allocation of USD 500,000, was prepared and its 

Summary posted on Bank’s on 21st March 2017  to provide guidelines for the management of 

potential environmental and social aspects at all possible project sites.  

 

3.2.2 AVCP will have significant positive environmental impacts including (i) contribution to the 

restoration of forest cover that will lead to reduced soil erosion, flooding, and water pollution. The 

carbon dioxide (CO2) removed from the atmosphere is estimated at 245, 000 tons over 20 years as a 

result of tree planting by the project as shown in the details under Technical Annex C.3.1 (b) of the 

Technical Annex; (ii) restoration and enhancement of the ecosystems through re-vegetation and tree 

planting activities planned as part of the project - this  will have significant impacts on combating 

deforestation and desertification as well as mitigating the impacts of climate change; (iii) 

rehabilitation of degraded watersheds to sustain and enhance water catchment ; and (iv) improved 

farm productivity, soil fertility management and increased uptake of proper crop husbandry practices 

that will improve agricultural production and marketing, thus contributing to food security and 

improved farm incomes.  

 

3.2.3 Most of the negative impacts to the environment will be attributed to construction activities 

with minimal operation and post operation effects. Some of these impacts will pertain to (i) loss of 

vegetation due to land clearing for irrigation schemes and farm/forest roads construction that can be 

minimized by refilling of burrow pits and re-vegetation, (ii) increase in water abstraction arising from 

small-scale irrigation schemes requirement, that  could upset the existing flow patterns of the rivers, 

but will be minimized through established water management systems and environmental flow 

requirements to allow sufficient water for downstream users, and (iii) soil erosion due to loose top soil.  

 

3.2.4 Climate Change: Climate change models for Uganda suggest a projected increase in 
temperature of 0.7o C to 1.5o C by 2020. These models also predict a likely increase in the variability 

of rainfall with most areas projected to experience higher rainfall. Uganda is already experiencing 

extreme weather events including droughts, floods and landslides.  Floods and landslides have been 

linked to drained wetlands, deforestation, and compacted soil that no longer have any water-retention 

capacity. The Uganda Vision 2040- the long term development blue print for the country-recognizes 

the impacts of climate change on all sectors of Uganda’s economy, and has committed to the need 

for preparedness through adaptation and mitigation strategies to ensure the resilience of the country 

to climate change impacts. The Bank categorized the project as Category 2 in terms of Climate Risk, 

requiring the application of the Climate Adaptation Review and Evaluation Procedures (AREP).  The 

project carried out Climate Screening Score (CSS) as shown in Appendix VII. The project design 

reflects the projected climate change risks in Uganda and has embedded adaption measures based on 

the Bank’s AREP and aligned with the country’s National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) 

priority projects including community tree planting, land degradation and water for production 

projects.  

 

3.2.5 The AVCP programme is by design part of a strategic response to the impact of climate change 

evidenced by environmental degradation, dry spells and floods in the vulnerable districts of Uganda. 

The planned interventions of AVCP project will help reduce impacts of extreme weather events 

through the development of irrigation systems and promotion of alternative livelihoods that will help 



 

13 

 

smoothen the cyclical impacts of droughts and ensure all-year income generating activities. 

Specifically, the catchment management activities under component 1 of the project will facilitate 

the reduction of land degradation and related flood impacts; thus increasing the resilience of the 

community. The irrigation infrastructure will also be designed to be climate resilient in order to 

prolong the life span of the infrastructures. The project’s ESMP further elaborates the challenges 

posed by climate risks on the project outcomes as well as proposed adaptation and mitigation 

measures.  

 

3.2.6 Involuntary resettlement: The proposed new irrigation structures will be located on 

Governments owned land and communally owned land tenure systems. It is anticipated that all 

Project activities will not lead to land acquisition as project activities will be carried out on land that 

already belongs to the Government or the beneficiary groups, therefore no land disputes are 

anticipated. Extensive consultations on access were held with beneficiary groups, district officers, 

and other government counterparts including the Uganda National Environmental Management 

Agency. There is a strong commitment from all stakeholders and  Government will provide the Bank 

with a Letter of Comfort stating that the land where the project infrastructure is to be constructed are 

free of encumbrances and belongs to the communities and/or government agencies who have 

consented to project activities.  

  

3.2.7 Green Growth: AVCP has been designed in accordance with the Green Growth principle of 

“quality and inclusiveness of growth”. The Program design is flexible enough to address existing and 

emerging development challenges (equitable rural development, youth unemployment, equitable 

access to food, water and clean environment) without locking resources into activities that may 

deplete the country’s natural resource capital. AVCP has been designed in a holistic manner that has 

integrated economic, social and environmental concerns for overall improvement of the well-being 

of the communities.  

 

3.2.8 Gender and Social: In 2014, 19.79 million females accounted for 51.5% of the total population, 
while an estimated 31% of rural households were female headed. The significance of women’s role 

in community is underscored by the fact that females are normally charged with the responsibility of 

food production at household level. The low access to water for production, especially in rural areas, 

undermines agricultural productivity. While the GoU has made substantial efforts in adopting gender-
related laws and with the amendment of the Land Act (2010), and the launch of Uganda National land 

Policy (2015), significant progress has been registered in increasing female land ownership, from a low 

16% in 2010 to 39% in 2012. Despite this,   issues of limited ownership, access to land owing to cultural 

barriers and lack of access to credit continue to affect women’s agricultural production. Other 

hindrances include, lack of extension service, inadequate access to information technology and poor 

linkages to markets, post-harvest loses, and degradation of the environment which mostly affects 

women. Consequently, AVCP has been designed to address gaps in sustainable agricultural water 

management and low agricultural productivity. The project will support a minimum of 30% 

representation of women in the leadership role in water user associations, and emphasize 50% of the 

target group training on agribusiness skills in crop value chain preferred by women and youth.  The 

project will support a minimum of 30% women, and 30% youth employment in the labour intensive 

infrastructure development activities on the scheme. 

 

3.2.9 The project will support gender capacity building activities for AVCP as detailed in Annex B8 

of the Technical Annex. Furthermore, the project will adopt a gender sensitive approach to support 

implementation, to ensure capacity is built for effective gender responsiveness in all project 

components. As such, gender mainstreaming guidelines will be developed in project Y1 to prepare 

women to participate in different community committees dealing with financing (Tier 4 Microfinance 

institutions), agriculture and natural resources. The project will also promote strong institutional 

involvement of women as beneficiaries in farmer cooperatives group trainings, specifically with 



 

14 

 

regards to extension service in agronomic practices, access of financial resources, post-harvest 

handling, collective commodity bulking and marketing and the establishment to sustainable market 

linkages. A Social Development Specialist/Gender expert will be assigned from MAAIF to focus on 

implementation of these activities. The gender mainstreaming in this project is estimated at UGX 

548,900,000 for capacity building as shown in the Technical Annex page B8.9 (ii). 

 

3.2.10 Youth unemployment:  The challenges facing the youth include limited job opportunities, 

inadequate employable skills and skills mis-match, limited access to productive assets, and early 

marriages hence forcing the youth into informal agricultural practices. According to the Uganda 

statistical abstract 2014, the overall national unemployment rate increased to 9.4% (2012/13) from 

3.6% (2009/2010) and 1.9% in 2005/06. Similarly youth unemployment remains high at 78% 

(NDPII). Majority (79%) of the youth live in rural areas engaging in agriculture. The AVCP project 

will ensure the participation of youth on the irrigation scheme management and engage youth farmer 

groups in agribusiness skills trainings, value chain activities especially in income generating projects 

such as Apiary and fish farming. At least 10% youth will be employed in any labour intensive 

agricultural activities on the irrigation schemes by providing targeted training programme. The 

Empowering Novel Agri-Business-Led Employment for Youth in Uganda’s Agriculture (ENABLE 

Youth Uganda) Program being piloted in Uganda by the African Development Bank (AfDB) under 

FIEFOC.2 Project. 

 

3.2.11 HIV/AIDS: The project does not envisage the creation of farm worker camps. Notwithstanding 

this, the Project will support selected activities aimed at reduction of HIV/AIDS new infection 

especially among women and youth who present a higher rates of infection (8.3% women, 6.1% men 

and youth 3.7%). The National HIV prevalence increased from 6.4% in 2004 to 7.3% in 2011 among 

15-49 year olds (Uganda Aids Indicator Survey). The core activities to be supported include 

awareness creation on HIV/Aids among farmer and agribusiness groups to enhance their protection 

from HIV/Aids infections and also improve the living conditions of those who are already persons 

Living with Aids. The schemes will designate an HIV-AIDS coordinator from farmer groups and 

collaborate with the existing national programmes to publicize the HIV/AIDs activities in the 

schemes. The project will collaborate with such organizations like the Uganda AIDS commission; 

and with local NGOs at the project levels (for execution purposes). It is mandatory that contractors 

to have an active HIV and AIDS workplace policy (with activities for (Staff) internal awareness 

raising, prevention, tackling issues like stigma and discrimination, treatment, focal point etc.). At 

implementation level, the partners will be mandated to enhance capacity of beneficiaries to address 

issues like awareness raising, prevention, treatment; the design should include community categories 

like the youth, farmers, mothers etc., incorporate HIV and AIDS module in the proposed 

entrepreneurial training, strengthen beneficiary referral systems with the already established 

structures like hospitals (for prevention and treatment purposes); strengthen/ create community 

support structures like e.g. treatment groups etc. 

 

3.2.12 Addressing fragility and building resilience: The project will help build resilience in target 

communities by addressing the issues of food security and increasing economic opportunities through 

agribusiness. 
 

IV. IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1. Implementation arrangements 

4.1.1 Executing and Implementing Agencies:  The Project’s Executing Agency will be the Ministry 

of Agriculture, Animal Industry and Fisheries (MAAIF) who will be responsible for the overall 

implementation and management of the Project. The Ministry of Water and Environment will be 

responsible for implementation of the watershed management related activities (in conjunction with 

relevant MAAIF departments) and also provide technical backup in the development and 



 

15 

 

implementation of irrigation related infrastructure. Further, MAAIF will coordinate implementation 

of activities being undertaken by other institutions, namely, the Uganda National Bureau of Standards 

(UNBS)/Ministry of Trade, Industry and Cooperatives (MTIC); Uganda Seed Trade Association 

(USTA), Farmer Cooperatives and Associations; National Agricultural Research Organisation 

(NARO); Diary Development Authority (DDA); the National Animal Genetic Resources Centre and 

Data Bank (NAGRIC&DB); and, the Private Sector Foundation of Uganda (PSFU) and its related 

agribusiness associations.  

 

4.1.2 A National Project Coordination Unit (NPCU) will be established to assist MAAIF in 

coordinating implementation of Project activities between the respective implementing agencies. 

MAAIF will designate a National Project Coordinator who will be the overall Project Manager.  In 

addition, to the National Project Coordinator, a Senior Procurement Officer with engineering 

background, a Senior Financial Management Officer, a Senior Monitoring and Evaluation Officer, a 

Senior Value Chains Development Officer, and a Senior Engineer will be recruited competitively as 

core staff of the NPCU. The NPCU will also draw from the technical staff in the Ministries and 

agencies involved in the implementation of Project activities to complement its work. Each Ministry 

or Agency will assign a technical staff who will lead implementation of activities in such an 

institution and will be a member of the Project’s Technical Committee to be chaired by the National 

Project Coordinator. The technical committee will ensure a collaborated implementation of project 

activities and provide technical support. A multi-sectoral Steering Committee will be established to 

provide policy oversight of the project, approve work plans and budgets, and ensure adherence to 

relevant strategies established by Government during project implementation. The Steering 

Committee will be chaired by the Permanent Secretary, MAAIF and will comprise Permanent 

Secretaries of MoWE, MoTIC, MoFPED, and technical heads of the three agencies responsible for 

implementation of Project activities (i.e. Diary Development Authority, Uganda National Bureau of 

Standards, and the National Animal Genetics and Resources Data Bank. Other members will be 

selected from relevant private sector organizations, research institutions, and beneficiary 

organizations. The Steering Committee will meet at least twice every year.  

 

4.1.3 Furthermore, the National Project Coordination Unit will be an integral part of the Executing 

Agency under the direction and supervision the Permanent Secretary, MAAIF. The National Project 

Coordinator will report directly to the Permanent Secretary, MAAIF. The NPCU will ensure that 

Project activities are initiated and are adequately budgeted for, consolidate project records, submit 

all procurement documents to the Bank for review and approval; compile and submit all disbursement 

applications and quarterly progress reports; coordinate annual audits of all Project accounts and 

facilitate submission of audit reports to the Bank. Each District will designate a Project Support 

Officer (PSO) among its staff, who will head the District Technical Support Team as detailed in the 

Technical Annex (B3.3) to support the implementation and technical supervision of the Project, 

including sensitization of farmers, training, and monitoring and evaluation in the respective local 

governments. The PSO will also coordinate the relevant stakeholders involved in the implementation 

of the project in the district.  

 

Procurement Arrangements 

 

4.1.4: “Procurement of goods (including non-consultancy services), works and the acquisition of 

consulting services, financed by the Bank for the project, will be carried out in accordance with the 

“Procurement Policy for Bank Group Funded Operations”, dated October 2015 and following the 

provisions stated in the Financing Agreement. Specifically, Procurement would be carried out 

following: 

Borrower Procurement System ( BPS): Specific Procurement Methods and Procedures (PMPs) 

under BPS comprising Public Procurement Disposal of Public Assets Act and Regulations, using the 



 

16 

 

national Standard Solicitation Documents (SSDs) for various group of transactions to be entailed 

under the project. Considerations shall be made to promote Government efforts on local content.  

Bank Procurement Methods and Procedures (BPP): Bank standard PMPs, using the relevant Bank 

Standard or Model Solicitation Documents SDs, for contracts that are either: (i) above the thresholds, 

or (ii) in case BPS is not relied upon for any category of procurement;  

Procurement Risks and Capacity Development: the assessment of procurement risks at the 

Country, Sector, and Project levels and of procurement capacity at the Executing Agency (EA),   were 

undertaken for the project and the output have informed the decisions on the procurement regimes 

(BPS and Bank)   being used for specific transactions or groups of similar transactions under the 

project. The appropriate mitigation measures and costs have been included in the procurement 

capacity development action plan (CDAP) under the project. 

 

4.1.5 MAAIF has a Procurement and Disposal Unit (PDU) that is responsible for procurement of 

goods, works and services with technical support from the directorates. The PDU is headed by a 

Principal Procurement Officer and has a total of four procurement officers as well as four contract 

staff. A Contracts Committee that approves all procurement activities is in place and functional. The 

ministry has experience in managing procurements of Bank financed projects. The resources, 

capacity, expertise and experience of MAAIF are adequate to carry out the procurement activities 

financed under this project. However, in view of the work load, the capacity of the PDU will be 

further strengthened by the recruitment of a senior procurement specialist, who will fast track the 

procurement processes on the project (see appendix VI). A delegated contracts committee will also 

be established to facilitate the Project’s procurement processes.   

 

Financial Management Arrangements 
 

4.1.6 The project will make use of the country’s PFM systems and the Assistant Commissioner, 

Accounts of the Ministry of Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Fisheries (MAIIF) will be 

responsible for the Financial Management (FM) of the project. With the Permanent Secretary MAIIF 

being the Accounting Officer. 

 

The Ministry’s Finance and Administration department led by a Principal Accountant who has 

appointed accountants to manage the day to day financial operations of all donor funded projects 

guided by the Government of Uganda (GoU) financial regulations and procedures and the PFM Act 

2015.  The project will use a manual accounting system for the funds received from the Bank with 

the GoU’s counterpart funding managed through the Integrated Financial Management Information 

System (IFMIS). All project’s financial transactions will be captured and reported based on the 

International public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS). The Finance Department of the Ministry 

has sixteen accountants who will assist the NPCU in normal Ministry financial documentation 

approvals. 

 

4.1.7 Budgeting for the project will follow the GoU rules and procedures on budgeting. The total 

project budget will be included in the ministry’s annual budget and included in the GoU’s National 

budget. The project will follow the GoU financial year of 1st July to 30th June and its financial 

statements which will be prepared within three months of the end of the financial year, will be audited 

by the Office of the Auditor General or his appointee. The audit terms of reference will be agreed 

between GoU and the Bank by negotiations. The audit report, complete with a Management Letter 

and responses, will be submitted to the Bank within six months of the end of the financial year. The 

Ministry will also be required to submit quarterly Financial Reports together with the Projects 

Progress report to the Bank no later than 45 days after the end of each quarter. The format of the 

quarterly reporting will be agreed by negotiations. 

 



 

17 

 

The Government procedures regarding internal controls in place and also applied for the existing 

projects should be used by the new project. The following internal control procedures among others 

are in place: Approval of bank accounts opening, proper authorization and approval of bank 

reconciliations, segregation of duties in payments and cash management, monthly bank 

reconciliations and timely banking of receipts. To provide oversight and assist in strengthening the 

project internal control mechanism, the Ministry’s internal audit section will include the project in 

its annual audit planning and the project’s audit reports will be shared with the Bank as needed.  

 

The results of the assessment indicate that the Financial Management overall risk rating is Moderate 

after mitigating measures. In conclusion, the proposed financial management arrangements put in 

place meet the Bank’s minimum requirements for project financial management and therefore 

adequate to provide, with reasonable assurance, accurate and timely information on the status of the 

project required by the Bank. 

 

Disbursement Arrangements 

4.1.8. The Bank’s special account and direct payment disbursement methods will be available to the 

project as prescribed in the bank’s Disbursement Handbook. All Project expenditures incurred by the 

Ministry will be paid by the PIU either from the special account or using the direct payment method.  

All activities being done by other non-governmental entities will be paid for using the direct payment 

method with documents processing done by the PIU. 

The project will open one foreign currency special account into which the proceeds of the loan will 

be deposited. A project account in UGX will also be opened. The accounts will be opened at the Bank 

of Uganda and their opening will be a condition precedent to first disbursement of the loan. An initial 

disbursement will be deposited in the project Special Account (SA) in foreign currency based on a 

six-month work program and an estimated budget of activities drawn from the agreed work plan 

approved by the Bank.  The SA will be replenished through submission of Withdrawal Applications 

when the project meets the replenishment conditions as stipulated in the Disbursement Letter and 

Handbook. The direct payment method will be used for payments of contracts for equipment, supplies 

and services (including audit-where applicable and consultancy). The Bank’s Disbursement Letter 

will be issued stipulating key disbursement procedures and requirements. To ensure adherence to 

agreed financial regulations, the special account will be monitored by AfDB supervision missions. 

4.2. Monitoring  

4.2.1 Monitoring will be an integral part of project management activities. The M&E Specialist at 

the NPCU will be responsible for the overall monitoring and evaluation of Project activities.  In using 

the performance indicators and targets specified in the Results Based Logical Framework (RBLF), 

project implementers tracking progress towards project results are expected to take special note of 

changes that reflect advancement towards the translation of outputs into development outcomes. In 

developing monitoring and planning indicators, they will be disaggregated along gender lines. A 

gender sensitive baseline study will be undertaken in PY1 which will be followed up with annual 

gender sensitive surveys to assess performance and impact of project activities.  

 

Table 4.1 – Implementation Monitoring Timeframe 

Timeframe Milestone 
Monitoring process / 

feedback loop 

Q2 – 2018 Project Launching Supervision and Progress Report 

Q2 – 2018 Procurement of Civil Works Completed Procurement Plan/Progress Report 

Q4 – 2020 Mid-Term review Midterm Review & Progress Report 

Q4 – 2022 Substantial completion of civil works Supervision and Progress Report 



 

18 

 

Timeframe Milestone 
Monitoring process / 

feedback loop 

Q2 – 2023 Project Completion Project Completion Report 

4.3. Governance  

4.3.1 International assessments show that Uganda has progressed its accountability and transparency 

ratings and indicators of Governance including corruption control, rule of law, regulatory quality and 

Government effectiveness. The 2014 Ibrahim Index of African Governance (IIAG) ranked Uganda 

19th out of 52 African countries. The 2013 IIAG provided Uganda’s performance across four 

categories of governance namely (a) Safety & Rule of Law (25 out of 52), (b) National Security (74.5 

out of 100), (c) Gender (6th out of 52), and (d) Human Development (19th out of 52). Uganda’s 

average score was 56.1 out of 100 which was higher than the continental average of 51.5. The 2012 

World Bank Institute’s Worldwide Governance Indicators rated Uganda as follows (0=low and 

1=high): (a) voice and accountability = 0.31; (b) political stability and absence of violence = 0.20; 

(c) Government effectiveness = 0.33; (d) regulatory quality = 0.45; (e) rule of law = 0.44; and (f) 

control of corruption = 0.14. The proposed measures in terms of project implementation include: (i) 

provision of financial management manual to guide Project staff; (ii) utilization of internal audit to 

identify pre-audit transaction challenges; and (iii) regular submission of progress reports.  

4.4. Sustainability   

4.4.1 The participatory approach adopted during the project design and envisioned to be extended 

during the implementation phase will enhance the ownership of project’s activities and realizations 

by the main stakeholders ensuring its sustainability. The irrigation infrastructure will be operated and 

maintained by the Water Users Associations (WUA) whose capacities will be developed through 

training. The project will ensure that at least 30% of women and youth are represented in the irrigation 

management committees. Operation and Maintenance guidelines will be developed including tariff 

setting by the supervising consultant for the operation and maintenance of the schemes that takes into 

consideration past experiences in the management of irrigation schemes in the country. The WUAs 

are expected to cover the O&M costs from the contribution of farmers through water charges. The 

management of support infrastructures such as storage and essential O&M equipment could be 

outsourced to business service provider on agreed terms under the overall supervision of the WUA.  

 

4.4.2 Capacity Building: Lack of qualified engineers and farmers’ experience in irrigation 

development has been identified as a serious constraint in implementation of the project. The project 

will develop a proposal to train farmers, extension agents, relevant government technicians and 

agribusiness actors including in the use of the pilot demonstration site to enhance the capabilities of 

the operation and maintenance of the irrigation schemes. Further, the project through MAAIF will 

endeavor to partner with JICA, IsDB, WB, The Netherlands Embassy, DFID and others who have 

interest in the area of farmers’ capacity development to ensure sustainability of the irrigation scheme.  

4.5. Risk management:  

4.5.1 The first risk is related to the effect that the private sector may not be willing to take advantage 

of the opportunities in developing the value chains. Provision of Business Development Support 

Services to potential SMEs actors will motivate them to participate in the project  
 

4.5.2 The second risk is associated with difficulties of managing the infrastructure that the project 

will develop. The use of Business Service Provider (BDS) with requisite experience will do this 

before handing them over to farmer groups.  

4.5.3 The third risk is that the beneficiaries may not attain the required level of Operation and 

Maintenance of the infrastructures. However, this will be mitigated by developing an Operations and 

Maintenance Manual for infrastructure facilities, which the farmers also participated in identifying.  



 

19 

 

 

4.5.4. The fifth risk would be delayed fulfillment of loan conditions. However, COUG will work and 

follow up closely with the Government  

4.6. Knowledge building 

4.6.1 A number of studies/surveys are planned to be undertaken through the project, with a view to 

generating information that will inform both the farmers, the local governments, Ministries as well 

as other stakeholders in the course of decision making. The analytical work will focus on beef value 

chain study, study on the potentials for agro-poles and Farmers’ Cooperative Formation modalities. 

All knowledge attributes and lessons generated from the project will be shared with the respective 

Government and District authorities, the Bank, development partner agencies and civic society. 

 

 V.  LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

5.1. Legal instrument:   

ADF Loan to the Republic of Uganda. 

5.2. Conditions associated with Bank’s intervention   

 Conditions Precedent to Entry into Force: The entry into force of the Loan Agreement shall be 
subject to the fulfilment by the Borrower of the provisions of Section 12.01 of the General 

Conditions of the Bank. 

 

 Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement:  The obligations of the Bank to make the first 
disbursement shall be conditional upon the entry into force of the Loan Agreement in accordance 

with the immediately preceding paragraph and the fulfilment by the Borrower of the following 

conditions:  

 

(i) Provide the Bank with a Letter of Comfort stating that the land where the project 
infrastructure is to be constructed are free of encumbrances and belongs to the communities 

and/or government agencies who have consented to project activities.   

 

5.3. Other Conditions  
 

The GoU shall,  

 

 

(i) Prior to a request for disbursement into the Special Account and local currency account, 
provide evidence of having opened one foreign currency Special Account (SA) and one 

local currency account at the Bank of Uganda for the deposit of part of the proceeds of 

the loan and for transfer of funds from the SA respectively; and 

 

(ii) Within 6 months of first disbursement, recruit a Senior Procurement Officer with 
engineering background, a Senior Financial Management Officer, a Senior Monitoring 

and Evaluation Officer, a Senior Value Chains Development Officer, and a Senior 

Engineer for the NPCU. 

 

5.4. Compliance with Bank Policies: The project complies with all applicable Bank policies 

  

VI. RECOMMENDATION 



 

20 

 

 

Management recommends that the Board of Directors approves the proposed ADF loan of UA57 

million to the Republic of Uganda for the purposes of implementation of Agricultural Value Chains 

Development Programme (AVCP) – Project 1 and subject to the conditions stipulated in this report 



 

























































 

 

 

 

 

SUPPORT PROJECT FOR YOUTH EMPLOYMENT AND 

SKILLS DEVELOPMENT IN RURAL AREAS 
 

COUNTRY : BURKINA FASO 
 

APPRAISAL REPORT  
Date: August 2018 

 

 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND  


Project Information Sheet 

 

 

Client Information 

DONEE   : Burkina Faso 

 

TITLE OF PROJECT :  Support Project for Youth Employment and Skills  

     Development in Rural Areas  

 

EXECUTING AGENCY  : Ministry of Youth Affairs, Vocational Training and 

 Integration (MJFIP) 

 

PROJECT AREA :  Burkina Faso 

 

Financing Plan 

Source Amount (UA) Instrument 

 

ADF  

 

Government                          

 

10.30 

 

1.144 

 

ADF grant 

  

Counterpart funds 

TOTAL COST 11.444  

 

Key Financial Information of the AfDB 

 

Grant Currency 

 

UA 

Interest* Type NA 

Interest Rate Margin* NA 

Commitment Charge* NA 

Other Charges* NA 

Maturity  NA 

Grace period NA 

FRR, NPV (baseline scenario) NA 

ERR (baseline scenario) NA 

 

 

Time Frame – Main Milestones (expected) 

 

Approval of the concept note 

 

April 2018 

Project approval 19 September 2018 

Effectiveness November 2018 

Last disbursement December 2023 

Completion December 2023 



 

 

iv 

PROJECT SUMMARY  

 

General Project Overview: The rural sector has enormous agro-pastoral and environmental 

potential, comprising: 9 million hectares of arable land, about 59% of which is cultivated; 

233,500 ha of irrigable land, about 30% of which is currently exploited; 500,000 ha of mud 

plains that are relatively easy to develop; and enormous potential for the development of 

irrigation, fishing and aquaculture. The above-mentioned high potential, existing prospects of 

diversifying crops and increasing yields, and the existence of a local and sub-regional market 

represent opportunities for stimulating the agricultural and rural sectors.   

 

By intervening in four regions of the country (North, Centre-North, Boucle du Mouhoun and 

Centre-West), the project will create enabling conditions for more inclusive economic growth 

that can reduce youth unemployment and under-employment. Its purpose is to ensure a closer 

match between young people's professional qualifications and the required labour market 

profiles by: (i) strengthening the existing technical and vocational training available to young 

people in rural areas; and (ii) developing the entrepreneurial skills of young people wishing to 

establishing their own businesses in sectors with real job creation potential.  

 

Component 1 is aimed at supporting the entrepreneurship of young higher education graduates 

trained in agriculture and agribusiness, while Component 2 targets skills development to boost 

the employability and entrepreneurship of rural youth, regardless of whether they are graduates 

or not. The total project cost, net of taxes, is estimated at UA 11,444 million, including UA 

10.30 million that will come from the ADF. The project will be approved in September 2018, 

for a five-year performance period. 

 

The Bank’s Value added: The Bank’s value added arises from the implementation of the Jobs 

for Youth in Africa Strategy (2016-2025), which seeks to promote employment and 

entrepreneurship with a view to ensuring inclusion; strengthening human capital; and creating 

sustainable links on the labour market. The project seeks to support the entrepreneurship of 

young graduates in agribusiness, in line with the Enable Youth initiative which is one of the 

flagship programmes of the Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa and Jobs for 

Youth in Africa Strategy. Furthermore, the project will create appropriate conditions for skills 

development by improving the existing vocational training and apprenticeship system for rural 

youth in sectors that have a real job-creation potential. 

 

Knowledge Management: The various studies to be conducted and the strategic plans to be 

formulated in the area of youth employment and entrepreneurship will lead to the 

implementation of relevant measures for strengthening the national mechanism. Formulation 

of the strategic plan to develop a single fund that finances the projects by youths and women, 

as well as the economic and financial feasibility study for the Vocational Training 

Centre/Incubation Centre (CFP-CI) will improve the effectiveness of public funds and 

operationalize the incubator of the Assessment and Vocational Training Centre of 

Ouagadougou (CEFPO). In the area of technical and vocational education and training (TVET), 

the project plans to formulate a strategic plan for the National Vocational Training Agency and 

conduct studies on the establishment of incubators in vocational training centres. These 

activities have a strategic impact on knowledge development and will ultimately improve the 

effectiveness of the country’s vocational training system. A monitoring/evaluation mechanism 

is planned under the project to capitalize on knowledge and leverage the lessons that will be 

learned from it. The knowledge and lessons learned will be published on the Bank's websit e 

and in project reports, publications and videos.



 

v 

 

 

RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK  

                                                
1  The term “youth” covers young people (girls and boys) as well as women. 

Country and Project Title: Burkina Faso: Promotion of Youth Employment and Skills Development in Rural Areas (PADEJ-MR) 

Project Goal:   Improve youth employability and entrepreneurship1 in the agricultural, forestry and livestock sectors as well as in promising sub-sectors in rural 

areas. 

RESULTS CHAIN 

PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICATI

ON 

RISKS/ 

MITIGATING MEASURES Indicator (including 
ISCs) 

Baseline 
Situation 

Target 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

1. Contribution to 

the reduction of 

youth under-

employment in 

rural areas 

 

2. Rural sector 

contribution to the 

economy  

1. Under-employment rate 

in the agricultural sector 

 

 

 

 

2. Annual growth rate of 

the agricultural sector 

value added. 

64% (in 2017) 

 

 

 

 

 

2.6% (in 

2017) 

50% (in 2023)  
 

 

 

 

 

5.7% (in 2023) 

Continuous 
Multi-sectoral 

Survey (CMS) 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

1. 

Entrepreneurship 

opportunities in 

agribusiness have 

been exploited by 

the youth. 

1.1. Additional number of 

businesses created or 

consolidated by young 

graduates in agriculture and 

agribusiness. 

 

0 

 

350 (including 50% 

by women) 

 

 

 

Implementation 

report  

 

Progress report 

of the Business 

Creation Centre 

(CEFORE).  

Risk 1: Insecurity linked to terrorism 

 

Mitigatiing measure 1: Strengthening of 

the security mechanism in the project 

area. 

 

2. The 

employability and 

integration of rural 

youth have been 

improved. 

2.1. Additional number of 

young beneficiaries of 

training/apprenticeship 

programmes who have 

obtained a job or created 

their own business. 

 

 

 

 

0  800 (650+150) 

(including 50% by 

women) 

Implementation 

report. 



 

vi 

 

 

 Component 1: Support to the entrepreneurship of young higher education graduates in the areas of agriculture and agribusiness 
O

U
T

P
U

T
 

Output 1.  
Awareness-raising 

to change the 

perception of 5,000 

youths vis-à-vis 

agriculture.  

 

Number of young 

graduates sensitized to 

agribusiness 

 

 

Exchange and 

information-sharing visits 

1.1 -0 

 

 

 

 

 

1.2 -0 

1.1-5000 (including 

50% by women) 

 

 

1.2 -5 

 

 

Implementation 

reports 

Risk 2: Shortage of medium or long-term 

resources to finance the development of 

the newly-created businesses. 

 

Mitigating measure 2: In addition to the 

planned funding mechanism (seed funds), 

implement a partnership strategy with 

financial intermediaries to guide young 

entrepreneurs who have undergone the 

incubation process  

 

Risk 3: A regulatory environment that is 

not conducive to the development of 

agricultural entrepreneurship  

 

Mitigating measure 3: Implementation of 

the law pertaining to the investment code 

for the agricultural, forestry, livestock 

and fisheries sectors 

Output 2. 

Incubation of 

young graduates. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2.1 Number of incubators 

with which the project will 

sign agreements or 

performance contracts 

 

2.2 Number of young 

higher education graduates 

who have benefited from 

incubation services  

 

2.1 -0 

 

 

 

 

 

2.2 -0 

 

 

 

2.1- 4 

 

 

 

 

 

2.2- 350 (including 

50% by women) 

Implementation 

reports 

 

 

 

Output 3. Business 

development 

 

3.1. Funding mechanism 

(seed fund) established 

 

3.2. Number of budding 

businesses funded.  

 3.1 -0 

 

 

 

3.2 -0 

 

3.1- 1 

 

 

 

3.2- 500 

 

Implementation 

reports. 

 

Component 2: Skills development to promote the employability and entrepreneurship of rural youth  

Output 1. 

Strengthening of 

the technical and 

vocational 

education and 

training (TVET) 

mechanism. 

 

 

1.1 Number of 

training/apprenticeship 

institutions strengthened. 

 

1.2 Number of institutions 

that include training 

modules on business and 

entrepreneurship. 

1.1 -0 

 

 

 

 

1.2 -0 

 

 

 

1.1-10 (6 VTCs and 

4 RPCs 

 

 

1.2-20 

 

 

 

 

Implementation 

reports. 

 

 

 

 

 



 

vii 

 

 Output 2. Skills 
improvement for 

the youth. 

 

2.1 Number of young non-

graduates who have 

benefited from skills 

training in vocational 

training institutions. 

2.1 -0 

 

 

 

 
 

2.1-1300 (including 

50% by women) 

 

Implementation 

reports 

 

 

 

 

Output 3. 

Professional 

integration of the 

youth. 

 

 

 

 

3.1 Number of young 

people who obtain a job 

after their training. 

 

3.2 Number of young 

people who benefit from 

TVET and have created 

their own business. 

3.1 -0 

 

 

 

3.2 -0 

3.1-650 (including 

50% by women) 

3.2-150 (including 

50% by women). 

 

Implementation 

reports 

Risk 4: Quality of education and its 

consistency with market needs  

Mitigating measure 4: Implementation of 

apprenticeship-integration agreements 

between training centres and employers’ 

organizations 

 Component 3: Project management and coordination   

 

An operational 

mechanism for  

management and 

coordination has 

been established 

and it guarantees 

smooth 

implementation. 

Quarterly monitoring 

reports 

Audit reports validated 

Cumulative disbursement 

rates 

Strengthening of 

employment support and 

monitoring units at MJFIP 

 20 

 

 

5 

 

100% 

(2023) 

 

Implementation reports  

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

 

COMPONENTS RESOURCES 

Component I: Support to the entrepreneurship of young higher education 

graduates in the areas of agriculture and agribusiness. 

 

Component II: Skills development to promote the employability and 

entrepreneurship of rural youth. 

Component III: Project management and coordination. 

 

Financing sources: UA 11.444 million  

ADF loan: UA 10.30 million 

Government: UA 1.144 million 



 

viii 

 

Project Implementation Schedule  

 Year 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 
 Quarter Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 

1 INITIAL ACTIVITIES                           

 Appraisal                              

 Negotiation and approval of the grant                            

 
Signature of the loan agreement and fulfilment of first 
disbursement conditions 

                          

 Publication of General Procurement Notice                           

2 START-UP ACTIVITIES                           

 Establishment of the project team                           

 Project launching mission                            

 Procurement of property (vehicles, computers, etc.)                           

 Agreements with partner structures                           

3 
SUPPORT TO THE ENTREPRENEURSHIP OF YOUNG 

GRADUATES 
                    

    
  

 Implementation of awareness-raising strategy                           

 Selection of incubators                           

 Selection and incubation of the youth                           

 Mentoring and coaching for the preparation of business plans                           

 Creation of youth businesses                           

 Establishment of the project team                           

 Funding of projects                            

4 SKILLS DEVELOPMENT                           

 Preparation of various studies                           

 
Award of contracts for the rehabilitation/creation of VTCs and 
RPCs  

                    
    

  

 
Award of contracts for the rehabilitation/creation of VTCs and 

RPCs 
                    

    
  

 Equipment of VTCs and RPCs                           

 Design and adaptation of training modules and material                           

 Establishment of a test incubator within VTCs and RPCs                            

 Training and support for professional integration                           

5 PROJECT COORDINATION AND MANAGEMENT                            

 
Establishment of the accounting system and manual of 
procedures 

                    
    

  

 
 Preparation of the baseline situation and establishment of the 

M/E system 
                    

    
  

 
Management, monitoring/evaluation and communication 
activities 

                    
    

  

 Annual accounts audit                           

 Midterm review                           

 Completion report                            



 

1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND 

MANAGEMENT TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS CONCERNING THE AWARD OF A 

GRANT TO BURKINA FASO TO FINANCE THE SUPPORT PROJECT FOR YOUTH 

EMPLOYMENT AND SKILLS DEVELOPMENT IN RURAL AREAS 

 

Management hereby submits this report and recommendation concerning a proposal to award a grant of 

UA 10.30 million to Burkina Faso to finance the Support Project for Youth Employment and Skills 

Development in Rural Areas (PADEJ-MR). 

I. STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE 

 Project Linkage with Country Strategy and Objectives  

1.1 PADEJ-MR is perfectly consistent with the National Economic and Social Development Plan 

(PNDES, 2016-2020), which focuses on three strategic pillars, namely: (i) reforming institutions and 

modernizing the administration; (ii) developing human capital; and (iii) boosting sectors that guarantee 

economic growth and jobs. Pillars 2 and 3 focus respectively on education, vocational and technical 

training, health, access to drinking water and sanitation, improving agricultural productivity, and 

increasing value added in the agri-food and service industries. 

1.2 The project is also consistent with the National Strategy for the Development of Agricultural 

Entrepreneurship (SNDEA, 2017-2026), which is the framework document for promoting agricultural 

entrepreneurship in Burkina Faso. The promotion of agricultural entrepreneurship is intended to address 

the low agricultural productivity resulting mainly from extreme vulnerability to agro-climatic conditions, 

land insecurity and especially difficulties in accessing funding, inputs and agricultural equipment.  

Similarly, the project is consistent with the 2018-2020 Three-Year Action Plan of the Ministry of Youth, 

Vocational Training and Employment (MJFIP) which lays emphasis on conducting a series of priority 

actions to achieve the integration of young people into the economic circuit.  

1.3 The project is consistent with: (i) the Long-Term Strategy (LTS) 2013-2022 through its 

operational priorities “Skills and technologies” and “Private Sector Development”; (ii) the Human Capital 

Strategy 2014-2018 whose overall objective is to improve employment skills; and (iii) the Jobs for Youth 

in Africa Strategy, whose flagship programmes include the promotion of rural micro-entreprises and agri-

business by young graduates. The project is fully in line with the Bank's High-5s, notably “Feed Africa” 

and “Improve living conditions for the people of Africa”. Lastly, it ties in well with Pillar II of the Bank's 

Country Strategy Paper (CSP, 2017-2021) to support agricultural sector development for inclusive growth. 

Lastly, the project is included in the indicative programme of the CSP. 

1.2 Rationale for Bank Involvement  

1.2.1 The rural sector has enormous agro-pastoral and environmental potential, comprising: 9 million 

hectares of arable land about 59% of which is cultivated; 233,500 ha of irrigable land, about 30% of which is 

currently exploited; 500,000 ha of mud plains that are relatively easy to develop; and enormous potential for 

the development of irrigation, fishing and aquaculture. The above-mentioned high potential, existing 

opportunities to diversify crops and increase yields, and the existence of a local and sub-regional markets all 

constitute opportunities for stimulating the agricultural and rural sectors.   

1.2.2 The country also has a diverse regulatory framework (framework law on agriculture, forestry, 

livestock, wildlife and fishery activities; law on rural land tenure; investment code for the agriculture, 

forestry and livestock sectors, etc.), offers many opportunities for developing agricultural entrepreneurship 



 

2 

 

and is endowed with an abundant and accessible agricultural labour-force. However, there are many 

obstacles to job creation and entrepreneurship, namely: (i) low levels of training and skills, especially 

among the youth; (ii) a wide discrepancy between the profiles of job-seekers and the economy’s potential; 

(iii) a weak culture of entrepreneurship; and (iv) a large informal sector, characterized by precarious and 

very low-paid jobs. Furthermore, according to the diagnosis carried during the preparatory studies of the 

project, youth employment in the agricultural, forestry and livestock sectors is constrained by many 

challenges, including: (i) access to financing; (ii) better ownership of the process to establish a legal and 

regulatory framework for agricultural entrepreneurship; (iii) support for stakeholder professionalization; 

and (iv) strengthening of stakeholder capacity throughout the value chain. 

1.2.3  These issues are central to the challenges that the Bank intends to address through this operation. 

The Bank's comparative advantage in this operation resides in its experience in Burkina Faso’s agricultural 

and social sectors which it has financed through several investments. These experiences have provided 

the Bank with expertise in skills development, promotion of agricultural value chains and improvement 

of youth employability in rural areas. The Bank's value added in this new operation resides in promoting 

the business spirit and entrepreneurship of young higher education graduates in agricultural value chains 

with a view to creating a critical mass of young farmers through incubation and establishing a financing 

mechanism that will reduce risks associated with establishing a business in the agricultural sector. 

1.3 Aid Coordination  

1.3.1 The Government has established 14 sectoral dialogue frameworks (SDFs) as part of PNDES 

implementation. The dialogue framework is led by the FAO in the rural sector; and by Italian cooperation 

in the employment sector. The AfDB is a member of these two dialogue frameworks. Furthermore, since 

2009, technical and financial partners (TFPs) have set up a harmonization mechanism in the form of a 

troika, which serves as a consultative entity and interface with the Government. The AfDB was the lead 

agency of TFPs from 2013 to 2014. 

1.3.2 This operation complements other Bank projects and those of other partners under appraisal or 

implementation (see Annex III). The employment sector benefits from the support of bilateral and 

multilateral financial partners for the implementation of projects and programmes to improve 

employability and employment. The Bank intends to continue its coordination and complementarity efforts 
with these and other partners during the implementation of this project. 



 

3 

 

Sector or Sub-sector* GDP   Sector share in total budget   

Education/Training  7%2 21.51 % 

Stakeholders – Annual Public Expenditure (in UA million) 

Government (average 

2016 and 2017) 
Donors Period 

1115  World Bank 34.8 2013-2019 

  Switzerland 7.02 2019-2023 

 
Donor pool (Switzerland, AFD, 

Austria, Monaco, Luxembourg) 
22.09 2018-2022 

  European Union via Expertise France 5.87 2017-2020 

 
Norway/Netherlands 

(Job booster) 

7.56 (5.4 from Norway 

and 2.1 from the 

Netherlands) 

2018-2022 

 
UNDP-Luxembourg 

 
1.25 2017-2020 

Aid Coordination Level  

Existence of thematic working groups 
 

Yes 

Existence of a global sectoral programme for vocational training 

and the rural economy 

 

Yes 

Existence of a sectoral programme for employment 
 

Yes 

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

2.1 Project Components   

2.1.1. The project seeks to create conditions conducive to more inclusive economic growth that can 

reduce youth unemployment and under-employment. This will be done mainly by mainstreaming 

employment into sector policies and developing young people’s skills in conjunction with the productive 

sector. The project focuses on three complementary components.  

2.1.2. The first component is aimed at supporting entrepreneurship among young higher education 

graduates in agriculture and agri-business with a view to: (i) encouraging them to create and develop 

businesses within the agricultural value chain; and (ii) providing them with the skills and support 

necessary for them to succeed in this sector and to build a respectable professional career through a quality 

incubation process and a seed funding mechanism for their business projects. 

2.1.3  Component 2 focuses on skills development to promote the employability and entrepreneurship 

of rural youth, be they graduates or not. The aim is to improve the matching between young people's 

vocational qualifications and the profiles required by the labour market by: (i) strengthening the existing 

technical and vocational training available to young people in rural areas; and (ii) developing the 

entrepreneurial skills of young people who wish to establish their own businesses in sectors with real job 

creation potential. 

                                                
2  Education budget as percentage of GDP. Source: Statistical yearbooks of education sector, Burkina Faso  



 

4 

 

2.1.4 The third component supports project management through actions pertaining to institutional 

support and knowledge development to ensure proper project implementation. 
 

Table 2.1 

Project Components 

Components 
Cost estimate 

(UA million) 

Description of components 

 

Support to the 

entrepreneurship 
of young higher 

education 

graduates in the 
areas of 

agriculture and 

agribusiness 

4.81 (42%) 

The activities planned under this component are presented, in 

chronological order, as follows: 

(i) Awareness-raising for 5,000 youths (50% being women) to change 
their perception of agriculture This activity is necessary to demonstrate to 

young people that agriculture is not only about tilling the land, it  also  

includes many opportunities to create businesses in which they can make 
a career and flourish as in any other sector. To that end, the project will 

conduct information and awareness campaigns using relay workers and 

organize exchange and experience-sharing visits. 

(ii) Incubation of 350 young university graduates (50% of whom are 
women) to provide them with intensive support to ensure the success of 

their businesses: training, support, access to markets and funding, contacts 

with partners, etc. This activity will be conducted by a public incubator, 
namely the AFP-PME, and private incubators selected and contracted for 

this purpose. The following criteria will be used to select partner 

incubators: similarity of targets with the project; convergence of 

intervention areas; relevance of the candidate selection and incubation 
methodology; and the ability to connect incubates to the market. These 

criteria will be evaluated for the AFP-PME and for the private incubators. 

(iii) Business development through the establishment of a seed fund 
accessible to young entrepreneurs undergoing incubation processes to 

fund the early developmental stages of their (often pre-commercial) 

businesses. This seed fund will be entrusted to the Burkina Faso Fund for 
Economic and Social Development (FBDES) (see text box on the FBDES) 

on an agreement basis, with the objective of financing 500 young 

entrepreneurs (350 higher education graduates and incubates, and 150 CFP 

and CPR graduates who have also benefited from incubation).   

Skills 
development to 

promote the 

employability 
and 

entrepreneurship 

of rural youth 

5.20 (45%) 

The main activities scheduled are: 

(i) Strengthening of the technical and vocational education and training 

(TVET) system through the rehabilitation and equipment of 6 VTCs, 

namely Gourcy (North), Tougan, Boromo, Toma and Solenzo (Boucle du 

Mouhoun) and the provincial ANPE centre of Koudougou (West Centre); 
and 4 RPCs, namely Kodougou (Boucle du Mouhoun), Goundi (West 

Centre), Kongoussi (North Centre) and Bonam (North Centre). 

(ii) Improvement of young people's skills through training in the priority 
occupations found in the PNDES (agriculture, forestry and stockbreeding; 

construction and public works, handicrafts and emerging trades) adapted 

to the needs of the labour market with a target of 1,300 young people, 50% 

of whom are women. 



 

5 

 

Components 
Cost estimate 

(UA million) 

Description of components 

 

(iii) Professional integration of 650 young people (50% of whom are 

women) with access to employment and 150 young entrepreneurs. The 
objective of integrating 650 young people into the labour market will be 

achieved through: (i) the effective implementation of the national strategy 

for the integration of trained PSCs; (ii) capacity-building support for 
integration stakeholders on the mastery of labour market needs and job 

niches; (iii) support for the development of a partnership between training 

centres (through the supervisory ministries) and enterprises (through 

employers’ organization); and (iv) traceability and monitoring of VTC and 
RPC graduates. Furthermore, the project will select 150 young people 

(50% being women) among the 1,300 trained and desirous of building 

their own business and grant them access to two incubation centres that 

will be created (in 1 VTC and 1 RPC) to support them in their projects. 

Project 

management 
and coordination 

1.14 (10%) 

The main activities to be conducted are: Administrative and financial 
management, planning and monitoring-evaluation, coordination, 

procurement, audit, communication, monitoring of cross-cutting issues 

such as gender and environment.   

2.2 Technical Solution Adopted and Alternatives Explored  

2.2.1 The project was designed to address the issue of youth integration more effectively through: (i) 

the integration of young higher education graduates into the agricultural value chain as entrepreneurs; and 

(ii) the improvement of employability in growth sectors. The option chosen is twofold, namely: (i) creating 

a critical mass of young entrepreneurs with higher education degrees within the agricultural value chain 

by strengthening their entrepreneurial capacities through incubation and facilitating their access to start-

up capital through a seed fund; the success of these young entrepreneurs and their role as “leaders” will 

serve as a model for raising awareness among other young people, thus creating a virtuous circle that 

should contribute in developing the employment potential of the agricultural sector; and, (ii) improving 

the supply and quality of vocational training for rural youth in order to fill the skills gap in certain 

promising sectors and limit training inefficiencies. Ultimately, skills training for promising occupations 

will help to combat under-employment and low productivity in rural areas and thus maintain or even 

attract young people to rural areas with high economic potential through decent work and income. 

2.2.2  This option was preferred for its capacity to cover the entire ecosystem (agricultural value chain, 

incubation, seed funds) and its potential impact on youth entrepreneurship in a sector (agriculture) 

generally considered as unattractive and unpromising for young graduates and the rural world that is often 

equated with poverty and exodus.  

 

  



 

6 

 

 

2.2.3  The following alternatives were also explored; but rejected for the above-mentioned reasons. 

 

Alternatives Brief Description  Reasons for Rejection 

Supporting 

access to funding 

for businesses 

without an 

incubation 

process 

This approach would entail 

granting loans to companies 

selected according to certain 

criteria and from a fund 

established within the banking 

system 

- Given the high failure rate of new businesses (over 85% go bust 
before the third year), these loans have a very low repayment 

rate. 

- Financial support for companies does not always lead to growth; 
only a rigorous selection of entrepreneurs with the potential to 

succeed, as well as intensive support through incubation, can 

guarantee viability and sustainability. 

- This approach would focus more on the enterprise than on the 
entrepreneur, unlike the adopted option which guarantees a better 

chance of generating a critical mass of entrepreneurs within the 

agricultural value chain. 

Capacity-

building for the 

TEVT system 

This approach would entail 

strengthening the capacities of 

VTCs/RPCs in order to increase 

the supply and quality of 

training: 

- Training in the trades alone is insufficient, since it does not take 
into account the fact that many trained young people do not have 

the capacity to engage in entrepreneurship. That is why the 

training is combined with an incubation process. 

 

2.3 Type of Project  

2.3.1 PADEJ-MR is an autonomous operation in the form of a grant for an investment project. At this 

stage, the project approach is the most appropriate way to guarantee the achievement of results and ensure 

the effective and efficient use of resources. 

2.4 Project Cost and Financing Mechanisms 

2.4.1 The total project cost, net of taxes and customs duties, is evaluated at UA 11.44 million. This 

cost comprises UA 3.892 million (34%) in foreign exchange and UA 7.552 million (66%) in local 

currency. It is financed by an ADF grant of UA 10.30 million and a Burkina Faso Government contribution 

of UA 1.14 million (10%). ADF financing consists of UA 10.30 million from the ADF 14 country 

allocation. 

2.4.2 Costs were determined on the basis of information obtained from official structures, national 

market stakeholders and the Bank's experience in financing similar activities. They included a 3% 

provision for price increase in accordance with the standards of the Central Bank of West African States 

(BCEAO) and a 5% provision for physical contingencies. Tables 2.3, 2.4 and 2.5 below present project 

costs by component, financing source and expenditure category and Table 2.6 presents the expenditure 

schedule by component. 

  



 

7 

 

Table 2.3 

Estimated Costs by Component 

Components 
In CFAF thousand In UA thousand 

F.E. L.C. Total F.E. L.C. Total 

1. Support to the entrepreneurship of young 
higher education graduates in the areas of 

agriculture and agribusiness 
1,226,000 2,451,918 3,677,918 1,570 3,140 4,710 

2. Skills development to promote the 
employability and entrepreneurship of rural 

youth 
1,363,500 2,465,578 3,829,078 1,746 3,157 4,903 

3. Project coordination and management  110,000 772,500 882,500 141 989 1,130 

BASELINE COST 2,699,500 5,689,996 8,389,496 3,457 7,286 10,743 

Physical contingencies (5%) 54,900 62,420 117,320 70 80 150 

Financial contingencies (3%) 50,985 145,455 196,440 65 186 252 

PPF advance3 234,285  234,285 300   300 

TOTAL 3,039,670 5,897,870 8,937,540 3,892 7,552 11,444 

The exchange rates used are indicated in the introduction to this report (page i).  

 

Table 2.4 

Financing Sources 

Financing 

Sources 

CFA.F UA thousand Total (in 

UA) 
% 

F.E. L.C. Total F.E. L.C. 

ADF 2,877,670 5,166,149 8,043,819 3,685 6,615 10,300 90% 

GOV’T 162,000 731,721 893,721 207 937 1,144 10% 

TOTAL 

PROJECT 

COST 

3,039,670 5,897,870 8,937,540 3,892 7,552 11,444   

 

Table 2.5 

Project Costs by Expenditure Category 

 

a) Costs by expenditure category for all funding  

Expenditure Category CFAF     UA     

  F.E. L.C. Total F.E. L.C. Total 

A. GOODS 558,000 208,400 766,400 715 267 981 

B. SERVICES 366,500 3,595,030 3,961,530 469 4,603 5,073 

C. WORKS 750,000 925,000 1,675,000 960 1,184 2,145 

D. FUNCTIONING 0 986,566 986,566 0 1,263 1,263 

E. MISCELLANEOUS4 

(funding) 
1,000,000   1,000,000 1,280   1,280 

BASELINE COST 2,674,500 5,714,996 8,389,496 3,425 7,318 10,743 

Physical contingencies 

(5%) 
54,900 62,420 117,320 70 80 150 

Financial contingencies 

(2%) 
50,235 146,205 196,440 64 187 252 

PPF advance 234,285   234,285 300 0 300 

TOTAL 3,013,920 5,923,620 8,937,540 3,859 7,585 11,444 

                                                
3  PPF approved on 25/05/2016. It has made it possible to carry out preparatory studies. 
4  Miscellaneous refers to resources destined for the Seed Fund 



 

8 

 

b) Costs by expenditure category for the ADF 

 

Expenditure Category CFAF     UA     

  F.E. L.C. Total F.E. L.C. Total 

A. GOODS 408,000 133,400 541,400 522 171 693 

B. SERVICES 366,500 3,461,000 3,827,500 469 4,432 4,901 

C. WORKS 750,000 925,000 1,675,000 960 1,184 2,145 

D. FUNCTIONING 0 488,318 488,318 0 625 625 

E. MISCELLANEOUS5 

(funding) 
1,000,000   1,000,000 1,280   1,280 

BASELINE COST 2,524,500 5,007,718 7,532,218 3,233 6,412 9,645 

Physical contingencies 

(5%) 
47,400 54,170 101,570 61 69 130 

Financial contingencies 

(2%) 
45,735 130,012 175,747 59 166 225 

PPF advance 234,285   234,285 300 0 300 

TOTAL 2,851,920 5,191,899 8,043,819 3,652 6,648 10,300 

 

Table 2.6 

Expenditure Schedule by Component (in CFAF thousand) 
Components 32% 25% 26% 12% 5%     

2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 Total Percentage 

1. Support to the 
entrepreneurship of young 
higher education graduates 
in the areas of agriculture 
and agribusiness. 

1,365,197 1,420,076 773,433 186,548 10,000 3,755,255 42% 

2. Skills development to 
promote the employability 

and entrepreneurship of 
rural youth. 

956,520 692,173 1,378,579 709,459 321,539 4,058,270 45% 

3. Project coordination and 
management.  

295,950 142,780 163,380 133,510 154,110 889,730 10% 

PPF advance. 234,285         234,285 3% 

TOTAL 2,851,952 2,255,029 2,315,393 1,029,518 485,649 8,937,540   

 

2.5 Project Area and Beneficiaries  

2.5.1 The project area (PA) selected in accordance with the Government's proposal was defined based 

on the following criteria: (i) high agricultural, forestry, livestock and fisheries (AFLF) potential as well as 

economic potential; (ii) exposure to climate risks; (iii) a high proportion of young people in the region; 

(iv) a high poverty rate in the locality; and (v) the existence of training or financing structures in the region. 

Hence, the Project will be implemented in the following areas: North Region, Boucle du Mouhoun Region, 

Centre-West Region and Centre-North Region.  The beneficiaries of the project are mainly: (i) young 

people living in rural areas; (ii) trained young people, whether qualified or less qualified; and (iii) young 

higher education graduates. The target age bracket is between 15 and 35 years for men and up to 50 years 

for women. Lastly, the project will benefit the following target population: (i) 5,000 young people in terms 

of awareness-raising to guide them towards agricultural value chain professions; (ii) 500 young 

entrepreneurs (350 young university graduates and 150 young people from TVET structures who will all 

                                                
5 Idem  



 

9 

 

benefit from incubation services); (iii) 1,300 young people trained in VTCs and RPCs, at least 50% of 

whom will be able to find jobs on the market; and (iv) 1,500 young people who may be employed in the 

500 enterprises created. 

2.5.2 In addition to age (young people between the ages of 15 to 35 years for men and up to 50 years 

for women), the selection criteria will be as follows: (i) for access to incubation services and the seed fund, 

the criteria will be those set by partner incubators; they will be based on the entrepreneurial potential of 

the candidate, the innovative nature of his project and its development and job creation potential; (ii) for 

access to technical and vocational training system, the criteria will be those already in force, albeit with 

an improvement through consultation between the supervisory Ministries (Agriculture and Employment) 

and employers in order to identify sectors, needs, qualification types, etc.  

2.6 Participatory Approach to Project Identification, Design and Implementation 

2.6.1 Project preparation followed a participatory and iterative process that facilitated the consultation 

of all stakeholders. Indeed, consultations were held with public sector institutions (Ministries concerned); 

the private sector (companies, employers); NGOs/CSOs (umbrella farmers’ organizations); as well as 

technical and financial partners active in vocational and technical training, and business creation and 

support. The diagnostic study led to the conduct of surveys among youth and women “entrepreneurs” and 

“potential entrepreneurs” in order to identify the various constraints and expectations regarding the 

project. The stakeholders insisted on: (i) better targeting of young beneficiaries by focusing on their 

entrepreneurial potential; (ii) better handling of the issue of access to funding; (iii) better coordination 

between various stakeholders; and (iv) the quest for synergy with ongoing initiatives. The stakeholders’ 

recommendations were factored into project design, mainly through: (i) the establishment of a rigorous 

mechanism to be initiated by the incubation centres for the selection of young beneficiaries; (ii) the 

establishment of a seed fund; (iii) the strengthening and management of a national consultation framework 

between public and private operational stakeholders (employers, financing structures), and; iv) 

complementarity with ongoing youth employment initiatives. 

2.6.2 This participatory approach followed during project formulation will be continued during project 

implementation. The monitoring-evaluation process will also involve the various stakeholders for the 

proper conduct of project actions. A gender-sensitive information and communication system will also be 

established to regularly disseminate information on project implementation results. 

2.7 Bank Group Experience and Lessons Reflected in Project Design  

2.7.1 As of 30 April 2018, the Bank Group’s active portfolio in Burkina Faso comprised 18 projects 

worth a total of UA 454.04 million in commitments. Of these commitments, UA 69,22 million covers 

agriculture through five projects and one PPF. The total disbursement rate is 39.66%. The portfolio review 

conducted in March 2018 found the overall performance satisfactory. The Bank’s previous interventions 

in the social and agricultural sectors focused on developing rural infrastructure; enhancing food security; 

addressing inequalities; supporting income generation and access to basic social services; improving 

access to and quality of basic education; and building the capacity of the education and training sector. 
Completion reports have been prepared for all these projects. These various reports showed that the 

performance of these operations was generally satisfactory and their impact on the ground was perceptible. 

2.7.2 The main lessons learned from these projects are: (i) the importance of ensuring good quality at 

entry by carrying out studies during the project preparation phase; (ii) the need for appropriate targeting 

of beneficiaries; (iii) the need to take gender into account; and (iv) the need to set up an effective internal 

and external monitoring and evaluation system. These lessons have been factored into this project through: 

(i) the mobilization of a PPF to carry out diagnostic and baseline studies of the project; (ii) the conduct of 



 

10 

 

a rigorous selection of beneficiaries based on their entrepreneurial spirit as well as the innovativeness and 

job creation potential of their project; (iii) the proposal of incentive measures and actions to encourage 

women to contribute to and benefit from the project's spin-offs; (iv) the setting up of a monitoring-

evaluation mechanism involving the various structures and partners of the project as well as the 

strengthening of employment support and monitoring units; and (v) the setting up of an innovative and 

adapted support and financing mechanism. Lastly, the conditions precedent to first disbursement for 

portfolio projects have been met or are well on track. 

2.8 Key Performance Indicators  

2.8.1 The main performance indicators are those included in the logical framework, whose monitoring 

shall be coordinated by the project monitoring/evaluation expert in conjunction with all partners and 

associated structures. Particular emphasis will be placed on targeting the most relevant parameters that 

can be monitored and collected internally, and all indicators will be disaggregated by gender, with the 

objective of reaching 50% of women for each indicator. 

2.8.2 Monitoring will specifically cover: (i) the under-employment rate in rural areas; (ii) the number 

of young people reached through awareness-raising; (iii) the number of young people who have benefited 

from incubation services; (iv) the number of businesses created; (v) the number of jobs created by the 

incubated businesses; (v) the number of training establishments strengthened; (vii) the number of young 

people trained in TVET and starting their own business; and (viii) the number of young people who 

obtained employment after their training. A monitoring/evaluation mechanism will be established as soon 

as the project is initiated. 

III. Project Feasibility 

3.1 Economic and Financial Performance  

Table 3.1 

Key Economic and Financial Figures* 
 Baseline Scenario Key assumptions for calculating the economic viability of the project 

NPV (in CFAF billion) 
Opportunity cost of 12% 

61.9 

 4% unemployment rate for VTC/RPC trainees 

 Risk rate of 10% for the cash-flow of newly created businesses 

 Mortality rate of 23% for business three years after their creation 

 At least 6% of the incubated youth from VTCs/RPCs have access to the 
 seed fund 

IRR  
(Internal rate of return) 

32.8% 

(*) The assumptions for calculation are discussed in detail in Technical Annex B7.  

3.1.1 The project is economically viable. Indeed, it alone will help to place 1,300 young people trained 

in vocational training centres (VTCs) and rural promotion centres (RPCs) on the job market to exercise 

trades with high employment potential desired by employers. Furthermore, it will facilitate the creation of 

500 businesses by young people (350 higher education graduates and 150 VTC/RPC graduates) who will 

in turn be able to create 1,500 jobs. Furthermore, the project will sensitize 5,000 young people to the 

agricultural and agribusiness professions. 

3.1.2 Overall, the net present value (NPV) of the project is CFAF 62 billion (which is indicative of its 

viability), and the internal rate of return (IRR) is 33% (which is well above the opportunity cost of capital 

set at 12%). The sensitivity tests conducted suggest that the IRR would vary within a range of 28% to 34% 

depending on the reasonable assumptions used.6 

                                                
6  These results are detailed in the Technical Annex B.7. It should to be noted that the economic rate of return (ratio of the o perating income to amount of 

capital invested), has not been explicitly calculated for the project. The reason is that the notions of equity or net results are not very relevant in component 



 

11 

 

3.2. Environmental and Social Impact 

3.2.1 Environmental Impact: The activities planned under the project mainly focus on awareness-

raising and capacity-building; the setting up of incubators (structures which receive and guide project 

proponents); increased access to technical and vocational training; support and coaching; facilitation of 

access to finance, etc. Most of these activities will take place in existing facilities (training centres) and 

will not have any direct negative impact on bio-physical and human environments. Implementation of the 

project will not lead to community displacement or the loss of assets or access to resources. Moreover, it 

presents very low risk of accidents, waste generation and non-compliance with working and safety 

standards. 

3.2.2 The sharing and dissemination of best practices as well as awareness-raising on compliance with 

hygiene and quality standards for future agricultural entrepreneurs will enhance the positive impact of the 

project. Actually, the project will generate very little direct adverse impact. In accordance with the national 

legal framework, namely Decree No. 2015-1187 of 22 October 2015 on conditions and procedures for 

conducting and validating environmental and social assessments and its Annex 1, the project, by its nature, 

is not subject to an environmental and social impact assessment. However, it has provided for the 

establishment of a Seed Fund to facilitate young entrepreneurs’ access to funding that is tailored to their 

situation, but which could generate some adverse environmental and social effects if certain measures are 

not taken. The potential negative impacts will be on a medium to small scale, and will concern certain 

agricultural projects submitted for financing by the Fund. Such risks essentially pertain to deforestation to 

create rights of way; as well as worksite pollution and nuisances (noise, dust, safety, etc.) during the 

execution of certain works, owing to non-compliance with certain security and hygiene best practices, etc. 

3.2.3 The project is classified under Category 4 (FI B) in accordance with the Bank's environmental 

and social procedures. Category 4 projects relate to loans or grants awarded by the Bank to financial 

intermediaries, which onlend or invest in sub-projects that may have adverse environmental and social 

effects. 

3.2.4 The Burkinabé Economic and Social Development Fund (FBDES), which is responsible for 

managing the Fund, is required to apply the Operational Safeguards (SO) and equivalent Bank procedures 

to their sub-projects and to comply with national environmental and social requirements. It is also required 

to locally publicize the Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) of the project which is 

being designed. The ESMS provides guidelines for establishing an environmental and social selection 

process and for determining the activities eligible for Seed Fund financing, depending on the scale and 

nature of their potential impacts on the environment. Furthermore, the ESMS defines the monitoring and 

surveillance framework, the institutional measures and provisions, as well as the capacity-building needs 

and other assistance to be provided before, during and after project implementation. 

3.2.5  Climate Change: The target areas are the Boucle du Mouhoun, North, Centre-North and Centre-

West regions. These areas remain characterized by enormous pressures on natural resources and recurrent 

droughts which sometimes alternated with periods of heavy rainfall that severely aggravate the 

vulnerability of ecosystems and communities. However, given the nature of the project and the main 

activities and sectors targeted (capacity-building, coaching, awareness-raising, support, etc.), the risks and 

vulnerabilities associated with climate change that could arise from project activities are very few. These 

activities are not likely to generate direct negative impacts or major risks for natural environments. Some 

suggested measures to optimize the positive impacts of the project will enhance resilience to climate 

change through the implementation of a series of activities including improving value chains that will help 

                                                
2 of the project where most young people who are trained will enter the job market as self-employed workers in the informal or simple wage sector, such 

that it would not be possible to determine what the amount of their equity would have been (especially for the self -employed). 

 



 

12 

 

to enhance agricultural production systems, reducing extensive practices, applying agricultural best 

practices and introducing innovative techniques. 

3.2.6 Social Impact: The popular uprising that rocked Burkina Faso in 2014 was rooted, inter alia, in 

the social tensions inherent in youth unemployment and under-employment. A few years later, the 

relevance given to the issue of employment and the development of young people's skills in rural areas 

are such that the activities of this project constitute a guarantee of more inclusive growth in the country. 

With regard to the positive effects of the project, a significant social impact will eventually be achieved 

in terms of a reduction of the risks of social exclusion by improving the employment situation of young 

people (decline in the youth unemployment and underemployment rate). More generally, the expected 

project implementation effects will help to reduce the poverty rate estimated at 40.1% in 2014 (Sources: 

INSD, EMC 2014) and which will decrease to 35% in 2020 according to PNDES projections. 

3.2.6.1 By creating jobs for young people, including women, the project will increase their autonomy 

and raise household incomes. This will enhance the economic context in the project area and the country 

as a whole. Furthermore, the increase in agri-food production and the promotion of agri-food processing 

and marketing will improve the nutritional situation of Burkina Faso’s vulnerable population in particular. 

Finally, the project will help to curb rural exodus by keeping young people within their communities while 

enhancing regional and local potential in agricultural value chains, public works and innovative trades. 

3.2.7 Gender: Gender analysis in Burkina Faso shows wide disparities and inequalities between men 

and women in most sectors of economic and social life. In terms of employment, the net activity rate in 

the first quarter of 2014 stood at 67.9% for the whole country, 76.8% for women and 60.2% for men. In 

both urban and rural areas, this rate was higher for men than for women. For instance, it was 71.7% for 

men compared to 58.1% for women in urban areas and 78.9% for men compared to 61% for women in 

rural areas.7 When women hold salaried employment, they tend to work at the lower end of the scale. This 

is essentially due to the socio-cultural strictures that define the role of men and women in society, because 

education and the family tend to shape the future of girls and boys from birth.  

3.2.7.1 To address this situation, the project plans to take into account all aspects of the gender 

dimension. Accordingly, incentive measures and actions are proposed to encourage women to contribute 

to and benefit from the project. The project has extended the age of beneficiaries from 16 to 50 years for 

women compared to 15 to 35 years for men, and plans to raise awareness in the project area by targeting 

women. Personalized and group coaching activities will also be initiated for women to guide them in the 

establishment of their businesses. It has also been proposed that mentoring and reference model (role 

model) activities will be organized to motivate young women to enrol in vocational training courses 

traditionally considered to be the preserve of men. Parental awareness campaigns to prevent and combat 

early marriages are also envisaged in order to keep girls in school for as long as possible so that they can 

achieve the level of education and training deemed necessary for professional integration. The project is 

classified in “category 2” according to the Bank's gender marker system. The detailed gender analysis and 

categorization requirements are presented in Technical Annex B.8. 

3.2.8  Resettlement: The project will not lead to community displacement or restriction of access to 

resources or livelihoods. 

                                                
7 National Survey on the Workforce in the Public and Formal Private Sectors (ENMO) in Burkina Faso  



 

13 

 

IV. IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1 Implementation Arrangements  

4.1.1 Institutional arrangements for project implementation: With reference to the new general 

regulations for development projects and programmes signed on 15/02/2018 (Decree N° 2018-

092/PRES/PM/MINEFID), this project will be attached to the professional integration budgetary 

programme of the Ministry of Youth, Vocational Training and Integration (MJFIP). Accordingly, the 

Director General for Vocational Integration and Employment (DGIPE) is responsible for the budgetary 

programme and is de facto the Project Coordinator. It will be supported by a Project Officer, a procurement 

expert, an administrative and financial officer, an accountant, an expert in youth employment, and an 

expert in monitoring/evaluation responsible for cross-cutting issues (gender and environment). A 

description of the profiles of key PMU personnel can be found in Annex C1. The project will establish 

agreements/protocols with implementing structures, namely; the technical services and the other 

implementing partners selected (AFP-SME, FBDES, FONAENF, DGPER, DGFP, DGFOMR, ONEF). 

These conventions will lead to the establishment of an annual schedule of activities to be carried out by 

each structure, with precise budget and performance indicators. 

A reporting mechanism and a review committee serving as a supreme policy body will be established. 

4.1.2 The review committee shall assume the functions devolved to the Project Steering Committee in 

accordance with the new general regulations for development projects or programmes implemented in 

Burkina Faso. Specifically, it shall: (i) review and adopt the project implementation plan; (ii) review and 

adopt the periodic activity and financial reports; (iii) review and adopt the annual activity programmes, 

budgets and procurement plans; and (vi) approve  project financial statements. 

4.1.3 Ongoing monitoring of project implementation, including the results to be achieved, is a major 

challenge for the project. The Project Management Unit (PMU) will ensure the establishment of a 

monitoring/evaluation mechanism. On the Bank side, COBF will manage the implementation of the 

project supervision missions. Moreover, the PMU will prepare and submit quarterly and annual progress 

reports. The budget for monitoring/evaluation activities will be covered by the project's operating budget. 

4.1.4 Procurement Arrangements: Goods (including services other than those of consultants) funded 

by the Bank under the project shall be procured in accordance with the Procurement Framework for Bank 

Group-funded Operations, October 2015 edition, and in accordance with the provisions set out in the 

Funding Agreement. Specifically, procurements will be conducted according to: 

i) The procurement system (PS) of the Donee: Procurement methods and procedures 
(PMP) applicable to the Donee's procurement system, including its implementing laws and 

decrees, in particular Law No. 039-2016/AN of 02 December 2016 on the general public 

procurement regulations and Decree No. 2017-0049/PRES/PM/MINEFID on procedures for the 

award and settlement of public contracts and the delegation of public services, as well as its 

various implementing texts. This will be done using National Standard Bidding Documents 

(NSBDs) or other bidding documents as approved during project negotiations for low-value and 

low-complexity routine works and goods contracts under the project and generally available in 

Burkina Faso. Details on the thresholds are found in Annex B.5. 

  



 

14 

 

ii) Bank’s Procurement Methods and Procedures (BPM): The Bank's standard BPMs, 
based on the relevant standard bidding documents (SBDs) for contracts above the thresholds 

specified in Annex B5, Para. B.5.3.2, will be used for larger, more complex and high value goods 

and works contracts, as well as consultancy services, for which the country’s fiduciary risk is 

deemed to be substantial. 

4.1.5 Assessment of procurement risks and capacity (APRC): An assessment of the national, sector 

and project risks and of the capacity of the executing agency (EA) to manage procurements was conducted8 

under the project and the results were used as a basis for choosing the procurement system (Donee or 

Bank) used for given activities or a set of similar activities under the project. The appropriate risk 

mitigation measures have been included in the PERCA action plan indicated in paragraph B.5.9. of Annex 

B5. 

4.1.6 Financial Management  

4.1.6.1 Financial management and disbursements: Despite the reforms undertaken since 2013 to improve 

the public finance management system in Burkina Faso, the latest PEFA 2017 shows that certain 

weaknesses persist and continue to hamper budgetary effectiveness and efficiency. Indeed, wide variations 

are always observed between the initial and the final budget, both in terms of amount and the composition 

of revenue and expenditure. This situation, which undermines the credibility of the budget, mainly stems 

from shortcomings in the planning and budgetary framework. A few sectors do not yet have sectoral 

policies. Furthermore, some ministries and institutions have not formally appointed their programme 

managers. In this context, the creation of a PMU for PADEJ-MR within the Directorate General for 

Vocational Integration and Employment (DGIPE) is necessary in accordance with Decree No. 2018-0092 

on the general regulation of development projects and programmes implemented in Burkina Faso. 

Moreover, capacity-building must be organized for the PMU on project management and the Bank's rules 

and procedures. To ensure the effective financial implementation of PADEJ-MR, the Ministry of Youth, 

Training and Vocational Integration will undertake a number of actions immediately after approval of the 

funding.9 These include:10 (i) creation of the Review Committee and the appointment of its members; (ii) 

creation of the PADEJ-MR PMU within the Directorate General of Professional Integration and 

Employment and the appointment of a Project Officer; (iii) the recruitment of financial management and 

procurement experts and the accountant; (v) the procurement of accounting software (multi-project), 

software configuration and staff training; (vi) the recruitment of an external auditor; and (vii) the opening 

of two special accounts: the first one dedicated to defrayment of the operating expenditure of the PMU 

and the second for the seed fund. Details on financial management and disbursement are provided in 

Annex B6. 

4.1.6.2 The special account method will therefore be used to finance operating expenses and the seed 

fund. To that end, two special accounts will be opened: the first special account will be used to finance 

the PMU's operating expenditure and the second will be used for the seed fund. As a condition precedent 

to the disbursement of seed funds (to be included under “Other conditions”), the Donee must provide the 

Fund, no later than three (3) months after entry into force of the financing agreement, with a partnership 

agreement signed with the FBDES to host and administer the seed fund. This agreement shall define the 

conditions justifying the use of special account resources to be submitted to FIFC.3 for approval. 

                                                
8 See the technical annexes for more information. 
9  In dialogue with the Government, initiatives will be taken by COBF to accelerate and/or anticipate the establishment of the PMU to ensure rapid 

commencement of the project. 
10  It should be noted that the budgetary programme officer has already been appointed. 



 

15 

 

4.1.6.3  Audits: Annual audits of financial statements shall be conducted by an external audit firm based 

on terms of reference approved by the Bank. Audit reports shall be transmitted to the Bank at mo st six 

months after the end of the fiscal year under review. 

4.1.6.4 Disbursement arrangements: Grant resources shall be disbursed in accordance with the Bank's 

Disbursement Manual once the Protocol Agreement becomes effective and the conditions precedent to 

first disbursement have been met. The first disbursement is expected to take place at the latest within three 

months following the signature of the Protocol Agreement. The following disbursement methods will be 

applied for the disbursement of grant resources by the Bank: (i) the direct payment method; (ii) the special 

account method; and (iii) the repayment method. The direct payment method will be used for the payment 

of contracts for expenditure categories relating to construction, goods and services. The special account 

method will be used to finance operating expenses and the seed fund. Indeed, two special accounts will 

be opened to receive grant resources: the first one will be dedicated to financing the PMU's operating 

expenditure and the second will hold the seed fund.   

4.1.6.5 The procedures relating to the resources allocated to the FBDES shall, in principle, be recorded 

in a project procedures manual. 

4.2. Monitoring of Project Activities  

4.2.1 The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) mechanism will make it possible to determine the level 

of physical implementation (implementation rate for the whole project and for each component) and of 

financial implementation (commitment rate and disbursement rate for ADF and State counterpart 

resources). It will be provided with information coming mainly from control / supervision missions 

(physical execution) and progress reports. The monitoring of physical and financial achievements 

(commitments and disbursements), relative to projections, will ensure that the project implementation 

schedule is respected. The evaluation will be done through periodic monitoring/evaluation surveys. The 

project monitoring-evaluation officer will be responsible for harmonizing formats and consolidating all 

partner and project reports. 

4.2.2 A harmonized gender-sensitive monitoring/evaluation framework will be developed for 

operationalizing the logical framework indicators and defining the collection, reporting, processing and 

reporting circuit. Activities scheduled under the project are summed up in the table below. These activities 

will be implemented  following the project implementation schedule. 

No Activities Entity in charge Maturity 

1 Appraisal ADF May 2018 

2 Negotiations Government/ADF July 2018 

3 Presentation of project to ADF Board  ADF   September 2018 

4 Signature of grant protocol agreement   Government/ADF September-October 2018 

5 Authorization of 1st disbursement ADF    December 2018 

6 Launching of project  Executing Agency/ADF January 2019 

7 Implementation of services PMU/Government January 2019 - December 2023 

8 Midterm review Government/ADF June 2021 

9 Completion of activities Government/ADF December 2023 

10 Completion report   Government/ADF March 2024 

11 Audits PMU Annually 
 



 

16 

 

4.3. Governance  

4.3.1 Burkina Faso has made significant progress over the past two years. According to the 2017 

edition of the Mo Ibrahim Index of African Governance, Burkina Faso is above the average for the whole 

of Africa, with a score of 53.7/100 and a ranking of 23rd out of 54 countries assessed. Regarding rule of 

law and accountability, it ranks among the top 10 least-corrupt African countries in 2016, according to the 

Transparency International corruption perception index. The authorities have initiated legislative reforms 

to step up the fight against corruption, mainly through the adoption in March 2015, of the law on 

prevention and repression of corruption. In November 2015, the new authorities increased the powers of 

the Supreme State Control and Anti-Corruption Authority (ASCE-LC). Since then, ASCE-LC has 

conducted an annual audit of budget management, which is published. Specialized judicial units in charge 

of economic cases were created in 2017 to speed up the adjudication of cases on corruption and related 

offences. Civil society organizations (CSOs), including the National Anti-Corruption Network 

(RENLAC) are also heavily involved in combating corruption. They act as a counterweight to the 

Government by denouncing abuses and the mismanagement of public resources. 

4.3.2 With regard to favourable project implementation conditions, note should be taken of the 

country's performance in business creation (with a score of 88/100) and promulgation of the investment 

code to create an enabling environment for the promotion of entrepreneurship in the agriculture, forestry, 

livestock and wildlife sectors; the promotion of decent jobs; boosting of the competitiveness of national 

production on the domestic and foreign markets; and the modernization of production, conservation or 

processing techniques for products from the agriculture, forestry, livestock, fisheries and wildlife sectors. 

4.4 Sustainability  

4.4.1 To ensure project sustainability, the existing system will be strengthened by providing the 

necessary support to improve not only its governance but also its effectiveness. Indeed, the prominence 

given to youth employment and skills development in national strategies augurs well for a new vision of 

employment as an essential variable in achieving highly inclusive growth. The adoption of the NP/TEVT 

and its three-year action plan 2018-2020 confirms the Burkina Faso Government’s commitment to 

implement key reforms that promote youth employment.  

4.4.2 Furthermore, the recruitment of the youth employment expert within the PMU at the MJFIP will 

lead to capacity-building for the stakeholders involved in project implementation. Ultimately, the PMU 

will make it possible to internalize certain training and employment management functions within public 

services. These capacities will contribute to the efficient management of public resources allocated to 

employment and vocational training, which are expected to increase over the next five years, including 

the share of funding raised by the private sector.  

4.4.3 Finally, to ensure the sustainability of results, capacity-building activities will be organized for 

the benefit of the various key stakeholders. The project will ensure that beneficiaries develop the proper 

skills to carry on with activities after its completion. Sustainability will all the more be enhanced as the 

Government and TFPs have shown an interest in perpetuating the project's achievements (seed funds, 

business incubators in rural areas, etc.). 

4.5 Risk Management and Mitigation  

To ensure the success of the project, mitigating measures have been scheduled to address identified risks. 

The main risks presented in the table below are indicated in the results-based logical framework matrix. 

  



 

17 

 

 

Table of Risks and Mitigating Measures 

Potential risks Mitigating measures 

Insecurity linked to terrorism 

 

Strengthening of the security mechanism in the project area 

Shortage of medium or long-term 

resources to fund young entrepreneurs. 

In addition to the planned funding mechanism (seed funds), implement a 

partnership strategy with financial intermediaries to guide young 

entrepreneurs who have undergone the incubation process  

A regulatory environment that is not 

conducive to the development of 

agricultural entrepreneurship 

Implementation of the law on the investment code for the agricultural, 

forestry, livestock and fisheries sectors  

Quality of education and its consistency 

with market needs 

 

Implementation of apprenticeship-integration agreements between training 

centres and employers’ organizations 

 

4.6 Knowledge Building  

4.6.1 PADEJ-MR will contribute to knowledge development and the strengthening of institutional 

support for youth employment and entrepreneurship. The project will also lay particular emphasis on 

Technical and Vocational Education and Training (TVET). The various studies to be conducted and the 

strategic plans to be formulated in the area of youth employment and entrepreneurship will lead to the 

implementation of relevant measures for strengthening the national mechanism. Indeed, formulation of 

the strategic plan for developing a single fund to finance the projects of young people and women and the 

economic and financial feasibility study for the CFP-CI incubator will improve the effectiveness of public 

funds and operationalize the incubator of the Assessment and Vocational Training Centre in 

Ouagadougou. 

4.6.2 With respect to the TVET system, the PADEJ-MR plans to develop a strategic plan for the 

National Vocational Training Agency11 and to conduct studies on the establishment of incubators in VTCs 

and RPCs. These activities have a strategic impact on knowledge development and will ultimately improve 

the effectiveness of the TEVT mechanism in Burkina Faso. Furthermore, the project will have a direct 

impact on young people who will benefit from technical and vocational training under better conditions. 

V. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY  

5.1 Legal Instrument  

The legal framework of the project will be a grant protocol agreement to be concluded between Burkina 

Faso and the African Development Fund. 

5.2 Conditions Associated with Fund Intervention  

5.2.1 Conditions precedent to grant effectiveness: The grant agreement shall become effective on its 

date of signature by the Donee and the Fund. 

  

                                                
11  In collaboration with the International Labor Office (ILO). 



 

18 

 

 

5.2.2 Conditions precedent to first disbursement of grant resources: The Fund’s obligation to make a 

first disbursement of grant resources will be subject to the effectiveness of the grant agreement in 

accordance with the provisions of Paragraph 5.2.1 above and proof of satisfaction by the Donee of the 

following conditions to the satisfaction of the Fund:  

(i) Provide proof of recruitment or appointment of members of the project coordinating team; 
and 

(ii) Provide proof of the creation of the review committee and appointment of its members in 
accordance with the Decree (No. 2018-0092/PRES/PM/MINEFID) of 15 February 2018 

on the general regulation of development projects and programmes carried out in Burkina 

Faso.   

5.2.3 Conditions precedent to first disbursement of grant resources: The obligation for the Fund to 

make a second disbursement of grant resources shall be subject to fulfilment by the Donee of the following 

conditions to the satisfaction of the Fund: 

(i) Provide a copy of the partnership agreement with the FBDES for the hosting and 
administration of the seed fund no later than six months after entry into force of the grant 

protocol agreement;   

(ii) Provide copies of the agreements signed with the executing structures which shall enable 
the establishment of an annual schedule of activities to be conducted per structure, 

accompanied by budgets and specific results indicators for the project; and, 

(iii) Provide a copy of the manual of procedures for the administrative, accounting and financial 
management of the project validated by the Bank. 

5.2.4 Commitments: The Donee undertakes to:  

(i) Raise counterpart funds annually in accordance with the funding plan, within a national 

counterpart account opened at the Treasury; and 

(ii) Prepare and submit quarterly and annual progress reports that are satisfactory to the Fund 

in format and substance. 

5.3 Conformity with Bank policies  

The project is in accordance with the Bank’s applicable policies. It will be implemented within t he 

framework of the Bank's intervention strategy in Burkina Faso defined in the 2017-2021CSP approved in 

September 2017 by the Board, as well as the Bank's strategy for the 2013-2022 period. 

VI. RECOMMENDATION 

Management recommends that the Board of Directors  approves the proposed grant of UA 10.30 million 

(ten million three hundred thousand) for Burkina Faso to finance the Support Project for Youth 

Employment and Skills Development in Rural Areas  (PADEJ-MR), subject to the conditions stipulated 

in this report. 



 


