


















































President's report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
El Salvador for the National Programme of
Rural Economic Transformation for Living
Well - Rural Adelante

Republic of El Salvador

National Programme of Rural Economic Transformation
for Living Well - Rural Adelante

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of El Salvador

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock

Total programme cost: US$18.69 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 10.85 million (equivalent to approximately
US$12.13 million)

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant: SDR 3.56 million (equivalent to approximately

US$5.0 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including agrace period of 3 years, with an interest rate per
annum equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference
interest rate

Contribution of the borrower: US$500,000

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.06 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD




1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation on the proposed
financing to the Republic of El Salvador for the National Programme of Rural Economic
Transformation for Living Well - Rural Adelante, as contained in paragraph 46.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of El Salvador
for the National Programme of Rural Economic
Transformation for Living Well - Rural Adelante

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. El Salvador has the highest population density in Latin America, with an area of

just 20,742 km² and a population of 6,279,783 (2014). Demographic growth was
0.5 per cent per annum during the period 2001-2013, the lowest rate in Central
America and one of the lowest in Latin America as a whole, owing to negative
migratory flows and a low gross birth rate.

2. El Salvador is a middle-income country. The economy has transitioned from an
agrarian model to a model based on services, consumption, and nontraditional
agricultural and industrial exports. Real GDP grew 1.9 per cent per annum and GNI
per capita 1.19 per cent per annum during the period 2001-2013. Inflation in 2013
stood at 0.76 per cent compared to a high of 7.26 per cent in 2008. Low growth
results in part from low levels of investment – leading in turn to insufficient
employment that is poor in quality and limited income growth for the population.
The low level of economic growth is directly related to poor productivity both
overall and by sector, in addition to insecurity and crime.

3. Poverty in El Salvador is associated with both historic internal issues – the civil
war, the economic and market model and natural disasters such as the earthquake
in 2011 – and, more recently, a series of external shocks such as falling coffee
prices, the global recession and higher oil prices, all of which have contributed to
low economic growth and slow progress on social indicators. Poverty affects in
particular vulnerable and traditionally excluded population groups such as
indigenous peoples, children, young people, women and seniors. Among rural
young people between the ages of 18 and 35, 38 per cent live in poverty and are
seriously impacted by crime and violence. Among rural women, many of whom are
subject to unemployment and family violence, 42 per cent are poor. Although there
are no exact figures on the number of indigenous people in El Salvador, Ministry of
Health estimates indicate that in the Eastern region alone there are 32,725
indigenous people (2014), the vast majority of whom are living in poverty. This
population group has historically been marginalized, until 2014 when the
Legislative Assembly issued official recognition.

4. During the period 2000-2013 poverty declined in the country. The percentage of
households living in poverty fell from 38.8 per cent to 29.6 per cent with the
reduction in rural poverty of 18 per cent. Urban poverty also posted a slight decline
from 29.9 per cent to 26.2 per cent.

5. Despite the reduction in poverty overall and the decline in rural poverty, growth in
the agriculture sector has stagnated, as a result of the crisis in the traditional
export agriculture model, low levels of domestic and foreign private investment and
increasing environmental vulnerability. High price volatility within the agriculture
sector, for both inputs and products, has increased uncertainty and reduced
incentives to invest in agriculture. The sector's contribution to GDP fell slightly



2

during the period 2001-2013, from 10.12 per cent of GDP in 2001 to 10 per cent in
2013.

6. Climate change and increasing climate volatility pose one of the greatest
challenges to agriculture given the magnitude and frequency of extreme events,
which have caused significant losses and economic damage in recent decades. El
Salvador is one of the most climate change-vulnerable countries in the world. The
country's exposure to intense rainfall in the North-east and recurring drought in the
Eastern region, within the dry corridor, results in losses – particularly for
smallholder farmers.

7. The Government of El Salvador launched the Five-year Development Plan 2014-
2019 to spur economic and social growth. This document sets out a roadmap to
achieve equitable and inclusive development that will translate into living well for
the population. The plan highlights three priorities: productive employment, under
a model of sustained economic growth; education with inclusion and social equity;
and effective citizen safety. The plan also recognizes that environmental policy and
risk mitigation are a social and economic imperative. These priorities are geared to
achieve, within five years, a human development index of 0.7, associated with
countries at a higher level of human development.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

8. National and sector policy priorities call for a number of actions to generate
opportunities for living well for the population as a whole, while recognizing the
different needs of various population groups. IFAD's priorities and interests in the
country are aligned with government policies: areas of complementarity include
economic development; developing human potential; inclusion and equity,
especially for young people, women and indigenous people; sustainable production
with adaptation to climate change; government consultation with society by
promoting dialogue and citizen participation; and promoting results-based
management.

9. In addition, the programme is fully consistent with IFAD's strategic objectives as
outlined in the new results-based country strategic opportunities programme (RB-
COSOP) for El Salvador, which are as follows: (i) improve family farmers’ access to
resources, technologies and information to enable them to develop more
sustainable agriculture and adapt better to climate change; (ii) promote economic
empowerment of youth, rural women and indigenous peoples; and (iii) contribute
to the Government’s efforts to make public spending and investments in rural
areas more efficient, effective and equitable.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
10. During the first stage, the programme area will include the four departments

comprising El Salvador's Eastern region – La Unión, Usulután, San Miguel and
Morazán – and the 87 municipalities that lie within them. In view of their condition
of poverty and climate change vulnerability, first priority will be given to the
municipalities located in the region's north and central areas, followed by those
located in the south, in accordance with national and sector priorities. The eastern
region forms part of the dry corridor and is subject to cyclical drought, which is one
of the main causes of social, environmental, productive and economic crisis and
catastrophe.

11. The target group includes rural people living in poverty in the eastern region who
have productive and associative potential. The programme will pursue three
strategies to reach the target population: (i) a value chains-based strategy; (ii) a
targeting strategy based on selection by participating organizations; and (iii) a
social targeting strategy based on selection of families and people in the most
excluded groups: women, youth and indigenous people.


12. Through their participation in organizations, and on an individual basis in the case
of young people and adults participating in the technical training programme, a
total of 8,300 families will benefit directly and an estimated 32,000 people will
benefit directly and indirectly. Direct beneficiaries will be mainly women or men
heads of household, young people and women, acting as representatives for
purposes of the programme. Indirect beneficiaries will be members of the direct
representatives' families, estimated at four people per family.

13. Women account for 40 per cent of all direct beneficiaries of Rural Adelante, young
people 20 per cent and indigenous people 5 per cent. In the case of young people,
equal numbers of men and women are included to continue encouraging egalitarian
participation by both groups and the creation of a more equitable new generation
ready to take over.

B. Programme development objective
14. The development objective of Rural Adelante is to sustainably increase the incomes

of poor rural families in the departments of San Miguel, Usulután, La Unión and
Morazán and facilitate their adaptation to climate change. The programme will have
achieved its objective when at least 8,300 families (33,200 beneficiaries) have
received services under the project, 5,900 families with business plans have
improved their incomes1 and 5,000 producers (20,000 beneficiaries) have been
provided with more climate change-resilient organizational business plans.

C. Components/outcomes
15. The programme is structured in four interrelated components:

(a) Capacity-building for sustainable production adapted to climate
change. The objective of this component is to improve research, extension,
education and training services to develop priority value chains under a
climate change adaptation approach. The component seeks to generate
knowledge by: (i) setting up a climate information service; (ii) conducting
technology research and innovation; (iii) developing climate change
adaptation plans; and (iv) strengthening human talent. The latter includes
two actions: (i) developing training for producers linked to value chains; and
(ii) designing and implementing a technical training programme for young
people and adults.

(b) Competitive, sustainable and inclusive value chain development. The
objective of this component is to promote sustainable market access by
target groups – smallholder farmers, women, youth and indigenous people –
as a way of raising the incomes of poor rural families. To this end, a
competitive, inclusive and sustainable value chains approach will be
promoted, based on market demand. The expected outcome is for
organizations to make the necessary improvements to sell high quality
products demanded by the market. The programme will encourage value
chain actors – input suppliers, technical assistance and training providers,
financial service providers, private and public collection and
commercialization centres and marketers – to achieve more efficient
coordination and enter into strategic partnerships to strengthen links and
support services.

(c) Strengthening the public policy framework for rural development. The
objective of this component is to strengthen the institutional and policy
framework for rural development. This will be based on policy analysis,
formulation and implementation in connection with selected value chains –
with policies on gender, rural youth and indigenous peoples, the environment
and climate change adaptation. To this end, support will be provided for the
functional capacities of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG), the
National Youth Institute (INJUVE), municipalities, and associations of

1 Measured by gross income increased by 100 per cent for one or more years, taking into account diversified income sources associated
with the programme.




producers, rural youth, women and indigenous peoples. The expected
outcome is strengthened capacities of women, rural youth and indigenous
peoples, to improve their participation in the rural development public policy
cycle.

(d) Programme management and M&E. This component covers programme
management and administration, and includes M&E.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
16. The programme approach is based on three pillars promoting sustainable action:

competitiveness, inclusion and sustainability. These provide the frame of reference
or approach guiding the strategic and operational decisions to be taken to achieve
the objectives and expected outcomes, i.e. they provide the elements that
determine whether a programme action can be included in accordance with these
three pillars.

17. Competitiveness refers to increased capacity on the part of organizations, families
and people to participate in markets for goods and services around selected value
chains with the required quality, quantity and frequency. Inclusion, besides
covering differences in gender, culture and economic sector of provenance, seeks
to create and defend a level playing field – equal conditions and opportunities for
all in accessing resources, opportunities, and participatory and decision-making
platforms under the programme. Sustainability calls for directing all programme
actions to respect and guarantee environmental quality, in order to avoid
environmental degradation, conserve and protect natural resources, promote the
generation and use of climate change adapted technologies, and employ mitigation
measures to address natural disasters and risk management, resulting in a
population with greater resilience to environmental risks.

B. Organizational framework
18. Responsibility for programme implementation will reside with Ministry of

Agriculture and Livestock. Setting up the programme management unit (PMU),
which will have functional autonomy but report to the Ministry of Agriculture and
Livestock, will be the responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock as
the implementing agency, through the Rural Development Directorate (DGDR). The
PMU will be headed up by programme management. Implementation will also
involve the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) as the agency
administering resources and specialized service providers, which will include among
its activities a capacity-building strategy for the Ministry of Agriculture and
Livestock in procurement.

19. The PMU will have a structure comprising a general manager, five advisory units
(administrative and financial; communication; capacity-building; inclusion, gender
and planning; and M&E and knowledge management). In addition, there will be
three specialists in thematic areas performing a coordination role: environment and
climate change adaptation, rural business and public policy. The PMU will have, as
part of financial administration, an administrator, an accountant, a procurement
specialist, an accounting assistant, a financial assistant responsible for the
integrated financial administration system (SAFI) and a logistics officer.

20. To implement the programme and its components, the PMU will enter into the
necessary agreements with local, national, public and private entities. To this end,
selection and accreditation processes will take place for service providers based on
value chain needs and strategies, organizational business plans and other
initiatives.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

21. The programme will design and implement a planning and monitoring system to
serve as a management instrument to facilitate platforms for learning, exchange of
experiences, best practices and results dissemination, and generate updated
relevant information on programme performance, with an emphasis on results
measurement (outputs, outcomes and impact).

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
22. The DGDR of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, through the PMU

administrative and financial unit, will be responsible for the programme's financial
management – including the annual workplan, flow of funds, disbursements,
internal controls, accounting, financial reporting and audit. In addition, to improve
funds management, the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock will sign an
agreement with UNDP, which will support the programme in resource
administration and procurement. The programme will record accounting
transactions in SAFI.

23. Flow of funds. The borrower/recipient, through MAG, will open a designated
account exclusively for the loan proceeds and another designated account
exclusively for the ASAP grant proceeds at the Central Reserve Bank of El Salvador.

24. Procurement. Procurement of goods and contracting for works and consulting
services under the programme will be conducted in accordance with the guidelines
on the procurement of goods and contracting of works and services for IFAD
projects (IFAD guidelines).

25. UNDP will support the programme in procurement processes, and the agreement
between the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock and UNDP will cover capacity-
building activities to strengthen the procurement area within the Ministry of
Agriculture and Livestock.

26. Audit. The annual consolidated financial statements will be audited each year by
an independent auditor in accordance with IFAD guidelines on project audits. All
project accounts will be audited, including those designated for loan funds, grant
funds and national counterpart funds. The audit reports will be delivered to IFAD
six months after the end of each fiscal year.

D. Supervision
27. IFAD will provide direct supervision of the programme. Implementation support will

be provided from the outset of the programme to prepare properly for start-up.
IFAD and the borrower will perform a midterm review following year three.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
28. The programme will have a total cost of approximately US$18.69 million, including

contingencies. Component 1 will involve an expense of US$3.64 million, equivalent
to 19 per cent, and component 2 will cost US$10.46 million, representing 56 per
cent of total investment. Component 3 will involve an expense of approximately
US$1.22 million, representing 7 per cent of the total. Finally, component 4 will cost
approximately US$3.37 million, or 18 per cent.



Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan ASAP grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

Counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Capacity-building for sustainable
production adapted to climate
change

3 642 100 3 642 19

2. Competitive, sustainable and
inclusive value chain development

8 195 78 1 203 12 1 062 10 10 460 56

3. Strengthening the public policy
framework for rural development

992 81 155 13 72 6 1 219 7

4. Programme management and
M&E

2 940 87 428 13 3 368 18

Total 12 127 65 5 000 27 1 062 5 500 3 18 689 100

B. Programme financing
29. The combined programme financing breaks down as follows by financier: the

borrower will contribute US$500,000 (3 per cent), the IFAD loan will provide
approximately US$12.13 million (65 per cent), the ASAP grant will provide US$5.00
million (27 per cent), and the beneficiaries will contribute approximately US$1.06
million (5 per cent) in cash and in kind.

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan ASAP grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Vehicles, equipment and materials 456 91 42 9% 498 3

2. Technical assistance/ institutional
agreements

497 1 2404 83 2 901 16

3. Technical assistance/ service
agreements

3 248 93% 155 4 72 2 3 475 19

4. Subsidies/ rural business 5 712 64 2 203 25 1 062 12 8 977 48

5. Salaries/ operating costs 2 214 78 238 8 386 14 2 838 15

Total 12 127 65 5 000 27 1 062 6 500 3 18 689 100

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The cost-benefit methodology was used for the economic analysis, based on a

calculation of the flow of net incremental annual benefits for the selected 10-year
period. The cost-benefit or profitability analysis was done using the internal rate of
return (IRR) and net present value (NPV). The IRR was calculated on the basis of
the economic flow of funds generated by Rural Adelante (economic IRR). Generally
a project is considered economically viable if the IRR exceeds the opportunity cost
of capital, 12 per cent in the case of this programme. In calculating the IRR,
economic benefits and costs for a 10-year period were taken into account.

31. The financial IRR for the programme overall is 20 per cent with an NPV of US$6.40
million, and US$22.20 million if the NPV is calculated for a 20-year period.

D. Sustainability
32. Since the Rural Adelante approach was put forward, plans have called for actions

and innovations to remain in place beyond the programme implementation period.
Specifically, sustainability is expected to be achieved once the target population is
able to replicate what is being proposed or implemented, and to go even further
upon achieving the capacity to continue developing innovations – i.e. the target
group has the potential to innovate by consciously making adjustments and
changes for their own benefit in the organizations and value chains in which they
participate. Equally, sustainability will have been achieved once the Ministry of


7

Agriculture and Livestock is replicating, improving upon and making adjustments to
innovations.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
33. The programme implementation risks identified have a low to medium probability

of occurring and little potential impact on achieving the objectives and expected
outcomes.

34. Among the main risks are: (i) natural and climate phenomena having a severe
impact on the eastern region; and (ii) an escalation of crime and violence in the
programme area.

35. Measures to mitigate these risks could include: (i) undertaking concrete risk
management actions to address natural and climate phenomena by Rural Adelante
and other IFAD projects operating in the region; and (ii) maintaining contingency
plans and clear safety regulations for programme staff and an ongoing dialogue
with the relevant authorities in the programme area.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
36. The programme proposal falls within the overarching goal of IFAD's Strategic

Framework 2011-2015 and contributes to achieving the strategic objectives to
improve access to services that contribute to poverty reduction and to promote
economic and natural assets that strengthen the resilience of disadvantaged rural
populations. In addition, the programme approach and implementation strategies
are aligned with IFAD's policies and strategies on policy dialogue, targeting rural
poor people, gender equality and women's empowerment, engagement with
indigenous peoples (including matters relating to free, prior and informed consent),
natural resource management and the environment, climate change, social,
environmental and climate evaluation procedures, rural finance and business
management risk, and knowledge management and innovation.

B. Harmonization and alignment
37. IFAD's priorities and interests in the country are aligned with the policies of the

Government of El Salvador. Areas of complementarity include economic
development; developing human potential; inclusion and equity, especially for
youth, women and indigenous people; sustainable production adapted to climate
change; government consultation with society by promoting dialogue and citizen
participation; and promoting results-based management.

38. Within the sector, IFAD is consistent with the priorities of promoting food
sovereignty and security; production development through value chains;
environmental sustainability and adaptation to climate change; developing family
farming; reactivating cooperatives and modernizing institutions.

39. In addition, the programme will directly address the strategic objectives of the RB-
COSOP 2015-2019.

C. Innovation and scaling up
40. For the Government of El Salvador and IFAD, this new operation offers an

opportunity to capitalize on the experiences of recent years around rural
development and rural poverty reduction in the eastern region. These experiences
include the Rural Development Project for the North-Eastern Region (PRODERNOR)
and the Rural Development and Modernization Project for the Eastern Region
(PRODEMORO) and, more recently, the Rural Territorial Competitiveness
Programme (Amanecer Rural) – in addition to participation in regional programmes
on, inter alia, gender, policy dialogue and remittances. IFAD's loans and grants
operations have generated significant human and social capital that is fundamental
to the qualitative leap the country intends to take in reactivating productive and
entrepreneurial capacity in rural areas by strengthening profitable economic
initiatives.


41. A new intervention in the eastern region is based on transforming the traditional
economic, social and environmental model, whereby the intention is to bring about
change with the following innovative elements: (i) targeting territory, organizations
and people coordinated under a single platform with a value chain orientation,
rather than on the isolated initiatives traditionally undertaken; (ii) competitiveness
and market demand driving value chains to generate income and permanent
quality employment and improve wellbeing; (iii) promoting collective participation
around a single chain in which various groups and actors come together as a
function of the market and strengthening business and financing criteria, such as
sustainability considerations; (iv) IFAD financing acting as a catalyst, distributed in
different proportions according to the expenditure category in the business plan
and the type of organization; (v) linking the target population with financial
services to reduce their dependence on nonreimbursable transfers, inculcating a
sustainable business rather than a welfare-based culture; (vi) developing value
chain businesses under an approach that protects natural resources, the
environment and adaptation to climate change; (vii) promoting inclusion and
equity in participation by young people, women and indigenous people as actors
that require support for their development.

D. Policy engagement
42. The programme will demonstrate experience with integrating public policy dialogue

around value chains at the regional level with other platforms for dialogue already
existing in the country, and with support for implementing public policies in support
of climate change adaptation and mainstreaming rural women, youth and
indigenous people.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
43. A financing agreement between the Republic of El Salvador and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/
beneficiary. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an
appendix.

44. The Republic of El Salvador is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD and the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) Trust
Fund, through IFAD in its capacity as Trustee of the ASAP Trust Fund.

45. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria for IFAD.

VII. Recommendation
46. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of El Salvador in an amount equivalent to ten million eight hundred
fifty thousand euros (EUR 10,850,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that, under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP), the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of El
Salvador in an amount equivalent to three million five hundred sixty thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 3,560,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Argentine Republic for the
Goat Value Chain Development Programme


Argentine Republic

Goat Value Chain Development Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Argentine Republic

Executing agency: Unit for Rural Change

Total programme cost: US$25.45 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$12.30 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$1.02 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of three years, with an interest rate per annum
equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of borrower: US$7.00 million

Contribution of provincial governments: US$2.97 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.16 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed loan
and grant to the Argentine Republic for the Goat Value Chain Development
Programme, as contained in paragraph 33.

Proposed loan and grant to the Argentine Republic for
the Goat Value Chain Development Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country, rural development and poverty context
1. Argentina is one of the largest economies in Latin America and one of the world's

major producers of agricultural commodities, especially soybeans, maize and beef.
In addition, there are some 251,000 family farms in the country. Many of these are
run by poor families, the majority of whom live in the greater north region. In
addition, Argentina is home to about 950,000 indigenous peoples. In 2010, 18 per
cent of the rural population and 22 per cent of rural dispersed households had
unmet basic needs. About 46,000 farms are raising goats, principally smallholders.

2. Poverty is especially severe in farming families, indigenous communities, rural
working families and large families without fixed incomes. Youth unemployment is a
serious problem in rural areas, and outmigration of young rural women is common.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

3. The Government of Argentina aims to reduce rural poverty through income
generation based on sustainable agricultural production. The Unit for Rural Change
(UCAR), of the Ministry of Agroindustry (MAI), has demonstrated the capacity to
improve the performance of IFAD's portfolio, which is implemented within its
country programme as an instrumental part of public policy to support family
farming. Specialized technical institutions cooperate with UCAR in this task.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
4. The programme leverages public policy priorities, lessons learned in the IFAD

country programme and opportunities within the country to reduce rural poverty by
integrating family farming into value chains. Its design is based on the insertion of
smallholder goat breeders into value chains, following participatory planning by
producers’ organizations within goat production basins. Value chains include:
(i) meat; (ii) fibre, especially mohair and cashmere; and (iii) milk products. The
chains are not very developed, with limitations faced by family farmers and
processing companies.

5. The programme area includes the five provinces of Chaco, Formosa, Neuquén,
Mendoza and Santiago del Estero, which include some 60 per cent of the total
number of goats in the country.

6. Beneficiaries will include men and women producers (including indigenous
communities) engaged in goat breeding and organized in producers’ organizations.
The programme will prioritize existing organizations and promote incorporation of
vulnerable groups, especially indigenous peoples, women and youth.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

2

B. Programme development objective
7. The programme’s development objective is to raise the incomes of goat-breeding

families through their sustainable integration into value chains. The six-year
programme aims to reach 8,000 families.

C. Components and outcomes
8. The programme has three components:

 Component 1: Development of markets and sectoral policies. This
component will strengthen development of emerging value chains by creating
a conducive commercial environment, including marketing, policy and
normative aspects. To develop markets for goat products, it will support
market analysis and promotion, exploration of foreign markets and technical
assistance to processing companies. It will also promote product
standardization conforming to official normative rules, and creation of a
natural-resource monitoring framework for sustainable goat management.
Moreover, it will develop human resources by supporting technical exchange
visits and basic financial education.

 Component 2: Productive, organizational and commercial
development. To improve the functioning of value chains, the programme
will provide the following territorial support to participating organizations:

(a) Goat basin identification, the creation of goat basin forums and
participatory planning and monitoring of market-based sectoral
development.

(b) In the pre-investment phase, it will support preparation of participatory
rapid appraisals of producers’ organizations, institutional strengthening
and eventually the formulation of business plans in the framework of
business alliances in accordance with goat basin plans.

(c) In the investment phase, it will finance implementation of approved
business plans – including physical assets, training, technical assistance
and working capital – through revolving funds for credit administered by
producers’ organizations. Additionally, the programme will finance
guarantee funds to facilitate operating capital loans from financial
institutions to the associated lead companies in the value chains.

 Component 3: Programme management. This component includes
programme management by UCAR and provincial management units. It will
include the adaptation of systems for planning, monitoring and evaluation,
and also for knowledge management, with a special focus on South-South and
triangular cooperation (SSTC).

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

9. The programme’s operational strategy will be based on: (i) sector-wide investments
in goat product markets and policies; (ii) participatory goat basin plans; and
(iii) business plans as the principal instruments of producers’ organizations’ for
training, investment, technical assistance and operating capital.

Organizational frameworkB.
10. MAI, through the UCAR, will be responsible for programme implementation and will

directly execute the activities in components 1 and 3. Provincial governments will
be responsible for implementing component 2 through provincial management
units, based on provincial financing agreements with MAI. Beneficiary organizations
will be responsible for developing and executing business plans through
participatory processes.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

3

11. Beneficiary participation is central to the programme. Producers’ organizations will
participate in goat basin forums to prepare and monitor basin plans. They will be
responsible for planning and implementing business plans, including procurement.
Finally, they will monitor and evaluate implementation of their business plans,
which will provide the programme’s system with data.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledgeC.
management

12. Planning will be based on defined goals and objectives. The programme’s annual
planning exercise will provide the flexibility needed for implementation, in
coordination with provincial authorities. Goat basin plans will be prepared with the
participation of provincial authorities, producers’ organizations, private enterprises
and public institutions.

13. For the programme’s data and knowledge system, UCAR will apply results-based
management methods using an organizational matrix to manage the development
of goat basin and business plans. The system will be integrated into UCAR’s existing
management system, allowing monitoring of physical progress based on data
entered at the provincial level. A tracking sheet will facilitate analysis of information
critical to measuring results. For impact evaluation, implementers will collect
information from beneficiary households using a family questionnaire that includes
IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) survey. Institutional
advancement will be tracked by monitoring the participating producers’
organizations. Thematic studies will be carried out to analyse experiences in
programme implementation.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
14. Financial management. MAI, through UCAR, will be responsible for financial

management of all programme resources, including flow of funds, disbursement,
internal controls, accounting, financial reporting and audit. UCAR has been the
implementing agency of IFAD programmes since its creation in 2009. It has
extensive experience and adequate systems and procedures. For programme
implementation, UCAR will use its existing accounting system, which is satisfactory
to IFAD. Funding for start-up costs may be used for early programme expenditures.

15. Flow of funds. IFAD loan and grant resources will be disbursed to a receiving
account in United States dollars in the Central Bank of Argentina. Funds will then be
transferred to the two designated accounts in United States dollars in the Banco de
la Nación Argentina, to two designated accounts in United States dollars in the
central bank of Argentina. The accounts will be used exclusively for the proceeds of
the loan and grant, respectively. From each designated account, funds will flow to
the respective operational account denominated in Argentine pesos, which will be
managed by UCAR. Provincial-level implementation units will open provincial
operational accounts in Argentine pesos.

16. Procurement. The programme will follow national procurement regulations to the
extent these are compatible with IFAD’s procurement guidelines. UCAR, the
provincial management units and producers’ organizations will carry out
procurement on the basis of agreed procurement plans. Procurement of works,
goods and services in the framework of business plans, and accounting for these
expenditures, will be the responsibility of producers’ organizations, in line with
IFAD’s community-based procurement directives, with support from provincial
units.

17. Audit. The programme’s consolidated financial statements will be audited annually
by the national auditor general in accordance with IFAD’s Guidelines on Project
Audits. All programme accounts will be audited, including all sources of funding.
The scope of the audit will include visits to producers’ organizations. Annual audit
reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months of the end of each fiscal year.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

4

SupervisionE.
18. The programme will be supervised directly by IFAD in accordance with the

methodology agreed by IFAD and UCAR. Initial supervision tasks include support for
rapid programme start-up and set-up of the accounting, planning, and monitoring
and evaluation systems.

Exception to IFAD’s General Conditions for AgriculturalF.
Development Financing and operational policies

19. With respect to retroactive financing, expenses related to goat basin forums and to
SSTC for activities begun as of the date of negotiations will be considered eligible
up to US$500,000 under the expense categories “Goods, services and inputs for
beneficiaries” and “Consultancies (technical assistance)” from both the loan and
grant accounts. Activities to be financed by retroactive financing and their source of
funding will require prior “no objection” from IFAD to be considered eligible. For
expenses for reimbursement to be recognized, the borrower/recipient must submit
them to IFAD once disbursement conditions have been met.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
20. The total cost for six years of implementation will be US$25.5 million, including

contingencies, of which: US$2.7 million relates to component 1; US$19.0 million to
component 2; and US$3.8 million to component 3. Management costs make up
15 per cent of programme costs. Costs include 6 per cent for contingencies with
respect to price escalation for goods, services and operating expenses, and
0.001 per cent for physical contingencies with respect to goods and services.

B. Programme financing
21. The programme will be financed by: (i) the central government, with a contribution

of US$7.0 million to cofinance business plans of producers’ organizations and
management costs; (ii) provincial governments, with a contribution of
US$3.0 million to cofinance business plans and provincial management costs;
(iii) IFAD, through a loan of US$12.3 million and a grant of US$1.0 million for
SSTC; and (iv) beneficiaries, with in-kind contributions of US$2.2 million to
cofinance business plans. Programme costs by component and expenditure
category are presented in tables 1 and 2.

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Central

government
Provincial

government Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Development of markets and
sectoral policies 1 796 67 882 33 - - - - - - 2 678 11

2. Productive, organizational
and commercial development 10 377 55 - - 5 807 31 643 3 2 160 11 18 987 75

3. Programme management 127 3 135 4 1 192 32 2 329 62 - - 3 783 15

Total programme costs 12 300 48 1 017 4 7 000 28 2 972 12 2 160 9 25 448 100



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

5

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Central

government
Provincial

government Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Grants (capitalization of
producers’ organizations) 9 390 52 - - 5 807 32 643 4 2 160 12 18 000 71

2. Goods, services and inputs 123 100 - - 10 3 338 97 - - 472 2
3. Consultancies (technical

assistance) 1 725 81 402 19 - - - - - - 2 126 8
4. Training 662 52 615 48 - - - - - - 1 277 5
5. Credit and guarantee funds 400 100 - - - - - - - - 400 2
6. Salaries and allowances - - - - 989 39 1 523 61 - - 2 512 10
7. Operating costs 0 - 0 - 193 29 467 71 - - 660 3

Total programme costs 12 300 48 1 017 4 7 000 28 2 972 12 2 160 9 25 448 100

C. Benefit summary and economic analysis
22. The programme will serve some 8,000 rural families (approximately 40,000

people), including 5,600 smallholder families and 2,400 indigenous families. Small-
scale producers, organized in approximately 160 producers’ organizations, including
48 indigenous communities, will generate the programme’s expected benefits.

23. The financial and economic evaluation indicates the activities’ viability at farm and
programme levels. The internal rate of return is 23.3 per cent, and the net present
value US$19.6 million.

D. Sustainability
24. The programme’s sustainability will be ensured by: (i) collaboration of producers’

organizations with processing companies in the goat basin forums; (ii) support to
beneficiary organizations that will continue operating after programme completion;
(iii) sector-wide support provided in component 1, including the vegetation
monitoring system and SSTC activities; (iv) environmental, climate change
adaptation and commercial support measures to be integrated into business plans;
and (v) linkage of participating companies to commercial financial institutions.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
25. The programme’s potential adverse impacts and risks of failing to achieve its

objectives are limited. The main risks include: (i) political and institutional risks,
which are low in view of the country’s stable poverty-reduction policy framework
and UCAR’s track record in implementing poverty reduction programmes;
(ii) possible delay in incorporating participating provinces into the programme,
which has been mitigated by their identification and participation in programme
design; (iii) companies’ difficulties in joining the programme, which will be reduced
by inviting them to participate in the goat basin forums, and by technical assistance
and loan guarantees; (iv) market risks, which are already low by virtue of observed
demand for goat products, will be further reduced by addressing supply and
marketing constraints; (v) technological and climatic risks, which will be mitigated
through local technical assistance and support to integration of climate-proofing
measures into business plans and participating companies’ operations; and
(vi) fiduciary risk: based on a 2015 Transparency International Corruption
Perceptions Index score of 32, and IFAD experience in the country, the
programme’s fiduciary risk has been rated as medium. However, the solid
experience and systems of UCAR, along with close implementation support from
IFAD, are considered sufficient to mitigate fiduciary risk.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

6

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

26. The programme approach and implementation modalities are consistent with IFAD
strategies and policies. They specifically support IFAD’s fiduciary compliance and
are aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025 and the policies on rural
finance, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management,
gender equality and women’s empowerment, and targeting.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
27. The programme is in line with government objectives and the Federal and

Participative Agri-food and Agribusiness Strategic Plan, 2010/2016 (PEA2). It is also
consistent with the recommendations of IFAD’s 2010 country programme
evaluation in seeking a programme approach, expanding the range of financial
services and introducing the use of grants to boost knowledge management.

Innovations and scaling upC.
28. The programme’s innovations include: (i) focusing on specific value chains with a

high incidence of poverty and sound commercial potential; (ii) bringing together
smallholder producers, companies and public administration in forums to plan the
development of goat value chains; (iii) integrating sector-support activities such as
market analysis and promotion and policy support; (iv) introducing systematic
natural resource monitoring; (v) widening the spectrum of rural financial services,
including financial education and loan guarantees for participating companies; and
(vi) SSTC to support market and policy development activities.

Policy engagementD.
29. The programme will support development of public policies to promote sustainable

smallholder goat breeding in Argentina and beyond by generating and
communicating evidence of the value chain development approach it applies. Best
practices will be learned and disseminated in the framework of the SSTC
programme.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
30. A financing agreement between the Argentine Republic and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

31. The Argentine Republic is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

32. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
33. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Argentine Republic in the amount of twelve million three hundred thousand
dollars (US$12,300,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Argentine
Republic in the amount of one million seventeen thousand dollars
(US$1,017,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Cooperative Republic of Guyana for the
Hinterland Environmentally Sustainable
Agricultural Development Project

Cooperative Republic of Guyana

Hinterland Environmentally Sustainable Agricultural
Development Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Cooperative Republic of Guyana

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$11.15 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$7.96 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$0.5 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: Maturity period of 25 years, including a grace
period of five years, with a fixed interest rate of 1.25 per
cent per annum plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent
per annum.

Contribution of borrower: US$2.43 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$270,000

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to Cooperative Republic of Guyana for the Hinterland Environmentally
Sustainable Agricultural Development Project, as contained in paragraph 59.

Proposed loan and grant to the Cooperative Republic of
Guyana for the Hinterland Environmentally Sustainable
Agricultural Development Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Situated on the northern coast of South America, Guyana borders the Atlantic

Ocean, Brazil, Suriname and Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela; it belongs to the
Guiana Shield region, part of the Amazon Biome. Guyana hosts a vast expanse of
primary tropical forest, freshwater resources and a unique savannah ecosystem. It
covers an area of 215,000 km2 with a population of 747,883. Indigenous peoples
account for more than three quarters of the population in regions 8 and 9
(75.9 per cent and 89.2 per cent, respectively) and about two thirds of the
population in region 1 (62.2 per cent).

2. The World Bank estimates that Guyana’s GDP, based on the Atlas Method, was
US$3,763 in 2014. According to the Economist Intelligence Unit, economic growth
is expected to reach 3.2 per cent in 2016 and 3.7 per cent in 2017 as substantial
new gold mining projects are launched.

3. Agriculture and rural development. Agriculture is a significant contributor to the
country’s development. It is predominantly undertaken by small-scale farmers and
indigenous people farming less than 5 ha of land. Cultivated crops include rice
(90,000 ha), sugar (48,000 ha) and coconut (25,000 ha); non-traditional crops
occupy between 30,000 and 40,000 ha while 158,473 ha are used for livestock.
Agricultural products, excluding forest products, make up approximately
31 per cent of total exports; the main exported commodities are rice and sugar.

4. Poverty, nutrition and food security. According to the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), since 1992, the proportion of households living
in moderate poverty (on US$2 per day) has declined from 43 per cent to
36.3 per cent, and extreme poverty has dropped from 28.7 per cent to
19.1 per cent. The outlook remains far less favourable for indigenous peoples,
77 per cent of whom are poor, and inhabitants of the hinterland, where three out of
four people are poor.

5. Studies show that household food security in hinterland region 9 is compromised;
the situation worsens during drought and flood seasons. A rising dependence on
remittances, driven by migration towards mining and logging areas, is negatively
affecting consumption patterns in indigenous areas. Changes in indigenous peoples’
diets (which include increased consumption of refined carbohydrates, processed
foods, sweetened and calorie-dense foods) are likely responsible for the rise in
chronic diseases in this region.

6. Main natural resource constraints for agriculture and rural people in
regions 1 and 9. Agriculture and rural livelihoods in regions 1 and 9 are affected
by increased variability in rainfall patterns. In region 9, severe floods and prolonged
dry spells, coupled with a lack of adequate water-management technologies and



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

2

low fertility of the savannah soil, are major challenges for agriculture and livestock.
In region 1, salt water intrusion is a major impact of climate change, which over
time will affect arable land and freshwater resources in coastal areas. Climate
change is affecting the sustainability of established production patterns in both
regions, and the transition to new production patterns needs to involve greater
adaptability to changing climatic and economic conditions. This will require access
to knowledge, investment and technologies for natural resource management,
which are currently lacking.

7. Economic constraints in regions 1 and 9. The remoteness of regions 1 and 9
remains a challenge for the generation of business and income-generation
opportunities. Poor transportation and telecommunication networks limit market
access and hinder these regions’ integration into the national economy. There is
also a lack of access to information, technology and energy needed to support
investments in productive activities, and promote adaptation to changing economic
and environmental conditions.

8. Main challenges. Persistent poverty and climate change are severely straining the
target group’s resilience and social cohesion. The capacity of hinterland
communities to respond to new economic and environmental challenges is further
limited by a lack of incentives for investments that reduce economic and climate
risks.

9. Opportunities to improve livelihoods of indigenous people and small
farmers in the project area. Despite these challenges, both regions offer
opportunities for improving the livelihoods of the target group and generating
income from agriculture and related activities.

10. In the long term, the Ministry of Agriculture intends to strengthen hinterland
agriculture by moving production away from traditional export products and from
coastal areas that are vulnerable to salinization. In the short term, consultations
and field visits in regions 1 and 9 have confirmed that these regions offer: (i) high
levels of human capital, including education, skills, motivation and entrepreneurial
attitude; (ii) widespread awareness of the need to improve livelihood strategies to
adapt to economic, environmental and climate challenges; (iii) appreciation of the
value of ecosystems and biodiversity; (iv) common land titles, strong community
governance and familiarity with participatory planning approaches; (v) local
markets and local public procurement, which provide opportunities for small and
medium-sized agricultural producers (with little competition from large businesses);
and (vi) producer groups (including women’s associations) that have established
partnerships with NGOs and local government agencies.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
COSOP

11. The favorable conditions highlighted above provide an opportunity for the project to
support rural households and communities in identifying and developing value
chains that generate new income opportunities and contribute to rural livelihood
diversification. Both regions offer viable opportunities to increase the
competitiveness, inclusiveness and sustainability of local value chains through
improvements in natural resources management, production, processing, storage,
quality-enhancing technologies and smallholder market access. Preliminary
consultations have identified the following value chains as possible targets for
development: cassava and its main by-products farine and cassava bread; peanuts,
fruit and livestock in region 9; and spices such as ginger, turmeric and black pepper
in region 1.

12. The project strategy will combine decentralized participatory community
development, natural resource management and value chain approaches to
strengthen livelihood resilience by increasing income-generating opportunities,



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

3

access to resilience-building assets and food and nutrition security. This strategy
will also support an inclusive participatory planning process that strengthens the
organizational capacities of communities and producer groups, and enhances
institutional coordination among national and local institutions.

13. The project is aligned with IFAD’s strategy for Guyana as defined in the country
strategy note. Previous IFAD projects in Guyana mainly operated in the coastal
region, focusing on strengthening producers’ capacity and expanding opportunities
to develop small-scale enterprises. The proposed project applies experience gained
in previous projects to remote hinterland areas largely populated by indigenous
peoples. Through this strategy, IFAD supports the Government of Guyana in its
efforts to bridge the coast-hinterland divide and reduce poverty in isolated rural
communities.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
14. The project will be carried out in all sub-regions of region 9 and in the Mabaruma

and Moruca sub-regions of region 1. Beneficiaries will be located in approximately
80 of the 128 communities in regions 1 and 9 (60 communities in region 9 and 20
communities in region 1). Considering the remoteness, vastness and low population
density of region 9, a phased implementation approach will be adopted for this
region. The project will initially focus on North Rupununi in order to capitalize on
government efforts to exploit this sub-region’s significant agricultural potential.
Lessons learned from project implementation in North Rupununi will later be applied
to Central and South Rupununi. The target group will include 6,000 poor
households, equivalent to 94 per cent of all poor households in the project area. At
least 15 per cent of these households (900) will be headed by women, reflecting
the overall proportion of women-headed households in the project area.

15. These 6,000 households represent approximately 30,000 direct and indirect
beneficiaries, comprising men and women of different age groups. At least
75 per cent of project beneficiaries will be from indigenous groups. At least
30 per cent will be between 15 and 44 years old, and at least 50 per cent will be
women. As a result of the project’s phased approach, figures for the target
population may be revised at the midterm review.

B. Project development objective
16. The development objective of the project, responding to the priorities identified in

the country strategy note, is improved livelihood resilience through income
generation, access to assets, improved nutrition and adaptation to climate
variability.

17. Livelihood resilience will be strengthened by the following activities:

(a) Increasing income-generating opportunities through the identification of
commodities drives the inclusion of small farmers in markets, increases local
demand for services and labour, and supports beneficiaries’ inclusive and
informed participation in market opportunities that improve household
income.

(b) Improving access to public goods, knowledge and technologies builds
community resilience and creates an enabling environment for production
through: technology, knowledge and information for better planning and
natural resource management; improved water availability for agriculture and
human consumption; better soil-management practices; diffusion of
information and communications technologies; adoption of renewable energy;
and valuation of agro-biodiversity.

(c) Enhancing food security and nutrition identifies and promotes
commodities, including crops, fish and forest products that sustainably



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

4

improve household diets and increase nutrition awareness through nutrition
education and behaviour change activities, including food-based dietary
guidelines.

C. Components/outcomes
18. Component 1. This component aims to support village and community councils

(in region 9), value chain roundtables (in region 1) and regional development
councils in planning and prioritizing investments in local value chains1 and resilient
communities. As a result, communities and producer groups will have strengthened
capacities to identify investment opportunities and manage economic and climate
change risks. The main instruments to be developed through this component are
community production development plans for region 9 and value chain action plans
for region 1. These medium-term plans will be the basis for developing three types
of investment plans to be implemented with project support: public/collective
investment plans (P/CIPs), community training plans (CTPs) and business plans.

19. Component 2. While component 1 will provide training, studies and
capacity-building needed to develop investment plans, component 2 will support
these plans’ implementation. Under component 2, an investment fund will be
established to finance public and common goods and services, through
non-reimbursable mechanisms, to be included in each type of investment plan.
They will comprise: (i) investments that reduce climate and investment risks
(included in P/CIPs); (ii) training, capacity-building and awareness-raising
activities, and related research that contributes to a reduction in climate, economic
and nutritional risks (included in CTPs); and (iii) technical assistance and services
to support the diffusion of knowledge, technologies and capacities that improve
livelihood resilience by reducing climate, economic and nutritional risks (included in
business plans).

20. Component 3. The third component will establish management and administrative
procedures, including accounting and auditing, monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms in accordance with IFAD and national guidelines. Evidence-based
knowledge products will be developed on the basis of project experience in order to
extract lessons and best practices, scale up innovative solutions and achieve better
outcomes and greater impact from development resources.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

21. The project strategy aims to improve the target group’s livelihood resilience by
addressing major risks arising from contextual challenges in the project area. Since
natural resources and local governance systems are threatened by these economic
and environmental risks, in order to strengthen the resilience of target
communities, the prioritization of opportunities and the planning of investments and
activities will be carried out through a participatory process, which will include local
actors and governing bodies.

B. Organizational framework
22. The lead agency for the implementation of the hinterland project will be the

Ministry of Agriculture through its Agriculture Sector Development Unit (ASDU). For
activities such as consultative village planning, agricultural technology transfer,
technical assistance, natural resource management and regional investment
planning, the Ministry of Agriculture will be assisted by the Ministries of Indigenous
People’s Affairs, Natural Resources, Communities and Business, other government
agencies, NGOs, community-based organizations, academia and individual service
providers.

1 In region 1, there is also significant potential for developing linkages to international markets; this is particularly true for
spices such as ginger and turmeric.



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

5

23. The project management unit will comprise an office at the Ministry of Agriculture in
Georgetown and regional offices in regions 1 and 9. A national steering committee
and regional management committees will be established to provide policy
direction, support implementation, advise on annual workplans and budgets, and
encourage collaboration among stakeholders.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

24. The project will provide support to strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of
Agriculture’s Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Unit and ensure that project
monitoring is linked to the Ministry’s performance monitoring and Agriculture
Strategy indicators. M&E will be conducted using a participatory approach; data
collection will be kept simple and brief, focusing on the reliability and usefulness of
collected data. Evidence-based knowledge products will be developed to extract
lessons and best practices from project experiences, replicate innovative solutions,
maximize outcomes and impact from development resources, and disseminate
knowledge to support national, regional and local decision-making and policy
processes. A baseline study will be carried out immediately following the approval
of the financing agreement and before implementation.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
25. Financial management. Financial management and procurement for the project

will be undertaken by ASDU, which has adequate capacity, an appropriate
accounting system and extensive experience in implementing internationally funded
projects, including the IFAD-funded Rural Enterprise and Agricultural Development
Project. A qualified finance officer will be recruited through a competitive process as
a condition of disbursement for the loan and grant. Due to the remoteness of
project areas, an administrative/finance officer will be recruited at each regional
office through a competitive process and will be responsible for performing
administrative and basic accounting functions.

26. Flow of funds. The borrower will open a designated account in United States
dollars in the Central Bank of Guyana exclusively for the loan and grant, in which
advance funds will be deposited and from which funds will be transferred to the
project operational account in Guyanese dollars.

27. Retroactive financing. As an exception to section 4.08(a)(ii) of the General
Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, specific eligible expenditures
incurred from the date of approval by the Executive Board until the date of entry
into force of the financing agreement will be considered eligible up to the amount of
US$300,000 in accordance with and as specified in the financing agreement. These
eligible expenditures will consist of the costs related to: the detailed value chains
study for spices in region 1; a state of food and agriculture study in the Mabaruma
and Moruca sub-regions of region 1; and the hiring of personnel.

28. Procurement. Procurement of goods and services will be carried out by ASDU in
line with national regulations, IFAD’s Project Procurement Guidelines and the
provisions of the financing agreement. A procurement officer, exclusively assigned
to the hinterland project, will be hired by ASDU.

29. Audit. Annual consolidated financial statements for the project will be
independently audited pursuant to the agreed terms of reference and in accordance
with International Standards on Auditing and IFAD's guidelines on project audits. In
line with the 2004 Guyana Audit Act, the Auditor General shall be responsible for
conducting financial, compliance, performance and value-for-money audits of the
accounts of all projects funded by loans or grants from any foreign state or
organization. The Guyana Auditor General Audit Office will audit the project
financial statements. Annual audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six
months of the end of each fiscal year.



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

6

E. Supervision
30. IFAD will directly supervise the project, complemented by implementation-support

missions. One supervision mission will be planned each year. The first supervision
mission, undertaken approximately six months after project effectiveness, will
monitor progress against the timeframe defined in the implementation plan, and
will assess fiduciary aspects, expenditures, counterpart contributions of funds and
compliance with the financing agreement. Implementation-support missions will be
planned to cover the issues recommended by supervision missions.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
31. The total cost of the project is US$11.14 million over a period of six years. Of this

total, US$10.54 million (95 per cent) are baseline costs and US$610,000 (5 per cent)
are physical and price contingencies.
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Strengthening of
community's and
producer groups'
investment planning 2 142 71 247 8 637 21 3 025

2. Implementation of
investment plans 4 755 77 265 4 1 139 18 6 159

3. Project and
knowledge
management, and
coordination 1 055 54 253 13 650 33 1 959

Total 7 952 71 500 4 265 2 2 426 22 11 143

B. Project financing
32. The project will be financed by: (i) the Government, which will provide

US$2.43 million in cash and in-kind – equal to 22 per cent of the total cost;
(ii) IFAD in the amount of US$8.45 million (total performance-based allocation
system (PBAS) allocation 2016-2018), 76 per cent of the total cost, including a loan
of US$7.95 million and a grant of US$500,000; and (iii) beneficiaries, who will
contribute US$270,000 – 2 per cent of the total cost. Some of the categories of
expenditure indicated in table 2 below may be merged in the financing agreement.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Vehicles and equipment 188 84 36 16 224 2
2. Training 614 84 117 16 731 7
3. Consultancy services 2 904 66 500 11 982 22 4 385 39
4. Grants (for sub-projects) 3 202 78 265 6 660 16 4 128 37
5. Salaries 534 50 534 50 1 068 10
6. Operating expenses 510 84 97 16 607 5

Total 7 952 71 500 4 265 2 2 426 22 11 143 100



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

7

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
33. Financial analysis. To verify the financial viability of project activities, the flow of

annual incremental net benefits was calculated over a period of ten years, both for
rural households’ agricultural production and for producer groups’ enterprises. All
models confirmed increases in benefits, family net income, sales and labour.
Financial viability was positive in all models, with financial internal rates of return
between 23 per cent and 312 per cent.

34. Economic analysis. Economic viability indicators are positive, with an economic
internal rate of return of 21 per cent and an expected net present value of
US$6.97 million. Viability indicators are not highly sensitive to the reduction of
benefits and to delays in obtaining them; these indicators are moderately sensitive
to cost increases.

D. Sustainability
35. Political and institutional sustainability. The project is aligned with the national

policy framework, which: highlights the development of hinterland agriculture;
seeks to reduce the poverty and isolation of indigenous communities; and supports
the adoption of environmentally sustainable development. Coordination between
national government agencies and local authorities is already taking place in region
9, and the project will contribute to dialogue and coordination between government
agencies, indigenous communities, international donors and civil society
organizations operating in hinterland areas.

36. Sustainability, upscaling and replication. Previous IFAD projects in Guyana
mostly concentrated on coastal areas and communities. This project builds upon
and adapts IFAD’s approach to the unique conditions in the hinterland, and paves
the way for replication and scaling up in other remote areas of the country with
similar conditions. Of particular relevance is the phased implementation approach
adopted for region 1, where a state of food and agriculture study will be conducted
in the first year of the project. The knowledge and lessons learned in Mabaruma
and Moruca sub-regions can be used to replicate the project in other areas of
region 1. Using a participatory planning approach, the project will build upon the
planning capacity developed in villages that have already established community
development plans, and it will strengthen skills and capacities for climate- and
nutrition-sensitive planning.

37. Food security and nutritional quality. Awareness-raising activities and training
materials on nutritional quality will also be created through the project.

38. Environmental sustainability. The adoption of climate-resilient measures such as
the identification of drought-tolerant and climate-resilient crop varieties, and the
definition of climate-proof agricultural technologies will sustain productivity and
quality improvements. The state of food and agriculture study in region 1 will fill
the knowledge gap on environmental and socio-economic conditions in the region,
thus contributing to better planning.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The risks identified during the project design include economic risks,

climate-change risks, social risks and institutional risks.

40. Economic risks include excessive specialization and competition for labour from
other sectors. These risks will be mitigated through training and support activities
that build awareness of specialization risks and help communities and producers’
groups to integrate new income-generating activities into diversified livelihood
strategies. The project will promote the strengthening of local value chains and
increase access to information needed for target households’ equitable participation
in agricultural markets. It will also provide technical assistance and investment
incentives to maximize incomes and employment.



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

8

41. Climate-change risks will be addressed through support for investments in public
and collective goods included in P/CIPs and CTPs that increase access to
knowledge, technology and information for improved water and natural resource
management. The project will promote the adoption of good natural resource
management practices and measures for adapting to climate change within
business plans. Business plans will also include mitigation strategies to reduce the
negative effects of productive specialization on climate change resilience and
nutrition through the use of agro-biodiversity and the diversification of livelihoods.

42. Social risks will be reduced through the adoption of free, prior and informed
consent plans, and by strengthening participatory community planning. The
participation of vulnerable groups, including women and youth, will be promoted
through the targeting strategy, the inclusion of skills development and training for
youth and women in CTPs, and by prioritizing business plans that involve vulnerable
groups.

43. Risks to nutrition and food security will be addressed through training and technical
assistance that strengthens the links between income generation and nutrition
quality in order to: (i) help households to make more informed dietary choices;
(ii) increase the adoption of dietary recommendations; and (iii) increase the
richness, variety and nutritional quality of the local food system.

44. Institutional risks relate to limited regional coordination among stakeholders and to
the weak organizational capacities of communities and producer groups. The
project will strengthen national and regional coordination through its national
steering committee and regional management committee, facilitating linkages
among ministries, other government agencies and programmes, NGOs and other
projects.

45. Based on Guyana’s 2015 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 29 and public financial management assessments, the project’s fiduciary
risk has been rated as medium. The measures highlighted in section III.D of this
report are considered sufficient to mitigate any fiduciary risks.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

46. IFAD’s target group comprises rural people living in poverty and experiencing food
insecurity; IFAD proactively strives to reach extremely poor people (in line with
Sustainable Development Goal 1) with the potential to benefit from improved
access to agricultural production and rural income generation. In the case of
Guyana, poor people principally live in hinterland areas. Therefore, the geographical
focus of this project is in regions 1 and 9 – hinterland areas where indigenous
peoples constitute the majority of the population. Targeting will be monitored using
participatory monitoring and evaluation, and will be assessed at mid-term review.

47. To meet the requirements of IFAD’s demand–driven and consultative targeting
approach, participatory mapping of resource use and economic activities will be
carried out under component 1. IFAD will work with the Government and other
stakeholders to establish a shared understanding of the causes poverty and
exclusion in hinterland areas.

48. Compliance with IFAD policies for environment and natural resource
management. The project complies with IFAD’s Climate and Natural Resources
Management Policy, specifically principles 3 and 4, and will adopt an integrated
climate-smart approach. Local value chains will be identified through participatory
processes to ensure that their development contributes to increasing community-
and household-level resilience to climate change. Priority will be given to initiatives
that promote climate-related disaster risk reduction and management, and the
establishment of agroecological systems. The project will also provide technical



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

9

assistance for the incorporation of technologies and good practices for better
national resource management and climate-change adaptation into investment
plans.

49. Compliance with IFAD’s Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment. The hinterland project is aligned with IFAD’s Policy on Gender
Equality and Women’s Empowerment through a participatory approach designed to
ensure that the voices of different rural population segments are equally heard and
valued. Specific gender actions to ensure gender equity have been included in the
project design and budget. By working with entire households, the project will
leverage the complementary knowledge and skills of women and men (in line with
Strategic Objective 2).

50. Compliance with IFAD’s Nutrition Action Plan 2016-2018. The project is
nutrition sensitive as defined in the IFAD Nutrition Action Plan 2016-2018. It
contributes to families’ improved food and nutrition security by linking local food
production with the improved nutritional quality of diets.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
51. The project is aligned with the national policy framework, which highlights the

development of hinterland agriculture; reduction of poverty and isolation in
indigenous communities; and adoption of environmentally sustainable development
strategies to mitigate increased threats from climate change.

52. In region 9, the project will harness complementarities with the Inter-American
Development Bank (IDB) Sustainable Agricultural Development Project. This project
aims to increase the productivity of the agricultural sector while maintaining the
sustainable and climate-resilient use of natural resources in regions 5, 9 and 10.
IDB will support the Ministry of Agriculture in the preparation and implementation
of an extension strategy that includes incentives for small farmers to adopt
technologies for cassava, peanuts, livestock, orchards and pastures. To enhance
synergies and improve national and regional coordination, the two projects will use
the same national steering committee and regional management committee in
region 9. Collaboration will also be sought with IDB to utilize information and
communication technologies in rural areas.

53. The project will be harmonized with the IDB multilateral investment fund project
Leveraging Natural Capital in the Rupununi Region (region 9). This project aims to
create and strengthen environmentally sustainable local-level initiatives, and
enhance market access for community-based enterprises. It will be also
harmonized with Guyana’s Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest
Degradation Plus Investment Fund, which aims to invest in low-carbon approaches
identified in the Low Carbon Development Strategy. In addition, collaboration will
be sought with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
on the state of food and agriculture study in region 1, and to support
implementation of the Integrated Sustainable Agriculture Development Strategy for
region 9 2015-2020 (developed by the Ministry of Agriculture, FAO and
Conservation International).

Innovations and scaling upC.
54. Previous IFAD projects in Guyana were concentrated in coastal areas. This project

builds upon and adapts IFAD’s approach to the unique conditions in the hinterland,
and paves the way for replication and scaling up in other remote areas of the
country with similar conditions.

Policy engagementD.
55. The project, which will be mainly implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, is

aligned with government decentralization strategies involving local governments
and indigenous peoples’ institutions through the Ministries of Communities and



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

10

Indigenous Peoples’ Affairs (in partnership with other government agencies,
international donors and international NGOs). Coordination between national
government agencies and local authorities is already taking place in region 9; closer
cooperation will be sought throughout the project to strengthen capacities within
the Government and civil society for natural resource management, nutrition- and
climate-sensitive planning.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
56. A project financing agreement between the Cooperative Republic of Guyana and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in
appendix I.

57. The Cooperative Republic of Guyana is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

58. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
59. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the
Cooperative Republic of Guyana in the amount of seven million nine hundred
and sixty thousand United States dollars (US$7,960,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Cooperative
Republic of Guyana in the amount of five hundred thousand United States
dollars (US$500,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President






















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Argentina for the Programme for Economic
Insertion of Family Producers of Northern
Argentina (PROCANOR)


Republic of Argentina

Programme for Economic Insertion of Family Producers
of Northern Argentina (PROCANOR)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Argentina

Executing agency: Unit for Rural Change (UCAR)

Total programme cost: US$39.18 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 22.85 million (equivalent to approximately
US$24.17 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: EUR 0.31 million (equivalent to approximately
US$0.33 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum equal
to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of borrower: US$11.48 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.21 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/116/R.41/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed loan
and grant to the Republic of Argentina for the Programme for Economic Insertion of
Family Producers of Northern Argentina (PROCANOR), as contained in paragraph 33.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Argentina for
the Programme for Economic Insertion of Family
Producers of Northern Argentina (PROCANOR)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country, rural development and poverty context
1. Argentina is one of the largest economies in Latin America and one of the world's

major producers of agricultural commodities, especially soybeans, maize and beef.
In addition, there are some 251,000 family farms in the country. Many of these are
run by poor families, the majority of whom live in the Greater North region. In
2010, 18 per cent of the rural population and 22 per cent of rural dispersed
households had unmet basic needs. The provinces in Northern Argentina have the
highest rural poverty rates in the country.

2. Poverty is especially severe in farming families, indigenous communities, rural
working families and large families without fixed incomes. Youth unemployment is a
serious problem in rural areas, and outmigration of young rural women is common.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

3. The Government of Argentina aims to reduce rural poverty through income
generation based on sustainable agricultural production. The Unit for Rural Change
(UCAR), of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries (MALF), has
demonstrated the capacity to improve the performance of IFAD's portfolio, which is
implemented within its country programme as an instrumental part of the public
policy to support family farming. Specialized technical institutions cooperate with
UCAR in this task.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
4. The programme is based on public policy priorities, lessons learned in the IFAD

country programme and opportunities within the country to reduce rural poverty by
integrating family farming into value chains. Its design leverages opportunities for
building partnerships among agribusinesses, commercial enterprises and farmers’
organizations. It will prioritize emerging and dynamic value chains: (i) quinoa;
(ii) potatoes and ocas (Andean potatoes); (iii) chia; (iv) amaranth; (v) llama meat;
(vi) llama and vicuña wool; (vii) yacón (a tuber); and (viii) horticulture. These
value chains are characterized by market limitations and the increased participation
of family farmers.

5. The programme area includes the 10 provinces of Argentina’s Greater North:
Catamarca, Chaco, Corrientes, Formosa, Jujuy, La Rioja, Misiones, Salta, Santiago
del Estero and Tucumán, with activities concentrated in the provinces of
Catamarca, Chaco, Corrientes, Jujuy, Salta and Misiones.

6. Beneficiaries will include men and women producers (including indigenous
communities) engaged in the priority value chains and organized into producers’
organizations. The programme will prioritize existing organizations and promote



EB 2015/116/R.41/Rev.1

2

incorporation of vulnerable groups, especially indigenous peoples, women and
youth.

B. Programme development objective
7. The programme’s development objective is to improve sustainable integration of

small-scale producers into value chains. The five-year programme aims to reach
8,000 families.

C. Components and outcomes
8. The programme has four components:

 Component 1: Development of inclusive markets. This component will
strengthen development of dynamic, emerging value chains, with a focus on
family producers and joint ventures between small producers' organizations
and other private-sector actors. To develop markets for products, it will
support market promotion, brand creation and certification of origin. It will
also promote public procurement and the creation of market infrastructure.
Moreover, it will develop human resources by funding: scholarships for the
daughters and sons of family producers; training in business management,
business alliances and strategic partnerships; and special training for
government staff and producers’ organizations.

In addition, the programme will develop technologies for smallholder
producers, including adaptive research, prototyping of equipment, installation
of laboratories and development of seed systems for quinoa and other Andean
crops.

To develop markets for financial services, the component will carry out a
study of rural financial markets, organize provincial workshops and provide
resources to support requests for formal credit by producers’ organizations. It
will also support a study and pilot initiative on smallholder insurance.

In the framework of policy dialogue on value chains, the component includes
studies on the priority value chains and support to regional forums at the
cluster level that will facilitate interaction by value chain participants at the
regional level.

 Component 2: Organizational strengthening. To improve the functioning
of value chains, the programme will support participating organizations in the
following ways:

(a) In the pre-investment phase, it will support preparation of participatory
rapid diagnostics, institutional strengthening prior to the formulation of
business plans and establishment of business alliances.

(b) In the investment phase, it will finance implementation of approved
business plans, including physical assets, training and technical
assistance, and organic and fair-trade certification. In the rural finance
services sector, it will increase access to working capital through
guarantee funds to obtain loans from financial institutions and revolving
funds for direct credit. Land-use planning and tenure regularization
activities will include participatory development of maps to illustrate
local land tenure and resolve tenure issues.

 Component 3: Productive development. This component will strengthen
the productive capacities of producer families within participating producers’
organizations through investment in productive on-farm assets, technical
assistance, training and farmer field schools in which trials are performed by
producers’ groups and guided by technicians.

 Component 4: Management and administration. This component includes
programme management by UCAR and provincial management units. It will



EB 2015/116/R.41/Rev.1

3

include valid systems for planning, monitoring and evaluation, and knowledge
management.

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

9. The programme’s operational strategy will be based on: (i) development of clusters
in the emerging value chains; and (ii) business plans as the principal instruments
for investments, technical assistance and training for producers’ organizations.

Organizational frameworkB.
10. UCAR will be responsible for programme implementation and will directly execute

most activities in component 1 (including those designed to address market
failures) and component 4. Provincial governments will be responsible for
implementing components 2 and 3 through provincial management units, based on
financing agreements with MALF. If necessary, UCAR may implement some
component 2 and 3 activities. Beneficiary organizations will be responsible for
developing and executing the business plans through participatory processes.

11. There will be ample opportunity for beneficiary participation in the programme. In
the planning process, producers’ organizations will participate in cluster-level
forums to identify specific needs, define priorities and exchange ideas on policies
related to value chains. They will be responsible for planning and implementing
business plans, including procurement. Finally, they will monitor and evaluate the
implementation of their business plans, which will provide the programme’s system
with data.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledgeC.
management

12. Planning will be based on defined goals and objectives. The programme’s annual
planning exercise will provide the flexibility necessary to implementation, in
coordination with provincial authorities. At the cluster level, improvement plans will
be prepared with the participation of provincial authorities, smallholder producers,
private enterprises and public institutions.

13. For the programme’s data and knowledge system, UCAR will apply results-based
management methods that use an organizational matrix to manage the
development of clusters and business plans. The system will be integrated into
UCAR’s existing management system, which allows the monitoring of physical
progress based on data entered at the provincial level. A tracking sheet will
facilitate analysis of information critical to measuring results. For impact evaluation,
implementers will collect information from beneficiary households using a family
questionnaire that includes IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS)
survey. Institutional advancement will be tracked by monitoring the participating
producers’ organizations. Thematic studies will be carried out to analyse
experiences in programme implementation.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
14. Financial management. MALF, through UCAR, will be responsible for the financial

management of all programme resources, including flow of funds, disbursements,
internal controls, accounting, financial reporting and audit. For programme
implementation, UCAR will use its existing accounting system, which is satisfactory
to IFAD. Funding for start-up costs may be used for early programme expenditures.

15. Flow of funds. IFAD loan and grant resources will be disbursed to two designated
accounts in euro. From each designated account, funds will flow to the respective
operational account denominated in Argentine pesos, which will be managed by
UCAR. Provincial-level implementation units will open provincial operational
accounts denominated in Argentine pesos.



EB 2015/116/R.41/Rev.1

4

16. Procurement. UCAR, the provincial management units and producers’
organizations will carry out procurement on the basis of agreed procurement plans.
Procurement of works, goods and services in the framework of business plans, and
accounting for these expenditures, will be the responsibility of producers’
organizations, with support from provincial units.

17. Audit. The programme’s consolidated financial statements will be audited annually
by the national auditor general in accordance with IFAD’s Guidelines on Project
Audits. All programme accounts will be audited, including all sources of funding.
The scope of the audit will include visits to producers’ organizations. Annual audit
reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months of the end of each fiscal year.

SupervisionE.
18. The programme will be supervised directly by IFAD in accordance with the

methodology agreed on by IFAD and UCAR. Initial supervision tasks include support
for rapid programme start-up and set up of the accounting, planning, and
monitoring and evaluation systems.

Exception to IFAD’s general conditions for agriculturalF.
development financing and operational policies

19. With respect to retroactive financing, expenses related to the clusters supporting
priority value chains for activities beginning as of the date of negotiations will be
considered eligible up to US$500,000. For recognition, the borrower must submit
the expenses to IFAD for reimbursement once the financing agreement has entered
into force and disbursement conditions have been met.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
20. The total cost for five years of implementation will be US$39.2 million, including

contingencies, of which: US$7.7 million relates to the inclusive markets component;
US$18.7 million to organizational strengthening; US$8.4 million to productive
development; and US$4.4 million to programme management and administration.
Management costs make up 11 per cent of the programme cost. Costs include
8 per cent for contingencies with respect to price escalation for goods, services and
operating expenses, and 0.3 per cent for physical contingencies with respect to
goods and services.

B. Programme financing
21. The programme will be financed by: (i) the Government, with a contribution of

US$11.5 million to cofinance support to the business plans of producers’
organizations, operating expenses and staff salaries; (ii) IFAD, through a loan of
US$24.2 million and a grant of US$330,000 for research and knowledge
management; and (iii) beneficiaries, with in-kind contributions of US$3.2 million to
cofinance the business plans. Programme costs by component and expenditure
category are presented in tables 1 and 2 below.



EB 2015/116/R.41/Rev.1

5

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Government Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Development of inclusive markets 5 984 78 188 2 1 531 20 - - 7 704 20
2. Organizational strengthening 11 586 62 - - 4 720 25 2 364 13 18 670 48
3. Productive development 6 136 73 - - 1 393 17 844 10 8 373 21
4. Management and administration 460 10 140 3 3 835 87 - - 4 434 11
Total programme costs 24 166 62 328 1 11 479 29 3 208 8 39 181 100

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Government Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Grants (capitalization of producers’
organizations) 16 616 65 - - 5 837 23 3 208 13 25 661 66

2. Goods, services and inputs 3 512 90 - - 396 10 - - 3 908 10
3. Consultancies (technical assistance) 1 828 65 328 12 636 23 - - 2 792 7
4. Training 1 444 100 - - - - - - 1 444 4
5. Credit and guarantee funds 765 100 - - - - - - 765 2
6. Salaries and allowances - - - - 3 742 100 - - 3 742 10
7. Operating costs - - - - 869 100 - - 869 2
Total programme costs 24 166 62 328 1 11 479 29 3 208 8 39 181 100

C. Benefit summary and economic analysis
22. The programme will serve some 8,000 rural families (approximately 37,700

people), including 7,100 smallholder families and 900 on- and off-farm jobs.
Smallholder producers, organized in approximately 119 producers’ organizations,
including 24 indigenous communities, will generate the programme’s expected
benefits.

23. The financial and economic evaluation indicates the activities’ viability at farm and
programme levels. The programme’s internal rate of return is 24.3 per cent, and
the net present value 364 million Argentine pesos.

D. Sustainability
24. The programme’s sustainability will be ensured by: (i) its choice of dynamic value

chains for which there is sound market demand and in which participating
producers have experience; (ii) its support to beneficiary organizations that will
ensure sustainability after programme completion; (iii) the adaptive research
integrated into component 1; (iv) the environmental, climate change adaptation,
land tenure security and commercial certification measures to be integrated into the
business plans; and (v) its support to sustainable rural finance services.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
25. The programme’s potential adverse impacts and risks of failing to achieve its

objectives are limited. The main risks include: (i) political and institutional risks,
which are low in view of the stable poverty-reduction policy framework in Northern
Argentina and UCAR’s track record in implementing poverty reduction programmes;
(ii) possible delays in incorporating participating provinces into the programme,
which will be mitigated by their early identification and participation in programme
design; (iii) possible hesitance of private companies to join the programme – to be
reduced by open communication and invitation to participate in the clusters;
(iv) market risks, which are low by virtue of the selected value chains’ dynamism
and the reduction of both supply and marketing constraints; and (v) technological
and climatic risks, which will be mitigated through local seed programmes,



EB 2015/116/R.41/Rev.1

6

technology development, adaptive research and support to the integration of
climate-proof infrastructure into business plans.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

26. The programme approach and implementation modalities are consistent with IFAD
strategies and policies. They specifically support IFAD’s fiduciary compliance and
are aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and the policies on rural
finance, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management,
gender equality and women’s empowerment, and targeting.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
27. The programme is in line with government objectives and the Agri-Food and

Agribusiness Strategic Plan (PEA2). It is also consistent with the recommendations
of IFAD’s 2010 country programme evaluation in seeking a programme approach,
expanding the financial services available to smallholder producers and introducing
the use of grants to boost knowledge management.

Innovations and scaling upC.
28. The programme’s innovations include: (i) focusing on dynamic value chains;

(ii) bringing together smallholder producers, public institutions and private
companies in clusters to plan the development of the value chains; (iii) integrating
adaptive research into business plans; (iv) introducing sector-support activities
such as seed programmes and technology development to enhance production and
marketing processes; and (v) enabling access to a spectrum of rural finance
services.

Policy engagementD.
29. The programme will support development of public policies to support family

farming in Argentina and beyond by generating and communicating evidence of the
new approaches it applies. Best practices will be disseminated in coordination with
IFAD’s regional programme for the Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR),
which is active in strengthening pro-poor policy in the region.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
30. A financing agreement between the Republic of Argentina and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement will not be tabled at this session. The
Board is requested to approve the programme proposal subject to the completion of
the negotiations of the financing agreement before the April 2016 session of the
Executive Board. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement will be tabled at the
April 2016 Executive Board session, as well as any substantive changes to the
terms presented.

31. The Republic of Argentina is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

32. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.




VII. Recommendation
33. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Argentina in an amount equivalent to twenty-two million eight
hundred and fifty thousand euros (EUR 22,850,000), and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Argentina in an amount equivalent to three hundred and ten thousand euros
(EUR 310,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President














































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Plurinational State of
Bolivia for the Integral Strengthening
Programme for the Camelid Value Chain in
the Bolivian High Plateau

Plurinational State of Bolivia

Integral Strengthening Programme for the Camelid
Value Chain in the Bolivian High Plateau

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Plurinational State of Bolivia

Executing agency: Ministry of Rural Development and Lands

Total programme cost: US$38.76 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR12.87 million (equivalent to approximately
US$17.89 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: Maturity period of 25 years, including a grace
period of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of 1.25 per
cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Contribution of borrower: US$16.5 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$4.3 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Plurinational State of Bolivia for the Integral Strengthening Programme
for the Camelid Value Chain in the Bolivian High Plateau, as contained in
paragraph 47.

Proposed loan to the Plurinational State of Bolivia for the
Integral Strengthening Programme for the Camelid
Value Chain in the Bolivian High Plateau

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. In the past eight years, the performance of the economy of the Plurinational State

of Bolivia was sound, based on favourable macroeconomic policies despite slow
growth of major economies. From 2006 to 2013, the economy grew at an average
rate of 4.9 per cent, resulting in a fiscal surplus and a sustained increase in
international reserves. The debt-to-GDP ratio decreased from 51 per cent in 2006
to 27 per cent in 2010. Per capita income increased from US$1,100 in 2006 to
US$3,000 in 2014, with a GDP of US$30,000 million. Notwithstanding this, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia is one of the poorest countries in South America and
one of the most unequal: about 65 per cent of a total population of 10 million
inhabitants live in poverty and 2.7 million people live in extreme poverty.
Inequality remains high. The Gini index dropped from 0.59 in 2006 to 0.51 in
2009, and in rural areas from 0.64 to 0.53 in the same period. Poverty here has
the face of indigenous and peasant women, and the highest levels of food
insecurity. Of the 340 municipalities, 102 (30 per cent) are in an extremely
vulnerable situation.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

2. The proposed programme is fully justified in taking into account poverty conditions,
food insecurity and vulnerability of the rural population in selected priority
municipalities in the targeted area. Moreover, programme interventions are
relevant, taking into account the important contribution of South American
camelids to the economy of the population in the Bolivian High Plateau, whose
welfare is associated with the income derived from breeding and processing, and
from the marketing of fibre, meat and hides. The proposed activities will help
reduce difficulties and obstacles in primary production such as: (i) low productivity,
low quality and livestock numbers in the Bolivian High Plateau; (ii) improper
handling of animals and herds; (iii) limited availability of feed and water due to
deterioration of natural resources and climate change; (iv) expansion of the
agricultural frontier for quinoa cultivation; (v) low value added to raw materials;
and (vi) inadequate access to services (veterinary, inputs, etc.). The programme
will also address limitations on processing and marketing, including: (i) lack of
technical assistance; (ii) high production costs; (iii) inadequate access to markets;
(iv) lack of access to financial services; and (v) absence of relationships among the
diverse actors in the production complex. In this context, a long-term strategy is
proposed based on the sustainability of joint venture projects with access to
markets, and strengthening of organizational actors. Programme implementation
will scale up development approaches promoted by other IFAD-funded projects in
the country.The programme contributes to achievement of the objectives of the



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

2

National Development Plan, the Patriotic Agenda 2025 and the Agricultural
Development Sector Plan 2014-2018 of the Ministry of Rural Development and
Lands (MDRyT): poverty eradication and financial, productive and natural resource
sovereignty, which emphasizes that agricultural production must be used to meet
domestic demand and ensure food security.

3. The proposed programme, although not included in the results-based country
strategic opportunities programme (RB-COSOP) for the Plurinational State of
Bolivia 2008-2012 and its 2013-2014 extension, is consistent with IFAD Strategic
Framework 2011-2015 objectives to assist rural poor people in improving their
food security, increasing their incomes and strengthening their resilience by
implementing cost-effective and sustainable initiatives, which can create
opportunities for wealth creation and employment in rural areas.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
4. Programme area. The programme has been designed to be implemented in

approximately 47 municipalities in three departments of the High Plateau: La Paz,
Oruro and Potosi. Selection of the programme area was based on: (i) poverty
conditions; (ii) indices of economic, social and environmental vulnerability; and
(iii) the production potential of South American camelids and their by-products.
The programme area concentrates 67 per cent of the population of camelids in the
country, representing 1,915,436 animals, with Oruro accounting for 57 per cent, La
Paz 33 per cent and Potosi 17 per cent.

5. The programme area is characterized by altitudes ranging from 3,600 to
4,600 metres, presenting low humidity, low rainfall and high solar radiation. The
climate is cold and dry, with extreme temperatures up to minus 15° C in winter
and annual average temperatures of 4-8° C. Frosts occur throughout the year, and
hail by the end of the rainy period, causing serious damage to the few crops and
native grasslands of the area.

6. Targeting and target groups. Implementation of the programme will be based
on geographical targeting in accordance with IFAD’s targeting policy. The
programme will be consistent with the definition adopted by IFAD for interventions
in the Plurinational State of Bolivia, which determines that the target population is
composed of small-scale producers, artisans, women and men microentrepreneurs,
rural populations living in extreme poverty and food insecurity, and marginalized
groups (indigenous peoples, women and youth). The target group includes: rural
populations (Quechua, Aymara) with moderate to extreme levels of poverty,
limited access to irrigation and water, lack of financial capital, difficulties in
accessing financial services, training and technology, limited employment
opportunities, poor or inadequate socio-economic organizational levels and
outmigration in areas with high environmental vulnerability. As part of the
targeting strategy, the programme will take into account the New State
Constitution, which explicitly recognizes the collective rights of indigenous peoples
and the right to consultation processes.

7. Target group. Using geographical targeting criteria, a typology of farm families,
and data from the 2012 census by the National Institute of Statistics, the
programme area comprises 106,571 rural families. Of this total, it is estimated that
63,942 families are engaged in breeding camelids.

8. Gender. The programme is consistent with the three strategic objectives of IFAD's
gender policy: (i) promote economic empowerment to give women and men an
equal opportunity to participate in profitable economic activities and benefit from
them; (ii) give women and men the opportunity to equally express themselves and
influence rural institutions and organizations; and (iii) achieve a more equitable
balance in workloads and the distribution of economic and social benefits for



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

3

women and men. It will ensure that these considerations are taken into account,
identifying inequalities and furthering affirmative action. The programme will
promote equitable leadership in productive organizations that contribute to the
economic empowerment of women’s associations and groups, taking into account
the workload these economic initiatives will entail. It will also systematize
experience by productive organizations in the implementation of measures for
gender equality and inclusion of youth, disseminating findings and
recommendations through events and publications.

B. Programme development objective
9. The main purpose of the programme is to improve living conditions of families and

productive economic organizations linked to the camelid production complex, while
ensuring sustainable management of natural resources. The programme will
contribute towards: (i) reducing rural poverty and child malnutrition; (ii) increasing
physical assets (productive infrastructure) and financial assets of programme
users; (iii) enhancing the integration of business initiatives of beneficiaries in
camelid value chains; (iv) increasing the incomes of participating families;
(v) furthering adoption of practices conducive to natural resource management;
and (vi) increasing the capacities of programme users (human and social assets)
based on the principle of social inclusion of women and youth.

C. Components/outcomes
10. Programme implementation includes three main components:

11. Component 1: Primary production and management of natural resources.
The objectives of this component are to strengthen access by poor families to
initiatives seeking to improve: primary production at the level of family production
units and communities, and sustainable management of natural resources.
Programme initiatives will improve the productive environment, increase resilience
to the effects of climate change, mitigate negative environmental impacts and
provide conditions for competitive entry into markets.

12. Implementation of this component will include two subcomponents:

(a) Improvement of primary production in nutrition, animal health and
management and support to small farm infrastructure. Implementation will
include the following activities: (a) programme information dissemination
workshops; (b) participatory territorial planning; (c) competitive financing of
household and community production unit initiatives; and (d) training in
gender equality, rural youth and experience-sharing.

(b) Sustainable use of natural resources. This subcomponent will be based on a
territorial management approach to implementation of natural resource
management, aimed at improving livelihoods ecosystems through the
following activities: (a) integrated community management of water
resources; (b) management and soil conservation; and (c) strengthening
local institutions for natural resource management and systematization of
experiences.

13. Component 2: Processing and marketing. The objective of this component is to
support families and their organizations in generating productive economic
infrastructure conditions to encourage private investment, improve transformation
processes for value creation and deepen competitive access to markets, while
increasing interaction among actors in the South American camelid production
complex. The component links the dynamics of improving production and
productivity of camelid breeders with transformation initiatives to generate added
value in the fibre, meat and hides value chains.

14. This component includes two subcomponents:



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

4

(a) Processing of fibre, meat and hides. Implementation will include the following
main activities: (a) training of programme teams in competitive allocation of
financial resources and financing of business plans; (b) strategic analysis of
the camelid production complex in its three value chains; and (c) financing of
business plans in processing and speciality export markets.

(b) Marketing of processed products. Implementation will include the following
main activities: (a) support to marketing processes and markets; and
(b) innovation and systematization in terms of gender equality and rural
youth.

15. Component 3: Access to financial services. The objective of this component is
to enhance knowledge, access to and inclusion of participating farmers,
organizations and business groups in the financial services and products offered by
financial entities. This component includes three subcomponents: (i) information
and financial education; (ii) mobilization of savings; and (iii) promotion of financial
services.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
16. The programme will pursue a territorial development approach in the context of the

camelid production complex. lt will strengthen the capacities of families and local
organizations to improve camelid productivity, while enhancing the management of
natural resources and resilience in order to support livelihoods and food and
nutritional security, in partnership with public and private stakeholders. Assistance
will be provided in developing the business skills of productive economic
organizations to help them gain access to markets through implementing business
plans and through strategic investments in the processing of intermediate products
of the camelid complex value chain. The programme will also promote and deepen
the provision of financial services, thus furthering financial inclusion. It will allocate
funds through competitive mechanisms for the implementation of various
production and business initiatives in accordance with existing public policies.

B. Organizational framework
17. Programme implementation will be the responsibility of a programme

implementation unit (PIU) within the MDRyT, and departmental technical units
(DTUs), located in the three departments in the programme area.

18. Implementation. The PIU will be responsible for day-to-day implementation of
the programme, with technical, administrative, financial and legal capacity. The
PIU will be staffed by a programme coordinator and by the professional, technical
and administrative staff required for the correct implementation of the programme.
Staff will be located in a central office in La Paz and in the three DTUs located in
the programme area.

19. Programme guidance. Overall guidance will be provided by a programme
steering committee (PSC). At the departmental level, the programme will establish
territorial rating committees, community juries and local productive initiatives
approval committees (LPIACs).

20. Programme steering committee. The PSC will be responsible for providing
strategic policy for interventions. It will be composed of five members,
representing the MDRyT – which will head the committee; ministries involved in
programme implementation; and programme users.

21. Territorial rating committees. These committees will assess proposed primary
production and food security and nutrition initiatives. They will be established at
the departmental level and composed of five members selected according to
custom. One of the members will be a subject-matter specialist or local expert.



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

5

22. Community juries. Participating communities will select an expert in natural
resource management according to local customs, who will qualify the physical
results in each community, together with a local municipal facilitator.

23. Local productive initiatives approval committees. Three LPIACs will be
established in the programme area and entrusted with selection and approval of
business plans submitted by potential users or beneficiary groups. The composition
of the committees and the requirements for the submission and approval of
business plans will be detailed in the programme implementation manual.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

24. Planning. Operational planning will be based on annual workplans and budgets
(AWP/Bs) prepared through a participatory process. The PIU will submit quarterly
progress reports and an annual report to IFAD.

25. Monitoring and evaluation. M&E will be the responsibility of the PIU. Activities
will include preparation of a baseline survey, a midterm review (MTR) and a
programme completion report. The baseline survey will be prepared in parallel with
the collection and systematization of information under the Results and Impact
Management System (RIMS), which will be replicated at midterm and at
programme completion.

26. Learning and knowledge management. Programme implementation will involve
introduction of an effective knowledge management system involving all
stakeholders. The programme will develop activities to enable a process of
reflection to better understand what processes and programme outcomes are being
reached. Knowledge acquired will contribute towards lessons learned and towards
adjusting the implementation strategy of the programme if needed. The
programme will support systematization, exchanges of experiences, life stories and
the use of audiovisual techniques in evaluation. These will be disseminated through
information and communications technologies and will contribute greatly towards
knowledge-sharing.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
27. Financial management. The MDRyT, through the PIU, will be responsible for

overall financial management of the programme, including AWP/Bs, procurement,
flow of funds, disbursement, internal control, accounting, financial reporting and
audit. The programme will use the national Integrated System of Management and
Administrative Modernization software, in addition to programme-specific software
for budget and accounting to ensure compliance with IFAD requirements.

28. Flow of funds. The Ministry of Economy and Public Finance will open, in the
Central Bank of Bolivia, a designated account in United States dollars, within the
treasury single account system. The designated account will be operated by the
MDRyT and will be used exclusively for the proceeds of the loan.

29. Procurement. Procurement will follow national procurement procedures and
regulations to the extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s procurement
guidelines.

30. Audit. The programme’s consolidated financial statements will be audited annually
by private independent auditors in accordance with IFAD Guidelines on Project
Audits. All programme accounts will be audited, including all sources of funding,
IFAD, the Government, departmental and municipal governments and communities
of users. Annual audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months after the
end of each fiscal year.



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

6

E. Supervision
31. The programme will be directly supervised by IFAD, which will oversee compliance

with the programme financing agreement, including procurement and contractual
agreements, in collaboration with the PIU. Supervision missions will be scheduled
after consultation with the national authorities and the PIU.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
32. Total programme costs have been estimated at the equivalent of US$38.8 million.

The cost structure includes the three main components and programme
management: (i) primary production and management of natural resources,
US$18.3 million (47.2 per cent); (ii) processing and marketing, US$13.7 million
(35.9 per cent); (iii) access to financial services, US$1.4 million (35.4 per cent)
and; (iv) programme management, US$5.4 million (13.8 per cent).
Table 1
Indicative programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan

National
Government
counterpart Beneficiaries

Departamental
governments

Municipal
governments Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Primary production

and management of
natural resources 5 361 29.3 4 221 23.1 2 351 12.9 1 154 6.3 5 204 28.5 18 291 47.2

2. Processing and
marketing 7 005 51.0 1 901 13.9 1 461 10.6 2 747 20.0 610 4.4 13 725 35.4

3. Access to financial
services 808 58.5 55 4.0 518 37.5 - - - - 1 381 3.6

4. Programme
management 4 717 87.9 648 12.1 - - - - - - 5 365 13.8

Total 17 891 46.2 6 826 17.6 4 329 11.2 3 902 10.1 5 814 15.0 38 762 100.0



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

7

B. Programme financing
33. Programme financing comprises an IFAD loan of approximately US$17.9 million

(46.2 per cent); the Government contribution of US$16.5 million (49.7 per cent),
made up of the national government counterpart contribution of about
US$6.8 million (17.6 per cent), departmental governments US$3.9 million
(10.1 per cent), municipal governments US$5.8 million (15 per cent); and
contributions in cash from beneficiaries of about US$4.3 million (11.2 per cent).
Table 2
Indicative Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan

National
Government
counterpart Beneficiaries

Departamental
governments

Municipal
governments Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Grants and

subsidies 9 151 38.5 3 442 14.5 4 329 18.2 1 471 6.2 5 352 22.5 23 744 61.3
2. Training 2 299 48.6 2 407 50.9 - - - - 20 0.4 4 726 12.2
3. Works 150 4.9 29 0.9 - - 2 431 79.7 442 14.5 3 052 7.9
4. Consultancies 1 920 84.0 376 16.0 - - - - - - 2 287 5.9
5. Vehicles and

equipment 524 83.2 106 16.8 - - - - - - 630 1.6
6. Operating costs 3 848 89.0 475 11.0 - - - - - - 4 324 11.2

Total 17 891 46.2 6 826 17.6 4 392 11.2 3 902 10.1 5 814 15.0 38 762 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. Benefits and beneficiaries. Programme benefits will accrue as a result of

increased herd productivity, value addition in fibre, meat and leather, strengthened
partnerships with other actors in the value chain, better participatory territorial
management of the sustainable use of natural resources (water, soil and
grassland), and cofinancing of business plans, capacity-building of users and
greater participation by women and youth. It will benefit a total of 30,000 families;
equivalent to 47 per cent of the target population, encompassing a total of
1,996 rural communities.

35. Economic analysis. The programme’s financial feasibility was evaluated for
10 years, taking into account the opportunity cost relative to the bank rate
(11.5 per cent). For farm models, the internal rate of return (IRR) was estimated
at 22-37 per cent. Net present value (NPV) was positive in all cases, ranging from
US$107 to US$543, with incomes above the poverty line. Microenterprise models
showed an IRR from 18 to 56 per cent, and NPV ranged from US$5,882 to
US$45,312 with increased employment levels – implying a reduction of wage
labour outside the farm and greater commitment to business development. The
economic evaluation was projected for 20 years in terms of contributing to
improving the national economy. The evaluation considered adjustments in cash
transfers to programme users (competitions for primary production, management
of natural resources, productive infrastructure for proposed business plans and
savings). Price contingencies were adjusted, considering that imported inflation is a
distortion of actual prices. Adjustments were also made regarding economic input
prices (farm labour) and shadow prices (for tradable goods) whose ratio is
equivalent to US$1.24. Indicators show that the programme is economically
feasible and a good investment for the Government. The IRR is 27 per cent, NPV
US$23.5 million and the cost-benefit ratio 2.3:1, considering a discount rate of
12.67 per cent.

36. Sensitivity analysis shows that in terms of economic feasibility the programme is
more sensitive to the reduction of benefits than to increased costs. With reduced
benefits, the programme withstands up to 37 per cent, and with increases in costs,
up to 84 per cent. Considering delays, the programme withstands two-year delays,
maintaining positive benefits.



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

8

D. Sustainability
37. Sustainability of programme interventions is based on: (i) strengthened capacity of

families, communities and municipalities to undertake sustainable territorial
planning to manage their productive base – assuming the adoption of improved
management of natural resources; (ii) organizational strengthening of communities
and productive economic organizations, which will enable greater empowerment
and capacity for coordination in intervention areas and will generate public/private
partnerships; (iii) improved access by producers – as a result of technical and
business management training – and strategic investments in productive
infrastructure (jointly with municipal and provincial governments) will enable them
to fully participate in value chains, gaining access to local, regional, national and
international markets; and (iv) adoption of gender and generational approaches
will allow for greater participation by vulnerable groups such as women and youth.
All of the above will be reinforced through financial education supported by savings
mobilization, which will allow producers and productive economic organizations to
graduate from dependence on government funding and grants, allowing them to
grow independently. The MTR and M&E of the programme will facilitate design of
an exit strategy – considering progress made and prospects for sustainability of the
results in different dimensions (institutional/organizational, financial, technical and
environmental).

E. Risk identification and mitigation
38. The following risks have been identified: (i) possible duplication with upcoming

financing by the World Bank; (ii) delays in launching programme operations;
(iii) limitations on the processes of establishing or formalizing small- and medium-
sized enterprises; (iv) funding for new business ventures will require transfers to
producer organizations with low implementation capacity, including for fiduciary
duties, which may affect implementation of economic initiatives;
(v) implementation of infrastructure initiatives in conjunction with departmental
and municipal governments will require financial contributions that may not be
available; (vi) market acceptance, increased demand for diverse products in the
value chain, and reduced barriers resulting from measures designed to ensure food
safety, especially meat products; (vii) climate change events such as droughts,
frosts and hailstorms affecting agricultural primary production; (viii) increased
deforestation of native species in favour of the introduction of quinoa, based on
market demand; and (ix) difficulty in making progress in financial inclusion, owing
to geographical and cultural distance between financial institutions and potential
customers.

39. Mitigation measures will include: (i) coordination during the design of new projects
and leadership of national authorities in generating synergies in the
implementation stages and agreements between funders to avoid duplication of
efforts; (ii) IFAD and national authorities will facilitate the processes needed for
effectiveness, including prompt approvals and no objections; (iii) the programme
will facilitate establishment of new ventures through support to strengthening
corporate governance and compliance requirements; (iv) it will provide training to
programme users in managing trust mechanisms of the financial resources
transferred; (v) the programme will ensure that funding by departmental and
municipal governments is assured before the start of activities, and that
agreements have been signed to ensure compliance with the agreements made;
(vi) it will support producers’ groups in fulfilling food-safety certification
requirements when it begins sponsoring implementation of this type of initiative.
The programme will also follow up on ongoing measures designed to streamline the
obtaining of health certificates from the National Agricultural Health and Food
Safety Service (SENASAG) for infrastructure and meat products; (vii) it will provide
funding for initiatives by target groups to improve their environment and reduce
their vulnerability; (viii) the programme will implement awareness workshops on



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

9

environmental issues, keeping in mind the balance that must exist in the
man/nature relationship, and strengthening knowledge management activities
through learning routes and other mechanisms; and (ix) a strategy to reduce
geographical and cultural distances in accessing financial services will be adapted
to include financial education and temporary monetary savings incentives, which
have proved to be useful tools in stimulating demand for deposit-taking services.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
40. The programme is aligned with IFAD policies regarding: (i) targeting, by supporting

activities that benefit the rural population living in poverty; (ii) gender equality, by
furthering empowerment and promoting greater participation by women;
(iii) indigenous peoples, by adopting an intervention strategy based on sustainable
land management, strengthening the traditional local organization of production
units through a participatory approach and recognition of the value of ancestral
knowledge; (iv) management of natural resources, through more productive and
resilient ecosystems and activities including soil conservation, integrated water
resource management, and institutional strengthening of local communities and
municipal governments; (v) rural finance, by supporting access to financial services
and deepening access to credit for productive enterprises; and (vi) private-sector
development, through strengthening the capacity of camelid breeders to establish
partnerships with diverse actors in the fibre, meat and leather value chains
generated.

B. Alignment and harmonization
41. The programme is aligned with the Agricultural Sector Development Plan

2014-2018, which includes technological development, agricultural innovation, use
and management of soil, water and vegetation cover for agricultural production,
health and food safety, sovereignty and territorial management by indigenous and
peasant farmers. The programme will generate synergies and strategic alliances
with public and private entities that operate in some municipalities in the
programme area, thus contributing to harmonization of activities in rural territories
(e.g. the World Bank’s Rural Alliances and Community Investment in Rural Areas
Projects).

C. Innovations and scaling up
42. The programme will innovate by introducing participatory planning, and supporting

economic initiatives on a more continuous basis, including provision of diversified
technical assistance. It will scale up development approaches promoted by the
VALE, PROMARENA and PROSAT projects funded by IFAD in the country.1 The
scaling up process is possible in the context of a favourable regulatory framework
that supports innovation with a territorial perspective aimed at management of the
primary production base, an efficient management of natural resources, financial
inclusion and inclusion of women and youth.

D. Policy engagement
43. Policy dialogue will cover: governance of municipal territories and communities for

sustainable territorial management; strengthening of local institutions in natural
resource management; and capacity-building of communities and municipalities in
land-use planning and in natural resource and risk management, including
strengthening municipal productivity and risk management units. The programme
will further engage in analysing the policy approach of the MDRyT in the context of
its National Camelid Programme.

1 Enhancement of the Peasant Camelid Economy Support Project, Management of Natural Resources in the Chaco
and High Valleys Regions Project and Technical Assistance Services Project for Small Holders.



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

10

VI. Legal instruments and authority
44. A programme financing agreement between the Plurinational State of Bolivia and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed loan to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

45. The Plurinational State of Bolivia is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

46. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
47. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the
Plurinational State of Bolivia in the amount of twelve million eight hundred
seventy thousand special drawing rights (SDR 12,870,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of Cuba for the
Livestock Cooperatives Development Project
in the Central-Eastern Region


Republic of Cuba

Livestock Cooperatives Development Project in the
Central-Eastern Region

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Cuba

Executing agency: Ministry of Foreign Trade and Foreign Investment,
delegated to the Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$50 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 10.9 million (equivalent to approximately
US$11.9 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a
grace period of three years, with an interest rate per
annum equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference
interest rate

Cofinancier: French Development Agency

Amount of cofinancing: EUR 25 million

Contribution of borrower: US$10 million (CUP 10 million as per official exchange
rate of the Central Bank of Cuba)

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of Cuba for the Livestock Cooperatives Development Project in
the Central-Eastern Region as contained in paragraph 58.

Proposed loan to the Republic of Cuba for the Livestock
Cooperatives Development Project in the Central-Eastern
Region

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Cuba is a middle-income country that in 2014 had a population of 11.2 million,

23 per cent living in rural areas. In 2014, Cuba’s nominal gross domestic product
(GDP) was US$80,656 million, equivalent to a GDP per capita of US$7,186.
However, care must be taken when analysing per capita GDP in view of the
country’s regulated dual monetary system, in which the Cuban Peso (CUP) and the
Cuban Convertible Peso (CUC) coexist. According to the World Food Programme
(WFP), between 60 per cent and 75 per cent of households’ income is spent on
food, which is high compared to other middle-income countries (the average is
between 20 per cent and 45 per cent).

2. With social policies guaranteeing food and nutritional security, and targeting the
most vulnerable populations, Cuba has made major strides in eradicating extreme
poverty and hunger. It is the only country in Latin America and the Caribbean to
have eliminated severe infant malnutrition. According to the 2015 Human
Development Report, Cuba is advanced in terms of human development, with a
score of 0.769, ranking 67th out of 188 countries. Cuba’s score is above average for
countries rated as high in human development (0.744).

3. Cuba’s agricultural sector accounts for about 4 per cent of its GDP but employs
approximately 20 per cent of the workforce, 16 per cent of whom are women. The
agricultural sector is in transition, with an increasing role played by private
cooperatives and individual farmers, which account for over 90 per cent of
agricultural production on 70 per cent of the land. While the state purchased
80 per cent of national production in 2007, this figure decreased to 60 per cent in
2012. Growing domestic food markets and demand from the increasing tourist
sector are providing opportunities for local producers; however producers must
enhance the quality and quantity of their production in order to serve these
markets.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities
4. Food security is a strategic priority for the Cuban Government. The agricultural

sector’s current productivity is well below the country’s potential, considering the
availability of natural resources and human and technological capital. As a result,
local food production is insufficient to cover demand and Cuba is highly dependent
on food imports.

5. A decline of productivity in Cuba’s livestock sector was caused by gradual
decapitalization since the 1990s. As a result, the livestock sector changed from an
advanced production system based on the intensive use of inputs to a dispersed
system of pastoralism. National milk production fell from 982 million litres in 1989
to 434 million litres in 2014, and meat production decreased from 271 thousand
tons in 1990 to 119 thousand tons in 2014.



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

6. Improving agricultural productivity is therefore at the core of Cuba’s public policy
agenda. Since April 2011, Cuba has begun a series of political, institutional and
economic reforms known as the Economic and Social Policy Guidelines. These
guidelines call for a gradual transformation of the agricultural sector by introducing
more market incentives and private-sector production, and reducing controls on
prices and wages.

7. As outlined in the country strategy note, IFAD can play an important role in
supporting the transformation of Cuba’s agricultural sector by supporting
smallholders organized into private cooperatives, who represent the productive
backbone of the sector. In order to meet the challenges of changing economic
conditions and benefit from new opportunities, these smallholders need productive
assets, inputs and capacity-building.

8. The Livestock Cooperatives Development Project in the Central-Eastern Region
(PRODEGAN) aims to support private cooperatives comprised of smallholders
managing dual-purpose cattle and focused on milk and meat production. The
Government currently imports nearly 50,000 tons of milk powder per year to cover
50 percent of local demand in a world market characterized by volatile prices.

9. The proposed project builds upon the experience gained from the ongoing
Cooperative Rural Development Project in the Oriental Region (PRODECOR), which
focuses on production of maize and beans in the eastern provinces of Las Tunas,
Holguín, Granma and Santiago de Cuba. As in PRODECOR, the focus of this project
is on increasing the productivity of private cooperatives through participatory
development plans and improved service provision.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
10. The project area encompasses the province of Camagüey, in which four priority

municipalities have been selected: Guaímaro, Sibanicú, Camagüey and Jimaguayú.
These municipalities comprise 45 per cent of the province’s cattle population and
57 per cent of its milk production. The area was selected because of its long
tradition of livestock production, its productive potential, the presence of processing
plants with spare capacity and the concentration of cooperatives that are already
integrated into existing value chains.

11. Since the 1990s, the economy in Camagüey province has suffered because of a
decline in the livestock sector caused by decreasing investments, a lack of inputs,
limited technical assistance, land degradation and the effects of climate change and
variability. The proposed project aims to reverse this trend.

12. PRODEGAN will directly benefit 11,500 rural families organized in 105 cooperatives,
for a total of 34,500 direct beneficiaries. These direct beneficiaries will include:
(i) members of cooperatives producing meat, milk and dairy products such as
cheese; (ii) wage-earning rural workers employed by the cooperatives; and
(iii) technicians employed by the service providers of livestock cooperatives.

13. The cooperatives average between 60 and 140 members; women represent
13 per cent of cooperative membership and young people 11 per cent. PRODEGAN
will focus on reaching women (at least 20 per cent) and youth (at least 15
per cent), and will support their inclusion in cooperatives’ decision-making and
productive activities.

14. Three types of cooperatives exist in Cuba. Credit and service cooperatives, created
in 1963, are characterized by individual land ownership and comprise
approximately 60 per cent of the cooperatives in the area; they are considered to
be the most efficient form of cooperative. Basic cooperative production units are
former state farms transformed in 1993. Characterized by collective ownership
structures, they comprise approximately 30 per cent of cooperatives in the area. In
agricultural production cooperatives, which were created in 1975, individuals



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

voluntarily agree on collective ownership (they comprise approximately 10 per cent
of the cooperatives in the area).

B. Project development objective
15. The development objective of the project is to promote the sustainable growth of

the livestock sector by increasing the production and sale of milk and meat, raising
the incomes of beneficiary families in cooperatives. The main outcomes for the
primary target group will be: (i) higher average net incomes for members of
participating cooperatives; (ii) increased delivery of cold milk from cooperatives to
the industry from 17 million litres to 47 million liters per year; and (iii) increased
sale of beef by cooperatives from 5,000 tons to 6,000 tons per year.

C. Components/outcomes
16. PRODEGAN has three inter-linked technical components and one component for

project management. The main focus of component 1 is on strengthening milk and
meat producing cooperatives, which currently have significant manual labour
capacity, high mortality and low birth rates of cattle, insufficient pastures and
limited water availability. Through component 2, service providers in the project
area will be strengthened in order to free up land, increase water availability,
improve artificial insemination and veterinary services, and build cooperatives’
capacity. Finally, in order to ensure sufficient capacity to collect and process the
increased milk and meat produced, agro-industry in the project area will be
supported through component 3. The main expected outcomes of each component
are detailed below:

(a) Component 1: Strengthening smallholder livestock cooperatives. By
implementing cooperative development plans (CDPs), livestock farmers will
increase their cattle populations and milk and meat production in a
sustainable manner. The project also aims to improve their managerial and
organizational capacities, with a focus on gender. Specific outcomes will
include: (i) an increase in annual milk production per lactating cow from
600 liters to 1,300 liters; (ii) decreased mortality of herds from 7 per cent to
4 per cent; and (iii) an increase in the percentage of women in managerial
positions within cooperatives from 14 per cent to 20 per cent.

(b) Component 2: Strengthening service providers. The project is expected
to enable service providers to substantially improve the frequency and quality
of their services, including technical assistance and provision of quality inputs.
Specifically: (i) the percentage of pregnant inseminated cows is expected to
increase from 45 per cent to 60 per cent; (ii) improved pastureland in the
project area will increase from 4,000 hectare to 8,000 hectare per year; and
(iii) 200 water-capture infrastructures will be rehabilitated.

(c) Component 3: Strengthening agro-industry. Through component 3, milk
and meat transport and industry processing capacity will be strengthened; the
exact outcomes will be defined by a value chain study. Expected outcomes
include: (i) an increase in transport capacity for the collection of milk; and
(ii) an increase of the processing capacity of the meat industry in Camagüey.

(d) Component 4: Project management and coordination. This component
consists of project management and monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
activities. It includes the development of strategy and operational guidelines,
and the responsibility for technically sound project implementation. The M&E
system will be an important input into the knowledge management agenda of
IFAD’s country programme, which is the basis for IFAD’s dialogue with the
Government on rural development.



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

17. In line with experience from PRODECOR, the implementation approach is based on
the definition of community-driven CDPs. Through these plans, livestock farmers
will assess their strengths and weaknesses, and the opportunities and threats they
face, and define the most appropriate development strategy for their cooperatives.

18. In parallel with the development of the first CDPs, a participatory value chain
analysis will be carried out involving major stakeholders in the livestock sector. The
objective of this study is to identify the main weaknesses and entry points in the
milk and meat value chains in order to guide the development of
service-strengthening plans.

19. It is foreseen that cooperatives, most service providers and agro-industry
stakeholders will finance their investments through bank loans in the local currency
– mainly from the Bank for Credit and Trade. A similar mechanism is currently
being implemented through PRODECOR. Service providers such as environmental
agencies, institutes for land and water, and the University of Camagüey, which
cannot utilize credit, will be supported through budgetary allocations by the
Government.

20. The CDPs and service-strengthening plans are expected to be formulated over a
three-year period and each will have a time horizon of two to three years. The
overall duration of the project is expected to be six years.

B. Organizational framework
21. The Ministry of Foreign Trade and Foreign Investment will act as legal

representative of the borrower. The responsibility for execution will be delegated to
the Ministry of Agriculture, which regulates all activities related to milk and meat
production. Within the Ministry of Agriculture, the responsible agency will be the
Livestock Business Group, which is responsible for providing production and
business services to livestock cooperatives. The Ministry of Agriculture will also
coordinate agro-industry investments with the Ministry of Food Industry and the
Food Industry Business Group.

22. In order to benefit from lessons learned, a national coordination office for IFAD
projects in Cuba will be established at the Ministry of Agriculture, employing staff
from PRODECOR. This office will be in charge of: (i) supporting the definition of
participatory development plans; (ii) administration, financial management and
procurement; (iii) planning and M&E; and (iv) knowledge management, including
South-South cooperation, exchanges, seminars and studies.

23. In addition, a technical implementation unit will be established within the Livestock
Business Group with a main office in Havana and a local office in Camagüey.

24. An investment evaluation committee will be set up to evaluate the individual
investment plans of cooperatives, service providers and agro-industry stakeholders.
In addition, a national project steering committee will be established to approve
annual workplans and budgets, and provide strategic guidance. Both committees
will be comprised of representatives from government ministries; IFAD will be an
observer on the national project steering committee.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

25. A planning, M&E and knowledge management system will be established to provide
timely information on project performance and support continuous improvement of
project management. The system will be designed and launched during the first six
months of implementation, benefitting from the experience of PRODECOR. Its
purpose is to: (i) generate updated information on project goals, outputs, results
and impact; and (ii) facilitate learning, the exchange of experiences and best
practices, and the dissemination of project results.



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

26. A midterm review will be conducted to: (i) assess the cost recovery of the service
providers; (ii) evaluate the performance of the different types of cooperatives; and
(iii) analyse the performance and impact of the reference farms. As a result of this
midterm review, any necessary adjustments will be discussed with the Government.

27. The National Statistics and Information Office is expected to participate in the
development of the baseline survey, midterm review and final impact study.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
28. Financial management. Financial management and procurement for the project

will be undertaken by the national office for the management of IFAD-funded
projects within the Ministry of Agriculture. This arrangement will capitalize on the
experience gained by PRODECOR staff and is expected to promote project
readiness. This project will utilize the same accounting system as PRODECOR,
which complies with minimum IFAD requirements.

29. The financial management and procurement systems used by public entities in
Cuba are in line with national regulatory authorities including the Office of the
Comptroller General, the Ministry of Finance and Pricing, the Ministry of Economy
and Planning, and the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Foreign Investment.
Compliance with the standards and procedures governing these systems is
mandatory for all government agencies. This requirement also applies to the
Livestock Business Group, the national coordination office and technical
implementation unit.

30. Based on Cuba’s 2015 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 47 and IFAD’s experience in the country, the project’s fiduciary risk has
been rated as medium. The measures highlighted in this section, along with
implementation support, are considered sufficient to mitigate fiduciary risks.

31. Flow of funds. The borrower will open a designated account in euros at the Bank
for Credit and Trade exclusively for the loan proceeds. Operating accounts in
convertible pesos will be opened at the same bank and administered by the national
coordination office.

32. Audit. The project team will submit annual consolidated financial statements
compliant with international standards. The annual consolidated financial
statements will be independently audited in line with terms of reference approved
by IFAD and in accordance with the International Standards on Auditing and IFAD’s
Guidelines on Project Audits. Annual audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within
six months from the end of the each fiscal year.

33. Procurement. Goods from abroad will be procured using the services of the
Caribbean Citrus Anonymous Society, the Ministry of Agriculture’s specialized
import-export agency. The delivery of external acquisitions and domestic
procurement will be handled by the Ministry of Agriculture’s Business Logistics
Group and the Livestock Insurance and Services Company. The national
coordination office will be required to seek IFAD’s approval on a no-objection basis
before replacing the procurement agency. Minor purchases will be handled by the
national coordination office, which will apply the provisions and regulations detailed
in the project operating manual in accordance with IFAD’s procurement guidelines.

34. Governance. To promote good governance, IFAD applies a policy of zero tolerance
against fraud, corruption and misconduct.

E. Supervision
35. PRODEGAN will be directly supervised by IFAD in line with its policy on supervision

and implementation support. As the lead agency, IFAD will also supervise
implementation of the portion of the project financed by French Development
Agency (AFD) based on an agreement between AFD and IFAD. AFD will participate
in supervision missions and will approve all annual workplans and budgets,
procurement plans, terms of reference, reports of external evaluations and
requirements for annual audit reports related to AFD financing.



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

36. The first supervision mission is planned for the first year of the project and will
focus on operational and financial progress achieved during initial implementation.
It will include a review and assessment of the project’s financial management
arrangements. Subsequent supervision missions will take place annually, including
field visits to verify progress and evaluate any implementation problems.

37. Implementation-support activities during the first 18 months are expected to
include:(i) supporting the fulfilment of conditions for the first disbursement;
(ii) organizing a start-up workshop; (iii) training staff of the national coordination
office and technical implementation unit in the preparation of annual workplans and
budgets, procurement plans and withdrawal applications, and fiduciary
requirements and procurement procedures; (iv) supporting the preparation of an
implementation strategy, value chain study and progress reports for each project
component; and (v) supporting the design and set-up of the planning, M&E and
knowledge management system.

F. Exceptions to the General Conditions for Agricultural
Development Financing and IFAD’s operating policies

38. Expenses incurred from the date of approval by the Executive Board until the date
of entry into force of the financing agreement will be considered eligible up to a
ceiling of EUR 300,000 for activities related to: (i) adjustments to the accounting
system; (ii) the start-up workshop; (iii) the baseline survey and gender
methodology; (iv) the value chain study; and (v) equipping and operating the
national coordination office and the technical implementation unit. Depending on
the nature of expenditures, the costs of these activities will be charged against the
relevant categories of expenditures indicated in the financing agreement.

39. In addition, it was agreed with the Government of Cuba that as an exception to
section 14.04(a) of the General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing,
the number of arbitrators will be three, and the provisions of article 9 of the
Arbitration Rules 2012 of the Permanent Court of Arbitration will apply.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
40. The base cost of the project is US$47.5 million, plus estimated contingencies, for a

total cost of US$50 million. Of the total cost, 5 per cent is for physical contingencies
and price increases.
Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan
Other cofinancier

(AFD)
Borrower/

counterpart1 Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Strengthening smallholder
livestock cooperatives 7 940 67 18 485 66 4 512 45 30 937 62
2. Strengthening service
providers 2 412 20 5 615 20 2 131 21 10 158 20
3. Strengthening agro-industry - - 4 000 14 2 000 20 6 000 12
4. Project management and
coordination 1 548 13 - - 1 357 14 2 905 6

Total 11 900 24 28 100 56 10 000 20 50 000 100

1 In accordance with the Agreement Establishing IFAD and the General Conditions for Agricultural Development
Financing, IFAD usually calculates the value of government contributions using the exchange rate published by the
International Monetary Fund (IMF). However, Cuba is not a member of the IMF. According to the Central Bank of Cuba
and the United Nations Operational Rates of Exchange, the exchange rate of US$/CUP is 1:1, and is therefore the rate
used in this document for the US dollars value of the government contribution expressed in local currency. There is no
actual rate for foreign currency transaction to and from CUP within the country, and the exchange rate from CUP to CUC
used for private transactions in the country is significantly different than the US$/CUP rate. The actual value of the
government contribution will be subject to external audit based on expenditures incurred.



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Project financing
41. The project will be financed by: (i) an IFAD loan denominated in euros (equivalent

to approximately to US$11.9 million); (ii) a loan from AFD for EUR 25 million
(equivalent to approximately US$28.1 million); and (iii) a counterpart contribution
from the Government estimated at US$10 million.

42. IFAD and AFD loans will cofinance components 1 and 2; external financing of
component 3 (strengthening agro-industry) will be provided by AFD; and
component 4 (project management) will be financed by IFAD. The borrower’s
contribution will cofinance all components and taxes.
Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan
Other cofinancier

(AFD)
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Equipment and materials 10 415 88 27 589 98 5 162 51 43 166 86
2. Consultancies 685 6 193 1 58 1 936 2
3. Training 190 2 318 1 3 616 36 4 124 8
4. Operating costs 610 4 - - 1 164 12 1 774 4

Total 11 900 24 28 100 56 10 000 20 50 000 100

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
43. The main benefits expected from the project are: (i) an increase in domestic milk

and meat production and sales (which reduces the need for imports); (ii) the
strengthening of actors along the milk and meat value chains; and (iii) an increase
in the participation of women and youth, ensuring a better quality of life for
cooperative members.

44. The financial analysis shows that considering prices in Cuba’s livestock sector, the
proposed investments are financially viable. The financial rate of return ranges from
38 per cent to 87 per cent (whereby credit and service cooperatives have higher
rates of return than cooperatives characterized by common ownership structures).

45. The economic analysis, which considers economic prices and costs, shows that the
proposed project is competitive with imports, with an economic rate of return of
14.8 per cent and a net present value of US$26 million.

D. Sustainability
46. The project design is based on the sustainable development of the cooperative

organizations, with support also extended to service providers and local
agro-industry. Measures to promote sustainability include: (i) a special budget
dedicated to increasing the participation of women and youth, enabling the
sustainable development of human capital; (ii) integrating the area’s main
environmental agencies as service providers in order to ensure the sustainable
management of natural resources and the adoption of climate change adaptation
measures; and (iii) involving local financial institutions (especially the Bank for
Credit and Trade) as loan providers to ensure the financial sustainability of the
investment plans.



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

E. Risk identification and mitigation
47. The main identified risks and mitigation measures are described below:

Main risks Mitigation strategy

Changes in Cuba’s current
policy framework could lead to
changes in relative prices.

The project will strengthen the productive, organizational and
entrepreneurial capacities of participating cooperatives, increasing their
adaptive capacities to possible market changes. This will be achieved
through capacity-building and the sustainable provision of equipment and
inputs to increase their productivity and competitiveness.

Climate variability poses a risk
to project activities.

To ensure the sustainable management of natural resources, the
formulation and implementation of CDPs will take into consideration the
environmental context in which cooperatives operate; the Government’s
environmental agencies will be involved in this process.

A lack of understanding of the
project strategy, methodology
and implementation procedures
may have adverse effects on
implementation.

The establishment of a single coordination office with experience from
the PRODECOR project will allow the project to benefit from the lessons
learned in terms of methodology, administration, financial management,
procurement and M&E.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

48. The project is consistent with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025, and aims to
increase rural people’s productive capacities while supporting market participation
and strengthening the environmental sustainability and climate resilience of their
activities. The project is also compliant with IFAD’s policies on: (i) targeting, by
applying geographical targeting (by province, municipality and cooperative),
self-targeting (through participatory development plans) and social targeting
(focused on women and youth); (ii) gender, through its strategy aimed at closing
the gender gap and increasing women’s participation in cooperatives;
(iii) environmental and natural resource management, by supporting
climate-resilient production and the sustainable management of land and water
resources; and (iv) rural finance, by providing access to rural financial services.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
49. The proposed project is aligned with the Government’s agricultural sector reform

agenda, as outlined in the Economic and Social Policy Guidelines. This includes:
(i) fostering the autonomy and productivity of cooperatives; (ii) supporting free
competition by facilitating producers’ direct access to inputs, equipment and
markets; (iii) reducing the amount of unproductive land and increasing agricultural
yields in an environmentally sustainable manner; and (iv) ensuring that banking
services are available to the agro-industry sector. In addition, the project is aligned
with Cuba’s Intended Nationally Determined Contribution to the United Nations
Framework Convention on Climate Change since it includes climate change
adaptation activities and mitigation measures (e.g. renewable energy sources).

50. IFAD has engaged with development partners such as the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), WFP, Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO), the United Nations Industrial Development Organization
(UNIDO) and the European Union to ensure that the project is aligned with their
activities in the country. The project’s integrated approach, which considers value
chains and long-term environmental sustainability, is based on lessons learned
from two projects on environmental investments in milk production managed by
UNDP and financed by the European Union and the Swiss Agency for Development
and Cooperation.

Innovations and scaling upC.
51. The main innovations that the project will introduce are: (i) the establishment of

"service cooperatives" providing support to other cooperatives (e.g. hay and
ensilage services, and equipment maintenance); (ii) 10 reference farms for
observing and disseminating new technologies (four of which will develop



EB 2016/LOT/P.16/Rev.1

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

innovative environmental practices such as automatic meteorological systems,
solar-powered electric fences and biodigesters); and (iii) the establishment of
10 hectare of silvo-pastoral areas for each cooperative. Other innovations will be
demand driven, emerging from cooperatives’ development plans. These innovations
will be disseminated through knowledge-sharing activities.

52. If the project successfully meets its objectives, it could be scaled up to other
municipalities in Camagüey province and the neighboring provinces of Ciego de
Ávila and Las Tunas – potentially doubling the number of beneficiaries.

Policy engagementD.
53. Policy dialogue will be driven by the national project steering committee, which will

include representatives of the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Foreign Trade
and Foreign Investment, the Ministry of Food Industry, the Ministry of Science,
Technology and Environment, the Ministry of Economy and Planning, the National
Institute of Water Resources, the National Statistics and Information Office, the
Central Bank of Cuba and the Bank for Credit and Trade, with IFAD and AFD as
observers. This dialogue will cover: (i) lessons learned from project innovations and
their potential for scale-up; (ii) the results of efforts to increase the participation of
women and youth in the livestock sector; (iii) progress in establishing a financing
mechanism with the Bank for Credit and Trade; and (iv) any risks related to the
Cuban economy’s gradual liberalization and changes in relative prices, along with
mitigation strategies.

54. M&E and knowledge management activities during project implementation will
assist both the Government and IFAD in making better use of the policies for the
cooperative sector as detailed in the Economic and Social Policy Guidelines.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
55. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Cuba and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

56. The Republic of Cuba is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

57. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
58. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Cuba in an amount equivalent to ten million nine hundred
thousand euros (10,900,000) (equivalent to US$11.9 million), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Ecuador for the Project to Strengthen Rural
Actors in the Popular and Solidary Economy
(FAREPS)

Republic of Ecuador
Project to Strengthen Rural Actors in the Popular and
Solidary Economy (FAREPS)



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

iv

Republic of Ecuador

Project to Strengthen Rural Actors in the Popular and
Solidary Economy (FAREPS)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Republic of Ecuador

Executing agency: National Institute for Popular and Solidary Economy
(IEPS)

Total cost of the project: US$35.97 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 14.25 million (equivalent to approximately
US$15.90 million)

Amount of IFAD’s Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
(ASAP) grant:

SDR 2.85 million (equivalent to approximately
US$4.00 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum equal
to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of the borrower/recipient: US$12.00 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$4.07 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation on the proposed
financing to the Republic of Ecuador for the Project to Strengthen Rural Actors in
the Popular and Solidary Economy (FAREPS), as contained in paragraph 41.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Ecuador for
the Project to Strengthen Rural Actors in the Popular and
Solidary Economy (FAREPS)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Ecuador, with GDP in 2013 of US$94,470 million, is currently classified as a middle-

income country. The economy is largely dependent on oil and export agriculture.
Following years of political and economic instability, a stable government was
democratically elected in 2009 and has since implemented a programme of far-
reaching change in the political, economic and social spheres. In 2013, GDP grew
4.6 per cent. In view of the current decline in the price of oil and mining products,
the projected rate of growth for 2015 is somewhat lower at 3.8 per cent, though
still above the regional average.

2. In recent years Ecuador has made significant strides in combating poverty.
Between 2009 and 2012, poverty fell from 36.0 per cent to 25.5 per cent, one of
the most notable achievements in the region. The Gini coefficient improved from
0.55 to 0.484 over the same period. Despite the recent progress on social
indicators, the poverty gap persists, particularly in rural areas where poverty runs
at 42 per cent, close to double the urban rate. The campesino population generally,
and particularly Afro-Ecuadorans, indigenous people and women, occupy the
poorest quintiles. In addition, 1.6 million Ecuadorans live in extreme poverty, 70
per cent of them in rural areas.

3. In view of the foregoing, eradicating extreme poverty and reducing the incidence of
poverty is one of the major objectives of the Government of Ecuador. A key
strategy for promoting social and economic inclusion has been to strengthen the so-
called popular and solidary economy (PSE), which seeks to promote economic
development on an associative and solidary basis.

4. The concept of PSE arises from the need to recognize the value of the informal or
popular economy, and the economy formed by association-based or solidary
economic organizations, and their contribution to GDP. Indeed, the popular and
solidary economy is the largest employer in the Ecuadoran labour force. Sales by
microenterprises represent an estimated 25.7 per cent of GDP, 10 per cent of total
net income and 90 per cent of the country’s production units, and generate
approximately 60 per cent of total employment.

5. Formalizing the informal economy within Ecuador’s new regulatory and
administrative frameworks is one way of promoting more equitable and democratic
economic relations, as well as greater inclusion of people living in conditions of
poverty and vulnerability. The prevailing legal framework requires economic
organizations to adopt best practices in management, such as regularizing
employees, democratizing decision-making processes and distributing any
dividends in an equitable manner. These best practices make the PSE attractive to
people living in poverty, who may decide either to join an existing organization or
set up a new one.



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and with
the RB-COSOP

6. In 2014, Ecuador approved the National Strategy for Equality and Poverty
Eradication (ENIEP), which calls for mainstreaming poverty reduction into the
overall initiative for change in the production matrix. In the case of the rural sector,
the strategy promotes a shift from providing support for campesino production to
adopting a more complex value chain-based approach. In this way the project is
fully aligned with the Government of Ecuador’s priorities and strategies for
economic and social inclusion, thus contributing to rural poverty eradication.

7. In addition, the project is completely consistent with the strategic objectives set
forth in IFAD’s new results-based country strategic opportunities programme (RB-
COSOP) for Ecuador, as follows: (a) improve access to assets and resources to
support diversification of the Ecuadorian rural economy, promoting, among other
measures, associative enterprises and investments that generate employment and
income for poor rural families in Ecuador; and (b) Increase the capacities of poor
rural producers and potential entrepreneurs to engage in, and benefit from, pro-
poor and inclusive productive policies.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. The project will take place in the south-eastern part of Ecuador, in the Costa, Sierra

Sur and Amazonia regions. In the Costa r1egion, the project will cover the
provinces of Guayas and Los Ríos; in Sierra Sur the province of Azuay; and in
Amazonia the provinces of Morona Santiago and Zamora Chinchipe, which borders
on Peru. The population of Morona Santiago is largely indigenous (48.4 per cent),
while in the provinces located in Costa, more than half the population identify as
Montubio, a regional ethnic group.

9. The project will focus on areas with high levels of unmet basic needs (UBN) and a
high incidence of vulnerability. In a context of UBN-based poverty calculated on the
order of 60.1 per cent countrywide in 2010, the cantons where the project will be
implemented post indexes that are higher than both the national and the provincial
averages. The highest levels are found in Amazonia, where UBN-based poverty is
95.9 per cent. The population in these cantons is young, with an average age of
under 29.

10. The project will work with organizations and association-based enterprises that are
already registered with the Superintendency of Popular and Solidary Economy
(SPSE), or with other public institutions such as the Ministry of Agriculture,
Livestock, Aquaculture and Fisheries and the Ministry of Economic and Social
Inclusion (MIES). New associations may also be legalized. The project beneficiaries
will be smallholder farmer and rural worker families living in poverty as measured
by UBN and/or vulnerability but no longer receiving the human development bond,
who have both the interest and potential to undertake and manage business plans
on the terms outlined in the PSE framework. Two specific target groups have also
been identified: women and their families, and young people. At least 30 per cent
of the beneficiary families are to be headed by women (about 6,000 families), and
10 per cent by young people (about 2,000 families).

11. Within this framework, those wishing to become project beneficiaries will need to
belong to or join a legalized PSE organization, or set up a new organization and
legalize it – IEPS will assist the latter in the legalization process within the EPS
system. The project is expected to cover at least 200 organizations in this way.

B. Project development objective
12. The development objective of the project is to increase incomes and employment

among PSE rural families living in conditions of poverty and vulnerability within the



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

project area. Upon completion of the project, approximately 20,000 rural families
living in conditions of poverty and vulnerability – in social, economic and climate
change terms – are expected to have received benefits, with at least 80 per cent of
them having seen a sustainable increase in income derived from agricultural and
non-agricultural activities promoted by the project.

C. Components/outcomes
13. The project is structured in three interrelated components:

(a) Capacity-building (initial and preinvestment phase). The aim is to lower the
barriers limiting the development of organizations and association-based
enterprises and to strengthen PSE actors to develop and manage them
sustainably. The component is intended to: (i) build the capacities of the
target groups in fundamental PSE areas; and (ii) promote dialogue among
PSE actors and between these and local and national institutions. This
component will also contribute to improving public policies promoting the PSE,
to facilitate access by PSE actors to resources, services, and public and
private markets.

(b) Enterprise development and commercial exchange (investment phase).
To support the target groups in developing profitable and sustainable
initiatives, the component calls for two types of direct investment:
(i) investment in solidary business plans; support will be provided for
organizations included in implementation of the first component with
comprehensive strengthening plans (CSPs) prepared on a participatory basis
and being applied by their members. On this basis the project may make
investments in the form of nonreimbursable transfers to cofinance specific
aspects or all of a solidary business plan (SBP), in accordance with the criteria
stipulated in the project operating manual. The SBP will cover goods or
services for which the territorial area offers strengths and internal or external
markets; and (ii) funds for conditional incentives; PSE organizations will be
offered incentives to achieve two kinds of specific objectives: economic
integration and decent employment. In the first case, incentives will ensure
that a larger number of farmers are able to place their products on the market
and have access to transportation, collection or technical assistance services;
and that small association-based enterprises are able to join an existing entity
or create a new one. In the second case, incentives will be linked to an
increase in decent jobs for people living in conditions of poverty or
vulnerability: young people, handicapped people, the indigent, women,
indigenous people, Afro-Ecuadorans and Montubios. These incentives are
reserved for organizations that are already consolidated and have access to
stable markets, with installed capacity that is sufficient and timely.

(c) Knowledge management, management and administration (investment
phase). Covers essentially promotion of a participatory planning, monitoring
and evaluation system for the target population, as well as knowledge
management and project administration. This component also includes
strengthening other PSE actors, including IEPS and local service providers, in
key areas for PSE development, including participatory monitoring and
evaluation (M&E) and management of the knowledge generated.

14. The project also includes activities to be implemented with ASAP funding to
complement the overall project strategy. Organizations will be trained to be better
adapted to climate change, and specific activities will be identified, proposed and
financed to improve the resilience of the beneficiaries and investments funded. A
specialized service provider will provide training. As part of the CSP preparation
process, information will be included on climate risks and proposed mitigation
measures, as well as specific adaptation measures to be included in SBPs. The



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

ASAP funding will cover implementation of such specific adaptation measures in the
context of the SBP.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
15. The project strategy is intended to create and consolidate the capacities of

association-based enterprises that are to form the economic fabric of the PSE at the
territorial level. To this end, three main avenues of action will be established,
following the operating structure of IEPS: (i) strengthening of actors; (ii) productive
development and market exchange; and (iii) M&E, including participatory
monitoring and knowledge management. The project will develop and apply
differentiated local strategies in a concerted and participatory manner with local
actors, involving a process of ongoing dialogue with the main PSE actors, local
offices of government institutions, decentralized autonomous governments and, in
the case of indigenous peoples, traditional authorities.

B. Organizational framework
16. IEPS will be responsible for implementing the project. IEPS headquarters is located

in Quito and it is present in the project area in the Zone 5 Directorate, covering the
provinces of Los Rios and Guayas, the Zone 6 Directorate covering the provinces of
Azuay and Morona Santiago, and the Zone 7 Directorate, covering the province of
Zamora Chinchipe.

17. The project will have a general contractor hired by IEPS in accordance with
prevailing legislation in the country by means of a selection process acceptable to
IFAD. The general coordinator will report to the IEPS Director General and will be
responsible for project administration and day-to-day operations, in accordance
with the zone directorates of the provinces where activities are located. Financial
administration will be done in coordination with the financial administration
department of IEPS. The general coordinator will be supported by the professional,
technical and administrative staff needed for proper implementation.

18. The project’s financial administration will be the responsibility of a team to be hired
by IEPS, reporting to the financial administration department of IEPS. Project
management at the provincial level will be done by technical teams reporting to the
zone directorates for the provinces of Guayas and Los Ríos, Azuay and Morona
Santiago, and Zamora Chinchipe, in close coordination with the general coordinator.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

19. The project will apply a planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
system in accordance with national and IEPS directives and IFAD guidelines. This
system will be an integral part of project management and a management tool
generating updated relevant information on project results, with an emphasis on
results measurement – outputs, outcomes and impact – and will facilitate the
development of learning platforms, exchanges of experiences, best practices and
dissemination of results.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. The IEPS financial administration department will be responsible for overall financial

management of the project, including the annual operating plan, flow of funds,
disbursements, internal controls, accounting, financial reporting and auditing. The
project will used the national financial management information system (e-SIGEF),
together with an additional specific system meeting IFAD requirements.

21. Flow of funds. The borrower will open an account at the Central Bank of Ecuador
designated exclusively for the loan proceeds, and another account designated
exclusively for the ASAP grant. Both will be denominated in United States dollars.



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

22. Audit. The consolidated annual financial statements will be audited each year by an
independent auditor in accordance with IFAD guidelines on project audits. All
project accounts will be audited, including those relating to IFAD funds and those
relating to national counterpart funding. The audit reports will be delivered to IFAD
six months before the end of each fiscal year.

23. Procurement and contracting. Procurement and contracting will take place in
accordance with the National Public Contracting System Organic Law and
Regulations, to the extent they are compatible with IFAD’s guidelines on the
procurement of goods, works and services.

E. Supervision
24. IFAD will supervise the project directly. Support will be provided from the outset of

design to prepare adequately for start-up. IFAD and the borrower/recipient will
jointly conduct a midterm review at the end of year three.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
25. The total project cost will be approximately US$35.97 million, including

contingencies. The first component will cost US$4.27 million (equivalent to 11.9 per
cent), whereas the second component calls for an allocation of US$26.43 million,
representing 73.5 per cent of total investment. The third component will involve
spending of US$5.27 million (14.7 per cent).
Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries

Borrower/
recipient

counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Capacity-
building 2 913 68.3 840 19.7 - - 512 12.0 4 265 11.9
2. Enterprise
development and
commercial
exchange 12 213 46.2 3 160 12.0 4 073 15.4 6 988 26.4 26 434 73.,5
3. Knowledge,
management and
administration 774 14.7 - - - - 4 500 85.3 5 274 14.7

Total 15 900 44.2 4 000 11.1 4 073 11.3 12 000 33.4 35 973 100.0

B. Project financing
26. The combined project financing totals approximately US$35.97 million. The

borrower/recipient will contribute US$12 million (33.4 per cent), the IFAD loan will
provide US$15.90 million (44.2 per cent), the ASAP grant will provide US$4 million
(11.1 per cent), and the beneficiaries will contribute US$4.07 million
(11.3 per cent) in cash or in kind.



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/recipient

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

A. Training 2 913 83.0 312 8.9 - - 283 8.1 3 508
B. Consulting 2 445 72.4 528 15.6 - - 405 12.0 3 379
C. Grants 10 256 42.1 3 159 13.0 4 073 16.7 6 878 28.2 24 367
D. Goods,
services and
inputs - - - - - - 127 100.0 127
E. Vehicles 285 88.0 - - - - 39 12.0 324
F. Salaries - - - - 4 267 100.0 4 267

Total 15 900 44.2 4 000 11.1 4 073 11.3 12 000 33.4 35 973

C. Summary of benefit and economic analysis
27. The project is expected to directly benefit approximately 20,000 rural families. Most

of the beneficiary households are expected to engage in agricultural production with
value added, and the remaining households to other kinds of production or
provision of other services. Most of the subprojects will be cofinanced with
contributions in cash or in kind by beneficiaries.

28. The activities financed will generate income of between US$400 and US$1,000 per
annum by family, depending on the type of activity, level of specialization and
allocation of productive assets.

D. Sustainability
29. The design of simple but efficient and effective SBPs that show motivating results in

the short term will ensure the economic sustainability of initiatives. The
sustainability of the cultural changes to be introduced with the project, in terms of
valuing and assimilating association-based and business-oriented concepts and
practices, will essentially depend on the actual benefits accrued by PSE families.
Accordingly, awareness-raising and capacity-building are essential; at the same
time, opening up spaces for participation and leadership by young people will be
key to the sustainability of initiatives. Finally, environmental risk analysis from the
design of initiatives will reinforce the environmental sustainability of association-
based projects, introducing specific technologies and practices to attenuate the
effects of climate change.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
30. The risks associated with project implementation relate mainly to management

issues. Among possible mitigation measures are: (i) development of a
communication plan to facilitate effective coordination and linkages among the
various actors involved in project implementation; (ii) conduct of a market analysis
and participatory design of business plans to assess the market feasibility of each
enterprise prior to making the investments; (iii) ongoing monitoring of service
providers based on process indicators, to mitigate the risk of low local supply of
sufficiently qualified service providers; (iv) finally, to mitigate the effects of climate
change, adaptation and risk management technologies will be introduced and
support will be provided for, inter alia, crop diversification.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
31. The project proposal falls under the overarching objective of IFAD’s Strategic

Framework 2011-2015 and contributes to achieving the strategic objectives relating
to improving access to services contributing to poverty reduction, as well as



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

developing economic and natural assets to improve the resilience of disadvantaged
rural people. In addition, the project approach and implementation strategies are
aligned with the rural poor targeting policy, the gender equality and women’s
empowerment policy, the policy on IFAD’s engagement with indigenous peoples,
including the requirement of free, prior and informed consent, the policy on natural
resources and environmental management, the climate change, social,
environmental and climate evaluation procedures, and the policies on rural finance,
knowledge management and innovation.

B. Harmonization and alignment
32. The project falls squarely within the priorities of the Government of Ecuador as

stated in the National Plan on Living Well 2013-2017 (national development plan),
and contributes to the strategy of economic and social inclusion under the approach
of changing the MIES and IEPS production matrix to eradicate rural poverty by
developing the popular and solidary economy. It is also consistent with the second
component of the ENIEP, whose pillars are agrarian revolution for food sovereignty,
promoting dignified work and strengthening the popular and solidary economy. The
project will also directly address the strategic objectives of the RB-COSOP 2014-
2018.

C. Innovation and scaling up
33. The project will allow for replicating the PSE approach, which has had very good

results under the Central Corridor Ecuador Project (PDCC) implemented by IEPS
with IFAD funding and closed in 2014. Given the positive impact of PDCC, IEPS
requested IFAD support to prepare this new operation to continue supporting PSE
actors by scaling up to a new intervention area and including new approaches and
tools based on lessons learned.

34. Moreover, this proposal includes innovative measures to promote the economic
inclusion of vulnerable people. Among these will be scaling up association-based
enterprises with conditional incentives, to be used to cofinance the operating capital
of consolidated solidary enterprises. In this way the project will enable particularly
promising solidary enterprises to grow in size.

35. Finally, knowledge management will include activities to collect, share and
capitalize on knowledge accumulated during project implementation, in order to
disseminate best practices and practical knowledge available in the project areas.

D. Policy engagement
36. The compilation of experiences and lessons learned, and exchanges on them among

the actors responsible for the PSE and their partners, will contribute to improving
IEPS workings, and will also serve as practical information on the use and
functionality of PSE public policies, and contribute to reform as needed. In addition,
the project will provide training to build the capacities of these actors and the
leaders of beneficiary organizations in applying PSE instruments.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
37. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Ecuador and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. The negotiated financing agreement is attached in appendix I.

38. The Republic of Ecuador is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

39. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.



EB 2015/LOT/P.18

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

VII. Recommendation
40. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Ecuador in an amount equivalent to fourteen million, two hundred
fifty thousand euros (EUR 14,250,000, (equivalent to approximately
US$15.90 million) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an ASAP grant to the
Republic of Ecuador in an amount equivalent to two million eight hundred fifty
special drawing rights (SDR 2,850,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





















































President's report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Ecuador for the Catalysing Inclusive Value
Chain Partnerships Project (DINAMINGA)

Republic of Ecuador

Catalysing Inclusive Value Chain Partnerships Project
(DINAMINGA)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Ecuador

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Aquaculture
and Fisheries

Total project cost: US$35.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$25.7 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$0.3 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of six years, with an interest rate per annum
equivalent to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference
interest rate

Contribution of the borrower: US$5.6 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.6 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Ecuador for the Catalysing Inclusive Value Chain
Partnerships Project (DINAMINGA), as contained in paragraph 59.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Ecuador for
the Catalysing Inclusive Value Chain Partnerships Project
(DINAMINGA)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Republic of Ecuador is classified as an upper middle-income country. In 2015

the country posted GDP growth of 4.1 per cent, with inflation and external debt of
4.0 per cent and 20.4 per cent, respectively. With sustained growth over the past
decade has come an expansion in the public sector, broad-based reforms and social
programmes, and upgraded infrastructure, particularly roads. This modernization
process has been funded largely with oil revenues. However, the gradual decline in
oil prices since 2014, difficulty accessing new sources of financing and dollar
appreciation have affected the general government budget, which was cut by
2.2 per cent of GDP in 2016.

2. The economic deceleration and contraction in domestic demand contributed to
pushing up poverty from 22.5 per cent to 23.3 per cent between 2014 and 2015,
resulting in a rise in rural poverty from 35.3 per cent to 39.3 per cent. Despite the
progress made on inequality, poverty and expanding access to services, the gaps
between urban and rural and vulnerable people – indigenous, Montubian and
Afro-Ecuadorean people – are even more marked. In addition, the current
macro-economic situation places this progress in jeopardy. Many of the families
who have risen above the poverty threshold are in a vulnerable situation that could
easily revert to absolute poverty.

3. In this context, one of this administration’s priority objectives is to make a shift in
production patterns by promoting the value chain approach and adding value to
commodities in order to boost exports.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. The project originated in the realization by the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock,
Aquaculture and Fisheries (MAGAP) that providing production support is not
sufficient to enable smallholder farmers to overcome poverty. What is needed is to
identify promising subsectors and act along the entire value chain to distribute
returns more fairly. To contribute to sustainable rural development it is crucial to
seek institutional partnerships with the private sector, in order to match supply to
demand and enable smallholder producers to benefit from market opportunities and
raise their incomes. The project’s collaboration with the Ministry of Industry and
Productivity (MIPRO) is a response to these needs, and the partnership with IFAD is
taking place in the context of major government policies.

5. The project is aligned with the strategic objectives of the country strategic
opportunities programme (COSOP), which are as follows: (i) to improve access to
assets and resources to support the diversification of Ecuador's rural economy by
promoting, inter alia, associational initiatives and investments that generate
employment and income for poor rural families in Ecuador; and (ii) build the



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

capacities of poor rural producers and potential entrepreneurs to enable them to
participate in and benefit from the formulation of inclusive, pro-poor production
policies.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. The selected area includes 65 cantons in the provinces of Orellana, Napo

(Amazonia), Imbabura (Sierra Norte), Cotopaxi, Chimborazo, Bolívar and
Tungurahua (Sierra Centro), Guayas, Los Ríos, Manabí and Esmeraldas (Costa), the
latter two seriously affected by the earthquake earlier in 2016.

7. The selection criteria included the incidence of poverty in terms of unmet basic
needs and consumption; the presence of vulnerable groups; production volumes in
the selected subsectors; and the existence of smallholder producers organizations
(SPOs) in the value chains considered, with access to collection and/or processing
infrastructure.

8. The project target group comprises approximately 20,000 rural smallholder
producer families deriving most of their family incomes directly from one of the
selected subsectors – fine flavour or flavour cacao, blackberries and golden
berries – and are living near the poverty line.

9. The smallholder producers considered include people of mixed race (Montubians
from the Coastal area), and indigenous and Afro-Ecuadorean people. The social
targeting criteria are intended to promote the inclusion of smallholder producer
families and limit resource capture by non-needy families, and to adapt the project
to regional characteristics.

B. Project development objective
10. The goal of the Catalysing Inclusive Value Chain Partnerships Project (DINAMINGA)

is to improve the living conditions of smallholder families in strategic sectors. The
development objective is to improve the incomes of smallholder families producing
cacao, blackberries and golden berries within the project area.

11. The aim is to generate an increase in the margins derived from value addition and
redistribute income within the priority value chains so that profits reach smallholder
producers.

C. Components/outcomes
12. Component 1: Promoting partnerships1 by smallholder producers with the

agribusiness sector and markets. The objective is to forge win-win partnerships
between smallholder producers and agro-industrial enterprises, to enhance the
impact and sustainability of business initiatives supported within the selected value
chains. The expected outcome is better market access for the targeted smallholder
producers. Activities include: promoting commercial partnerships among value
chain actors; promoting trade in the selected subsectors; building competencies
and capacities for partnerships; and promoting access to financial products and
services.

13. Component 2: Building sustainable production, associational and
entrepreneurial capacities of smallholder producers. The objective is to
improve the capacities of targeted smallholder producers to boost productivity,
enhance quality, generate value added, and improve management and governance
of their production organizations or family enterprises. This component will
cofinance the execution of gap-closing plans. Activities include: promoting

1 Minga (mink'a or minga in quechua) means collective work done for the community; minca derives from
the quechua minccacuni, "to ask for help while promising something"). It refers to a pre-Columbian tradition of voluntary
community or collective work for a common (social) or reciprocal purpose. In Ecuador the term "minga" has been used
in the term “Gran Minga del Cacao nacional”, part of the MAGAP National Programme.



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

agricultural and post-harvest good practices; building entrepreneurial, associational
and gender equality capacities; and generating capacities to access financial
services.

14. Component 3: Knowledge development, management and administration.
This component consists of a planning, M&E, knowledge management, and
management and administration systems.

III. Project execution
A. Approach
15. Ecuador’s export agriculture sector, which provides 25 per cent of total

employment, plays a dominant role in the economy and contributed 36 per cent of
GDP in 2015, but continues to be a two-tier system. On one hand is a dynamic and
industrialized sector of medium-sized and large enterprises engaging in intensive
monocropping of banana, flowers and African palm. On the other, holding potential
for improvement – in cacao, coffee and fruit – is a sector composed of smallholder
producers who are the country’s poorest and do not as yet participate in value
chains with strong demand from domestic and international markets.

16. The fine flavour cacao and non-traditional Andean fruit (blackberry and golden
berry) value chains were selected on the basis of rising broad-based demand on
domestic and global markets, high potential for improvement, producers living in
conditions of poverty and vulnerability, and areas with high poverty rates.

17. IFAD will contribute significant value added under this project on the basis of past
experience in the cacao sector through public-private-producer partnerships (4Ps)
with local governments and cacao processors; previous projects in Ecuador; and
agro-enterprise operating models. The analysis done by IFAD shows the need for
flexibility and adaptability to different contexts. Moreover, three cases in the cacao
sector – in the Dominican Republic, Indonesia and Sao Tome and
Principe – have shown that an immediately operational and market-oriented private
sector allows for greater efficiency in projects.

18. The selected value chains feature similar constraints on allowing producers to
garner a larger share of the benefits. These are both endogenous – relating to
production, productivity, quality, traceability, certification and lack of business
capacity – and exogenous – a high level of intermediation, lack of recognition for
weight and quality of the products, and volatile prices. This creates an obstacle to
achieving stable quality in the supply of raw or processed materials, and to building
trust between members, and between members and buyers.

19. The project has been designed around the structure of the selected value chains,
both associational and individual, to address all bottlenecks identified within
them: at the production stage for Andean fruit, and in processing and marketing,
the main links in the chain, in the case of cacao. The strategic orientation set out by
MAGAP and MIPRO calls for linking producers’ associations to business demand both
on the domestic market and for export, including niche markets such as the organic
and fair trade segments. The strategy follows the 4P model, which consists of
building partnerships between the public sector, the private sector and smallholder
producers, represented by their leaders, with intermediation and facilitation by the
public sector, represented by the executing agencies MAGAP and MIPRO. To reflect
Ecuador's diverse realities, the model has been adapted to different
modalities. Through these, the aim is to facilitate and support the matching of
supply and demand so that supply responds to the requirements of demand, better
prices are obtained in recognition of quality and the level of intermediation is
lowered.

20. The greatest possible number of targeted beneficiaries will be reached by adopting
differentiated approaches. The project calls for: (i) an economies of scale approach



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

by supporting selected SPOs in providing timely marketing and other services to
member and non-member providers; (ii) a family business approach in the form of
support for individual smallholder producers to enable them, through their leaders,
to participate in partnerships with enterprises; (iii) a women in development and
youth approach to ensure that opportunities to access project resources and
services are available equally to women and men involved in the cacao, blackberry
and golden berry production chains, by setting gender and age quotas for
beneficiaries and introducing affirmative action measures; and (iv) a vulnerable
population approach by including indigenous and Afro-Ecuadorean people among
the targeted producers.

21. The operating strategy contemplates two kinds of complementary support: support
for off-farm activities managed by organizations with at least one collection centre,
in the form of subsidies (nonreimbursable transfers) conditional upon the fulfilment
of terms agreed under the 4P partnership; and direct on-farm support for individual
smallholder producers, considering their family businesses as rural
microenterprises. The objective is for activities by organizations and farms to
conform to conditions demanded by the market and for producers to gain greater
capacities, empower themselves and strengthen their links with organizations and
agribusinesses.

B. Organizational framework
22. The executing agency is MAGAP, through a project executing unit (PEU) within the

organizational structure of MAGAP that will provide administration, coordination,
supervision, support and M&E, together with MIPRO and pursuant to a specific
agreement.

23. Project implementation will be outsourced to an operator. MAGAP will be
responsible for relations with the National Planning and Development Secretariat
(SENPLADES), the Ministry of Finance and IFAD in connection with budget
allocation, withdrawal requests and reports on the project’s technical and financial
progress.

C. Planning, M&E, and learning and knowledge management
24. The project will perform planning, M&E, and learning and knowledge management

(PMELKM) functions in accordance with national and MAGAP provisions on PMELKM
and IFAD guidelines contained in the Project M&E Manual and General Conditions
for Financing. A conceptual and methodological document will be prepared outlining
the main orientations of PMELKM, highlighting the respective responsibilities of
MAGAP, MIPRO and the operator, the schedule of activities and the expected
outcomes.

25. The main approach guiding the planning and M&E functions is the managing for
development results (MfDR) approach, which calls for obtaining observable and
verifiable change for the target group. MfDR falls within the MAGAP’s governing for
results (GfR) initiative whereby MAGAP generates information on previously
established indicators. MfDR will be applied in project execution and in planning and
M&E by adopting the following principles: effectiveness in achieving objectives;
quality in serving people’s needs; transparency and accountability;
complementarity with other public agencies; citizen participation; learning
promotion; and continuity through institutional strengthening.

26. This methodology is supported by an automated tool to systematize and monitor
results. SENPLADES engages in medium- and long-term M&E in connection with the
quantifiable targets set in the National Development Plan. The coordinating
ministries monitor short-term commitments through the Managing for Governance
System (SIGOB).

27. The planning and M&E system will conform to the requirements of the M&E
subsystems of GfR, the Public Administration Secretariat, SIGOB, the Ministry of



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Production, Employment and Competitiveness and the Integrated Financial
Management System (SIGEF) of the Ministry of Finance.

28. An impact assessment plan has been agreed upon with the Government of Ecuador.
The quasi-experimental methodology will allow for a comparison of results by
producers and SPOs benefiting from the project (treatment group) with similar
producers and organizations that have not received any benefits (control group).
The intention is to measure the project’s causal impact on indicators of interest,
such as household income, production and sales, and other variables.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
29. Financial management. Financial management will take place through the PEU

financial unit which, in coordination with the MAGAP Financial Administration
Coordination Office, will be responsible for proper administration of the resources.
The main responsibilities of the PEU financial unit will be as follows: (i) ensure that
the project has adequate liquidity and prepare withdrawal requests; (ii) review the
Plan of Action (POA) and prepare the annual procurement plan; (iii) make the
necessary arrangements for yearly budget allocations; (iv) manage disbursements
to the operator; (v) review the operator’s financial statements and relevant
documentation and monitor the operator’s financial management; (vi) prepare
annual financial statements and deliver them to IFAD; (vii) contract the audit firm
and deliver the annual audit report to IFAD; and (viii) ensure fulfilment of the
fiduciary conditions of the financial agreement.

30. Operationally, the project will be implemented by an operator selected by MAGAP
under a competitive and transparent process based on national public contracting
regulations and in accordance with IFAD guidelines on project procurement. IFAD
will evaluate the proposed operator’s financial management before the contracting
process is finalized. The findings of the financial management evaluation will be one
of the criteria considered by IFAD in issuing its non objection to contracting the
operator.

31. Based on the country’s rating of 32 on the Transparency International Corruption
Perceptions Index, as well as IFAD’s experience in the country, the project fiduciary
risk is considered moderate. The financial management arrangements provided for
this project, together with close implementation support by IFAD, are considered
sufficient to mitigate this fiduciary risk.

32. Flow of funds. The borrower will open and maintain two designated accounts in
United States dollars exclusively for advance deposit of the loan and grant
proceeds, respectively.

33. Audit. The project will prepare annual consolidated financial statements in
accordance with the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS). The
consolidated financial statements will be audited annually by an independent
private auditor in accordance with IFAD Project audit guidlines and international
auditing standards. All of the project accounts will be audited, including all financing
sources. The auditor’s terms of reference will include a detailed review of the
financial transactions carried out by th eoperator and all relevant documentation.
The audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within the first six months following the
end of the fiscal year under review.

34. Procurement. Procurement will take place in accordance with the Organic Law on
the National Public Procurement System and regulations, provided they are
compatible with IFADs’ procurement guidelines.

E. Supervision
35. IFAD will provide support for project implementation in the manner deemed most

advisable by the parties, seeking to improve effectiveness and ensure that the
objectives and desired outcomes are achieved. In addition, IFAD, in coordination



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

with MAGAP and MIPRO, will supervise the project directly, in accordance with the
Policy on Supervision and Implementation Support.

36. The implementation support and supervision plan will seek to contribute to reaching
the targets set and will monitor compliance with the commitments, provisions and
standards set forth in the financing agreement and operating manual. Support will
be provided from the time of formulation, taking advantage of the various
phases – review, negotiation, approval – for proper preparation of start-up. Among
other activities, plans call for providing support as follows: start-up workshop,
annual supervisión (two per year at the initial stage), midterm review and closing
workshop, and ongoing activities in support of execution. The plan will initially focus
on ensuring operating capacity for project management; preparing annual
workplans and procurement plans; and consolidate financial management
arrangements.

IV. Costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
37. The total cost of the project has been estimated at US$35.2 million, covering two

operating components and a project management component: (i) promoting
smallholder partnerships with agribusiness and markets, US$8.3 million
(24 per cent); (ii) building sustainable production, associational and entrepreneurial
capacities among smallholders, US$20.6 million (59 per cent); and (iii) knowledge
development, management and administration, US$6.3 million (18 per cent). Costs
have been calculated at current prices, taking into account the selected area.
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Borrower/

counterpart Beneficiaries Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Promoting smallholder
partnerships with
agribusiness and markets 7 024 27 - - 1 144 20 100 3 8 268 24
2. Building sustainable
production, associational
and entrepreneurial
capacities among
smallholders 14 860 58 - - 2 226 39 3 503 97 20 588 59
3. Knowledge development,
management and
administration 3 776 15 250 100 2 274 40 - - 6 300 18

Total 25 660 73 250 1 5 644 16 3 603 10 35 157 100

B. Project financing
38. The project will be financed by: the IFAD loan for US$25.7 million (73 per cent of

total project cost; the IFAD grant for US$0.3 million (1 per cent); a contribution by
the Government for US$5.6 million (16 per cent); and cash contributions by
beneficiaries for US$3.6 million (10 per cent). Detailed allocations by source of
financing and category of expenditure are shown in table 2.



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 2
Project costs by category of expenditure and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Borrower/

counterpart Beneficiaries Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Works 636 2 - - 103 2 71 2 810 2
2. Equipment, materials
and vehicles 499 2 - - 81 1 37 1 582 2
3. Consulting and training 8 682 34 250 100 1 261 22 1 398 39 3 761 11
4. Grants and subsidies 12 853 50 - - 2 092 37 2 097 58 17 042 48
5. Salaries and operating
costs 2 992 12 - - 2 106 37 - - 5 098 14

Total 25 660 73 250 1 5 644 16 3 603 10 35 157 100

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
39. In the farm models, the financial internal rate of return (FIRR) is higher than the

discount rate and the financial net present value (FNPV), at an average of
US$3,000, demonstrates the project's financial feasibility to a 10-year horizon.

40. Strengthening the associations and improving their production capacities is
expected to generate the following benefits: an increase in household assets of
19 per cent over the baseline, and an average increase in incomes of
21 per cent. This gives an idea of the prospects for the associations' sustainability,
improved access to value chains and better negotiating power with buyers.

41. The cost estimate done for economic feasibility took into account adjustments for
transfers to direct beneficiaries, strengthening of organizations, investments in
upgrading infrastructure and equipment; adjustments to price contingencies;
adjustments to value-added taxes to reflect transfer payments; adjustments to
economic prices for inputs, tradable goods and the social discount rate.

42. The results obtained show that the project is economically feasible, with an
economic IRR of 28.50 per cent; economic NPV of incremental net return of
US$23.9 million and a cost-benefit ratio of 1.77.

43. The project’s sensitivity analysis and economic feasibility indicators show that it is
more sensitive to a price reduction where with a fall of 10 per cent the EIRR falls to
12.18 per cent and a reduction in returns where a fall of 14 per cent causes a fall in
EIRR to 12.51 per cent. In addition, with a reduction in returns of
20 per cent the EIRR is 22.94 per cent and a cost increase of 20 per cent leads to
an EIRR 22.94 per cent. In terms of delays, the project can withstand two years
and still maintain positive returns above the discount rate.

D. Sustainability
44. The project will promote a match between supply and demand of quality products,

and will make use of existing financial services available in the marketplace, adapt
them to potential demand and enable the two parties to negotiate the services they
need and the prerequisites for accessing such services, with support and mediation
from the Government in its capacity as intermediary. This matching of supply and
demand will serve as the basis for the partnerships and will contribute to their long-
term sustainability, even after the project's conclusion.

45. Success in terms of the scope of goal and objectives, sustainability and replicability,
lies in strengthening the actors involved and their partnerships: SPOs and both
female and male members, both formal and comercial; enterprises; and
institutions. This institutional strengthening and consolidation of capacities for
analysis, training, marketing and formulation of proposals will be achieved with
training and advisory assistance, and with the same participation and shared



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

responsibility of the target groups and their involvement in the project M&E
process.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
46. The project’s socio-environmental classification is B in accordance with IFAD's

Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures. The project will not
finance activities covered by category A of IFAD’s environmental policy. All of the
risks and adverse environmental and social impacts are avoidable.

47. The climate vulnerability classification is moderate. The project is in line with the
National Climate Change Plan 2015-2018, which prioritizes agricultura, water
management, ecosystems, energy and capacity-building in environmental risk
management.

48. The main risks identified with a medium or high probability of occurring are given
below.

Risk Probability Mitigation strategy
No timely fiscal allocation and no
adequate countryl counterpart
contribution

Medium  MAGAP, MIPRO and IFA will exert all their influence to
ensure that the required amount is allocated in a timely
manner.
 Minimum country counterpart is set in view of the current
macroeconomic context and budget us in Ecuador

Demand for financing from collection
centres is limited given difficulties
meeting the requirements of financial
institutions

Medium Training and technical assistance (component 3) will support
organizations and overcome barriers in financial idiom,
procedures and consultations to meet requirements

Financial institutions are not interested
in financing producers’ organizations

Medium Training and assistance to financial institutions should
underscore promotion of the three agroindustrial value
chains and report on l inkages and opportunities for serving
this market niche

Liquidity in the financial sector
continues to fall to levels that do not
allow for earmarking resources to
these segments

High More emphasis will need to be given to international banks,
especially in the case of the export of products.

Unforeseen losses as a result of
market instability, sudden contraction
in demand, unusual drops in global
prices and the lack of a mechanism to
differentiate prices in the International
Coffee Organization and global
commodity exchanges, as well as
extreme climate events.

High The project promotes moving producers closer to
compensation mechanisms that can cover, albeit in part,
unforeseen losses for any of the reasons indicated
(emergency fund, insurance)

Main environmental risks: use of
agrochemicals, loss of genetic
biodiversity of cacao, improper
management of solid and liquid waste

Medium Financing investments at the collection level will be
conditional on developing an environmental profile, in
accordance with national environmental regulations, and
compliance by business plans with the sustainable
environmental management principles set forth in the
Operating Manual, the Guide on Coffee Growing Best
Practices, and the Cacao Post-harvest Best Practices
Manual (MAGAP)

Cadmium content in Ecuadorean
cacao not permitted in the European
and U.S. markets

Medium Field tests to identify the main causes, pilot interventions and
generalization of practices that limit the fixing of cadmium in
cacao

Main climate risks: reduced availability
of water during dry months (Sierra);
lower yields and plant production
capacity (Sierra); higher likelihood of
floods and landslides (Costa and
Amazonía);2 increase and distribution
of pests and their vectors

Medium Funded infrastructure should take the minimum
considerations of environmental safeguards and include a
localization analysis. Construction of infrastructure will
include the principles of labour security, risk analysis
(seismic risks), and will take place outside areas of flooding,
landslides or geological faults

2 Flooding and landslides are among the primary four threats to the country in the provinces of the Coast region, and to a
lesser extent in the Sierra and Amazon regions.



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
49. The project complies with the main IFAD policies on targeting rural poor people,

gender equality and women’s empowerment, implementation in relation to
indigenous peoples, natural resources management and environment, and strategy
on climate change.

B. Harmonization and alignment
50. The project is fully aligned with the priority government policy to effect a shift in

production patters, as set forth in the National Plan for Good Living 2013-2017, and
with three of the main government policies: the National Strategy for Equality and
Poverty Eradication (ENIEP, SENPLADES, 2014); Ecuadorean Agricultural Policy and
Sustainable Territorial Rural Development 2015-2025 (MAGAP, 2016). In addition,
the project will directly address the COSOP strategic objectives based on the results
for 2014-2018.

51. Linkages were developed with other donors through their initiatives in support of
the private sector (Multilateral Investment Fund of the Inter-American Development
Bank, the Development Bank of Latin America) during implementation of the
project to improve private investment.

52. Also, within the framework of collaboration among the Rome-based agencies, the
project will be supported by FAO in developing and implementing the nutrition pilot
in the cantons prioritized for their higher incidence of malnutrition and integrated
disease and pest management.

C. Innovation and scaling up
53. The innovation by the project is to put forward the 4P model, adapted to the

diverse realities of Ecuador, as the central thrust of the approach, and seeks to
replicate successful partnership models.

54. Knowledge management will include activities to collect, share and capitalize on
knowledge accumulated during project execution, with the goal of disseminating
best practices and practical knowledge available in the project territories.

D. Policy engagement
55. The compilation of experiences and learnings, and exchanges between actors

responsable for MAGAP and MIPRO and their members, will contribute to improving
their operations, and will serve as practical information on the use and functionality
of public policies, helping with reform as needed. The project will build the
capacities of these actors and the leaders of beneficiary organizations.

VI. Legal instruments and powers
56. A financing agreement between the Republic of Ecuador and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in appendix I.

57. The Republic of Ecuador is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

58. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.



EB 2016/119/R.27/Rev.1

10

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

VII. Recomendation
59. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Ecuador in the amount of twenty-five million six hundred and sixty
thousand United States dollars (US$25,660,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Ecuador in the amount of two hundred and fifty thousand United States
dollars (US$250,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
United Mexican States for the
Rural Productive Inclusion Project


United Mexican States

Rural Productive Inclusion Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: United Mexican States

Executing agency: Ministry of Social Development (SEDESOL)

Total project cost: US$19.5 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 5.87 million
(equivalent to approximately US$6.6 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: US$0.5 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary terms: Maturity period of 15 years, including agrace period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum
equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of borrower: US$11.4 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.1 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the United Mexican States for the Rural Productive Inclusion Project, as
contained in paragraph 52.

Proposed loan and grant to the United Mexican States for
the Rural Productive Inclusion Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Mexico is a country with a surface area of 1.96 million km2. The National Council on

Population estimated a total population of 121 million people in 2015 (112.3 million
according to the 2010 census), posting average demographic growth of 1.4 per
cent per annum. Rural people account for 23.1 per cent of the total population.

2. The Mexican economy is the second largest in Latin America and fourteenth in the
world. Mexico is a middle-to-high-income country at US$9,740 per capita. Although
total GDP grew at an annual average rate of 2.5 per cent from 1994 to 2013, this
was insufficient to improve living conditions for the population. Two key constraints
on economic performance are stagnant productivity and unequal income
distribution. Productivity over the past 30 years has declined at a rate of 0.7 per
cent per annum, while the Gini coefficient was 0.509 in 2010.

3. Within the agriculture sector, a highly heterogeneous productive structure prevails.
Family farms – subsistence farming with no market linkages and located mainly in
the central and southern regions of the country – represent 51 per cent of all rural
production units. Labour productivity in Mexican agriculture is notoriously low, at
just 26 per cent of the national average. Another critical problem in sector
performance is lack of access by rural smallholders to financing.

4. In recent decades the Government of Mexico has deployed significant efforts to
combat poverty, involving a broad range of public programmes with steadily
increasing budgetary allocations. The 2015 federal budget includes a package of
financing equivalent to US$22 billion for the Special Concurrent Programme for
Sustainable Rural Development.

5. Despite the scale of this institutional and financial effort, broad portions of the
population continue to live in poverty. In 2012 the National Council on Policy
Evaluation produced data indicating that 53.3 million people were living in
situations of poverty, 31 per cent of them in rural areas. Accordingly, the
administration that took office on 1 December 2012 designed a new social policy
that explicitly seeks to create synergy between income support (mainly conditional
cash transfers) and productive development programmes. Combining these
instruments was assigned as a mandate to Prospera, the social inclusion
programme created at the end of 2014, based on earlier experiences of the
Oportunidades and Progresa programmes. This new social policy seeks to give
families benefiting from income support the opportunity to develop their own
productive initiatives in order to autonomously and sustainably generate income
that enables them to improve their living conditions.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

6. In this context, the Government is looking for ways to implement the new social
policy and is thus simultaneously testing different approaches to productive
inclusion. The present Rural Productive Inclusion Project (RPIP) should be seen as a
pilot in that regard, as should the Productive Territories Pilot Programme (PPTP).
IFAD provided support to the PPTP for design and initial implementation, in the
form of a grant to the Government for technical cooperation from the Latin
American Centre for Rural Development. The PPTP is now in operation and will
provide valuable lessons for implementation of the proposed project.

7. The RPIP is aligned with the National Development Plan 2013-2018, and especially
the Special Program to Democratize Productivity and the Social Development Sector
Program, which shape the context in which a new generation of social policy has
been designed. High priority is now given to the strategy of productive inclusion,
whereby the Ministry of Social Development (SEDESOL) and Prospera have
undertaken a number of actions such as design of the RPIP.

8. The project is fully aligned with IFAD’s country strategy, which sets forth two main
objectives: (i) help smallholders and campesinos significantly increase their
productivity by strengthening their assets, capacities, organization and access to
public services and to goods and service markets; and (ii) contribute to making
public spending for the economic development of smallholders and campesinos
more efficient and equitable.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
9. This project will be implemented in 26 municipalities in three federal states:

Guerrero, Hidalgo and Zacatecas. The municipalities have been selected on the
basis of: eligibility for the National Crusade against Hunger; incidence of poverty;
presence of indigenous peoples; a significant number of families served by
Prospera, especially those with land; and the location of strategic population
centres with market potential for carrying out the productive projects of Prospera
families.

10. The target population will comprise Prospera heads of household and their families
that: (i) live in rural areas in the selected states and municipalities; (ii) live in
situations of poverty; (iii) have the potential to engage in income-generating
agricultural and non-agricultural productive activities; and (iv) show interest in
participating in the project. Priority will be given to indigenous populations.

11. The project is expected to reach 12,800 Prospera beneficiary families, of whom
65 per cent are expected to submit applications to access productive projects, with
promotion provided by the project (8,400 families), and 65 per cent of these will
successfully access investments under ongoing productive development
programmes (5,400 families).

B. Project development objective
12. The goal of the project is to contribute to effective implementation of the

Government’s national strategy for productive inclusion and the reduction of rural
poverty.

13. The development objective is that beneficiary families increase their income by
implementing profitable and sustainable productive activities.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

3

C. Components/outcomes
14. The project will seek to achieve its development objective through two

components: productive inclusion and institutional strengthening. In addition,
financial inclusion will be incorporated as a cross-cutting axis.

15. Component 1: Productive inclusion. This component will support Prospera
beneficiaries and their families participating in the project in accessing programmes
for productive development. It will help them use the investments efficiently to
increase the quantity and improve the quality of their products, access markets,
and thus raise their incomes. To this end, the project will strengthen the
organizational, technical and productive skills of the beneficiaries and improve their
capacities to access other government programmes.

16. In coordinating project activities in the communities, project promoters of
productive and financial inclusion (PIPFs) will play a key role, being responsible for
assisting beneficiaries in identifying potential productive activities and facilitating
access to technical assistance in designing projects for financing by the
programmes. PIPFs will also facilitate access to technical assistance for
implementation of beneficiary productive projects, and build capacities in
beneficiary organizations for obtaining additional aspects needed by some groups,
such as additional financing, legal constitution of small enterprises, etc. On the
other hand, technical assistance for the design and implementation of productive
projects will be provided by external technical assistants.

17. Component 2: Institutional strengthening. This component is designed to
strengthen the ability of Prospera to successfully take on a new role as the key
actor implementing the national strategy for productive inclusion. Its current solid
capacities are focused mainly on implementing social programmes and, above all,
on efficiently providing conditional cash transfers to more than six million
beneficiary families. Capacity-building will thus be provided both to implement the
project in the three states selected and to implement the productive inclusion
strategy nationwide.

18. The component will contribute to the development of new institutional skills through
capacity-building and training of Prospera staff in the project area and at
headquarters. In addition, research and analysis will be conducted and proposals
for innovation developed throughout implementation of the national strategy for
productive inclusion, i.e. in planning and design, operation, monitoring and
evaluation (M&E). Finally, organizational learning and discussion of public policies
will be promoted through targeted knowledge management activities.

19. Cross-cutting axis: Financial inclusion. As an integral part of the process of
developing capacity for effective productive inclusion and of facilitating technical
assistance provided to Prospera families, financial inclusion constitutes a cross-
cutting axis with three concrete activities: (i) financial literacy will be promoted
through provision of financial education among beneficiaries. This training will be
provided mainly by existing institutional programmes, and will be complemented by
PIPFs; (ii) the project management unit, with PIPF support, will strive to link
productive projects with the existing supply of rural financial services, including
existing guarantee funds, and will coordinate actions with government programmes
operating in the project area, thereby leveraging additional financing, mainly
working capital, for beneficiary productive activities; and (iii) each year, as part of
the annual project seminar, a forum promoted by Prospera will take place to raise
awareness among other actors in the financial sector. This will facilitate the
effective provision of finance to productive activities of family units within the most
vulnerable segments of the population, thus supporting them in their development
and income generation.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

4

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

20. The project is being formulated in the framework of the new social policies, which
focus on promoting productive activities among beneficiaries. Thus the project
facilitates identification and creation of productive opportunities for people living in
poverty. It does this through access to resources from programmes for productive
development that enable beneficiaries to develop sustainable income-generating
activities, with the objective of structurally breaking the cycle of poverty.

21. Prospera’s mandate seeks to create synergy between the social and productive
policies, including the numerous programmes for productive development. In that
context, it should be stressed that the project will mainly facilitate access to
investments and services – such as productive investments, technical assistance for
implementation, and rural financial services – that are currently being offered by
the other government agencies or private actors.

22. The project will promote links with productive development programmes, based on
lessons learned from other pilot programmes, such as the PPTP. In that regard, it
will benefit from the institutional linkages and attention generated by the PPTP with
several federal productive programmes. It will also take advantage of valuable
lessons learned on the strengthening of producer groups and targeting
mechanisms, among other aspects.

B. Organizational framework
23. Strategic project direction will be provided by the Prospera Technical Subcommittee

on Employment, Income and Savings (STEIA), currently chaired by the Ministry of
Finance and Public Credit (SHCP), with representatives of Prospera’s national
coordination and heads of various productive development programmes. The
executing agency is SEDESOL, through Prospera’s national coordination. To this
end, a technical team will be appointed within the existing Prospera structure,
specifically within the Office of Coordination and Linkages (DGCV), to direct project
implementation in coordination with the various Prospera operating divisions
involved, as well as with state-level branches. This team and its location within
DGCV, with functions to be specified in the project implementation manual, is
strategically important in ensuring project management in accordance with the
objectives and timelines set, as well as close coordination with other productive
inclusion actions operating within Prospera. The Office of General Administration
and Finance (DGAF) will be responsible for the project’s administrative and financial
management within Prospera.

24. The project calls for two types of key actors for technical assistance and capacity-
building: (i) national-level institutions to provide training of national coordination
project staff and technicians supporting Prospera families benefiting from the
project; and (ii) technical assistance and training service providers supporting the
design, processing, start-up and consolidation of productive projects of Prospera
family organizations.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

25. The project will set up a system for planning and M&E that is compatible with
Prospera’s M&E framework. Prospera is known for its strong capacity in this area,
which so far, however, has focused mainly on evaluation of conditional cash
transfers and their impact on the beneficiary group. This project will complement
the current system with a strong focus on M&E of productive inclusion and
institutionalization of these new capacities in Prospera.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

5

26. Prospera has not yet defined a single operating modality for implementation of the
productive inclusion strategy, but is rather testing different methods, such as the
previously mentioned PPTP, to then evaluate which modality is the most efficient
and effective. The present project should also be seen as a pilot providing a
learning opportunity for the institution. The lessons learned from project evaluation
and systematization will be invaluable to the Government in refining the productive
inclusion strategy. Accordingly, knowledge management is a central activity for the
project and, indeed, one of its reasons for being.

27. Ensuring the kind of learning that enables continuing improvement – based on
results and experiences in implementation of the project and other pilots – is
critical. To this end, beginning in year one, a total of three seminars will be held on
public policy and productive inclusion, as well as to share experiences, analyse
project results and promote discussion and dialogue on comprehensive policies for
productive inclusion.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
28. Financial management. The project's financial management, including budgeting,

procurement, flow of funds, disbursements, internal controls, accounting, financial
reporting and audit, will be the responsibility of Prospera’s DGAF, under the
supervision of a federal financial entity, to be nominated by SHCP. Project
execution will be carried out according to Prospera’s operational rules and
procedures and the implementation manual. The project will use Prospera's
accounting software, ensuring compliance with IFAD's financial reporting
requirements.

29. Flow of funds. Loan funds will be disbursed using the reimbursement method of
disbursement, whereas a designated account denominated in euro, and
administered by the designated federal financial entity, will be opened for advance
receipt of grant funds. The financial entity will open and administer a project
account, which will receive both IFAD and counterpart funds.

30. Procurement. Procurement of goods and services will follow national procurement
procedures and regulations to the extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s
procurement guidelines.

31. Audit. Consolidated project financial statements will be audited annually by an
independent auditor in accordance with current procedures and terms agreed by
the Ministry of Public Administration and international financial institutions, to the
extent that they are consistent with IFAD guidelines on project audits. All project
accounts will be audited, including those relating to IFAD funds and those relating
to national counterpart funding. Audit reports will be delivered to IFAD within six
months of the end of each fiscal year.

E. Supervision
32. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD, in accordance with its Policy on

Supervision and Implementation Support. This arrangement will facilitate two
supervision missions per year. Moreover, continuous implementation support and
problem-solving is envisaged, including initial support for the implementation
manual and annual workplan and budget.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
33. Total project costs amount to US$19.5 million, of which component 1: productive

inclusion, costs approximately US$17.2 million, and component 2: institutional
strengthening, costs approximately US$2.3 million.



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

6

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Counterpart
(Prospera) Beneficiaries

Productive
programmes Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount

1. Productive Inclusion 5 516 - - 1 060 10 595 17 171
2. Institutional
strengthening 1 067 500 788 - - 2 355

Total 6 583 500 788 1 060 10 595 19 526

B. Project financing
34. The total cost of the project will be financed by five sources. IFAD is financing

approximately US$7.1 million through its loan and grant, while Prospera is financing
roughly US$0.8 million in counterpart funds. Given that one of the project
objectives is to promote access by the Prospera population to current productive
development programmes, an estimated US$10.6 million will be made available to
beneficiaries under such programmes over and above the IFAD and Prospera
contributions, and a beneficiary contribution is estimated in the amount of
US$1.1 million to cofinance the productive investments.

35. The IFAD loan will be made available to the Government on ordinary terms and will
have a maturity period of 15 years, including a grace period of 3 years, with an
interest rate equal to the reference interest rate determined semi-annually by the
Fund.

36. IFAD financing for this project will also cover taxes, as requested by the
Government, given the impracticability of exempting the project from taxes from a
budgetary, operational and accounting viewpoint – and given that the World Bank
currently applies this practice in the country.

37. Retroactive financing will apply for eligible expenses incurred previous to loan entry
into force but after the date of Executive Board approval, of up to EUR 587,000 for
expense category 2 "Consultancies".

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Counterpart
(Prospera) Beneficiaries

Productive
programmes Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Equipment, material
and communication 138 2 - - - - - - - - 138
2. Consultancies 6 445 98 500 100 788 100 - - - - 7 733
3. Productive
investments - - - - - - 1 060 100 10 595 100 11 655

Total 6 583 500 788 1 060 10 595 19 526

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
38. This section describes the benefits expected from project interventions. The main

indicators of the analysis are as follows: (i) 12,800 Prospera families benefit from
the project in the form of basic advisory assistance on production issues and
information on access to financial services; (ii) about 8,400 families benefiting from
the project prepare and submit some 1,400 projects (averaging six families per
project) to productive development programmes, of which approximately two thirds
(approximately 900 projects) are approved, benefiting some 5,400 families;
(iii) 5,400 families access technical assistance for successful implementation of



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

7

their productive projects, as well as financial education; (iv) 75 per cent of the
productive projects approved are still operating after two years; (v) 400 young
people (Prospera beneficiaries and their children) are trained in project
management and leadership; and (vi) approximately 3,400 Prospera officers and
project operators have strengthened their capacity to implement the national
strategy of productive inclusion.

39. The economic analysis shows that the project represents a profitable investment,
with an economic internal rate of return of 29.5 per cent and a net present value of
US$164.6 million.

D. Sustainability
40. The project design points to the economic and social sustainability of productive

investments of the target group. The project strategy promotes development of
their technical, organizational and administrative skills, which will enhance the
sustainability of their activities.

41. On the institutional level, component 2 has the objective of strengthening
Prospera’s capacity to successfully carry out its mandate to promote the national
agenda for productive inclusion. In that regard, the project seeks to institutionalize
skills for and knowledge of productive inclusion, which will effectively ensure the
sustainability of the institutional approach to the subject.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
42. The main project risks are as follows:

Risk Mitigation strategy

Lack of normative provisions and
agreements with some productive
development programmes to ensure
priority and effective access for
Prospera beneficiaries to these
programmes.

Resistance by operators of productive
development programmes – which
have traditionally not worked with poor
populations – to facilitating access by
the Prospera population to such
programmes.

Through STEIA, which includes SHCP,
Prospera and representatives of these
programmes, an ongoing dialogue will be
maintained to strengthen their
commitment to the Government’s
objective of productive inclusion.

Awareness-raising will be provided for
programme operators in the field to
ensure their inclusion of the Prospera
population.

The isolated conditions of many
localities prevent families from learning
about opportunities to undertake
productive projects and access to
productive development programme
resources.

The project will incorporate promoters of
productive and financial inclusion within
its geographical coverage area to
disseminate information about these
programmes and facilitate liaison of
families with technical service providers.

Beneficiaries do not wish to formalize
new economic activities supported by
the project for fear of losing their
Prospera transfers and having to pay
taxes.

The project will emphasize the provision
of accurate information on the rights and
responsibilities of beneficiaries in two
areas: (i) receipt of conditional cash
transfers; and (ii) tax treatment of their
productive initiatives.

Insufficient quality of technical
assistance services are available in the
project area to support families in
developing and implementing their
productive projects, as well as
insufficient incentives to attract service
providers.

Lessons learned in Mexico and other
countries show the importance of having
technicians that are familiar with, and
ideally live in, the project area. A
preliminary assessment carried out
during project design shows that quality
services are available in the project area,



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

8

having work experience within the area,
and with populations with a similar profile
to that of Prospera.

Project management is hampered by:
(i) delays and/or deficiencies in budget
availability and changes in
programming structure that place
constraints on access by the Prospera
population; and (ii) unsafe conditions in
some parts of the project area.

Project management risks will be
mitigated by ongoing dialogue between
government authorities and IFAD, and
full ownership by Prospera during
execution. The security risk will require
constant monitoring of conditions in the
field.

Degradation of natural resources
caused by the implemented production
projects, particularly sheep breeding.

This risk will be mitigated by the
inclusion of criteria of environmental
impact on the design of productive
projects. In the case of sheep breeding,
mitigation actions will be included, and
compliance with an adequate ratio of
animals per designated grazing area will
be ensured.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

43. The project is aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011–2015 in promoting
an economic asset base that is resilient to market and climate change, and in
improving access to technical assistance services in support of smallholders. The
project is also compliant with IFAD’s policies on: (i) targeting, by applying a
geographical, direct and self-targeting strategy; (ii) gender and age equality,
through the strategy to target women; (iii) rural finance, through greater access by
smallholder farmers to the rural financial services they need to meet their
production requirements; (iv) engagement with indigenous peoples, respecting the
principle of free, prior and informed consent; and (v) environment and natural
resource management, through the promotion of good environmental practices in
production.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
44. This project is intended to contribute to effective implementation of the

Government’s national strategy for productive inclusion and to reducing rural
poverty and food insecurity. The project has been formulated in the framework of
the country’s National Development Plan 2013-2018, more specifically the Special
Program to Democratize Productivity, which coordinates government actions aimed
at carrying out public policies that remove barriers limiting the productive potential
of citizens and enterprises. Moreover, the project area falls within the areas of the
National Crusade against Hunger, which comprise the Government’s priority areas
for poverty reduction.

45. The project will be implemented in close coordination with other initiatives in
Prospera, such as the PTPP, among others.

Innovations and scaling upC.
46. The approach of this project is innovative in that it seeks to bridge the gap between

social transfer programmes and productive development programmes, allowing the
beneficiaries of the first to access the latter and implement sustainable productive
projects. In that way, the project will not directly finance productive investments,
but will facilitate access to already-existing funds in the country.

47. This project is being designed as a pilot project to contribute to the government
strategy for productive inclusion. If proven successful, it can be scaled up in



EB 2015/LOT/P.31/Rev.1

9

accordance with government priorities. As mentioned above, Prospera has not yet
defined a single operating modality for implementation of the productive inclusion
strategy, but is testing different approaches of which this project is one. The idea is
to evaluate the diverse modalities and scale up the option that has proven the most
efficient and effective.

Policy engagementD.
48. Being a pilot, the project will have a strong focus on learning. At strategic points in

time, and at least once per year, during the annual seminar on public policy and
productive inclusion organized by the project, policymakers will be updated on
progress and lessons learned and on concrete, evidence-based policy
recommendations.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
49. A financing agreement between the United Mexican States and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed loan to the borrower. A grant
agreement between the United Mexican States and IFAD will constitute the legal
instrument for extending the proposed IFAD grant to the recipient. Copies of both
negotiated agreements are attached as appendix I.

50. The United Mexican States is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

51. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
52. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the United
Mexican States in an amount equivalent to five million eight hundred and
seventy thousand euros (EUR 5,870,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the United
Mexican States in an amount equivalent to five hundred thousand United
States dollars (US$500,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of Nicaragua for
the Nicaraguan Dry Corridor Rural Family
Sustainable Development Project (NICAVIDA)



Republic of Nicaragua

Nicaraguan Dry Corridor Rural Family Sustainable
Development Project (NICAVIDA)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Nicaragua

Executing agency: Ministry for Family, Community, Cooperative and
Associative Economy (MEFCCA)

Total project cost: US$48.460 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$20.504 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: 40 years, including a grace period
of 10 years, with a service charge of 0.75 per cent per
annum

Cofinancier: Central American Bank for Economic Integration

Amount of cofinancing: US$15 million

Contribution of borrower: US$5.97 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$6.99 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of Nicaragua for the Nicaraguan Dry Corridor Rural Family
Sustainable Development Project (NICAVIDA), as contained in paragraph 33.

Proposed loan to the Republic of Nicaragua for the
Nicaraguan Dry Corridor Rural Family Sustainable
Development Project (NICAVIDA)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Republic of Nicaragua covers an area of 129,494 km² and has a population of

6.17 million people. The country has experienced macroeconomic stability and
sustained economic growth over recent decades. GDP increased between 2010 and
2014 by an average of 4.7 per cent per annum, reaching US$1,904 per capita in
2014. The agricultural sector accounted for 17 per cent of national GDP in 2014,
following a gradual reduction begun in the 1990s. Nonetheless, the sector
generates 31 per cent of employment and 70 per cent of overall exports, signalling
that Nicaragua’s economy remains in transition, with a significant presence in the
productive agricultural sector.

2. The 2014 National Household Living Standards Survey (NHLSS) found 29.6 per cent
of the population to be living below the poverty line and 8.3 per cent in extreme
poverty. These figures reflect a significant improvement on those from the 2009
NHLSS (42.5 per cent and 14.6 per cent, respectively). In rural areas over the
same period, the overall poverty rate decreased from 63.3 per cent to
50.1 per cent of rural population and the number affected by extreme poverty
declined from 26.8 per cent to 16.3 per cent. Despite this significant progress in
poverty reduction, half of the rural population still lives in poverty. Nicaragua is
highly vulnerable to extreme weather events: 25 per cent of the population lives in
locations at risk of hurricanes and tropical storms while 40 per cent is affected by
recurrent drought, with Dry Corridor inhabitants and food production feeling the
greatest effects.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

3. The proposed project is aligned with the IFAD country strategy as articulated in the
results-based country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) (2013-2017).
NICAVIDA is further aligned with current policy priorities and follows the axes of the
national “Dry Corridor Strategic Framework” implemented by the Government in
response to the severe social, productive and environmental conditions affecting
the area. Under that Framework and in support of the Government’s programmatic
approach, the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit will coordinate the investments
of international and development organizations, such as the World Bank, the Inter-
American Development Bank, the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation,
the Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI) and IFAD.

4. As the factors contributing to rural poverty in the Dry Corridor not only persist but
worsen, the incidence of malnutrition in rural areas must be addressed. According
to the National Demographic and Health Survey 2011-2012, 21 per cent of boys
and girls aged less than five years in rural areas exhibit overall chronic
malnutrition. The Dry Corridor has a higher overall incidence (for rural and urban



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

areas combined) of chronic malnutrition (29.5 per cent in Madriz and 27.7 per cent
in Nueva Segovia). Agricultural activities are carried out against a backdrop of
deteriorating micro/sub-basins, depleting water resources and plant cover, and soil
degradation. The situation is further exacerbated by climate change and volatility,
with production projected to decline significantly.

5. NICAVIDA will support the economic diversification and productive transformation
strategies of families in rural areas, developing articulated links between the
diversification of their sources of income, environmental protection, adaptation to
climate change and food and nutrition security. To that end, the project builds on
lessons learned from previous IFAD-financed operations, including the Programme
for the Economic Development of the Dry Region in Nicaragua (PRODESEC), the
Technical Assistance Fund, the Inclusion of Small-scale Producers in Value Chains
and Market Access Project (PROCAVAL), the Agricultural, Fishery and Forestry
Productive Systems Development Programme in RAAN and RAAS Indigenous
Territories and the Adapting to Markets and Climate Change Project (NICADAPTA).
Those operations contributed to the implementation of national public policies and
proved successful in facilitating public investment processes, increased production
and productivity, food production, climate change-adaptation investments and
income generation.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. The NICAVIDA project area covers 58 municipios in the Dry Corridor. As per

agreement with the Government, initial project phases will prioritize the 37
municipios with the highest rates of poverty and at greatest risk of food and
nutrition insecurity and climate vulnerability. Natural ecosystems in the Dry
Corridor are undergoing severe degradation, with 52 per cent of soils overused and
40 per cent strongly or severely eroded. Falling production has led to food
insecurity and a decline in household incomes in rural parts of the area.

7. The target population of NICAVIDA comprises poor rural people and indigenous
peoples, with or without land, with a particular focus on women and young people.
The project will directly benefit 30,000 families, approximately 152,000 people,
characterized by the diversity of the activities in which they engage, combining
strategies for agricultural production with labour market integration. Rural
households living in the 37 priority municipios in 2015 were estimated to total
122,000, 11.2 per cent of which identified as indigenous.

B. Project development objective
8. The overall objective of NICAVIDA is to contribute to the attainment of national

targets to improve the living standards of rural families and indigenous peoples in
the Dry Corridor. The development objective is to support poor rural families in the
project area, including indigenous peoples, in boosting their incomes, enhancing the
nutritional content of their diets and strengthening their capacities to adapt to
climate change. Beneficiary incomes will be increased through the productive and
economic diversification of their activities, while their resilience to climate change
will be enhanced by the sustainable management of natural resources.

C. Components/outcomes
9. NICAVADA will be organized around the following three components:

 Component 1. Capacity-building and planning. This component will put in
place the conditions to allow families and their organizations, taking into
account their resources and climatic, economic and social context, to map their
own paths towards development that will allow them to improve their incomes,
strengthen their food and nutrition security, and enhance their resilience and
capacities to adapt to climate change.



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

This component will address two strategic themes: (i) the food and nutrition
security of families, ensuring access to nutritious food and an adequate diet;
and (ii) natural resource management and adaptation to climate change,
strengthening capacities to manage natural resources sustainably,
incorporating climate change-adaptation practices and adopting strategies to
reduce vulnerability to production- and climate-related risks. This component
will achieve: (i) project targeting, both geographically and towards families,
indigenous peoples and communities, prioritizing women and young people;
(ii) adaptation to the territorial, socioeconomic and environmental context of
the Dry Corridor; (iii) the provision of training to build families’ capacities to
manage economic and social strategies; and (iv) capacity-building to increase
employment, business and productive opportunities.

The implementation of this component will be based on participatory
assessments used to develop family plans and business plans to promote
productive diversification and agricultural and non-agricultural income-
generating activities. Moreover, territorial plans will be developed, based on the
demands of families, organizations and institutions, to meet needs in terms of
productive infrastructure, the stewardship and management of natural
resources, access to water, road improvement and management of
microbasins.

 Component 2. Family, territorial and business investments. This
component includes the activities and resources for the implementation of the
family, business and territorial plans. Once approved by the project
management unit (PMU) within the Ministry for Family, Community,
Cooperative and Associative Economy (MEFCCA) pursuant to the relevant
approval mechanism detailed in the project implementation manual (PIM),
these plans will be financed under this component with funds allocated under
the Project’s Family, Territorial and Business Investment Fund (FTE). The PMU
will manage the FTE directly, in accordance with the standards and procedures
defined in the PIM.

The FTE will be able to finance: (i) territorial plans targeting investments in
public goods and services that will create conditions conducive to improving the
living standards of families in rural areas and of indigenous peoples; (ii) family
plans, seeking to improve how families use and manage their resources (land,
manpower, cash), agricultural and non-agricultural activities, and food and
nutrition security, and to boost income and quality of life; (iii) business plans,
aiming to promote the link between family income strategies, environmental
protection and adaptation to climate change. Such plans may include
productive agricultural activities, value-addition, access-to-market and small
business development activities, as well as commercial, service and
microenterprise activities.

 Component 3. Project management. This component seeks to ensure
effective and efficient project implementation and to build capacity for the
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of project activities, results and impact. A
timely, efficient and effective implementation system will be established within
MEFCCA at the central and district levels, with attention to inter-institutional
coordination. With regard to planning, monitoring and evaluation (PM&E), it is
hoped that IFAD-financed MEFCCA projects will have a single M&E system. This
component includes project management and administration, which comes
under MEFCCA’s institutional responsibilities, and shall be in coordination with
other IFAD-financed projects.



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

10. Project activities follow an approach that places central importance on families and
on the territory of the project area. In this context, through the family, territorial and
business plans, it is hoped that the following will be achieved: (i) at the family level,
families are able to make adequate use of their resources (land, manpower, cash)
and pursue their own development strategies, improving food and nutrition security
and building resilience to climate change; (ii) at the territorial and indigenous
community levels, investments in public goods and services create an environment
conducive to improving the living standards of rural families and indigenous peoples,
including behavioural changes that enhance natural resource management, resilience
to climate change and inhabitants’ nutrition; and (iii) in the context of business plans,
families and their organizations embark on a process of rural transformation, linking
income generation and diversification with environmental protection and food and
nutrition security, and strengthening their resilience to climate change.

B. Organizational framework
11. MEFCCA will be responsible for project implementation. A PMU will be established

under the MEFCCA Project Division to coordinate and manage the project. In
coordination with IFAD operations already under way, a number of specialized units
will be set up to deal with financial management, procurement, PM&E and
knowledge management and will service all projects in IFAD’s portfolio. District-
level MEFCCA offices will play a key operational role and will be responsible for the
activities in their respective districts. The project will involve measures and
activities requiring the active participation of specialized entities – such as the
Ministry for the Environment and Natural Resources (MARENA), the Nicaraguan
Institute of Agricultural Technology (INTA) and the Nicaraguan Institute of
Territorial Studies (INETER), among others – with which specific agreements will be
established.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

12. NICAVIDA will implement a PM&E and knowledge management system based on
lessons learned from previous IFAD operations in the country. The project will
establish an M&E system, with short-term reporting (institutional, administrative
and first-level Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) reports), medium-
term reporting (national and sectorial statistics and second-level RIMS reports) and
long-term reporting (National Human Development Plan indicators and third-level
RIMS reports). Knowledge management will ensure the use of information and the
incorporation of lessons learned on key issues such as fiduciary aspects, business
plan implementation, climate change adaptation and food and nutrition security.
The project will complement and support the NICADAPTA efforts to establish a
MEFCCA PM&E system. A baseline study will be carried out immediately following
the adoption of the financing agreement by the IFAD Executive Board and prior to
project launch.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
13. Financial management. MEFCCA will be charged with the financial management

of all project resources, in particular flow of funds, disbursements, internal controls,
accounting, financial reporting and audit. A specialized financial management unit
will be established within MEFCCA for all projects financed or cofinanced by IFAD.

14. Flow of funds. IFAD will open and deposit the loan principal in an account in
United States dollars in the name of the borrower. To receive the loan funds, the
borrower shall open and maintain in the Central Bank of Nicaragua an account
designated in United States dollars, under the control of the General Treasury of
the Republic, in which advance funds shall be deposited and from which funds will



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

be transferred to the operational account(s) of the project in MEFCCA. The latter
accounts will be opened by the borrower on terms acceptable to the Fund.

15. Retroactive financing. Expenses incurred prior to the date of entry into force of
the financing agreement will be considered eligible up to a total amount of
US$250,000, in accordance with and as specified in the financing agreement.

16. Procurement. Project procurement of goods and services will be carried out in
accordance with IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines and in accordance with the
provisions of the loan agreement. The specialized procurement unit will plan and
execute procurement processes. Any procurement required under the plans
developed by beneficiary families and organizations will be completed in compliance
with private commercial practices, in accordance with the procedures set out in the
PIM and the MEFCCA “Technical and Financial Administrative Rules”, and shall be
compatible with IFAD Guidelines. Any procurement to be carried out under the
territorial plans through agreements or contracts with public or private institutions
shall be governed by the applicable laws and must comply with IFAD guidelines.

17. Audit. The annual accounts and financial statements of the project will be
independently audited, pursuant to the terms of reference and in accordance with
International Standards on Audit and the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits. Within
a period not longer than three (3) months from the effective date of project launch,
MEFCCA will engage an independent, external private company acceptable to IFAD
to audit the project. The annual report shall be submitted to IFAD within the six
months following the close of the fiscal year.

18. Governance and control. Principles of good governance, transparency and
participation will be agreed by all relevant parties, primarily MEFCCA and the
groups, organizations, communities and institutions involved in the project. These
agreements and procedures will be reflected in the PIM.

E. Supervision
19. IFAD will directly supervise the project and carry out implementation support

missions. As far as possible, such missions will be conducted in combination with
the supervision of other projects of the IFAD-financed portfolio in the country. The
first project supervision mission will take place approximately six months from the
entry into force of the project financing agreement. That mission will evaluate
progress against the timeline established in the implementation plan, and verify
progress on fiduciary aspects, expenditures, counterpart contributions and
compliance with the terms of the loan agreement. The second mission will take
place six months after the first.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
20. The total cost of NICAVIDA over the six-year implementation period will be

US$48.46 million, comprising US$45.54 million in baseline costs (94 per cent of the
total cost) and US$2.92 million for physical and price contingencies (6 per cent of
total cost). Components 1 and 2 account for 93 per cent of base costs of the
project, with the majority of these funds going directly to beneficiaries and their
organizations. Project management (component 3) accounts for 8 per cent of base
costs.



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Government of
Nicaragua IFAD loan CABEI Beneficiaries Total

amountComponents Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Capacity-building
and planning 1 731 15.9 5 811 53.4 3 330 30.6 - - 10 873
2. Family, territorial
and business
investments 2 985 8.9 11 873 35.4 11 670 34.8 6 984 20.8 33 512
3. Project
management 1 258 30.9 2 819 69.1 - - - - 4 078
Total project costs 5 974 12.3 20 504 42.3 15 000 31.0 6 984 14.4 48 463

B. Project financing
21. NICAVIDA will be financed by: (i) the Government of Nicaragua, with a contribution

of US$5.9 million; (ii) IFAD, through a loan of US$20.5 million; (iii) CABEI, with a
loan of US$15.0 million; and (iv) the project beneficiaries, with US$6.9 million.
IFAD will finance 39 per cent of the investments, with IFAD’s highest allocation by
expenditure category corresponding to FTE (US$11.35 million, equivalent to 55 per
cent of IFAD financing).
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Government of
Nicaragua IFAD loan CABEI Beneficiaries Total

Expenditure category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

I. Investments
A. Vehicles 70 15.0 395 85.0 - - - - 465 1.0
B. Equipment 60 15.0 342 85.0 - - - - 403 0.8
C. Training 752 15.0 2 961 59.1 1 301 25.9 - - 5 015 10.3
D. Consultations 696 15.0 1 916 41.3 2 029 43.7 - - 4 641 9.6
E. Grants (FTE) 2 811 8.6 11 351 34.6 11 670 35.6 6 984 21.3 32 816 67.7

Total investments 4 389 10.1 16 966 39.1 15 000 34.6 6 984 16.1 43 340 89.4
II. Recurrent costs

A. Salaries 1 402 35.9 2 499 64.1 - - - - 3 901 8.0
B. Operating costs 183 15.0 1 039 85.0 - - - - 1 222 2.5

Total recurrent costs 1 585 30.9 3 538 69.1 - - - - 5 123 10.6
Total project costs 5 974 12.3 20 504 42.3 15 000 31.0 6 984 14.4 48 463 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
22. NICAVIDA will benefit 30,000 families in rural areas (approximately 152,100

people). It is estimated that: (a) 13,450 families will receive support to improve
their nutrition and food security, acquire non-agricultural income-generating
activities and improve their working conditions; (b) 14,500 families will receive a
combination of support in the areas of food security and agricultural production and
diversification, agricultural and non-agricultural income generation, and business
plans; (c) 2,050 families will receive a combination of the support above and will
develop productive processes and agricultural diversification through business plans
incorporating technology and cash crops. The economic internal rate of return is
22.7 per cent and the net present value is US$20.8 million.

D. Sustainability
23. The sustainability of the project will be ensured by: (i) its integration with the

Government's policy for fighting rural poverty and the strengthening and expansion
of that policy, and its response to the conditions affecting the Dry Corridor; (ii) its



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

coherence and alignment with the Dry Corridor Strategic Framework; and (iii) its
approach seeking to ensure the sustainability of families in terms of food and
nutrition security, income, climate change adaptation and natural resource
management.

24. The sustainability of food security, enhanced nutrition and increased production will
be ensured by the central importance given to rural families as the focus of
NICAVIDA activities and interventions, and by the resources allocated to food
security and nutrition. At the same time, NICAVIDA also supports income-
generating activities for families through small businesses, value addition and
access to better employment opportunities through training. The project has a solid
strategic direction and dedicates resources to climate change adaptation and
climate variability-risk reduction. The integration of these measures with productive
agricultural activities will promote their sustainability.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
25. The approach and activities proposed under NICAVIDA aim to reduce risks relating

to food security, nutrition and climate change. The territorial investments and those
in farms aim to promote the sustainable management of natural resources, in
particular soil and water. The planned productive activities take into account
limitations reflecting the availability of tested technologies and the environmental
fragility of the land, and include measures for continuous monitoring and analysis
so timely preventative measures can be taken to mitigate such risks. Interventions
to improve access to water resources for human consumption and irrigation will be
accompanied by measures to improve the replenishment and protection of water
sources and analysis to ensure that improving access to water for irrigation does
not compete with its use for human consumption. In the present context,
institutional and political risks are limited. Risks relating to the efficiency of
management and administration, institutional coordination and agreements with
specialized institutions will be minimized by the application of measures drawn from
IFAD’s long experience implementing projects with MEFCCA and the Government.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

26. The approach, objectives and implementation modalities of NICAVIDA are
consistent with IFAD policies and strategies. The project pursues the objectives of
the COSOP 2013-2017 and is aligned with IFAD’s core policies: (i) the IFAD policy
on targeting, applying direct targeting mechanisms based on analyses of poverty,
food and nutrition insecurity and climate change risk, geographic targeting so as to
include indigenous peoples, and self-targeting within these groups and
communities; (ii) the IFAD policy on gender and youth, replicating and scaling up
lessons from previous projects applied directly to the beneficiaries;( iii) the IFAD
Policy on the Environment and Natural Resource Management, as well as the
Strategy on Climate Change, which includes the objective of maximizing the impact
of IFAD investments in rural poverty in the context of climate change and volatility;
iv) the policies on food and nutrition security, around which the project’s strategies
are built; and (v) the IFAD Policy on Engagement with Indigenous Peoples, applying
the principal of free, prior and informed consent, and with local territorial and
community authorities, recognizing the distinctive cultural identities of the
populations located in the project areas. The project is also fully aligned with IFAD
strategies devoting particular attention to building social capital, guiding
agricultural and non-agricultural productive activities and promoting market-
oriented small business.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
27. The project is aligned with: the National Human Development Plan; the Dry

Corridor Strategic Framework, which is the Government's instrument for addressing
development challenges in the dry zone; and the Government’s main rural
development and poverty-reduction initiatives and policies, such as asset-transfer



EB 2016/LOT/P.7/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and -recovery mechanisms, systems for the provision of technical assistance and
training. Designed in close consultation with the Ministry of Finance and Public
Credit and other relevant institutions, NICAVIDA will support the process of
transforming the productive capacities of families in rural areas, thereby
contributing to the achievement of Government policy objectives promoting the
links between the diversification of agricultural and non-agricultural income,
environmental protection, family nutrition and income generation for poor rural
people looking for an opportunity to get out of poverty.

Innovations and scaling upC.
28. The project is in line with the joint Government-IFAD strategy aiming to establish a

rural development model that ensures food security, improves nutrition, supports
families in adapting to climate change and promotes sustainable income-generating
activities. The project contributes to the building of a robust joint approach in the
Dry Corridor, with close collaboration between the Government, MEFCCA, other
institutions — such as the MARENA, INTA and INETER — and IFAD, under the policy
guidance of the Ministries of Finance and Public Credit and of Foreign Affairs. The
model aims to build, by replicating and scaling up experience gained in previous
projects, a broad rural development framework of policies, programmes and
projects that the Government and IFAD plan to replicate and expand.

Policy engagementD.
29. NICAVIDA builds on the success of previous projects, in particular PRODESEC,

PROCAVAL and NICADAPTA, and is aligned with Government and IFAD policies. The
planned implementation methodology and instruments comply with IFAD
guidelines. The proposal is aligned with and supported by the Government in its use
of MEFCCA’s decentralization system and a system for partial asset transfers in the
form of incentives, as well as provisions for the recovery of transferred resources
and policies on the environment and climate change adaptation, inter-institutional
cooperation and improved access to the financial system for beneficiaries and their
organizations. The project is aligned with the policy, institutional and regulatory
framework and with the policies and instruments implemented by the Government
and MEFCCA.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
30. A financing agreement between the Republic of Nicaragua and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower. A copy
of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

31. The Republic of Nicaragua is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

32. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
33. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Nicaragua in an amount equivalent to twenty million
five-hundred and four thousand United States dollars (US$20,504,000), and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Paraguay for the Project for
Improved Family and Indigenous Production
in Departments of Eastern Paraguay

Republic of Paraguay

Project for Improved Family and Indigenous Production
in Departments of Eastern Paraguay

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Paraguay

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock

Total project cost: US$23.83 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 15.80 million (equivalent to approximately
US$17.37 million)

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant:

SDR 3.65 million (equivalent to approximately
US$5.09 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum equal
to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.36 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed loan
and grant to the Republic of Paraguay for the Project for Improved Family and
Indigenous Production in Departments of Eastern Paraguay, as contained in
paragraph 30.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Paraguay for
the Project for Improved Family and Indigenous
Production in Departments of Eastern Paraguay

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country, rural development and poverty context
1. With a GDP per capita in 2013 of US$4,040, Paraguay has achieved an average

annual growth of 4.8 per cent in the past 10 years, albeit with wide variations
linked to climatic influence on the performance of the agriculture and livestock
sectors. Of the total population of 6.8 million people, 23.8 per cent are poor
according to the Continuous Household Survey conducted in 2012. Some 2.7 million
people live in rural areas, of whom 1.4 million are poor or extremely poor. Poor
producers are being displaced from their lands by the advance of export-based
farming, especially of soybeans. About two thirds of Paraguay’s 235,904
smallholder families are poor. Women stand out as particularly disadvantaged: out
of every 100 households in extreme poverty, 34 are headed by women. The
country has an indigenous population of 115,000, and over 90 per cent of these
people live in poverty.

2. The environmental situation is critical and exacerbated by the development model
followed by the country for decades, which is based on the extractive exploitation of
hardwoods coupled with deforestation to support the expansion of the agricultural
frontier on fragile soils and ecosystems. The projections of climate change models
predict higher temperatures and rainfall, which will increase the presence of disease
vectors and reduce the availability of water in the dry months, along with the
productivity of plants and animals.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP)

3. The Project for Improved Family and Indigenous Production in Departments of
Eastern Paraguay (PROMAFI) is aligned with national policies and responds to
IFAD's strategic framework for Paraguay as defined in the 2004 COSOP. It is
complementary to the ongoing Inclusion of Family Farming in Value Chains Project
(Paraguay Inclusivo), which is financed by IFAD and the Government.

4. The project is also consistent with current government policy, which prioritizes the
fight against rural poverty. As a consequence, the Government requested that the
project design reflect the strategic objectives of the current COSOP, to be followed
by the preparation of a results-based COSOP in 2015. The proposed project is
aligned with the poverty reduction and social development pillar of the National
Development Plan and the objectives of the Strategic Agricultural Framework,
2009-2018, which supports the development of family farming, food security and
the substantial reduction of poverty and social exclusion. It also complements the
Government’s "Sowing Opportunities" programme aimed at reducing extreme
poverty. This programme coordinates all ministerial and institutional interventions



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

2

through the Technical Planning Secretariat, and includes the Tekoporã programme,
which offers conditional cash transfers to families in extreme poverty.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project area includes four departments in the northeast of the country. In each

department, priority will be given to districts with high poverty rates.

6. The project focuses on family farmers and indigenous communities. A high level of
participation by women and young people will be achieved through a positive bias
in the financing conditions. Environmental factors will be taken into account, and
specific measures will be introduced to increase producers’ responses to climate
change. The project will work exclusively with families that belong to rural
organizations (ROs), encompassing both existing productive organizations and
incipient committees of family farmers and indigenous communities.

B. Project development objective
7. The project’s purpose is to contribute to the sustainable reduction of poverty among

the vulnerable rural population. Its development objective is to increase incomes
sustainably through strengthened social capital, productivity and adaptation to
climate change. The specific objectives are to: (i) consolidate organizations of small
producers; (ii) facilitate the use of productive assets by ROs to increase their
production and marketing sustainably and in a way that is adapted to climate
change; and (iii) provide ROs with access to appropriate financial services.

C. Components and outcomes
8. The project has four components:

 Component 1: Organizational strengthening. Starting with committees at
a relatively low level of organization, the grass-roots organizations will be
strengthened to enable them to identify and undertake business activities.
The methodology will involve identification of rural representatives chosen by
the organizations’ members from among their membership, who will be
trained to lead the participatory process of strengthening ROs. Participatory
rural appraisals will culminate in plans aimed at increasing the ROs’ capacity
for participation, organization, management and administration, production,
commerce and finance, and for identifying investment opportunities in
business plans. For the indigenous communities, a similar process will result
in the participatory development of indigenous community diagnostics, which
will serve as a foundation for the strengthening process and for investment
planning activities in community development plans.

This component includes services for climate change adaptation, including a
plan to complement the national network of weather stations with 20
additional stations in the project area, a climate information service to be
accessed by text messages, training of technicians, and support for preparing
the sector policy and strategy for climate change adaptation.

 Component 2: Sustainable productive development. This component
provides cash transfers and support services for investments at the level of
ROs through regular business plans, business plans with climate change
adaptation activities, and community development plans for indigenous
communities. The business plans will include productive investments,
technical assistance and activities to strengthen the ROs. The community
development plans will cover productive investments, social investments and
strengthening of indigenous communities. Advisory services will be provided
in order to integrate climate change adaptation activities into business plans,
especially for the production of vegetables and milk. In addition, ROs will



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

3

receive technical support from the project implementation unit to ensure that
the business plans meet market demand for public procurement programmes.

In addition, a production and marketing information service will be
established, delivering text messages and audio recordings provided by
various government units through a strategic partnership with a mobile
network operator.

 Component 3: Rural financial services. This component aims to
strengthen the capacity of ROs to finance their working capital needs through
credit from intermediary financial institutions. To this end, a guarantee trust
will be established to provide guarantee certificates to ROs with approved
business plans.

The project will contribute to the National Financial Inclusion Strategy
promoted by the Central Bank, through training-of-trainers courses in rural
financial education. The course topics will include financial literacy and
consumer protection for borrowers.

 Component 4: Project management. For efficient project management, a
project implementation unit will be established with headquarters in the field,
possibly in the city of San Estanislao. This office will have a project manager
responsible for overall implementation and a technical field coordinator
responsible for managing the field staff and for liaising with the target group
and local authorities in implementing project activities and instruments.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

9. The project will expand, deepen and replicate activities that were successfully
implemented under the Paraguay Rural Project (PPR), in view of high demand. The
participatory methodology applied by that project marked a substantive change in
the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock’s approach to rural development, and has
generated strong social capital through participatory assessments, institutional
strengthening plans and business plans that transfer authority for planning and
implementation to the ROs.

Organizational frameworkB.
10. The executing agency will be the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock through the

National Directorate for Project Coordination and Management (DINCAP), which will
constitute the project implementation unit. DINCAP will be responsible for project
implementation including planning, procurement and accounting. Since most of the
project activities are integrated into plans managed by ROs, supporting ROs in
planning, implementation and accounting for funds will be an important
responsibility of the project implementation unit.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledgeC.
management

11. The planning, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), learning and knowledge
management system is based on experiences and lessons learned from the PPR,
especially in connection with applying participatory processes and assessing the
maturity of ROs and the use of participatory, community-owned dynamic maps as
graphical diagnostic tools for determining the baseline situation of ROs and families.
The system will promote results-based management in order to provide a coherent
framework for strategic planning and project management.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
12. Financial management. The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, through the

project implementation unit, will be responsible for the financial management of all
project resources, including the flow of funds, disbursements, internal controls,



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

4

accounting, financial reporting and audit. The project will implement an accounting
system acceptable to the Fund as a condition of disbursement from the loan and
grant accounts. The mechanism of start-up costs may be used for early project
expenditures, including to set up the accounting system.

13. Flow of funds. The Ministry of Finance will open two designated accounts in United
States dollars at the Central Bank of Paraguay exclusively for the loan and grant. In
addition, operating accounts (project accounts) in local currency will be opened at
the Banco Nacional de Fomento or other banks acceptable to the Fund.

14. Procurement. Procurement of goods, works and services will be carried out by the
project implementation unit on the basis of national standards and in accordance
with IFAD’s procurement guidelines. Procurement in the context of strengthening
plans, business plans and community development plans will be managed by the
ROs in line with the project implementation manual.

15. Audit. The project’s consolidated financial statements will be audited annually by
private independent auditors in accordance with IFAD’s Guidelines on Project
Audits. All project accounts will be audited, including all sources of funding. The
scope of the audit will include visits to the ROs and review of the guarantee fund.
Annual audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months after the end of
each fiscal year.

SupervisionE.
16. IFAD will be in charge of project supervision. The initial supervision tasks include

support for the rapid start-up of PROMAFI and setting up the accounting, planning
and M&E systems.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
17. The total cost for six years of implementation will be US$23.8 million, including

contingencies, of which: US$4.6 million relates to the organizational strengthening
component; US$14.6 million to sustainable productive development; US$1.5 million
to improving rural financial services; and US$3.1 million to project management.
Management costs make up 13 per cent of the project cost. Costs include 3 per
cent for contingencies in respect of local price escalation for vehicles, goods,
services and operating expenses, and 2 per cent for physical contingencies in
respect of vehicles, goods and services.

B. Project financing
18. The project will be financed by IFAD through a loan of approximately

US$17.4 million and an Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP)
grant of US$5.09 million. The beneficiaries will contribute US$1.4 million (in kind).
In line with World Bank and Inter-American Development Bank funding operations
in the country, where applicable, IFAD’s resources will be used to finance taxes.
The financing plans by component and category of expenditure are presented in
tables 1 and 2 below (some of the categories of expenditures may be grouped in
the financing agreement).



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

5

Table 1
Financing plan by component
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan ASAP grant
Beneficiaries

(in kind) Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Organizational
strengthening 3 500 76 1 094 24 - - 4 594 19

2. Sustainable productive
development 9 569 65 3 705 25 1 361 9 14 634 61

3. Rural financial services 1 418 94 98 6 - - 1 515 6
4. Project management 2 888 94 197 6 - - 3 085 13

Total project costs 17 374 73 5 093 21 1 361 6 23 829 100

Table 2
Financing plan by category of expenditure
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan ASAP grant
Beneficiaries

(in kind) Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Vehicles 72 100 - - - - 72 0
2. Goods, services and inputs 2 809 49 1 553 27 1 361 24 5 723 24
3. Grants and subsidies 8 121 77 2 463 23 - - 10 584 44
4. Credit and guarantee funds 3 654 77 1 077 23 - - 4 731 20
5. Administration 2 718 100 - - - - 2 718 11

Total 17 374 73 5 093 21 1 361 6 23 829 100

C. Benefit summary and economic analysis
19. The project will reach approximately 14,000 rural households (around 60,000

people), organized in approximately 303 productive organizations and
33 indigenous communities. It is estimated that 80 per cent of project activities will
generate the expected benefits, which is equivalent to a portfolio of 195 successful
business plans and 26 community development plans.

20. The financial and economic evaluation indicates the viability of the family-based
project-level activities. The economic internal rate of return is 16.5 per cent.

D. Sustainability
21. PROMAFI is sustainable from a variety of perspectives: (i) institutionally, since it

responds to the framework of a specific national policy and an explicit decision by
the Government of Paraguay to replicate and extend the experiences of the PPR
and strengthen beneficiaries’ organizations; (ii) from a productive and market point
of view, given the guaranteed steady demand for food and in light of the policy
support to family farming as a positive prospect for the sustainability of productive
investments and markets; (iii) socially, by facilitating the access of rural poor
people, indigenous communities, women and youth to public goods and services;
(iv) financially, by creating sustainable rural finance services; and
(v) environmentally, by implementing environmental standards and
recommendations based on the rational use and conservation of natural resources.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
22. The risks of failing to achieve the stated objectives are limited both in quantity and

in potential adverse impacts. The main risks are: (i) difficulties in ensuring inclusion
of poor people, indigenous populations or producers, to be minimized by the
territorial targeting of beneficiaries in segments and ongoing evaluation of results;
(ii) slow pace of territorial coverage due to operational and management difficulties,
to be mitigated by the early hiring of technical support teams and provision of
training; (iii) slow rate of project implementation linked to the time required for



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

6

ROs to mature and implement business plans, to be addressed by timely annual
planning to ensure achievement of targets without distorting results; (iv) market
risks, to be addressed by affording special attention to marketing and supporting
linkages with public procurement; and (v) climate risks that may affect volume and
quality of production, to be attenuated by supporting climate-smart technology and
disseminating appropriate farming practices and meteorological information.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

23. The project approach and implementation modalities are fully consistent with IFAD
strategies and policies. Specifically, they support IFAD’s fiduciary compliance and
are aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and the policies on rural
finance, indigenous peoples, climate change, environment and natural resource
management, gender equality and women’s empowerment, and targeting. The
project is also fully compliant with the ASAP objectives.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
24. The project is in line with the Government's plans and the objectives of the

Strategic Agricultural Framework 2009-2018. It is also consistent with the
Government’s policy of financing transfers to communities with a 30 per cent credit
element.

Innovations and scaling upC.
25. PROMAFI is based on a broadening and replication of PPR activities in view of high

demand. The PPR has shown that, when appropriately supported, ROs can improve
their production and marketing, and achieve business continuity. The participatory
methodology that allowed the PPR to generate strong social capital will be improved
and scaled up. Project innovations include: scaling up the group-based credit
guarantee mechanism to a national system of credit guarantees; a mobile phone-
based production and marketing information service, which has the potential to
enhance the provision of extension services; and the creation of a system for
assessing the institutional maturity of productive and indigenous organizations,
which will facilitate the design of suitable capacity-building activities for
organizations.

Policy engagementD.
26. The project capitalizes on the successful experiences of the PPR, and is in line with

government and IFAD policies. It supports the Government’s policy of reducing
conditional cash transfers by including a credit element for financing investments,
and the strategic uptake of information technology for agricultural extension
services. In addition, in collaboration with the Central Bank of Paraguay, the project
backs the country’s financial inclusion policy by supporting rural financial education.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
27. A financing agreement between the Republic of Paraguay and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached herewith as an appendix.

28. The Republic of Paraguay is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD and from the IFAD Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP)
Trust Fund, acting through IFAD in its capacity of Trustee of the ASAP Trust Fund.

29. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



EB 2015/LOT/P.4/Rev.2

7

VII. Recommendation
30. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Paraguay for an amount of fifteen million eight hundred thousand
euros (EUR 15,800,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the
Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) to the Republic of
Paraguay for an amount of three million six hundred and fifty thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 3,650,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


























































President's report

Proposed loan to the Republic of Peru for the
Public Services Improvement for Sustainable
Territorial Development in the Apurímac, Ene
and Mantaro River Basins Project (Sustainable
Territorial Development Project)

Republic of Peru

Public Services Improvement for Sustainable Territorial
Development in the Apurímac, Ene and Mantaro River
Basins Project (Sustainable Territorial Development
Project)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Peru

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation, through the
Agro Rural Programme

Total project cost: US$74.512 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 20.65 million (equivalent to approximately
US$28.5 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: repayment term of 18 years, including a graceperiod of six years, with an annual interest rate
equivalent to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference rate

Contribution of the borrower: US$38.764 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$7.248 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/117/R.13

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation on the proposed
loan to the Republic of Peru for the Public Services Improvement for Sustainable
Territorial Development in the Apurímac, Ene and Mantaro River Basins Project
(Sustainable Territorial Development Project), as contained in paragraph 44.

Proposed loan to the Republic of Peru for the Public
Services Improvement for Sustainable Territorial
Development in the Apurímac, Ene and Mantaro River
Basins Project (Sustainable Territorial Development
Project)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Republic of Peru, with GDP per capita in 2014 of US$6,541, is currently

classified among the middle-income countries. The Peruvian economy has been one
of the best performing in Latin America, and visible progress has been made on
poverty reduction in recent years according to the International Monetary Fund
(IMF). However, Peru faced a challenging external context in 2014, together with
problems in domestic supply and declining public subnational investment –
aggravating the external shocks and leading to a marked deceleration in growth.
Although real GDP growth declined to 2.4 per cent in 2014 compared to 5.8 per
cent the previous year, Peru still posted double the regional average of about 1.2
per cent. Estimates place real GDP growth in 2015 at 3.26 per cent.

2. Peru continued to reduce poverty and extreme poverty levels in 2014, although at
a slower pace than in previous years. According to the National Statistics and
Informatics Institute (, poverty in 2014 stood at an estimated 22.7 per cent, 1.2
percentage points lower than in 2013 – meaning that over a quarter of a million
(289,000) people exited poverty. Overall figures for 2014 show that there were
6,995,000 Peruvians living in poverty. Average monthly income per capita for the
poorest rose by 2.2 per cent, mainly as a result of cash transfers under the Juntos,
Pension 65 and Beca 18 programmes. The incidence of poverty was higher in rural
areas at 46.0 per cent, three times the urban rate. Among the major causes of
rural poverty, the fact that communities are poorly integrated with the market
economy has been identified as one of the greatest obstacles to local development,
particularly in the Sierra region, causing the population to emigrate towards urban
centres.

3. A World Bank study done in 2013 indicates that 4.3 per cent of Peru's surface area
is occupied by agricultural activities. The main crops are coffee, potato, rice,
cotton, asparagus, sugar and maize. A modern and competitive agro-export sector
along the coast coexists with more traditional or subsistence farming in the Sierra
and Selva regions. Primary agriculture accounts for 9 per cent of GDP. Over the
last 12 years, Peruvian agriculture has grown at an average rate of 4.3. An
estimated 2.35 million families – close to 10 million people – depend on
agriculture, most of them concentrated in the Sierra. Agriculture in the Sierra
poses major challenges: low yields; small and fragmented plots with high
transaction costs; fragile soil with drainage, salinity and erosion problems; limited
availability of water; a lack of connectivity and an unpredictable climate.



EB 2016/117/R.13

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

4. The project is based on IFAD's past and current interventions in Peru, is consistent
with the strategic objectives set forth in the country strategic opportunities
programme (COSOP) and takes into account the recommendations of the midterm
review that took place in November 2011. The project complies with both IFAD's
own requirements and those of the National Public Investment System (SNIP), and
contributes to: (i) strengthening territorial planning and citizen management
processes; (ii) promoting strategic partnerships on public-private platforms for
access to markets; (iii) promoting the organization of productive linkages between
rural small enterprises; (iv) providing greater support for financial inclusion
through savings, insurance and financial education; (v) including initiatives that
favour sustainable natural resource management, with actions to mitigate and
prevent the effects of climate change; and (vi) promoting actions to increase water
availability and equal access to water, to help prevent social conflicts within the
territory.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project area covers the area of influence of the Apurímac, Ene and Mantaro

River Valley (VRAEM), corresponding to the periphery in contrast to the central part
or direct intervention area. Both of these areas are considered priorities by country
authorities in view of their high incidence of poverty and extreme poverty and their
exclusion from the country's development.

6. The selected area encompasses 27 municipal districts in seven provinces in the
departments of Ayacucho, Huancavelica, Junín, Apurímac and Cusco. Included are
a highland or Sierra area at between 3,000 and 4,500 metres, a number of inter-
Andean valleys at between 1,500 and 3,000 metres, a foothills or Ceja de Selva
area at between 300 and 1,500 metres and part of the Amazon plain or Selva at
less than 300 metres.

7. Within this area, 76.5 per cent of the population is rural, using the strict definition
of a disperse rural population. That percentage rises to 87 per cent if villages with
less than 2,000 inhabitants are included. In addition, 74 per cent of the population
in the area are living below the monetary poverty line. Of these, 39 per cent are
extremely poor and 33 are poor but not extremely poor – values that place these
districts among the country's most vulnerable. Among those living in the project
area, 73 per cent are under 29 years of age and 66 per cent are indigenous.

8. The 27 districts located in the project area have a combined population of 58,681
families. Of these, the project will serve 50,936 rural families who are living in
conditions of rural poverty according to the 2014 national household survey.

9. Among the around 50,000 poor rural families making up the project's target
population, 27,000 families will benefit from the development services to be
provided under components 1 (governance and investments in territorial natural
resources) and 2 (local economic initiatives), and 23,000 poor rural families will
benefit from activities under component 3 (connectivity and territorial
infrastructure). The remaining 7,745 families (13 per cent of the population in the
intervention area), who reside in areas considered urban in Peru, will not be
included in the project's target population.

B. Development objective of the project
10. The goal of the project is to contribute to reducing poverty among rural families

through social and productive inclusion. The development objective is to increase
the human, social, natural, physical and financial assets of the project
beneficiaries.



EB 2016/117/R.13

3

C. Components/results
11. The project will be implemented over six years and will include the implementation

of three major components, in addition to project management and administration:

(a) Component 1. Governance and investments in territorial natural
resources. This component will focus on communities and families and will
build institutional capacities in the territory, including in local and provincial
governments, supporting initiatives to improve communal goods and
properties. The component activities will contribute to improving the
endowment and quality of natural resources in territories owned by the
beneficiaries and their community and indigenous associations – including
adapting to and mitigating climate change, and building capacities and
competencies for sustainable natural resource management and
development.

(b) Component 2. Local economic initiatives. The objective of this
component is to build a sustainable network of associations among potential
project beneficiaries to promote and expand opportunities for economic
development and social inclusion, providing support for economic activities by
interest groups such as farmers organizations together with financial inclusion
of families and associations. In a fragile and diverse associational context, the
component will support the creation, development and consolidation of
economic associations of beneficiaries that are oriented towards improving
their livelihood strategies and achieving greater and better participation in
markets for goods and services. To this end, the component will implement a
flexible and cumulative strategy with specific arrangements to support rural
producers organizations, based on the different types and levels of
associative development among rural people.

(c) Component 3. Connectivity and territorial infrastructure. The objective
of this component is to maintain physical conditions in the area of influence
where the project beneficiaries are located, in order to generate synergies
with interventions under the other components. In a context of relative
isolation caused by deteriorating rural roads, scarce communication services
and limited development of water and natural resources as a result of low
levels of investment in irrigation, the project will, inter alia, facilitate market
access in the intervention area for rural people, create jobs with start-ups or
contracting of communal or associational microenterprises for routine
maintenance of roads, provide for irrigation infrastructure at community
level, and promote water harvesting and collection.

(d) Component 4. Project management and administration. Under this
component, support will be provided on a cross-cutting basis to the three
preceding components to achieve the results and meet the targets set by the
project. This component includes project administration, knowledge
management and M&E.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
12. The project will employ the following five main approaches:

(a) Territorial development: This approach combines two main aspects:
(i) institutional development to promote consultations among local and
external agents and include poor people in production transformation
processes and benefits; and (ii) production transformation to link the
territory's economy with dynamic markets.

(b) Community-driven development: Implies a degree of delegation of
accountability to communities to manage their own development, including
the design and implementation of subprojects. This approach facilitates



EB 2016/117/R.13

4

access to social, human, financial and physical capital and assets by rural
poor people, by transforming development agents from top-down planners to
bottom-up providers of client-oriented services.

(c) Geographical targeting: Takes into account government priorities defining
the VRAEM area of influence as a priority area in view of the high incidence of
poverty.

(d) Scaling up: The project is consistent with the scaling up approach adopted
by IFAD, encompassing the various dimensions of scaling up: (i) fiscal and
financial; (ii) political; (iii) policy-based; (iv) organizational; (v) cultural; and
(vi) learning-based.

(e) Social inclusion as cross-cutting intervention: The project benefits rural
women, men and young people in situations of poverty and recognizes the
tangible and intangible assets of campesino and indigenous populations. This
approach promotes the empowerment of the target groups and rural
associational development.

B. Organizational framework
13. The agency responsible for the project will be the Ministry of Agriculture and

Irrigation, through the Agro Rural programme acting as a central executing unit
(CEU) with the legal authority to administer the project, in close coordination with
three of its branches located in the regions of Huancavelica, Ayacucho and Cusco,
and with close coordination and collaboration from municipal and provincial
administrations.

14. Project implementation will be the responsibility of a project coordination unit
(PCU) reporting to Agro Rural through its agrarian development director and in
charge of coordinating physical and financial activities and monitoring progress on
meeting the targets set. The PCU will be composed of a project coordinator and
eight specialists in the following areas: (i) M&E; (ii) financial inclusion;
(iii) entrepreneurship; (iv) infrastructure; (v) natural resource management and
climate change; (vi) social inclusion; (vii) administration; and (viii) accounting and
support staff. Each local agency will have a team made up of a coordinator, an
administrative assistant and various specialists.

C. Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
15. The project will employ a system of planning, M&E, learning and knowledge

management that is in line with national regulations and with IFAD guidelines.

16. Planning. The project will be implemented on the basis of annual operating plans
(AOP) and procurement  plans subject to IFAD no objection. Progress made on
implementing the plans will be recorded in semi-annual progress reports.

17. M&E. The responsible agency, through the PCU, will conduct the baseline study
during the first 12 months of implementation, and will set up the M&E system and
an M&E plan that will be an integral part of the AOP. The system will report on
progress made in the process of strengthening associational social capital
throughout project implementation using participatory instruments. Agro Rural will
provide information to the SNIP monitoring operating system (SOSEM), which will
allow for verification of progress made on implementing public investment projects.

18. Knowledge management and learning. The main objective of learning and
knowledge management activities will be to enhance existing knowledge assets in
the project intervention area and disseminate content in an appropriate and timely
way to inform users.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. Financial management. The financial management of the project will be the

responsibility of Agro Rural under the CEU procedure, as follows: (i) include project
resource requirements in its annual budget and arrange for approval by the



EB 2016/117/R.13

5

Ministry of Economy and Finance; (ii) implement and supervise implementation of
the project; (iii) perform financial and accounting administration and disbursement
functions; (iv) conduct tenders and contracting processes; and (v) hire external
auditors. Project accounting will comply with the provisions of the integrated
financial information system that is mandatory for all public sector entities
including budget and administrative modules.

20. Flow of funds. The Ministry of Economy and Finance will open a sub-account in
United States dollars within the single Treasury account as a designated account to
receive IFAD loan proceeds. These funds will then be transferred to a project
operating account in local currency, to be opened at Banco de la Nación and
administered by Agro Rural. The borrower will open an account in local currency to
hold the counterpart funds. Agro Rural will transfer the project proceeds to the
CEU, which will make payments for procurement and allocate resources to fund
initiatives by the project users.

21. Procurement. The procurement of works, goods and services will take place in
accordance with IFAD guidelines on procurement of goods and services. The PCU,
together with the administrative office and procurement unit of Agro Rural, will
prepare a procurement plan as part of the AOP specifying the procurement method
and determining the goods and services required, in addition to timelines,
estimated costs, procedures and sources of financing. Procurement will be done
generally by the producers organizations benefiting from the project and hence
receiving specific technical training in areas such as procurement of minor works
and procurement of production equipment, information technology equipment and
others needed for management.

22. Audit. The audit arrangements will include internal processes and will adhere to
IFAD's guidelines on project audits. In accordance with national regulations, Agro
Rural is subject to internal audit by its internal control office, which reports to the
Office of the Comptroller General (CGR). The annual consolidated financial
statements of the project will be audited independently in accordance with terms of
reference acceptable to IFAD, in accordance with international auditing standards
and IFAD guidelines on project audits. An external auditor acceptable to both IFAD
and CGR will be employed. All project accounts will be audited, including both IFAD
financing and counterpart funds. The audit report will be submitted to IFAD within
six months after the close of each fiscal year. For audit purposes the fiscal year will
coincide with the calendar year.

E. Supervision
23. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD in accordance with the prevailing

guidelines on direct supervision.

24. Approximately six months after the start-up workshop, IFAD will organize a first
supervision mission with the following objectives: (i) detect possible problems or
difficulties encountered in the initial implementation; (ii) review progress made
against the targets set; (iii) review the AOP being implemented and proposals for
the subsequent AOP; (iv) consult with project users on their perceptions of the
project and their participation levels; (v) review expenses incurred and
procurement carried out to date; (vi) verify compliance with the financing
agreement; (vii) prepare the project status report; and (viii) perform the financial
management evaluation. Commencing in year two of project implementation, and
in accordance with the guidelines on direct supervision, IFAD will, together with
Agro Rural, organize monitoring activities, provide support for implementation and
supervision and, in addition to meeting the objectives outlined above, analyse the
process of social mobilization and formation of groups of possible beneficiaries,
paying special attention to rural women and young people and indigenous peoples.



EB 2016/117/R.13

6

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
25. The project will have a total cost of approximately US$74.512 million. The first

component calls for spending of US$6.046 million (equivalent to 8.1 per cent), and
the second for spending of US$51.011 million, representing 68.5 per cent of the
total. The third component will involve spending of US$8.849 million (11.9 per
cent) and the fourth component US$8.606 million (11.5 per cent).

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD Beneficiaries Borrower/  counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Governance and
investments in territorial
natural resources 5 627 93.1 419 6.9 6 046 8.1
2. Local economic
initiatives 21 507 42.2 7 248 14.2 22 256 43.6 51 011 68.5
3. Connectivity and
territorial infrastructure 8 849 100 8 849 11.9
4. Project management
and administration 1 365 15.9 7 240 84.1 8 606 11.5
Total 28 500 38.2 7 248 9.7 38 764 52.0 74 512 100

B. Project financing
26. Financing for the different project components includes: IFAD’s contribution, valued

at US$28.5 million, or 32.2 per cent of the total; the Government of Peru’s
contribution of ordinary resources in the amount of US$38.764 million, or 52.0 per
cent; and contributions by beneficiaries in the amount of US$7.248 million or 9.7
per cent of the total.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Works 1 568 8.8 16 242 91.2 17 810 23.9

2. Vehicles 338 100.0 419 0.5
3. Equipment and
supplies 168.5 45.3 203.5 54.7 372 0.5

4. Consultancies 2 965.5 63.5 1 707.5 36.5 4 673 6.3
5. Grants and
subsidies 21 360 51.2 7 248 17.4 13 087 31.4 41 695 56.0

6. Training 2438 72.2 937 27.8 3 375 4.5
7. Salaries and
benefits 4 699.5 100.0 4 699.5 6.3

8. Operating costs 1 549.5 100.0 1 549.5 2.1

Total 28 500 38.2 7 248 9.7 38 764 52.0 74 512 100.0

C. Economic analysis and benefit summary
27. Project implementation calls for obtaining the following benefits for participating

families and communities: an increase in physical assets for communities,
improved agricultural productivity, sustainable natural resource management, and
increased social capital promoting start-up and development of economic
associations to improve their access to value chains and promote their participation
in the benefits of territorial development. Over the long term, this will result in



EB 2016/117/R.13

7

higher incomes, greater employment, higher yields and better quality agricultural
products and by-products.

28. Financial analysis shows internal rates of return (IRR) for the activities funded by
the project at above the interbank rate of 13.19 per cent, ranging between 26 per
cent and 137 per cent. Net present values (NPV) range between US$45 and
US$12,456, showing that the project is financially feasible. Both models indicate
that family labour will be freed up, so that additional off-farm income and a
reduced workload for women can be expected.

29. An economic analysis indicates that the project is economically feasible, with the
following results: (i) an economic rate of return (EIRR) of 32.5 per cent; and (ii) an
economic NPV of US$214 million at a discount rate of 9 per cent, indicating a
profitable investment.

D. Sustainability
30. The project will ensure that its interventions are sustainable by increasing and

strengthening the social fabric and generating confidence by promoting
associational development processes. At the same time, it will build confidence and
open up opportunities for the development of individuals, families and
communities. Once conditions have been created for groups of individuals or
families to associate and carry out shared activities, the sustainability of such
groups will depend upon the social cohesion established and on external factors.
Political sustainability will be ensured by commitment on the part of national
authorities to address problems in the project area, promoting solid technical and
financial linkages with sector institutions and subnational governments.

31. Social sustainability will be based on already existing community organizations,
such as the campesino and indigenous communities present in the intervention
area, which will ensure social sustainability. At the same time, the sustainability of
the interest groups associating to undertake economic initiatives will be realized by
means of ongoing support to strengthen associative principles and consolidate
them.

32. Local governments will be strengthened and trained to improve the administration
of resources and respond to the population's needs, which will contribute to
institutional sustainability. The economic and financial sustainability of the
economic initiatives undertaken by associated groups is expected to be brought
about by providing specific advisory assistance in market analysis, support from
mentoring institutions and relationships with potential clients for the products or
services cofinanced by the project.

33. Technical sustainability will be ensured by promoting local talents to operate the
initiatives identified by the project clients. Environmental sustainability will be
ensured by promoting and adopting best practices in natural resource
management.

34. Finally, the sustainability of investments in road maintenance will be the
responsibility of the municipalities under the conditional programme transfers
managed by MTC with resources provided by the Ministry of Economy and Finance.
To ensure that the roads covered by scheduled and emergency maintenance are
included in regular maintenance plans, specific clauses will be included in the
agreements to be signed with provincial road authorities and municipalities in the
implementation area to ensure compliance with current Ministry of Economy and
Finance policy.

E. Risk determination and mitigation
35. Implementation of the project will involve moderate risks, and the measures

planned to mitigate them are outlined in table 3:



EB 2016/117/R.13

8

Table 3
Risks and mitigation measures

Risk Level Mitigation measures

Administrative and bureaucratic
constraints on implementation

Moderate Participation by all stakeholders

Limited institutional capacity at regional
and local levels

Moderate Training for provincial and local
governments

Restricted coverage by agency
responsible for implementation

Moderate Budget support

Limitations on the use of local talents
Moderate Creation of a mechanism to recognize

local talents

Limitations on process of empowerment
of communities and groups

Moderate Strengthening of community
representation and agreements with
local governments

Possibility of benefits capture Moderate Setting amounts of incentives or rewards
that do not incentivize capture and
filtration

Climate phenomena, including collapse
and landslide

Moderate Active participation in road upgrading by
community enterprises

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
36. The proposed project is aligned with the overarching goal of the IFAD Strategic

Framework 2016-2025 and contributes to all three strategic objectives: increase
rural people’s productive capacities, increase rural people’s benefits from market
participation, and strengthen the environmental sustainability and climate
resistance of rural people’s economic activities. Moreover, the project approach and
implementation strategies are in compliance with the policies and strategies on
targeting rural poor people, gender equality and women's empowerment,
engagement with indigenous peoples (including free, prior and informed consent),
natural resources and environmental management, climate change, social,
environmental and climate procedures (SECAP note, category B), rural finance, and
knowledge management and innovation.

B. Harmonization and alignment
37. The project is consistent with the national policy environment promoting rural and

territorial development, decentralization and development of production. The
proposed project, to be implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation
through Agro Rural, will be consistent with the Medium-term Plan 2013-2016 and
its objective to reduce poverty and extreme poverty, improve local institutions and
management, generate competitiveness in agricultural production, and improve the
inclusion of producers by facilitating the sustainability of natural resources. The
proposed project will also be harmonized with the Ministry of Economy and Finance
programme Strengthening the Competitiveness of Rural Associative Enterprises
(PROCOMPITE) and its objective to achieve sustainability in production value chains
through development, adaptation and technology transfer. In addition, the use of
technical teams of local governments will build capacity to mobilize resources from
the Rural Economic Inclusion Fund (FONIE) to rehabilitate rural roads.
Furthermore, the project is fully justified and responsive to the decision by country
authorities to address problems in the intervention area under the VRAEM
Comprehensive Territorial Plan, which pursues the overall objective of shaping an
environment of security, legality and social peace that will improve the quality of
life and social inclusion of the inhabitants by making production activities more
profitable in the area.

C. Innovation and scaling up
38. Implementing the project will involve the use of new mechanisms in addition to

those already used and proven effective in previous IFAD-funded projects in Peru –



EB 2016/117/R.13

9

such as allocating financial resources competitively and transferring them to hire
technical assistance, processing and commercialization services, following a
participatory approach to identify, formulate, implement and monitor subprojects
using local resource allocation committees, with financial inclusion and the creation
of collaboration mechanisms with local governments to invest in business
facilitation.

39. In this project, the innovations in implementation will include strong support for
local and provincial governments in defining territorial assets, and shared financing
by administrative agencies within those governments to improve planning and
implementation of territorial investment projects, including: investing in road
network maintenance to mitigate barriers of connectivity to market access; using
mobile banking as a way of facilitating financial inclusion on a massive basis; and
creating incentives for the development of new financial products and services. The
inclusion of indigenous communities will mean adopting new mechanisms for
managing natural resources and financing community initiatives, with technical and
financial assistance. A systematic strategy will also be followed to build associative
capacities among beneficiary people, supporting organizational development
processes with results-based incentives. Finally, in addition to reinforcing gender
equity, the project calls for strategies, actions and financial resources to diversify
economic opportunities, including access to employment and decent employment.

D. Policy engagement
40. The project calls for actions and resources to promote and facilitate policy dialogue

using lessons learned and recommendations arising from the project
implementation process – to remove barriers that prevent poor rural people from
sharing in the benefits of territorial development. To this end, policy dialogue will
seek to have an influence on the actors involved in decision-making processes at
the local, regional and national levels. Generally speaking, the project will seek to
build an enabling environment from a policy, institutional and regulatory point of
view to advance the interests of poor rural people. Special attention will be paid to
constructing platforms for dialogue between and by indigenous communities,
seeking to open up a space whereby they can have an influence and improve their
participation and their social and economic inclusion.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
41. A financing agreement between the Republic of Peru and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower. A copy of
the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an appendix.

42. The Republic of Peru is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

43. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
44. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary conditions to the
Republic of Peru in an amount equivalent to twenty million six hundred and
fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 20,650,000), and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





