













































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 
 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 1 of 23  

     

 

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 25-Apr-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSA21792 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 

 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 2 of 23  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

OECS Countries P158958 OECS Regional Agriculture 
Competitiveness Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN 06-Feb-2017 25-May-2017 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing St. Vincent & the 
Grenadines, Grenada 

SVG - Ministry of 
Economic Planning, 
Sustainable Development, 
Industry, Information and 
Labour, Grenada - 
Ministry of Finance & 
Energy, SVG - Ministry of 
Agriculture, Forestry, 
Fisheries and Rural 
Transformation, Grenada 
- Ministry of Agriculture, 
Lands, Forestry and 
Fisheries. 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance access to markets and sales for competitively 
selected farmers and fishers, as well as their allied aggregators and agro-processors, in Grenada and St. Vincent and 
the Grenadines. 
 
Components 

Support for Preparation of Business Plans 
Implementation of Business Plans 
General Agricultural Services and Enabling Environment 
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

Financing Source Amount  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development    1.80  

International Development Association (IDA)    6.50  



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 3 of 23  

 

 

LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES    1.36  

Total Project Cost    9.66  

 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

The small and open countries of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS)
1
 have 

traditionally encountered serious development challenges, coupled with low growth, high debt, and 
limited fiscal space to maneuver around these problems. Agricultural exports and tourism drove 
growth of roughly 6 percent per year on average in OECS economies the 1980s, but growth and external 
trade began to decline in the late 1990s, after the European Union (EU) withdrew preferential access for 
traditional OECS agricultural exports (bananas and sugar).

2
 Efforts to revive growth and offset 

exogenous shocks through increased public investment engendered a large public debt and stifled 
private investment. The global financial crisis in 2008 heavily curbed tourism, remittances, and financial 
sector activity, while sharply increasing public debt and fiscal imbalances. OECS countries recorded a 
cumulative drop in output of 6 percent during 2009–12; at the same time, periodic natural disasters 
continued to batter their infrastructure and economies. OECS economies started to recuperate recently 
through a steady recovery in tourism and the United States economy. The regional growth forecast for 
2017 is positive, based on improving performance in key sectors (tourism, construction, agriculture) and 
lower fuel prices. Over the medium term, average growth for the region is expected to accelerate to 
about 2.5 percent. 

OECS countries have not reduced poverty and unemployment rates to levels compatible with their per 
capita income levels. Official poverty rates are 30.2 percent in Saint Vincent & the Grenadines (SVG) and 
37.7 percent in Grenada; poverty is concentrated in rural areas.

3
 The financial crisis and reduced 

demand for OECS exports and services have aggravated unemployment, which was already high. 
Unemployment (now 10.2 percent in Grenada and 18.8 percent in SVG) is higher among youth, 
exceeding 30 percent in both countries. Female-headed households, which account for two-thirds of all 
households in the OECS, are more likely to be poor.  

                                                           
1
 Established in 1981, this inter-governmental organization promotes economic harmonization and integration, human and 

legal rights, and good governance. It has seven founding and full members (Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada, 
Montserrat, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent & the Grenadines) and two associate members (Anguilla and the 
British Virgin Islands—British Overseas Territories). Martinique (France) joined in 2015 but is not represented by the OECS 
diplomatic mission.  
2
Governed by the Lomé Convention (1975) and its successor, the Cotonou Agreement, these trade arrangements included 

special protocols for EU imports of bananas and sugar. The EU initiated reforms for banana imports in 1999 and sugar in 2006.  
3
Specific figures on rural poverty are not readily available, but government studies and agricultural sector reviews reveal that 

most poor people in the OECS reside in rural areas. 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 4 of 23  

 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
Agriculture is a critical element for improving rural incomes, employment, and food security for OECS 
countries and farmers, however, it has not adapted rapidly to the changing trade regime. For example, 
SVG’s banana exports declined significantly; Grenada’s banana exports collapsed, and its nutmeg and 
cocoa production were devastated by Hurricanes Ivan (September 2004) and Emily (July 2005). 
Consequently, agriculture’s contribution to GDP, which was 13.4 percent in Grenada and 21.2 percent in 
SVG in 1990, was 5.4 percent in Grenada and 7.5 percent in SVG two decades later. The fact that 
agriculture remains a major contributor to employment, representing about 11 percent of the labor 
force in Grenada and 26 percent in SVG, indicates a persistent productivity problem.  

OECS agriculture could drive sustained gains in employment and income, while reducing dependence 
on imported food, if strategic investments are made to improve agricultural productivity and increase 
access to markets. Investment opportunities exist along the two main pathways for developing 
agriculture: import substitution and export expansion. For instance, Grenada produces nutmeg and 
cocoa of exceptional quality, in high demand internationally. Each product has only one principal 
exporter (public rather than private—the Grenada Cooperative Nutmeg Association and Grenada Cocoa 
Association), but the market for processing these products is open, and Grenada has two chocolate 
factories and a plant to produce medicines from nutmeg. Nutmeg and mace still lead Grenada’s 
agricultural exports, and it has also had success exporting soursop, citrus fruits, cloves, ginger, 
cinnamon, and fish, while agro-processing (pepper sauces, jams, juices) is becoming more important for 
the export market. SVG has started to export eddoes and dasheen (taro), arrowroot starch, roots and 
tubers, ginger, coconuts, spices, pineapples, and peppers, mostly to regional markets and the United 
Kingdom (UK). However, key investments are required to increase competitiveness to gain extended and 
sustainable access to regional and international markets. 

Local produce could potentially substitute for some imported produce in the tourism sector as well as 
in local and regional markets. Agricultural imports have increased in volume, variety, and value as 
tourism, supermarkets, and incomes have grown. The volume of OECS agricultural imports—mainly 
meat (especially poultry), cereals, and dairy products—is now about four times higher than the volume 
of agricultural exports. The World Bank estimates that 68 percent of food demand from the tourism 
sector is met through imports, representing around 20 percent of OECS agricultural imports. Locally 
produced fruits and vegetables appear to have the greatest import substitution potential, given high 
local demand, competitive production costs (in some cases), high perishability of these products, their 
ability to grow in most OECS countries, and their suitability for production even on small farms. Apart 
from hotels, the expanding yachting and supermarket sectors offer opportunities for local food 
producers. The freshness of local produce, as well as of fish and seafood, and better transport times and 
costs represent major advantages and opportunities for local farmers and fishermen where 
supermarkets and hotels will pay a premium for freshness. While for some locally grown products the 
cost of production is simply too high to compete with imported products, in some cases local fresh 
produce has the potential to be competitive.

4
 

A major consideration in this context is that the peak agricultural season is out of sync with the peak 
tourism season, impacting food demand, availability, and prices. Local demand for high-quality food 
peaks in mid-December to mid-April, the high season for tourism in the Caribbean, and falls 
precipitously afterward. On the other hand, agricultural production peaks in the wet season (June–

                                                           
4
 Jansen, Hans, Adam Stern, and Eli Weiss (2015), “Linking Farmers and Agro-processors to the Tourism Industry in the Eastern 

Caribbean,” Report No. ACS16280, World Bank, Washington, DC. 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Taro
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arrowroot


 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 5 of 23  

 

November, coinciding with the hurricane season), which is becoming less predictable and drier with 
climate change. During the December–May dry season, the absence of intensive irrigation to sustain 
horticultural production significantly reduces the consistent supply of local produce. Owing to the lack of 
storage facilities and farmers’ tendency to produce the same products at the same time, the oversupply 
of certain crops in the wet season leads to food losses, lower food prices, and declining farm revenue. 
Key strategic investments to ensure a sustained supply all through the year, to promote proper storage, 
and to diversify markets, seem to be essential for the sector to develop.  

In sum, the main barrier to purchasing more local produce is the limited ability of local farmers to 
deliver the required quantity and quality of produce in a timely, consistent, and competitive manner. 
Most farms are small and lack the inputs, equipment, infrastructure, and farm management skills 
(including production planning, crop management knowledge, and post-harvest handling capacity) to 
become reliable suppliers. Hotels belonging to large international chains prefer to purchase in bulk from 
Miami to get guaranteed quantities and volume discounts, rather than to deal with the uncertainty of 
sourcing large quantities locally from many small farmers. Recently established large hotels received 
government concessions to import duty free. Lacking such options, small and medium-sized hotels 
purchase from multiple local farmers and other sources to meet demand, which can be time consuming. 
They benefit from greater freshness (produce typically is picked and transported to hotels on the same 
day) and lower transport times and costs, but must cope with the inconsistent quantity and quality of 
produce, as well as the limited variety and overall quantity.  

The rudimentary market structure for fresh produce, including the lack of aggregation of smallholder 
supplies, results in suboptimal market performance. The limited aggregation of produce reduces 
smallholders’ access to assured and remunerative markets (and a more stable income), complicates 
buyers’ purchasing operations, and creates a disincentive to buy locally. Virtually all marketing of fresh 
local produce in OECS countries is done by individual farmers, and until they harvest, many do not know 
where or to whom they will sell. OECS countries have few producer or marketing organizations to 
remedy these problems, and such organizations generally suffer from financial problems, unstable and 
limited membership, side-selling, and mistrust. An added complication is that the public sector (typically 
ministries of agriculture) actively purchase and market produce through marketing boards that typically 
run at a loss, fail to provide remunerative prices to farmers, and crowd out private marketing activity. 
Poor communication and coordination between supply and demand complicate the planning of farm 
production and create uncertainty for buyers and sellers. 

The agro-processing industry is not well developed. Several small and medium enterprises (SMEs) 
produce a range of products, but difficulties in obtaining financing on affordable terms limit the 
investments in infrastructure, equipment, and inputs required to scale up and generate consistent 
profits. Many agribusiness entrepreneurs lack technical skills and knowledge to develop viable business 
plans, make the required investments, develop a network of reliable farmer-suppliers, and comply with 
the quality, food safety, and certification standards enabling them to penetrate profitable markets. The 
food processing industry cannot absorb all the produce offered, yet at the same time processors cannot 
obtain consistent supplies of quality produce. This mismatch between local production and industry 
demand, while partly related to seasonality, is mainly an organizational and marketing problem. As in 
marketing, in agro-processing public sector initiatives (largely unsuccessful) have crowded out the 
private sector.  

A combined production-marketing system, based on private sector aggregators of smallholder 
produce and agro-processors, could address most of these constraints and improve international 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 6 of 23  

 

competitiveness. Promising models are based on aggregation by private sector actors, who purchase 
from small-scale producers and give them a market for their produce. Apart from aggregating, storing, 
and marketing produce, aggregators can add value to certain products through basic activities such as 
washing, packaging and cutting, and can potentially offer support and services for producers (planting 
material, agro-chemicals, technical advice). Some producer organizations in Grenada and SVG could 
possibly act as aggregators and should be supported to do so, but they cannot succeed alone. Private 
actors—traders, wholesalers, or even larger (lead) farmers—need to step in and assume the required 
organizational and aggregation roles. Agro-processors can adopt the same model, in which smallholder 
farmers produce in accord with a plan agreed with the processor and embodied in a written contract.  

The Productive Alliance (PA) methodology, successfully tested in several projects in the LAC region, 
could help to resolve major constraints on producers’ access to markets. The PA methodology, 
introduced during the early 2000s in Latin America and more recently to other regions, engages with the 
private sector to enable smallholders to meet market demand for produce in terms of quantity, quality, 
and timeliness. The traditional PA approach involves three core agents: a group of smallholder 
producers, one or more buyers, and the public sector, while more advanced versions include technical 
service providers and lenders. These agents are connected through a business plan, which describes 
producers’ needs for capital and services and proposes improvements—attained through productive 
investments, technical assistance (TA), and business development—to upgrade their production 
capacities and skills and strengthen their linkage with markets. Evidence shows that the PA approach 
increases productivity, market integration, production, sales volume, prices, and smallholders’ incomes; 
generates on-farm and non-farm employment; and facilitates the inclusion of vulnerable groups in 
commercial value chains.  

The proposed project is well aligned with the revised OECS Regional Plan of Action for Agriculture 
(2012–2022) and national development plans. The priority of the Regional Plan of Action is to promote 
a market-oriented agribusiness approach to alleviating poverty and food and nutrition insecurity, 
consistent with the proposed project. Another priority is to mainstream climate change mitigation and 
adaptation strategies in agricultural programs to protect food production systems and build resilience 
against tropical storms, heavy rains, and droughts in rural/farming communities, which the proposed 
project will do. At the national level, the project is aligned with the National Economic and Social 
Development Plan (2013–2025) of SVG, which among other objectives for agriculture seeks to increase 
productivity, efficiency, and competitiveness; increase market access for agricultural produce; and 
increase agricultural exports; as well as with the National Agricultural Plan (2015-2030) of Grenada. 

Finally, the project is well positioned to contribute to the climate change policies and measures of 
Grenada and SVG, outlined in their Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs). The INDCs 
of both countries emphasize improving climate change adaptation in the priority sectors of tourism and 
agriculture. By taking climate change into consideration as an emerging risk and reflecting adaptation 
and mitigation in its design and implementation, the project provides a framework to achieve some of 
the INDC commitments.  The project includes strategic investments, both at the level of the public and 
the private sectors, to promote the development, dissemination and adoption of innovative 
technologies that would significantly contribute to decrease vulnerability to climate variability and, 
therefore, generate climate mitigation and adaptation co-benefits. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 7 of 23  

 

The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance access to markets and sales for 
competitively selected farmers and fishers, as well as their allied aggregators and agro-processors, in 
Grenada and St. Vincent and the Grenadines.  

 
The main beneficiaries of the proposed project include:  

(a) Small-scale individual or organized farmers and fishers (FFs). 
(b) Aggregators and agro-processors (AAs), including: (a) producer organizations (associations, 

cooperatives or similar formal organizations with legal standing); and (b) SMEs, such as 
wholesalers, traders, lead farmers (with legal standing to act as aggregator), and industrial 
agro-processors.  

(c) The respective ministries of agriculture, as well as their extension officers and staff, which 
will be strengthened by the Project.  

 

Detailed criteria for eligibility of FFs and AAs for receiving matching grants under the project will be 
defined in the Project Operational Manual (POM). The FFs and AAs will be eligible only if they are 
formally participating together in a strategic productive alliance approved by the project to pursue the 
stated objectives. It is expected that the Project will have 1,700 direct beneficiaries, of which at least 25 
percent will be female and 25 percent will be below the age of 40 years. 

Key Results 
 

The proposed PDO indicators are identical for both countries (with different quantitative targets for 
each country): 

(b) Market Access Compliance Score for participating FFs supplying products to their allied AAs 
in accordance with the agreed Business Plans per semester (this Score is a weighted average 
of the volume complying with the agreed terms of the business plans related to quantities, 
quality, and timeliness of delivery). 

(c) Market Access Compliance Score for sales from all participating AAs complying with buyers' 
specifications  as per their Business Plans per semester (weighted average of volume 
complying with quality, quantities, and timeliness of delivery). 

(d) Percentage increase in the average annual sales of FFs participating in strategic alliances 
under the project. 

(e) Percentage increase in the value of gross sales made by AAs participating in the project to 
their final buyers. 

(f) Direct project beneficiaries (number), of which female (%) and young (%). 

 
D. Project Description  

 

The scope of the proposed project is based on successful experiences with productive alliances (PA) in 
other operations supported by the World Bank in the region, adapted to the specific conditions of small 
island economies such as Grenada and SVG. As noted, the PA approach is intended to improve access to 
markets for AAs and small-size FFs, using the private sector as a vehicle to foster smallholder production 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 8 of 23  

 

in accordance to market demand in terms of quantity, quality, and timeliness. The main components, 
apply to both recipient/borrowing countries and are based on the need for improving linkages between 
demand and supply in prioritized value chains. 

Component 1: Support for Preparation of Business Plans (Costs: Grenada IBRD: US$ 0.38m; 

SVG IDA: US$0.40m) 

The objective of this component is to: (i) promote an understanding of the Project’s scope and 
objectives through outreach to potential stakeholders and beneficiaries (such as individual and 
organized FFs, AAs, buyers, and lenders); (ii) identify potential business opportunities for prioritized 
value chains and their translation into viable and profitable business proposals; and (iii) prepare full 
business plans for selected proposals. 

This component will finance the provision of goods, consulting and non-consulting services, training and 
operating costs in support of implementing pre-investment activities, including:  

(a) development and implementation of a communication and information dissemination strategy 
to raise awareness of the Project and its activities;  

(b) organization of networking events, including business roundtables and local workshops for 
supporting the formation of strategic alliances between aggregators and agro-processors 
(“AAs”) and farmers and fishers (“FF”), buyers, and lenders;  

(c) provision of Training to AAs, FFs and buyers to identify business opportunities and to translate 
them into viable business proposals;  

(d) implementation of a country-wide call for interested parties to present business proposals;  
(e) evaluation of business proposals, and selection of those proposals to be developed into business 

plans; 
(f) provision of technical assistance for the preparation of sustainable and competitive business 

plans;  
(g) evaluation and selection of final business plans, and the preparation of Subproject Agreements 

for those selected plans; and 
(h) analysis of the qualifications of input suppliers eligible to participate in the voucher program 

under Component 2 of the Project. 

A Technical Assistance Agreement between the borrowing countries and the Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO) of the United Nations, financed by contributions from the credit proceeds of both 
countries, will include TA support for the implementation of activities described under (c), and (f) above.  

Component 2: Implementation of Business Plans (Grenada: IDA US$2.2m; IBRD US$ 0.22m; 

beneficiaries: US$ 0.64m; SVG: IDA US$2.95m; beneficiaries: US$ 0.72m) 

The objective of this component is to provide matching grants to co-finance the implementation of 
technically feasible, financially viable, economically profitable, socially responsible, and environmentally 
sustainable business plans, which, when implemented, will contribute to a consistent and timely supply 
of sufficient quantities of quality produce to buyers while providing a reliable income to allied FFs. The 
implementation of these Business Plans will make possible an increase in productivity and quality of the 
products, as well as reducing dependency on rainfall, thus reducing the constraints for increasing supply 
during peak season and enhancing vulnerability to climatic factors.  In addition, Component 2 is 
expected to provide climate change co-benefits derived from: (i) adaptation, by promoting innovative 
resource management practices to increase resilience, expanding the use of crops and crop 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 9 of 23  

 

mixes/rotations less vulnerable to climate variability, and expanding the use of protected agriculture 
and drought/heat resistant varieties; and (ii) mitigation, by promoting agricultural intensification using 
higher yielding varieties, carbon sequestration species and cropping patterns, improving irrigation 
measures and replacing traditional sources of energy (see Annex 4). 

This component will finance:  

(a) The implementation of a matching grant and voucher program, including the provision of: 

(i) training for capacity building to AAs receiving matching grants (such as in logistics, 
storage, marketing, agronomy, accounting, financial literacy, food processing, good 
manufacturing practices, packaging, labelling, traceability, quality control, food safety 
and hygiene, legal and environmental aspects ) and FFs receiving vouchers (such as in 
good production practices, modern and improved technologies, climate-smart 
agriculture, post-harvest handling, and financial literacy); and 

(ii) support in supervising the implementation of the selected business plans, including 
assisting the PIUs to put in place a technical supervision and implementation support 
system, capable of following up the implementation of the Business Plans making sure 
they follow the approved Plans and detecting real or potential issues that could 
compromise the expected results of the Plans or their effectiveness. 

(b) Provision of matching grants to eligible AAs, and vouchers to eligible FFs, which are allied with 
the respective AAs, for the purpose of implementing the business plans selected under 
Component 1 of the Project, and co-financing investments under said plans, including:  

(i) for the selected AAs: (A) equipment (transport, office, ICT tools/mobile applications, 
cold storage, product processing, and so on), infrastructure (such as storage/warehouse 
and cold chain facilities) and other related inputs, and (B) technical assistance and 
specialized Training related to their respective business plans; and 

(ii) for the selected FFs: (A) farming equipment, infrastructure and other related inputs 
(such as equipment for land preparation and harvesting, irrigation infrastructure 
(including rainwater harvesting structures and pressured irrigation, greenhouses, 
tunnels, hydroponics, aquaponics, and so on), and (B) fishing equipment, infrastructure 
and other related inputs (such as boats and fishing implements, logistics, temporary cold 
storage) 

(c) Provision of (i) technical assistance and Training on procurement to AAs receiving Matching 
Grants, and (ii) specialized Training, in relation to the implementation of the relevant business 
plans, to FFs receiving Vouchers. 

The Technical Assistance Agreement to be signed between both countries and FAO to be financed under 
the Project will include necessary technical support for the implementation of activities described under 
(a) above, unless such activities constitute a conflict of interest with the services provided under this 
assignment. 

Each business plan will need co-financing from the AA (at least 20 percent of the AA investments for 
producer organizations and at least 50 percent for other private sector AAs). At least 10 percent of the 
AA costs of the subproject will have to be allocated upfront in cash by the beneficiary. The rest of the 
counterpart financing of the business plan will have to be covered by the beneficiaries from their own 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 10 of 23  

 

funds or through resources provided by other lenders (banks, credit unions, development banks, private 
sector, etc.). Proof of the availability of resources secured in advance from these sources will be a 
condition to start implementation of a subproject. Producer organizations with potential will be 
encouraged to participate as AA; however, to give them better opportunities to participate as AAs, they 
will not compete directly with other private sector AAs in the selection process.  Weaker producer 
groups will participate as FFs in alliance with an AA, and they will receive TA in organizational and 
institutional strengthening to help them become an AA in the future. 

The mechanisms to finance subprojects will be different for AAs and FFs:   

(a) For AAs: The procurement of investment items included in the Subproject will be undertaken 
by the AAs for small works, goods, and individual consulting and non-consulting services, 
under a threshold further defined in the POM. Above the specified threshold, and for all 
consulting services by firms regardless of value, all procurement for the benefit of the AAs will 
be undertaken by the PCU. The PCU will have a fiduciary control function of the procurement 
undertaken by the AAs and will provide TA and support to improve the procurement capacity 
of the AAs.  Under this proposed mechanism, each beneficiary AA will receive funds in a 
specific bank account opened by the AA for its exclusive use while implementing the 
subproject. The counterpart funds from the AA are expected to be deposited in the same 
specific account as a precondition for disbursing project funds, which will be sequenced in line 
with physical progress in accordance with the Subproject Agreement and the related schedule 
in the Subproject Procurement Plan. This matching-grants for the AAs would have a maximum 
of $120,000 for productive investments and a maximum of $20,000 for specific technical 
assistance for implementation. 

(b) For FFs: The project will implement a voucher mechanism to provide financial assistance to 
FFs. The investments to be supported by the sub-grants will be partially financed by vouchers 
issued by the PCU in the name of the benefitting FFs (in accordance with the terms of the 
respective business plans and the corresponding Subproject Agreement). The FFs will use 
these vouchers to complement their own funds in purchasing the specific approved items, as 
confirmed and approved by the PCU, from a local supplier selected by them from a list of 
suppliers approved beforehand by the PCU.  The maximum allowed for each individual 
beneficiary FF will be $8,000 and for a total of $120,000 for all the FFs in a single Subproject 
Agreement.  In addition, the FFs will receive free general training and extension services from 
FAO in collaboration with each Ministry of Agriculture and more specialized TA from other TA 
providers directly procured by the PCUs 

Component 3: General Agricultural Services and Enabling Environment (Grenada IBRD: US$0.54m; SVG 

IDA:  US$0.25m)  

The objective of this component is to strengthen general agricultural public services directly linked to 
the subprojects described in Component 2 and needed to enhance the probability of success. It will also 
support the strengthening of the overall enabling environment needed for the sustained development 
of the business enterprises with potential competitive advantages, locally and internationally. The 
project will finance goods, works, consulting and non-consulting services, training and operating costs 
(travel, per diem, etc.) to help implement the key activities under the component. This component will 
contribute to generate climate change co-benefits in two main areas: (i) promotion and incorporation of 
techniques more resilient to climate variability into public extension services practices; and 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 11 of 23  

 

(ii) mitigation, by conducting basic research as well as introduce new technologies that reduce GHG 
emissions in crop production and fisheries, as well as promoting the adoption of new systems increasing 
carbon sequestration (see Annex 4). A TA Agreement to be signed with FAO will include technical 
support for the implementation of activities under (c), as described below. 

The main activities under this component are to:  

(a) improve the quality and availability of key inputs required for the adoption of more 

productive technology (such as quality seeds, seedlings, and planting materials) for products 

supported under Component 2 of the Project;  

(b) organize, and facilitate participation in, trade fairs and study tours;  

(c) strengthen agricultural public extension service providers’ knowledge and skills to effectively 

(i) support the selected AAs and FFs to adopt technology for the efficient implementation of 

their business plans under Component 2 of the Project, and (ii) communicate and disseminate 

information broadly across the agricultural sector; 

(d) carrying out technical studies to competition improve competitiveness, including market 

studies, analysis of new potential value chains, enabling environment, reforms, agro-food 

logistics, and food safety requirements and quality standards (including legal framework) and 

related technical skills; and  

(e) carrying out improvements to public infrastructure that are required for the promotion of 

adequate internal distribution of produce, reduction of post-harvest losses, establishment of 

modern food safety mechanisms, as well as cold storage at key exit points for perishable 

agricultural exports (e.g., airports/port terminals).  

Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation (Grenada IBRD: US$0.66m; SVG IDA: 

US$0.70m)  

The objective of this component is to ensure effective project implementation, monitoring of activities 
and final project evaluation. The project will finance goods, consulting and non-consulting services, 
training and incremental operational costs to the PCU and the PIU for expenditures related to the 
project activities, including: (i) project coordination and management; (ii) monitoring, evaluation, and 
impact assessment; (iii) fiduciary administration, accounting and financial/technical audits; (iv) 
safeguards management; and (v) a citizens’ engagement mechanism. 

 
E. Implementation 
 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

Overall implementation responsibility. In each country, a Steering Committee (SC) will be formed by 
representatives of government ministries and agencies considered relevant for a successful project 
implementation and the achievement of its objectives, as well as from the private sector, to provide 
overall guidance and support for project implementation and ensure proper inter-institutional 
coordination. This committee will approve the annual Project Operating Plans and requests for 
budgetary allocations, and it will provide opinions on possible restructuring or adjustments in the 
project’s approach, methodology, and focus. The final constitution of the SC will be defined in the POM. 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 12 of 23  

 

Overall responsibility for financial management (FM), procurement, and safeguards for the proposed 
project will rest in the existing PCU in each country. In Grenada, the existing PCU is located in the 
Ministry of Finance and Energy (MoFE) and has been executing Bank-financed operations for several 
years. In SVG, the PCU is located in the Public Sector Investment Program Management Unit (PSIPMU), 
which is based in the Ministry of Economic Planning, Sustainable Development, Industry, Information 
and Labour (MoEP) and has also executed Bank-financed operations for several years. FM, procurement, 
and safeguards assessments of the PCUs were completed at appraisal to determine any needs for 
further strengthening of these functions under the project, either by providing additional staff or 
contracting consultants to efficiently implement the fiduciary and safeguard aspects of the proposed 
project.  

Overall responsibility for technical implementation will rest within the line ministries of agriculture 
(MoALFF in Grenada; MoAFFRT in SVG), through a small PIU in each country. In principle, each of these 
PIUs will consist of at least a Project Manager and an Agribusiness Monitoring and Evaluation Specialist. 
The PIU will be responsible for (i) coordinating and implementing all Project activities, including with 
relevant agencies and beneficiaries, as specified in the POM, (ii) ensuring that the requirements, criteria, 
policies, procedures and organizational arrangements set forth in the POM are applied in carrying out 
the Project, (iii) preparing all Project implementation documents, including Project reports, and (iv) 
monitoring and evaluating the Project. Very close collaboration between the PIU and the PCU will be 
crucial. 

Technical Assistance (TA). The main focus of this TA is to support the preparation and implementation 
of effective and sustainable business plans at the FF and AA levels and to strengthen the capacity of the 
respective ministries of agriculture to deliver the services needed to improve production and 
competitiveness. The TA services, together with the investments included in the business plans (for AAs 
and FFs), are the two main pillars of the project, complementing each other and aiming to achieving the 
development objectives. Grenada/SVG, through each PCU, will enter into a contractual agreement with 
a technical service provider to receive specific assistance and guidance in key aspects of project 
implementation. The two recipient governments have expressed their preference to engage a single 
service provider for covering the key phases of the business plan cycle (from identification/preparation 
of Business Plans to the supervision of implementation), ensuring a consistent approach and 
methodology. The two governments have requested that FAO serve as this main technical service 
provider, given the organization’s long engagement with both countries and its presence in the region, 
as well as its worldwide experience with agricultural competitiveness and technology development 
issues.  

 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

Environment Under Component 2, the Project would co-finance aggregators’ investments such as transport, 
storage, post-harvest, cold chain facilities, ICT tools and mobile applications, equipment, infrastructure, or 
energy-saving technologies; and for allied producers, investments such as equipment for land preparation 
and harvesting, irrigation infrastructure including rain water harvesting, greenhouses, tunnels, hydroponics, 
and aquaculture. Technical assistance, training, and extension services would also be provided for storage, 
marketing, agronomy, accounting, financial literacy, food processing, machinery, packaging, labeling, 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 13 of 23  

 

traceability, quality control, or food safety and hygiene; and good agricultural practices, modern and 
improved technologies, climate smart agriculture, post-harvest handling or financial literacy. The 
investments could take place anywhere in Grenada or in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines. While the prime 
agricultural lands are in relatively flat lying areas, fairly steep areas are routinely cultivated and therefore 
erosion control is of concern and was incorporated into the ESMF through extension services training for 
best management practice. Pest management is also being improved through other World Bank projects in 
the region and lessons learned will be applied to this Project. Processing or storage facilities could be 
located in non-agricultural lands, and will apply lessons learned in other projects in the region. Social The 
final design and location of sub-project sites will be defined during project implementation. Some of the 
physical characteristics of relevance to social safeguards analysis would include: population density, 
patterns of land ownership, livelihood activities, and presence of vulnerable populations. Once specific sub-
project sites are known, a screening of potential social risks and impacts will be conducted, where needed. 
Given that some investments under Component 2 may lead to involuntary resettlement impacts, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared to guide the application of the Operational Policy (OP) 
4.12 requirements. The RPF guides the resettlement objectives and principles, organizational arrangements 
and funding mechanisms for the preparation of the Resettlements Plans (RPs) to be carried out during 
Project implementation.  

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Silvia Del Pilar Larreamendy Ricardo,Michael J. Darr 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The World Bank Safeguard Policy OP 4.01 for 
Environmental Assessment (EA) is triggered, and 
after analysis of the Project and its components it 
was determined that it falls under Category B, due to 
minor to moderate potential negative impacts from 
agricultural production, food processing, 
aquaculture, livestock rearing, and other related 
activities.  The details of individual subprojects are 
not yet known, therefore an Environmental and 
Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been 
prepared for both recipient (Grenada and SVG), 
using examples from other World Bank OECS 
regional projects.  A consultation/workshop was 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 14 of 23  

 

held during the pre-appraisal mission in late October 
and early November and the ESMF has been 
disclosed in country for comments. A final version 
has been disclosed on the World Bank's external 
website on January 24, 2017, and in country on 
February 22, 2017 in Grenada and on March 2, 2017 
in SVG. A revised version was disclosed in-country 
and in the World Bank external website on April 18, 
2017.  
 
The ESMF includes guidance for screening of simple 
subprojects (such as washing and sorting facilities) 
that can use standard mitigation measures already 
detailed in the ESMF, as well as identification of 
more complex subprojects (such as large agro-
processing facilities) or subprojects in sensitive areas 
(such as mariculture or seafloor harvesting projects) 
that would require additional assessment during 
implementation to prepare comprehensive 
environmental management plans as needed. For 
simple subprojects and small producers, the ESMF 
includes a condensation of World Bank Group 
Environment Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines for 
reference as a generic environmental management 
plan.  Additional consideration is given to pest 
management, water supply, fertilizer use, mixed 
cropping (or rotation), soil conservation, and erosion 
control, since these are common issues in 
agricultural projects in the OECS.  Complex 
subprojects will require individual design reviews 
and due diligence for emissions and discharges, 
labor practice, and other environmental and safety 
aspects. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The Project will screen out and exclude any 
subproject works that would involve clearing of new 
land for agriculture; however, during Project 
preparation it was decided to trigger the policy as a 
precaution to ensure that any affected natural 
habitats are adequately protected, because some of 
the project sites may take place near parks or 
protected areas, or may potentially affect lands that 
meet the definition of natural habitat. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
The Project will categorically screen out and exclude 
any clearing or effects on forest lands. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes The Pest Management Policy (OP 4.09) was also 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 15 of 23  

 

triggered as a precaution, because pesticide use is a 
necessity in agricultural activities in the region. The 
ESMF promotes Integrated Pest Management as 
standard practice, and a screening mechanism is 
included in the ESMF to determine if there are any 
subprojects with significant pest management 
issues; if so, then a separate Pest Management Plan 
will be required to ensure that these materials are 
well managed for those subprojects. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

This policy was triggered as a precaution to ensure 
that any "chance finds" or other physical cultural 
resources during excavation or other earth-moving 
activities are adequately protected. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 

Policy OP/BP 4.10 is not triggered. In the context of 
preparation of other OECS regional projects in Saint 
Vincent and Grenada, screening, background 
research, and consultations were conducted by the 
World Bank to determine whether Indigenous 
Populations were present in the project area. These 
screening activities confirmed that while populations 
who claim historical indigenous heritage do exist in 
the OECS (in the area of Sandy Bay, Saint Vincent), 
these groups do not have distinctive customary 
cultural, economic, social or political institutions that 
are separate from the dominant society and culture. 
Nor do they have an indigenous language different 
from the official language of Saint Vincent (English). 
Therefore, it was concluded that this community 
does not retain the minimum characteristics 
necessary to claim indigenous group affiliation under 
Bank Policy OP/BP 4.10. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The designs of individual subprojects are not yet 
known, however, some investments for aggregators 
(for example: transport, storage, cold chain facilities, 
infrastructure) and allied producers under 
Component 2 may lead to involuntary 
resettlement/land acquisition, affecting land or 
livelihoods. Therefore, OP 4.12 is triggered and a 
Resettlement Policy framework (RPF) was developed 
to guide the application of the OP 4.12policy 
requirements. No project funds will be used for land 
acquisitions. In case land acquisition is needed, it 
would have to be entirely and directly financed by 
the concerned beneficiaries. Activities that could 
involve involuntary resettlement will be avoided, 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 16 of 23  

 

nevertheless a RPF has been elaborated as a 
precautionary measure. The RPF clarified 
resettlement objectives and principles, 
organizational arrangements and funding 
mechanisms to be prepared and implemented if any 
safeguards tools (e.g. Resettlement Action Plans) are 
required during project implementation. The RPF 
was prepared and disclosed and consulted  prior to 
Project appraisal.  A revised version was disclosed in-
country and in the World Bank external website on 
April 18, 2017. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
Improvements of canals or water conveyance 
systems are not envisioned and will be excluded in 
the EMF screening criteria. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
This policy should not be triggered since the Project 
will not finance activities involving the use or 
potential pollution of international waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The Project will categorically screen out and exclude 
any projects in disputed areas. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
Environment:   
 
Two of the main issues identified during Project preparation are the management of pesticides and the potential for 
soil erosion.  Both issues are prioritized in the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) through the 
promotion of best management practices.  Another potential issue relates to discharge and permitting for large agro-
processing facilities; these are also identified in the ESMF and would require additional studies as needed during 
implementation. 
 
The long-term environmental impacts would largely be positive through improved agricultural practice, among small 
farmers and larger co-ops and agro-processors.  There are no large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts 
anticipated from the Project. 
 
Social:   
 
Social impacts addressed in the ESMF, are related to  potential  involuntary resettlement  which are not expected to 
be significant. Other project’s potential impacts are associated with aggravation of social exclusion among 
disadvantaged farmers and fishers. The ESMF provide guidelines for screening business plans and subproject sites and 
for undertaking full social assessments, if needed, to analyze social impacts and risks, including but not limited to land 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 17 of 23  

 

acquisition/resettlement/economic displacement. Social assessment identifies population density, patterns of land 
ownership, and defines the establishment of mechanisms to screen for farm and rural larceny; determines the 
presence of vulnerable segments of the population in the Project area, including women, poorest smallholders, as well 
as young farmers under the age of 40, to ensure their participation and share in Project benefits (including in training 
and extensions services). 
 
Most works contemplated will involve temporary impacts, and potential land acquisition and/or resettlement 
associated with construction activities, as per the OP4.12. and estimated social impacts on affected people are 
estimated as low and temporary. The Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) ensures the mitigation and compensation 
of involuntary resettlement. The RPF guides the preparation of Resettlement Plans (RPs) during implementation. 
Regarding potential impacts on vulnerable population for assuring the inclusion of less advantage FFs and AAs, the 
Project’s PA participative approach will be implemented. 
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
The long-term environmental impacts would largely be positive through improved agricultural practice, among small 
farmers and larger co-ops and agro-processors.  There are not  indirect or long term social impacts estimated in the 
Project area. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
Environment:  
 
The ESMF includes guidance to avoid clearing new agricultural lands, and exclusions of effects on natural habitat or 
forests.  Otherwise the Project alternative analysis is not relevant with regards to environmental aspects. 
 
 
Social:  
 
In order to avoid and minimize land acquisition and define the mitigation and compensation measures needed when 
land acquisition is unavoidable, the Project has prepared an RPF that will guide the preparation RPs in the 
implementation phase. The RPs will define the specific alternatives for each sub-project to minimize and compensate 
social impacts. 
 
Fostering social inclusion will be addressed by a productive alliance (PA) tool that  aims at targeting established 
producer groups and value chains, supporting the inclusion of disadvantaged groups and building broader alliances 
with state agencies and/or municipalities. The proposed project approach is based on the PA methodology, adapted to 
the OECS context and reflecting lessons learned from similar projects, with the objective of improving the access of 
small farmers and fishers (FFs) to markets and increasing their productivity and income. Business plans developed 
under the Project will allow these individuals to upgrade their production, capacities, and skills. Project activities are 
defined to ensure access and opportunities for vulnerable beneficiaries, and capacity building under the Project will be 
tailored to the demands and interests of small producers, different age groups, and women.  
 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The Project Coordination Units (PCU)s will be responsible for oversight to ensure safeguards policies are followed, and 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 18 of 23  

 

their capacity will be strengthened by sharing of PCU staff dedicated to environmental safeguard resources among 
other World Bank projects.  The Ministries of Agriculture will be responsible for technical project management 
through Project Implementation Units(PIU)s and will coordinate with the PCUs, as well as directing the liaison with 
beneficiaries on the field level with extension officers.  Finally, technical training including best environmental practice 
and business plan preparation will be provided by academic partners, NGOs, and/or consultants who will be 
contracted to support the Program. Safeguards assessments of the PCUs will be completed prior to appraisal to 
determine any needs for further strengthening these functions under the project, either by providing additional staff 
or contracting consultants to efficiently implement the safeguard aspects of the proposed Project. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
Key stakeholders of the proposed project include: (i) small-scale farmers and fishers (FFs), either individually or 
organized in associations, cooperatives, or similar formal organizations with legal standing, or in the process of 
obtaining legal status, and (ii) aggregators and agro-processors (AAs), such as producer organizations, lead farmers, 
wholesalers, traders, and industrial agro-processors. Equally important, the project will support the participation of 
the rural private sector, including new suppliers. Workshops with key stakeholders were held in the pre-appraisal 
mission (Oct.-Nov. 2016) including the Ministries of Agriculture, the extension officers, other relevant government 
agencies, and potential beneficiaries (agro-processors, coops, and individual farmers). Disclosure of the draft ESMF 
was done by posting on the government website and targeted e-mailings to key stakeholders to solicit feedback.  
 
Comments were addressed and evidence of consultation and disclosure was included in the final ESMF.  If any 
sensitive or complex projects are identified during screening (such as large agro-processing facilities, mariculture or 
seafloor harvesting projects) which would require additional assessment and/or permitting, then the appropriate 
consultations would be done during implementation. A project-level Grievance Redress Mechanism has been 
developed by the Social Specialists at the PCUs to provide a way for project affected people and communities, as well 
as members of the public to lodge complaints and/or request information about the Project. Once subprojects’ sites 
are known, the social specialists will undertake community consultations to provide beneficiaries and stakeholder 
communities with information about the subproject and to elicit feedback on subproject activities and design. 
 
 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements  

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop 
For category A projects, date of 
distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 

20-Jan-2017 24-Jan-2017 
 

   

"In country" Disclosure   

   Grenada 
  31-Oct-2016 

Comments 

A revised version of the ESMF, which includes the Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) has been disclosed on 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 19 of 23  

 

February 22, 2017. The ESMF was revised for a third time to reflect the change in the IBRD/IDA allocation and to 
include the latest version of the project description. This third version was disclosed in country on April 18, 2017. The 
link is: http://www.gov.gd/egov/docs/publications/esmf_agricom_final.pdf 
 

   St. Vincent and the Grenadines 
  20-Jan-2017 

Comments 

A revised version of the ESMF, which includes the Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) has been disclosed on 
March 2, 2017. The ESMF was revised for a third time to reflect the change of the project amount and to include the 
latest version of the project description. This third version was disclosed in country on April 18, 2017. The link is: 
http://planning.gov.vc/planning/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=217&Itemid=252 

   
OPS_RA_D ISCL OSURE_T ABLE  

 

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process 

   

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop  

20-Jan-2017 24-Jan-2017  

   

"In country" Disclosure   
   Grenada 
  20-Jan-2017 

Comments 

The RPF was disclosed in country on January 20, 2017 and a revised version reflecting the change of the IBRD/IDA 
allocation and the latest version of the project description was disclosed in country on April 18, 2017. The link is: 
http://www.gov.gd/egov/docs/publications/rpf_agricom_final.pdf 
 

   St. Vincent and the Grenadines 
  20-Jan-2017 

Comments 

The RPF was disclosed in country on January 20, 2017 and a revised version reflecting the change of the project 
amount and the latest version of the project description was disclosed in country on April 18, 2017. The link is: 
http://planning.gov.vc/planning/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=217&Itemid=252 

     
OPS_ PM_D ISCL OSURE_TA BLE  

 

Pest Management Plan 
 
Was the document disclosed prior to 
appraisal? Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop 

NA   

   
"In country" Disclosure   



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 20 of 23  

 

 

 
OPS_PM_ PC R_TAB LE  

 

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to 
be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.  

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 

During Project implementation if subproject-specific safeguards instruments, (Environmental Impact Assessments 
(EIAs), or Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) are required, specific stakeholders will be identified and public meetings 
will be conducted to enable the reflection of stakeholder concerns in project design. These requirements will be 
incorporated into the TORs for EIAs. In the case of land acquisition, Project Affected People (PAP)  will be consulted in 
the whole sub-projects’ cycle,  involving design and implementation, as well as on the establishment and 
implementation of Grievance Redress Mechanisms. Advanced public notifications will inform PAPs, whom if necessary, 
will be compensated prior to works. Relevant line ministries will assist the respective PCUs in these efforts. 
 
 
 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project 
decision meeting)  
 
OPS_EA_COMP_TABLE OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
  
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes   
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report? 
Yes   
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes   

OPS_ NH_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
  
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats? 
No   
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the 
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank? 
NA   

OPS_ PM_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
  
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes   
Is a separate PMP required? 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 21 of 23  

 

NA   
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included in 
project design?  If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
NA   

OPS_ PCR_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources  
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
   
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on cultural property? 
    

OPS_IR_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 

 
 

Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes  
 

 

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan? 
Yes  
 

 
 

 

      
OPS_ PDI_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 

 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop? 
No   
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are understandable 
and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
Yes  

 
 
All Safeguard Policies 

 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? 
Yes 

  
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies? 
NA 

  
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 

 
 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 22 of 23  

 

 

CONTACT POINT 

 

  World Bank 
 

Eli Weiss 
Senior Rural Development Specialist 

  

 

  Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

St. Vincent & the Grenadines 

 

 

 
 
 

Grenada 

 

 

 
 

  Implementing Agencies 
 

SVG - Ministry of Economic Planning, Sustainable Development, Industry, Information and Labour 

Laura Anthony-Browne 

Director of Central Planning 

lanthony-browne@svgcpd.com 
 
 

Grenada - Ministry of Finance & Energy 

Kim Frederick 

Permanent Secretary 

Kim.Frederick@gov.gd 
 
 

SVG - Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, Fisheries and Rural Transformation 

Raymond Rayan 

Permanent Secretary 

rayjoel3163@hotmail.com 
 
 

Grenada - Ministry of Agriculture, Lands, Forestry and Fisheries. 

Merina Jessamy 

Permanent Secretary 

merina.jessamy@gov.gd 
 

 



 

The World Bank  
OECS Regional Agriculture Competitiveness Project (P158958) 

 

 

  
Apr 03, 2017 Page 23 of 23  

 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

 

Task Team Leader(s): Eli Weiss 
 

  Approved By 

Safeguards Advisor:   

Practice Manager/Manager: Garry Charlier 23-Apr-2017 

Country Director: Sabine Hader 25-Apr-2017 
 

    
 
 

 
 
 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects
















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 
 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 1 of 33  

     

 
     

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 08-Dec-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC21361 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 2 of 33  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Haiti P162908 Resilient Productive 
Landscapes in Haiti 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN 04-Dec-2017 28-Feb-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Economy and 
Finance 

Ministry of Agriculture, 
Natural Resources and 
Rural Development 
(MARNDR), Ministry of 
Environment 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The Project Development Objectives are: (i) to improve the adoption of resilience-enhancing agricultural and 
landscape management practices in selected sub-watersheds; and (ii) to enable the Government to respond promptly 
and effectively to an eligible emergency 
 
 
Components 

Strengthening of institutional and organizational capacities for landscape level interventions 
Investments to strengthen the establishment of resilient agricultural production and practices 
Project Coordination and Monitoring and Evaluation 
Emergency Response Mechanism 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 
 
FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 
SUMMARY 
 

Total Project Cost 26.21 

Total Financing 26.21 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFin3 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 3 of 33  

 

Total World Bank Group Financing 15.00 

     World Bank Lending 15.00 
 

Total Non-World Bank Group and Non-Client Government Financing 5.00 

Multilateral and Bilateral Financing (Concessional) 5.00 

 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
Baseline and business as usual 
 

1. Haiti is a densely populated island state, the third largest nation by area and population (10.4 
million) in the Caribbean and benefits from a rich economic endowment. Assets include proximity 
and access to major markets, a young labor force, a dynamic diaspora, and substantial geographic, 
historical, and cultural assets. The country possesses untapped markets and unmet demand for the 
private sector to explore, including agribusiness, light manufacturing, and tourism. Yet Haiti remains 
the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere and one of the poorest countries in the world, with 
a GDP per capita of US$820. Almost 60 percent of the population lives below the national poverty 
line with marked differences between urban and rural areas

1
, inequality is high, with wealth and 

economic opportunity concentrated around Port-au-Prince. Access to basic services is limited, 
particularly in rural areas, which has translated into low human development indicators (Haiti ranks 
168th out of 187 countries in the Human Development Index). 

 
2. Agriculture continues to play a dominant role in the Haitian economy, contributing over 20 

percent of GDP and most rural Haitians rely on agricultural production as their primary livelihood 
strategy. The agriculture sector also accounts for around 50 percent of overall employment, 66 
percent of employment in rural areas, and 75 percent of employment in low income households. 
Agriculture is the sole economic activity for 55 percent of the rural households, and involves more 

                                                           
1
 75% fall below poverty line in rural areas compared to 40% in urban areas 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 4 of 33  

 

than 70 percent of them. This production is critical for food security
2
, in a context where more than 

half of the population is affected by undernutrition (2016, FAO); around a third of the production is 
being used for subsistence

3
, while the rest of productions is sold generating much needed income. 

 
3. Climate change is significantly impacting agriculture and will increasingly do so in the future. 

Climate change is projected to manifest itself in Haiti the following ways:  a) increases in 

temperatures: it is likely that temperatures will increase by 0.8-1°C by the year 2030 and by 1.5-

1.7°C by the year 2060, with the highest increases expected in the months of June or July; b) 
decreases in precipitation: precipitation is expected to decrease by 5.9-20 percent by 2030 and by 
10.6-35.8 percent by 2060, with the greatest decreases also expected in the months of June or July

4
. 

This will affect agriculture in general, and subsistence agriculture in particular, which is primarily 
rain-fed and therefore highly vulnerable to rainfall patterns. A combination of increasing 
temperatures and decreasing precipitation, especially in June and July, is likely to impose 
particularly severe stresses on agricultural systems, especially given the highly-degraded nature of 
soils and vegetation in the target sub-watersheds.  

 
4. Haiti’s population and territory are extremely vulnerable to natural disasters and exposure is 

expected to increase as climate change impact intensifies. Haiti has the highest index of 
vulnerability to hurricanes (12,9 on a scale of 13) among small Low Income Countries (LIC) Island 
States and is the third country hardest hit by climatic events in the world

5
. Ninety-six (96) percent of 

the population is considered at risk. Climate change predictions for 2050 and beyond suggest that 
more than 50 percent of the total area of Haiti will be in danger of desertification largely due to 
climate variability and change. Extreme weather events, according to the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC)

6
, indicate that the Caribbean region is likely to be exposed in the future to 

more intense and frequent extreme weather events. On average, each disaster costs two percent of 
GDP per year, and occasionally much more (in 2008, tropical storms’ economic impact reached 15 
percent of GDP), and significantly affects the agriculture sector

7
. The country is highly mountainous 

with more than half of Haiti’s territory having slopes over 20 degrees, that centuries of 
deforestation have rendered particularly vulnerable to climatic events. Exposed agricultural fields 
which are now commonly exploited on slopes

8
 further exacerbates the issues. Deforestation, and 

inappropriate agricultural practices have produced predictable interlinked environmental and social 
consequences: the loss of topsoil, decreasing soil fertility, rain water run-off and depletion of 
aquifers, droughts, agricultural productive capacity decline, farmers’ losses of incomes and rural 
out-migration. In a context of climate change, extreme weather events and their average intensity 
and frequency are expected to increase, and will further accelerate land and population 

                                                           
2
 Undernutrition concerns more than half of the population (FAO)  

3
 Traditionally, rural Haitians take advantage of seasonal, nutrient rich productions, to complement their diet (fruits, vegetables, 

legumes, small livestock), yet this diversity is at risk due to the deterioration of natural resources that decreases the availability 
of many of these sources of supplementation. 
4
 http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/presentations/haitipres.pdf   

5
 Global index on Climate Change, 2016 : from 1993 to 2012 the country faced 2 droughts, 1 earthquake, 31 floodings and 26 

tropical storms/hurricanes. 
6
 https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/wg2/   

7
 In the case of tropical storms, almost 50 % of damages and losses in productive sectors have been concentrated in the 

agriculture sector (PDNA, Feb 2017)  
8
 63% of agricultural land is on more than 20 degrees’ slopes, and 40% of cultivated land in mountains is on slope of more than 

50 degrees. 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 5 of 33  

 

vulnerability trend
9
 : identified climate related hazards in Haiti include flash flooding, salt water 

intrusion, drought, intense rainfall, landslides, severe soil erosion, and hurricanes
10

.  
 

5. Addressing intertwined human and ecological vulnerabilities requires a holistic landscape-level 
“productive” approach. The above-mentioned context provides a rationale for integrating a 
landscape approach within watersheds (or sub-watershed) in Haiti to address major soil erosion and 
water retention capacity, prioritizing interventions helping to reduce downstream impacts. 
Improving the natural resource base through the promotion of climate-smart productions and 
practices best adapted to the agro-ecological context

11
, and, as importantly, the capacity to 

generate sustainable incomes out of these, is expected to have a significant positive impact on 
agriculture and the many people who derive their livelihoods and income from, together with the 
provision of nutritious food, and jobs. It will also contribute to protect in a sustainable way 
communities at large against the risks of flash flooding and landslides linked to soil erosion and 
water runoff.  

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
6. Agriculture in Haiti is beset with problems, despite its importance in local food security and 

contribution to GDP. Production is highly dependent on rainfall, with around five percent of farmers 
using irrigation. Most farmers have poor access to tools, machinery, and purchased inputs including 
improved seeds and fertilizer. Access to credit in rural areas is not a viable option either for poor 
farmers. In addition, there is little organization among producers and underdeveloped value chains, 
further compounded by a lack of rural infrastructure to access markets e.g. rural roads for 
connectivity with buyers, water storage and irrigation for production in dryer seasons and mitigation 
of drought impacts, food dryers and storage for reduction of vulnerability to prices volatility, 
reduction of post-harvest losses, , improved quality for better marketability as well as accessibility of 
nutritious food all year long. The lack of value addition along value chains, reliability and 
sustainability of sources of incomes for farmers generated from tree-crops and other types of 
resilient agricultural productions constitutes a major impediment to the maintenance and 
sustainable expansion of such systems. This also drives their choices towards higher demanded/less 
perishable productions, often at the expense of the environment (e.g. peanuts production on 
slopes, trees cutting for land expansion and/or cash generation with fire wood or charcoal 
production and sales), contributing to the vicious circle of land degradation and increasing 
population vulnerability. In addition, women play a major role in the post-harvest marketing of 
products in Haiti, and the improvement of these value chains is a critical factor for women’s 
economic empowerment, livelihoods and resilience, which offers opportunities for vulnerable 
population- such as women and youth- to increase rural income and jobs diversification.   
 

7. In a country that is already densely populated, steady population growth and land inheritance 

                                                           
9
 Based on available projections, major climatic changes expected to occur in Haiti include a reduction in rainfall of 6 to 20 

percent by 2030 and 11 to 36 percent by 2060. While annual precipitation is projected to decrease, the more limited rainfall 
events are expected to become more intense. Temperatures are also expected to increase by 0.8°C to 1.0°C by 2030, and by 
1.5°C to 1.7°C by 2060.  
10

 Source: Review of Current and Planned Adaptation Action: The Caribbean (Nov, 2011) 
11

 These would seek to improve the stability and quality of the soil substrate through measures such as agroforestry, live fences, 
hedgerows intercropping, vegetative wind breaks, soil vegetative cover, conservation tillage, among others. 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 6 of 33  

 

rules
12

 continues to put pressure on land, and drives land use changes. Haiti has 961 inhabitants 
per square kilometer of arable land, the highest pressure density on arable land in the Western 
Hemisphere. Farm sizes have shrunk dramatically over time: 85 percent of farms now have less than 
1 hectare. The main food crops produced are rice (in lowlands), maize, bananas, yams, cassava, 
beans, and millet, and main export crops include coffee and mangoes. Diversification has commonly 
been practiced by farmers as a risk-mitigation strategy (70 percent of farmers produce more than 4 
crops and 75 percent raise some livestock) but is becoming harder to implement in increasingly 
smaller plots. In addition, the traditional practice of creole garden (or “jardin creole”

13
) 

corresponding to small but highly diversified agro-forestry systems, providing fresh and nutritious 
food throughout most of the year among other benefits (high biodiversity, higher productivity linked 
to species associations, soil protection and quality), have tended to decrease to give way to annual 
crops. Yet these resilient systems are particularly adapted to face harsh topographic and climatic 
conditions and are now recognized as a typical climate-smart/agro-ecological best practices. 
Restoring these agro-forestry systems is however not affordable for the vast majority of farmers.   
     

8. The natural resource base and agriculture are linked by a negative feedback loop. Unsustainable 
farming practices such as agriculture on slopes and marginal areas, lack of agriculture conservation 
technologies, are driven by land pressure, low farmers’ education level, and poor farmers’ economic 
conditions. These have contributed to the severe degradation of around 85 percent of watersheds

14
 

with wide ranging impacts, namely on (i) yields -the depletion of the natural resource base and high 
exposure and vulnerability to extreme weather events have driven an average rate of decline in 
yields of between .5 to 1.2 percent per annum (World Bank, 2005). Stagnating or shrinking yields in 
turn further exacerbate land pressure, causing more degradation and deforestation; and (ii) on 
critical habitats such as mangroves

15
 -run off from denuded slopes and gullies leading to soil washed 

away and settling into valleys, rivers and eventually into the sea. Soil erosion caused by water, either 
as direct rainfall on the soil surface, or indirectly through gullies and channels, causes an annual loss 
of land for the whole country estimated at about 37 million metric tons (MT). This corresponds to an 
average loss of about 15 MT/ha/yr across the country. Without trees’ complex root systems to hold 
Haiti’s mountainous terrain in place, protect gullies from serious erosion and prevent water 
resources depletion, vulnerability of landscapes and people living on them is doomed to increase. 
Reducing poverty and building system resilience will require an integrated management approach 
that considers the complex interactions between the environment and agriculture and turns the 
negative- into a positive feedback loop.  Climate change is expected to increase these negative 
feedback loops. 
 

9. The unique challenge to building resilience in the Haitian Agriculture sector arises from the 
combination of climate change adding further stress to a system already engaged in a negative 
feedback loop between the agriculture production and the natural resource base.  As described 
above, the depleting natural resource base and lack of landscape level management increase the 
sensitivity of agricultural production and ecosystems to weather and climate events. Climate change 

                                                           
12

 All land is inherited bilaterally and equally between siblings, with arable land being usually divided immediately. 
13

 A Creole garden is a multi-storied agro-forestry system including a mix of perennial and annual crops, i.e. woody perennials, 
tree crops (i.e. bread fruit, mango, avocado, bananas, citrus, coffee), vegetable and staple crops, playing multiple roles, 
including household’s food security and providing ecosystems benefits 
14

 According to Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources, and Rural Development (MARNDR), 2016  
15

 Mangroves are essential for maintaining fish nursing sites, protecting coasts against storms, and lowland crops from soil 
salinization (e.g. rice production) which are ultimately important for livelihoods 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 7 of 33  

 

is expected to further amplify the exposure to such events. With both sensitivity and exposure set to 
increase, vulnerability will follow suit. The weather and climate events that today’s depleted natural 
resource base offers much reduced protection against are congruent with priority issues for 
resilience building in the climate change context: extreme events, drought, extreme rainfall events, 
etc. In each of these cases, the health of the natural resource base is a key determinant of farmer 
resilience. For example, the risk of drought is much reduced if the moisture retention capacity of 
soils is rehabilitated, micro-catchment areas include water storage facilities and water is being 
retained for longer periods in upstream forests. As a result, any effort to build resilience to climate 
change in Agriculture will need to take an integrated approach taking into account both sensitivity 
due to a diminished natural resource base and exposure due to climate change. 

 
Institutional context 
 
10. Ministry of Environment (MdE) and Ministry of Agriculture Natural Resources and Rural 

Development (MARNDR) recognize the interdependency between Natural Resources 
Management and Agriculture Production as well as the added stress imposed by climate change. 
In its policy framework 2010-2025, MARNDR identifies watersheds degradation as a major issue, and 
establishes the reduction of environmental vulnerability as a long-term objective requiring the 
protection of environment and natural resources. It also establishes the prevention and 
management of natural disasters as a priority

16
. In 2006, the Government submitted their National 

Adaptation Program of Action (NAPA, 2006) (Plan d’ Action National d’ Adaptation - PANA).  In this 
document, the Government lays out their most urgent risks from climate change and propose a way 
forward.  One of the key risks outlined is that of soil erosion

17
 and its relationship with the 

agriculture sector vulnerability. In a recent update of the National Action Plan against Desertification 
(2015), MdE establishes as one objective the collaborative development of management plans for 
the most vulnerable watersheds in the country. However, the operationalization of the Plans has yet 
to unfold. The need for stronger cross-sectoral collaboration is mutually recognized, but little 
concrete actions have taken place in a context of institutional weaknesses, absence of joint planning 
and insufficient budget to operationalize actions plans.  

 
11. In response to the country’s vulnerability to current climate variability and to climate change, there 

is a baseline of investments in this area: 

 World Bank (WB) financed Strengthening Hydro-Meteorological Services project (2015-2020, 
US$ 5 million), which aims to strengthen Haiti’s institutional capacity to provide hydro-
meteorological and climate information services customized to the needs of the civil protection 
and agriculture sectors, contributing to increasing disaster and climate resilience. The main 
counterpart agency is the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development 

                                                           
16

 The MARNDR Triennial Plan for Relaunching Agriculture 2013-2016 also identifies as a strategic pillar the watershed 
integrated approach (ridge to reef). 
17

 “Haiti is a mountainous country whose peaks reach up to 2684 meters over altitude. Poor farming practices weaken the soil 
capital and weaken the productive capacity as they lead the arable land towards the sea Land erosion, under the effects of 
some natural factors. Drought, wind, rain and some anthropogenic factors: excessive deforestation and uncontrolled 
construction in urban areas leads to a country's land desertification processes. The vulnerability of the agricultural sector is 
closely linked to that of water and soil.  Climate change by acting on water resources also influence agricultural production. On 
the other hand, winds, floods, droughts have direct impacts on agriculture given the level of soil erosion leading to their 
aridity. In addition, a study conducted by the MOE (2000) argues that early in the second half of the 21st century, more than 
half of the area of land of Haiti will be at desertification risk due to climatic conditions.” 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 8 of 33  

 

(MARNDR). 

 WB financed Relaunching Agriculture: Strengthening Agriculture Public Services Project Phase II - 
RESEPAG II  (2012-2019, US$ 85 million) which aims to  (a) reinforce the capacity of the Ministry 
of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development to provide or facilitate access to 
services in the agricultural sector; (b) increase market access to small producers and food 
security in Selected Areas; (c) improve livelihood in areas affected by Hurricane Matthew; and 
(d) enable the Government to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency. The 
project finances interventions in the North/North East, Centre, and South departments. It 
supports in particular a Farmer Subsidy scheme using various technical packages and 
implemented through individual vouchers to improve the adoption of improved agriculture 
inputs/technologies (with a particular emphasis on climate resilient production and practices) ; 
finances Farmer Field Schools as a vehicle to promote best practices (extension services 
mechanism) ; and a Market Support Facility, using matching grants to allow group of producers 
to add value to their productions (value chain development).  

 Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) financed Natural Disaster Mitigation Program II (2016-
2020, US$ 42 million), which aims to reduce rural economic losses through the improvement of 
climate risk management in selected watersheds. Some specific objectives include to: (i) 
increase capacities for adaptation to climate change and disaster risk management (DRM) in the 
agriculture sector; (ii) improve water and sediment conservation in selected gullies of priority 
watersheds; and (iii) reduce the risk of rural economic losses due to floods in targeted 
watersheds. 

 United States Agency for International Development (USAID) Reforestation Project (2017-2021, 
US$ 40 million), which aim is to reduce the threat of deforestation, improve resilience to 
economic and natural shocks, increase tree cover in targeted areas, and improve environmental 
governance and coordination. It will be implemented in northern departments. 

 International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) financed Projet Small Irrigation and 
Market Access Development Project in the Nippes and Goavienne Region (PPI-3) (2012-2017, 
US$ 13.2 million), which aims to achieve a sustainable improvement in the livelihoods 
and incomes of rural poor households, especially those belonging to the most vulnerable 
groups. Its specific objectives include: (i) increasing agricultural production sustainably through 
efficient water management and the consolidation of both collective and individual irrigated 
agriculture; (ii) improving the value of irrigated agriculture production and increasing farmers' 
access to markets and financial services in order to raise the incomes of the poorest families; 
and (iii) strengthening the planning, organizational and management capacities of grass-roots 
organizations in order to facilitate their access to markets and financial services. 

 Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) implemented with LDCF co-financing of the 
Strengthening Climate Resilience and Reducing Disaster Risk in Agriculture to Improve Food 
Security in Haiti Post Earthquake project (2012-2017, US$ 12 million), which aims to increase the 
resilience of vulnerable farmers including their livelihoods and agro-ecosystems against the 
impacts of climate variability and in the post-earthquake crises through integration of disaster 
risk management and adaptation practices in the agricultural sector and replication of more 
hazard resilient crop varieties and cultivation technologies. 

 UNEP implemented with GEF co-financing Program Ecosystem approach on the South Coast of 
Haiti (2015-2020, US$ 6.2 million), aims to strengthen the resilience of ecosystems in 
communities vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. This program advocates an integrated 
strategy encompassing all ecosystems and agricultural production areas from the mountains to 

https://www2.fundsforngos.org/category/democracy-and-good-governance/


 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 9 of 33  

 

the sea. The various components of the project will also try to address the whole issue of the 
destruction of the ecosystems of the Great South in a perspective of recovery and the fight 
against poverty. 

 French Development Agency (AFD) and European Union co-financed Project for Food Security 
(SECAL) (2013-2017, 15 million euros), which objective is to support agricultural sectors with 
high potential in southern Haiti, contribute to improving the food security of people in the South 
Department and generate additional revenue in the rural areas.  

 
12. Collaborative efforts are underway to boost the implementation of watershed approaches to 

strengthen the management of natural resources (wood, water, soil). In the context of the COP21 
process and resulting Paris Agreement, and in order to relieve the agriculture and population 
pressure on forests and landscapes, as well as adapt to the effects of climate change, a Haiti-based 
NGO, the J/P Haitian Relief Organization (J/P HRO), together with MdE and MARNDR, developed in 
2015 a proposal for a broad initiative – Haiti Takes Roots (HTR) – focused on watershed 
management and reforestation in key areas of Haiti

18
. Its objective is to facilitate engagement, 

coordination, learning, monitoring and synergies in a programmatic approach. This platform would 
be a conduit to operationalize Ministries’ plans, helping to bring key actors together around the 
issue, and establish long term strategies and mechanisms to sustain and implement its objectives. 
Supported by seed funding from J/P HRO and the French government, HTR has shaped its 
governance mechanisms

19
. The IDB and the WB participate in this initiative and more partners are 

expected to join. Two studies have been financed under the HTR umbrella by the WB together with 
J/P HRO to develop a participatory watershed management planning methodology and a post-
hurricane Charcoal and Arboreal Assessments

20
, contributing to the development of a body of 

knowledge and resources. The proposed Resilient Productive Landscapes Project (RPLP) is envisaged 
as a proof of concept under HTR aimed at being scaled-up in other (sub)watersheds of the country. 
For this reason, and in order to also benefit from the WB project management experience, J/P HRO 
has committed to provide a parallel financing of US$5 million to RPLP, which will be fully blended 
with IDA and the Global Environment Facility/Least Developed Countries Fund (GEF/LDCF) co-
financing. In this context, LDCF will leverage IDA and parallel financing resources to more 
systematically integrate the climate adaptation lens into productive-oriented interventions.  
 

13. RPLP builds on solid analytical work, as well as the lessons learned from other Global Environment 
Facility (GEF) funded and donor-funded project, including the World Bank’s own projects. Key 
lessons learned emphasize in particular the need for collaborative efforts including strong 
communities’ participatory engagement throughout a project process and continuous institutional 
commitment and support, as well as the necessary generation of revenues for farmers out of the 
supported investments. Since the 2010 Earthquake, the WB’s portfolio in Agriculture expanded with 
RESEPAG I and RESEPAG II,

21
 supporting MARNDR’s capacity to deliver public goods and piloting 

                                                           
18

 The mission of HTR is to contribute to a more rational management of Haiti’s natural, renewable through the management of 
watersheds, the restoration of soils, increasing forest cover, and the promotion of agroforestry – most notably in vulnerable 
watersheds – therefore breaking the vicious cycle of poverty and deforestation. 
19

 HTR shall be governed by a Steering committee chaired by the Prime Minister and supported by a Secretariat, a technical 
platform, a Monitoring and Evaluation Committee, a Geographical Platform, and a virtual Resource Centre; it will include 
members from concerned ministries, institutional partners, international organizations, civil society and private sector. 
20

  PROFOR-funded works to develop (i) a Resilient Productive Landscape Planning Methodology (P162352), and (ii) Haiti 
Arboreal Assessments - post- hurricane tree counting and charcoal assessment (P164024). 
21

 Relaunching Agriculture: Strengthening Agriculture Public Services Project – Phase II (P126744) is ongoing and will close on 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 10 of 33  

 

incentives schemes to support farmers’ improved productions through vouchers mechanisms and 
the strengthening of agricultural value chains through matching grants. RPLP would take advantage 
of the experience gained and use the same approaches, adjusted to the specificities of RPLP. On the 
environment side, the GEF co-funded several projects in Haiti and in the Caribbean, that focused on 
increasing the resilience of agriculture and ecosystems, and boosting food security through climate 
change adaptation. Several of these projects have also focused specifically on the Grand Sud 
(greater south area), given its increased vulnerability to climate shocks. While many of these 
projects were financially supported for the duration of the project, there was little effort to ensure 
that this financing was sustainable.     
 

14. In the context of Climate Change, sustainable financing over time is an important tool to address 
environmental and social vulnerability, and to support Climate adaptation and mitigate Climate 
Change impact. Ministries and other institutions in Haiti face significant financial resources 
constraints. Sustainability of short term programs have consistently been challenging. To address a 
similar problem faced by five other Caribbean islands, a GEF financed project, Sustainable financing 
and management of Eastern Caribbean Marine Ecosystem Project (P103470) (closed June 2016), set 
up and endowed a Caribbean Biodiversity Fund (CBF) mechanism to ensure sustainable financing 
over time to combat threats to biodiversity that arise through human, climate or other sources. 
Under the proposed Project, Haiti, which is an observer and has taken steps to become a full 
member of the CBF, would use LDCF financing (and co-financing from other donors) to join the CBF 
by contributing to the endowment, and establish a National Trust, which will enable Haiti to access 
long term sustainable financing for climate adaptation and biodiversity conservation into perpetuity. 
While the CBF has for various reasons retained this name, it will create a climate change adaptation 
window under RPLP to address climate change adaptation priority needs. This National Trust shall 
use the interests raised by the CBF from the LDCF funding to continue to fund sub-projects that 
would support primarily the sustainability of interventions financed under RPLP, and other future 
climate change adaptation related investments. The interest raised, however, will be off the total 
amount in the CBF (over US$34 million currently) to allow all the CBF countries to benefit from 
economies of scale. This longer-term source of predictable financing will mean that when a disaster 
strikes Haiti, the current practice of diverting government funding to address that crisis will not 
impact this fund. As such it presents a key long term stabilizing mechanism for addressing 
adaptation. 
 

15. The Project is consistent with the climate change action plan submitted to the UN Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), in the context of the Paris meetings in 2015 (Intended 
Nationally Determined Contribution – INDC)

22
. The Action Plan specifically names natural resource 

management within watersheds, use of agricultural technologies adapted to climate change, use of 
drought-resistant crops, soil conservation, reducing disaster risk in areas most vulnerable to 
drought, reforestation of upstream areas, as priorities for adaptation within the plan.  
 

16. It responds directly to strategic objectives laid out in the GEF Programming Strategy on 
Adaptation to Climate Change: Least Developed Countries Fund Special Climate Change Fund 
(June 11, 2014) and Haiti’s National Adaptation Program of Action (NAPA, 2006) by helping the 
country reduce its vulnerability to soil erosion, which are exacerbated through increasing volatile 

                                                                                                                                                                                           
December 31, 2019. 
22

 http://www4.unfccc.int/submissions/INDC/Published%20Documents/Haiti/1/CPDN_Republique%20d'Haiti.pdf 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 11 of 33  

 

climatic events (floods, cyclones, hurricanes) and human (agriculture) activity. The project will 
contribute to the LDCF strategy Objective 1 (Reduce the vulnerability of people, livelihoods, physical 
assets and natural systems to the adverse effects of climate change); Objective 2 (Strengthen 
institutional and technical capacities for effective climate change adaptation) ; and  Objective 3 
(Integrate climate change adaptation into relevant policies, plans and associated processes)

23
. The 

Project, using LDCF funds jointly with IDA financing and J/P HRO parallel financing, will (i) contribute 
towards building an increased awareness of climate change impacts, vulnerability and adaption, and 
directly reducing the vulnerability of farmers to climate change through investment in more resilient 
agricultural practices. These will occur in (sub)watersheds areas by financing climate-smart 
agricultural production practices (agroforestry, conservation agriculture, slope management, etc.) ; 
the project will also finance improvement of the product value chains to generate higher and more 
sustainable income, and reinforcement of climate resilient infrastructure assets ; (ii) support the 
enabling environment by strengthening institutional capacities to develop and implement sound 
cross-sectoral policies and action plans integrating climate change adaptation considerations in 
national and local level strategies ; access to and analyze geo-spatial and other climate related data 
to better address climate risks and inform decision processes ; and support a mechanism aimed at 
sustaining long term financing of adaptation technologies and practices; and (iii) it will provide 
extensive trainings programs to increase skills and knowledge tailored to the key stakeholders and 
audiences. RPLP will support the achievement of objectives set forth under the NAPA, which served 
as the basis for the plan submitted to the UNFCCC in 2015. The document weighted adaptation 
options based on their impact on vulnerable natural resources and groups, and ranked “watershed 
management and soil conservation” at the top (5 on a 1 to 5 scale).    
 

17. RPLP is consistent with the World Bank Group’s Haiti Country Partnerships Framework (CPF) 2016-
2019. Objective 1 of the CPF aims to enhance economic activities and income-generation 
opportunities, including in the agricultural sector through improving agricultural productivity by 
reinforcing the ability of farmer’s groups to bring quality products to market. RPLP will support value 
chains to access to new and better markets and reduce production risks while decreasing 
vulnerability to the effects of prices and climate shocks. The CPF’s Objective 2 targets improving 
disaster prevention and strengthening climate resilience through a number of avenues, including the 
analysis of land management practices and definition of entry points for investment in the 
promotion of resilient productive landscapes. RPLP will directly tackle the issue of improving disaster 
prevention, reducing the vulnerability to the adverse impacts of climate change, increase adaptive 
capacity to respond to the impacts of climate change, and strengthening climate resilience. It will 
target four sub-watersheds within hydrological zones hard-hit by Hurricane Matthew in the 
Department of Nippes, and help mitigate the impact of future extreme weather events.   

 
18. RPLP will work closely and coordinate actions with other development partners, especially 

through the HTR platform.  Given the challenges with fragmented donor contributions to all sectors 
in Haiti as identified by the CPF, the HTR platform will be important for the sector to bring all 
partners around critical development themes, and coordinate efforts for broader impact. In addition 
to ongoing projects mentioned above (see point 11) new projects with similar objectives are under 
development that RPLP will coordinate with. These include projects to be financed through IDB, 
AFD, and IFAD.  

                                                           
23

 Updated Results-Based Management Framework For Adaptation To Climate Change Under The Least Developed Countries 
Fund And The Special Climate Change Fund”, GEF/LDCF.SCCF.17/05/Rev.01 October 15, 2014 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 12 of 33  

 

 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
 

19. The Project Development Objectives are: (i) to improve the adoption of resilience-enhancing 
agricultural and landscape management practices in selected sub-watersheds; and (ii) to enable the 
Government to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible emergency. 

 
20. The crisis or emergency referred to in the PDO reflects a legal requirement that relates to the 

Contingency Emergency Response Component (component 4 of the Project).  
 

21. Selected areas for intervention. While Component 1 addressing institutional and organizational 
capacity would have a nationwide coverage, Component 2 would be implemented in selected sub-
watershed. In the process of selection of these sub-watersheds, specific aspects were considered: (i) 
Agro-ecological criteria; (ii) Socio-economic criteria; (iii) Environmental vulnerability criteria; and (iv) 
Institutional criteria. Using a ranking scale of 1 to 5 for each of these criteria to prioritize areas, and 
based on available funding from the Project, four sub-watersheds were selected. These are:  (i) Rivière 
Froide watershed; (ii) Petite Rivière de Nippes watershed; (iii) Piémont area and Baconnois Plain; and 
(iv) Bondeau sub-wastershed and its mangrove. They offer a diversity of agro-ecological conditions, 
yet geographically close, within the department of Nippes, under two municipalities.  

 
22. In the context of RPLP, resilience is defined as the ability of people, assets, and systems to resist, 

absorb, accommodate, and recover in a timely and efficient manner from climatic hazards without 
undermining its welfare, value, structure, and functioning, while also maintaining the capacity for 
adaptation, learning, and transformation in the long term. Resilient-enhancing agriculture and 
landscape management practices correspond to the group of technologies, practices and systemic 
approaches under the climate smart agriculture and landscapes framework of the Global Alliance for 
Climate Smart Agriculture. In the context of the RPLP, these include interlinked actions at diverse 
levels: at farm level; along food value chains; and, at landscape level.  

 
23. Landscape is defined as “an area large enough to produce vital ecosystem services, but small enough 

to be managed by the people using the land which produces those services” (FAO 2013). A landscape 
can contain various ecosystems, and human activities and institutions are viewed as an integral part of 
landscapes. Ecosystems services include soil health, essential for sustainable and productive 
agriculture; water retention; biodiversity conservation; carbon sequestration; renewable energy 
sources; among others. 

 

Project Beneficiaries 
 
24. Primary beneficiaries of RPLP will be smallholder farmers and communities living in the selected sub-

watersheds targeted by the Project that depend on agricultural production for their livelihoods. In a 
context of high poverty prevalence, extensive land use for agricultural production including on steep 
slopes including gullies, very small size plots, degraded or at risk for degradation, all farmers and 
communities can be considered vulnerable. They will benefit individually from improved agricultural 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 13 of 33  

 

production practices adapted to the agro-ecological context, improving soil conditions and becoming 
more resilient to extreme weather events, as well as from improved marketing conditions; and 
collectively from reduced soil erosion, improved water retention capacity, enhanced field level 
productivity linked to ecosystems services generated collectively and synergies created between 
differed production systems at the watershed level. 

 
25. Interventions will also benefit key actors along the agriculture value chains, including service and input 

providers, buyers, processors, and retailers. Lastly, it will benefit the national, regional and local 
institutions in providing with essential tools, knowledge, and management capacity of landscape level 
interventions. Direct beneficiaries would include: (i) producers who have benefited from the voucher 
mechanism (3,000 of which minimum 30% are female); (ii) Service Providers (100 of which minimum 
10% are female); (iii) members of producers’ groups that benefit from co-financing in selected value 
chains (800 of which minimum 50% are female); and, (iv) persons trained in Ministries and local / 
regional authorities (100). The total percentage of women is estimated on the basis of a weighted 
average.  In order to strengthen the role of women, they will receive preferential support to benefit 
from the Project’s interventions.  

 
26. Private sector. Investments of RPLP look at poor to extremely poor segments of the population. 

Access to rural credit is not an option for an already vulnerable population. In addition, changing 
practices, even if expected to provide longer term gains and reduction of vulnerability, involves an 
important level of risk in a context of frequent natural disasters, occurrence of pests, and markets 
uncertainties. No insurance mechanism exists either to cover for such types of high frequency, high 
impact types of risks. RPLP would therefore provide technical packages to producers (including 
knowledge/services and inputs on a one-off basis) required for them to move towards a less 
vulnerable category, and doing so in a concentrated manner in a determined area to produce the 
expected broader ecosystems benefits. The Project would strengthen the private sector actors related 
to agricultural production valorization, critical to develop economically viable and sustainable 
businesses as well as job opportunities; the voucher mechanism involves systematically private sector 
beneficiaries, which supply such inputs and services at market price. Matching grants for groups of 
producers or other actors along the value chains will also aim at filling access to finance gaps to 
increase agricultural production valorization. The Project will also work with the Ministries to 
strengthen their capacity to deliver on their public good mandates, and establish the enabling 
environment for supporting resilient landscapes management. 
 

27. Gender and Nutrition. RPLP acknowledges that women and men are not given the same opportunities 
towards climate adaption and raising of incomes. Women face supplementary constraints -such as less 
access to information, to assets, to credit, to inputs- that have to be taken into account. 
Mainstreaming gender and nutrition into the different investments and monitoring and evaluation 
(M&E) mechanisms will ensure that the Project will contribute to reduce gender gaps when building 
resilience and contribute toward improving food security. The Project will build on experience and 
knowledge developed through RESEPAG II Project, which will be facilitated by the fact that RPLP core 
actions to support climate smart practices adoption and value chains improvement will use similar 
instruments as RESEPAG II. Namely the design of selection mechanisms of beneficiaries and co-
financing rules for matching grants, the tailoring of participatory and training activities, including 
related to nutrition, and gender-disaggregated data collection in M&E and grievances, will be 
embedded into RPLP. In order to  address any possible outstanding  gender gaps in the areas of 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 14 of 33  

 

interventions,  further  analysis and gender planning will be conducted prior to Project 
implementation by the RESEPAG II gender specialist.   
 

28. Food Security co-benefits. Food insecurity is an important problem in Haiti particularly in rural areas 
that the Project will tackle at different levels. First, the promotion of activities contributing to the 
restoration of degraded areas and improvement of current practices in the different watersheds will 
have a positive impact on overall agricultural productivity as well as on the production of food of high 
nutritional value (mostly fruits and vegetables). Second, the Project will contribute to improve food 
security through the promotion of crop quality and diversity induced with agroforestry investments, 
named traditionally “jardins creoles” in Haiti.  The project expects to promote several types of fruit 
trees, such as breadfruit, coconut, mango, guava, banana, citrus, as well as vegetables and yam. In 
addition, the combination of such investments combined with small infrastructure and support to 
commercialization (through groups of producers, intermediaries, or small enterprises) within the 
entire value chain will therefore contribute to their greater accessibility, availability and thus 
affordability of food, creating more resilience of households toward food insecurity. Investments 
could be related not only to private but also institutional markets. The government has already been 
discussing with school feeding program in the area of intervention. Such intervention would seek to 
help increase the accessibility of nutritious local food to Haitian students and guarantee a stable 
market access to institutional markets for producers and groups. 
 

29. Climate change adaptation co-benefits. RPLP activities are expected to yield significant adaptation co-
benefits (as well as mitigation co-benefits described below). An initial assessment at concept note 
stage indicated that >80 percent of RPLP financing would achieve climate co-benefits. The below table 
summarizes expected adaptation co-benefits: 
 
Table1 Climate change adaptation co-benefits  
 

Current situation Project interventions (selection) Adaptation co-benefits 

Increasing vulnerability to climate 
change driven by: 
- Increased exposure to climate 

change impacts such as: droughts, 
extreme heat, flash floods etc. 

- Increasing sensitivity of production 
to climatic phenomena due to 
reduced resilience driven by a 
degrading natural resource base 

- Increased sensitivity due to a lack of 
adaptive planning capacity at the 
micro-catchment level 

- Increased sensitivity due to lack of 
cross-sectoral adaptive institutional 
capacity to take informed decisions, 
guide, report, and monitor 
interventions on the ground in 
function of a changing climate 

Capacity building: 
- Development of Master Plan for 

Resilient Landscapes Development 
- Intensive technical trainings within key 

line Ministries, at national and local 
level and other relevant stakeholders 

- Capacity building in cartography, 
satellite imaging data collection and 
analysis for climate modeling, , 
development and application of spatial 
decision support tools, forecasting and 
early-warning systems 
 

Investments: 
- Development of “technical packages” 

(including inputs, such as tree 
seedlings, seeds, stakes, fences; and 
services, such as grafting, and technical 
assistance)” adapted to specific agro-
ecological zones 

- Development of participatory 
investments plans identifying priority 
investments and their geographical 

Strengthening of resilience through 
fortification of natural resource 
base at landscape level: 

- Soil quality improvement in 
areas with high risks of erosion 

- Increased water retention 
capacity 

 
Reduced sensitivity of agricultural 
production & livelihoods to climate 
impacts: 

- Increased coverage of resilient 
agricultural practices, adapted 
to the topography and agro-
ecological context 

- Improved adaptation capacity 
of agricultural production 
through increased 
diversification of productions 
practices to increase resilience 

- Improved livelihoods with 
additional and more diversified 
incomes 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 15 of 33  

 

locations;  
- Development of participatory business 

plans based on specific vulnerability 
criteria (including ecosystems and 
livelihoods) to allow the 
implementation of climate smart 
productions and practices ; and  

- Set-up of Farmer-Field-Schools (FFS) for 
producers focusing on transferring 
knowledge and know-how on Climate 
resilient production systems and 
practices. 

 
Improved adaptive capacity: 

- Improved capacity for planning, 
implementing, monitoring, 
watershed-level interventions 
towards improved natural 
resources management and 
livelihoods. 

 
30. In terms of mitigation co-benefits, it is estimated that RPLP activities will lead to significant benefits 

compared to the baseline. A quantification of the Green House Gas (GHG) mitigation potential using 
the EX-ACT tool estimated that over a duration of 40 years (4 years for actual project implementation 
and 16 years for capitalization of its effects), the Project’s carbon emission reduction  is estimated at 
572,397 tons of CO2 equivalent (tCO2-eq), or 28,620 tCO2-eq per year. These benefits will principally be 
achieved through improved landscape management, in particular through the promotion of 
afforestation, agroforestry systems and perennial agriculture cultivars.  

 
Key Results 
 

31. The following PDO level results indicators have been identified: 
 

- Land area under sustainable landscape management practices (Ha) – Corporate Indicator - (target 
of 2,000 Ha) 

- Farmers adopting improved agricultural technology (number), of which female (in percentage) – 
Corporate Indicator - (target of 3,000 farmers) 

- Share of targeted farmers with improved market access (%) – (target of 40%) 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 16 of 33  

 

 D. Project Description  
 

32. RPLP is designed to restore ecosystem services at sub-watershed level to safeguard and enhance agricultural 
production, reduce vulnerability of economic and ecological systems to external shocks, and to strengthen 
capacities for the long-term sustainable management of those landscapes. The investment will result in the 
provision of environmental services, private and public goods, including enhanced watershed services 
encompassing soil conservation, hydrological services, and biomass supply.  

 
Maps 1 and 2 : Project area 

 

 
 
 
Project Alternative 
 

33. The approach used by RPLP builds on a rich set of lessons learned from past projects and evidence from analytical 
work. The Project will take a landscape approach and operate at sub-watershed level, combining a socio-



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 17 of 33  

 

economic and an ecological approach to landscape management.
24

 The Project’s interventions in the selected 
sub-watersheds will build on the results of two watershed management participatory planning exercises piloted 
within one of the selected sub-watersheds during Project preparation (Rivière Froide) that will be implemented in 
the entire area of the Project by effectiveness with the support of J/P HRO. The operationalization of these plans 
will consist in the development of sub-watersheds’ investments plans, that will be providing more detailed 
information related to each category of intervention offered by the Project with the volume of activities, types of 
instruments pre-identified during project preparation based on lessons learned and pilot participatory planning 
exercises (see Component 2), location and corresponding estimated budget.  

 
34. Resilience-enhancement from RPLP in the selected sub-watersheds will result from actions  to decrease the 

vulnerability of: (i) farmers linked to increasing soil degradation and subsequent continuous reduction of 
production capacity, and insufficient capacity to sell productions in a profitable and sustainable manner, including 
due to poor infrastructure condition; and (ii) landscapes, linked to the lack of holistic, participatory planning 
capacity, required to establish a common understanding of problems, propose solutions, prioritize actions 
expected to have the larger positive impact on ecosystems and populations in a defined sub-watershed, including 
interventions aimed at reducing soil erosion and enhancing water retention capacities in gullies as well as around 
natural springs, mostly through intensification of vegetative and tree cover, as well as small water harvesting 
infrastructure reducing water run-off.  
 

35. RPLP is designed to contribute to break the natural resources degradation/increasing populations’ vulnerability 
cycle in the selected sub-watersheds by taking an integrated approach. Based on geographic concentration, the 
Project will work at both farm- and community level to simultaneously raise production and productivity using 
more resilient, adapted agriculture practices to the hydro-geological context, which will directly contribute to 
rebuild the natural resource base; by protecting and restoring top soil cover in particular, the Project will improve 
water retention capacity, reduce erosion, enhance soil quality, which are required to counter the soil quality 
loss/productivity loss/increasing vulnerability cycle.  The Project will also work along the entire value chain from 
inputs via production to processing and marketing to ensure that the changes introduced result in income gains 
for farmers that are essential for Project sustainability. It will also support the construction or rehabilitation of 
small infrastructures considered critical to enhance landscape’s resilience (e.g. related to water management or 
improved access to markets), taking care of their quality to ensure the best possible resistance to adverse climatic 
conditions. 
 

36. It will also strengthen the institutional enabling environment and build capacity for landscape level governance 
and management at both national and local levels as well as delivering a proof of concept of the approach by 
investing into selected watersheds, to create the enabling conditions for subsequent scale-up. 
 

37. RPLP will include four components: (i) Strengthening of institutional and organizational capacity for landscape 
level resilience; (ii) Investments to strengthen the establishment of resilient agricultural production and practices; 
(iii) Project coordination, monitoring and evaluation; and (iv) Emergency Response Mechanism. The core of the 
investments and expected impact from RPLP shall be seen under Component 2 that will finance agricultural, value 
chains and infrastructure related activities to reduce land and farmers’ vulnerability in the four selected sub-
watersheds; while Component 1 shall establish the enabling environment for Component 2 to achieve its 
objectives and contribute to longer term implementation of sustainable productive landscapes approach by key 
institutions, in particular through the CBF mechanism to provide financing for climate adaptation into perpetuity.  

                                                           
24

 Landscape-level Land Management Efforts in Haiti. Lessons Learned from Case Studies Spanning Eight Decades. World Bank, 
2016 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 18 of 33  

 

 
Fig. 1: Theory of Change/Strategic Overview, Thematic Linkages and expected Achievements of  RPLP 

 
Component 1: Strengthening of institutional and organizational capacities for landscape level 
interventions (US$ 5.6 M total -US$ 1.4 M IDA and US$ 4.2 M LDCF- ; parallel financing of US$ 1.4 M 
from J/P HRO).  

38. This component will support national efforts to : create Agriculture/Environment joint landscapes policy and 
action plan towards resilient agriculture and ecosystems; fill skills and knowledge gaps required to implement 
respective mandates; foster partnerships and communication; strengthen institutional capacity to analyze climate 
related data for improved planning and climate related disaster risk prevention; fund the set-up of a National 
Trust Fund that will provide financing for climate adaptation into perpetuity through the CBF; and will also pave 
the way for Component 2 interventions that will rely on communities’ participatory planning exercises in all 
selected sub-watersheds. Specifically, the component will support:  
 

39. Sub-component 1.1. Institutional capacity building (US$ 2.6 M total -US$ 1.4 M IDA and US$ 0.8 M LDCF- ; parallel 
financing of US$ 0.4 M from J/P HRO). This sub-component would finance: (i) the development of a joint 
MdE/MARNDR Master Plan for Resilient Landscapes Development, building on respective policies and action 
plans

25
 and recent international commitments under Climate Change/Climate Adaptation global agendas 

(including NAPA and INDC implementation), establishing areas of synergies, joint action plan and related M&E, 
that will be field-tested under Component 2, and serve as a reference under HTR ; ii) intensive technical trainings 

                                                           
25

 Relation to policies and mandates from other relevant institutions shall be included as well, e.g. CIAT (Comité Interministériel 
d'Aménagement du Territoire).  

http://ciat.gouv.ht/
http://ciat.gouv.ht/


 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 19 of 33  

 

within key line Ministries, including MARNDR and MdE, at national and at local level with the branches of line 
ministries, as well as local governments and other relevant stakeholders (in the selected sub-watersheds), to carry 
out their mandate towards sustainable landscapes management; exchange visits in-country and abroad to share 
landscapes restoration and management experiences ; and students sponsorships for Masters degrees related to 
landscape /ecosystems /environmental fields ; iii) capacity building in cartography, satellite imaging data 
collection and analysis for climate modeling, , development and application of spatial decision support tools, 
forecasting and early-warning systems ; and establishing linkages with global networks of expertise in this field 
offering options to get high resolution Agro-Meteorological data. Informed by a background study supported by 
the WB, a set of dynamic decision support tools driven by geospatial and hydro-meteorological data were 
selected that would be supported by RPLP: soil health & erosion risk monitor; drought risk monitor. The creation 
of these tools would (a) help establish a baseline in project areas on critical variables and 2) inform project 
implementation at farm and landscape level. 

 
40. Sub-component 1.2. Support to national level sustainable landscape management approach to agriculture and 

watershed management (US$ 0.0 M total -US$ 0.0 M IDA and US$ 0.0 M LDCF- ; parallel financing of US$ 1.0 M 
from J/P HRO). Activities under this sub-component would be financed entirely through parallel financing from J/P 
HRO. They will aim at supporting (i) HTR, to develop/update its strategic and action plans, and operate its 
secretariat; (ii) the establishment, and operation of the National Committee for Climate Change in charge of 
steering, monitoring and reporting on activities to be implemented under the INDC; and (iii) the development of 
detailed participatory sub-watersheds management plans in the four selected sub-watersheds and their update. 
The development of these plans will follow the methodology piloted by J/P HRO, in close collaboration with 
MARNDR and MdE through the PROFOR study referred to in section I.B. They will serve as a basis for the 
development of detailed participatory business plans focused on RPLP interventions out of which the selection of 
investments financed under Component 2 will be made. The participatory sub-watersheds management plans will 
be completed by effectiveness of IDA and LDCF financing.     

 
41. Sub-component 1.3. Sustainable Financing of Resilient Productive Landscapes and Environmental Investments 

(US$ 3.4 M total - US$ 0.0 M IDA and US$ 3.4 M LDCF-). As indicated in section I.B, it would support the 
participation of Haiti in the CBF to benefit from financial resources towards climate adaptation and biodiversity 
conservation objectives into perpetuity. In the context of RPLP, it would specifically contribute to ensuring the 
long-term sustainability of interventions financed under Component 2. This sub-component would finance (i) 
remaining activities required to set up the National level Trust Fund to receive funds from the CBF on a yearly 
basis, complementing other donor’s contributions and (ii) an initial endowment of US$3 million to the CBF, 
earmarked for climate adaptation related interventions, complemented by a US$7 million endowment for 
biodiversity to be provided through the German Development Bank (KfW). It is estimated that the fund will take 
up to 3 years to establish and disburse funds. In the interim the other sources of project financing (IDA and J/P 
HRO parallel financing) will be used to support adaptation activities. Therefore, the establishment of the Trust 
Fund does not present delays to overall project implementation. 

 
Component 2: Investments to strengthen the establishment of resilient agricultural production and 
practices (US$ 12.1 M total -US$ 10.1 M IDA, US$ 2.0 M LDCF- and parallel financing of US$ 3.6 M from 
J/P HRO).  
 

42. This component will support individual farmers and communities within selected sub-watersheds to establish 
more resilient agricultural productions and practices, adapted to the agro-ecological contexts, and prioritized 
according to participatory planning exercises (under sub-component 1.2 and business plans under 2.2), supported 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 20 of 33  

 

by scientific expertise, in order to provide individual, and, to the maximum extent possible, landscape-level 
collective co-benefits from increased soil quality, water retention capacity and biodiversity. It will also support 
actions aimed at improving the revenues and livelihoods from better market access and improved food availability 
and nutritional quality, required to reduce people and, consequently, ecosystems’ vulnerability; and support the 
establishment or rehabilitation of small infrastructures supporting (i) and (ii) for increased farmers and landscape 
level resilience.   

 
43. Sub-component 2.1. Investments in resilient, sustainable agriculture and ecosystems (US$ 8.55 M total -US$ 6.55 

M IDA and US$ 2.0 M LDCF). This sub-component will support investments at individual and community levels 
that focus on increasing climate resilience of agricultural production systems in the selected sub-watershed. 
Specifically, the sub-component will finance (i) the development of a limited menu of “technical packages” 
(including inputs, such as tree seedlings, seeds, stakes, fences; and services, such as grafting, and technical 
assistance)” adapted to specific agro-ecological zones, and priority issues to be addressed, building on 
participatory planning documents, and experts inputs; (ii) the development of participatory investments plans 
identifying priority investments and their geographical locations, and costs to be financed out of RPLP under 
Component 2; (iii) the selection of beneficiaries according to participatory business plans based on specific 
vulnerability criteria (including ecosystems and livelihoods) and their access to one of these technical package 
over the course of the Project to allow the implementation of climate smart productions and practices ; and (iv) 
the set-up of Farmer-Field-Schools (FFS) for producers focusing on transferring knowledge and know-how on 
Climate resilient productions and practices (such as planting following contour lines, improved tillage, 
boundary/live fences planting for wind and water erosion protection, soil coverage, inter-cropping, agroforestry 
systems management, soil and water conservation and so on)

26
, as well as organizational and marketing 

approaches to add value to these productions (related to sub-component 2.2). This sub-component will use 
RESEPAG II experience with its farmer’s incentive scheme using a voucher mechanism, and be implemented with 
the support of an operator (consulting firm). It will also benefit from the registry of farmers being developed with 
the support of RESEPAG II. 

 
44. Sub-component 2.2. Intensification, diversification and commercial agriculture (US$ 2.85 M total -US$ 2.85 M IDA 

and US$ 0.0 M LDCF- ; parallel financing of US$ 1.1 M from J/P HRO). This sub-component will improve access to 
inputs and services from farmers, as well as marketing capacities and options, considered essential to ensure the 
profitability of investments, improve livelihoods and thereby contribute to sustain resilient landscapes. Under this 
sub-component, the Project will also seek to facilitate the mobilization of commercial credit both during and after 
project implementation. Before RPLP effectiveness, a market/value chains analysis for productions likely to be 
supported under sub-component 2.1, as well as an analysis of relevant inputs and services suppliers, would be 
carried out through J/P HRO financing. J/P HRO would also contribute to support these latter in order to meet 
expected quality and quantity of such inputs and services. This sub-component will both support (i) groups of 
producers within the selected watersheds to develop basic business plans identifying key inputs 
(equipment/services) to be financed under RPLP aimed at improving the quality and quantity of products sold to 
intermediaries or directly placed on markets ; and (ii) more advanced constituted groups of producers or small 
enterprises to increase their capacity to generate additional value to climate smart productions produced in the 
selected sub-watersheds (e.g. addressing logistics, agro-processing, reduction of food losses aspects), through 
improved business/marketing skills, as well as improved infrastructures and equipment to be financed through a 
matching grant mechanism. For this activity, the experience of the “Market Support Facility (MSF)” implemented 

                                                           
26

 The Farmer-Field-Schools will also be a vehicle to promote food diet-nutrition education which will be built from (i) the 
material being compiled in the context of J/P HRO arboretum, where a women repertoire of traditional plants used for 
medicine and diets is being created, and (ii) also re-use the food practice diet training developed under RESEPAG II. 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 21 of 33  

 

under RESEPAG II.  
 

45. The sub-component will also finance trainings that will provide more capacity in technical, financial as well as 
management and strategy, to improve market access -for inputs suppliers’ and services providers’ organizations, 
as well as producers and other actors along the value chains. The same operator as sub-component 2.1 would 
support the implementation of this sub-component to facilitate coordination between these complementary 
activities.  
 

46. Sub-component 2.3. Protection of infrastructure and watersheds (US$ 0.7 M total - US$ 0.7 M IDA and US$ 0.0 M 
LDCF- ; parallel financing of US$ 2.5 M from J/P HRO). This sub-component will finance works to: (i) protect 
/rehabilitate small public infrastructures (e.g. rural and access roads or tracks, river crossing structures) (ii) 
enhance water management in the selected areas (building small water harvesting infrastructures in gullies or 
slopes, rehabilitating small water catchments or small irrigation systems in plains). The activities to be carried out 
under this sub-component will be based on the investments plans developed in each of the selected areas. This 
stage would be followed by technical studies to inform the detailed scope and nature of works to be supported 
under the Project.  
 

47. Most of the works are expected to be simple, hence a community-based approach would be promoted using a 
labor-intensive workforce. This approach has been used various times by MARNDR successfully (including through 
RESEPAG II in response to Hurricane Matthew’s to restore some damaged infrastructures. A specific manual exists 
that would serve as a basis for RPLP. 

 
Component 3: Project Coordination and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) (US$ 3.5 M total – 100% 
IDA).  
 

48. The objective of this component is to support Project coordination and M&E as well as all aspects of management 
(including fiduciary matters, knowledge management, communication, gender and citizen engagement as well as 
monitoring mitigation measures related to safeguards). It will finance staff costs, goods, equipment and vehicles, 
incremental operating costs, assessments and studies (including technical and financial audits), construction 
and/or rehabilitation of Project Implementation Unit offices and in general eligible expenses associated with the 
overall management of the Project implementation. It will also provide resources to monitor progress and 
evaluate results and impact. For this purpose, an impact evaluation baseline will be established by no later than 
year one of Project implementation. 

 
Component 4: Emergency Response Component (US$0 - only IDA if activated).  

49. A Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) with zero allocation will be created to allow the 
Government to respond quickly in case of an eligible emergency. If an eligible emergency occurs, the inclusion of 
this component would provide a conduit for the use of uncommitted funds from the unallocated expenditure 
category and/or allow the government to request the Bank to re-categorize and reallocate financing from other 
project components to partially cover emergency response via implementation of key activities by the appropriate 
agencies to respond to the emergency. The CERC could also be used to channel additional funds should they 
become available as a result of an eligible emergency. An Emergency Response Operational Manual, acceptable to 
the WB, will be prepared and adopted during the first year of project implementation and clearly outline the 
triggers, eligible expenditures and procedures for tapping into the CERC.   

 
 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 22 of 33  

 

E. Implementation 
             Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

50. Joint Implementation, Project Duration and Geographic Coverage. The Project will be implemented 
jointly by the MARNDR and the MdE, with an expected duration of five years. This proposed 
duration (expected over calendar years 2018-2023) is set to allow a realistic timeframe for 
implementation. In terms of geographic coverage, four (4) specific zones have been selected based 
on detailed criteria (environmental, socio-economic, vulnerability, institutional, budget availability 
as well as relevance in view of proposed interventions).  
 

51. MARNDR and MdE Experiences. The MARNDR began implementing the US$5M RESEPAG I project in 
2009.  Within MARNDR, the Project will leverage the existing capacity – specifically on safeguards 
and fiduciary aspects – of the coordination unit currently supporting RESEPAG II and other donor 
projects. Conversely, MdE has no experience in the implementation of Bank-funded projects, and 
would develop its capacity building on MARNDR experience. The Project will collaborate closely with 
other development partners and receive parallel financing from the NGO J/P HRO.  
 

52. Implementation arrangements. It was agreed that the Project will be jointly implemented by 
MARNDR/MdE through one Project Implementation Unit; this latter would report to both Ministries 
through focal points nominated by the respective Ministers. The PIU will be split in two locations: at 
the Central Level (PIU-C or Unité de Gestion de Projet Centrale) based at Port-Au-Prince and at the 
local level (PIU-L or Unité de Gestion de Projet Locale) based at the Agricultural Communal Office 
(Bureau Agricole Communal – BAC) Anse-à-Veau, close to the areas of intervention. The two units 
will be staffed as needed (i.e. staff hired and paid for by Project resources and appointed civil 
servants by MARNDR/MdE paid for by the Government) with appropriate skills, taking into account 
existing human resources and arrangements as well as existing staff from active World Bank 
operations when relevant (i.e. RESEPAG II). All staff paid using Project resources will be hired on a 
competitive basis under terms of reference and qualifications acceptable by the World Bank. 
 

53. The PIU-C and PIU-L will ensure timely and effective coordination of activities in order to monitor 
progress towards PDO. The implementation arrangements will allow a joint technical coordination 
by MARNDR/MdE as well as capitalizing on the MARNDR’s existing capacity and experience with 
World Bank projects’ management, especially on the fiduciary aspects. In addition, the PIU-L will 
allow to coordinate with the local offices of MARNDR and MdE at Departmental and Communal 
levels, as well with the other local stakeholders. The PIU-C will be responsible for: (i) managing the 
project at national level, including financial management, procurement in accordance with World 
Bank guidelines and procedures, and M&E; (ii) finalizing the Project Implementation Manuel (PIM) 
before effectiveness; (iii) producing project progress reports; and (iv) project communication.  
 

54. Staffing. The PIU-C will be located at Port-Au-Prince and headed by one (1) General Coordinator. 
He/She will also coordinate aspects related to Component 1. Other members of the PIU-C will 
include the fiduciary staff: one (1) principal accountant and one (1) procurement specialist, receiving 
support from existing fiduciary staff from RESEPAG II. All PIU-C staff, including the General 
Coordinator, will be hired on a competitive basis and paid for by Project resources. Support Staff will 
also be hired. All other staff will be based in the field at the PIU-L in the BAC Anse-à-Veau and hired 
on a competitive basis and paid for by Project resources. Staff will include one (1) Coordinator in 
charge of Component 2 as well as one (1) communication & grievance redress mechanism specialist, 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 23 of 33  

 

one (1) environmental safeguards specialist, one (1) social safeguard/gender/citizen engagement 
specialist, one (1) M&E specialist. Support Staff will also be hired. In order not to delay the start of 
the Project, the recruitment processes of these specialists will be launched during the preparation 
phase with the preparation of Terms of References (TORs), and selection, using the existing 
RESEPAG II fiduciary team to manage the recruitment process according to WB rules. Under the 
LDCF Project Preparation Grant, a core team of two persons (technical and admin) should also be in 
place not later than February 2018 to support the MARNDR and MdE RPLP focal points carry out 
these tasks among others contributing to swift implementation post declaration of effectiveness.   
 

55. In terms of governance mechanisms, a Project Steering Committee – PSC will be created at national 
level and serve as a guidance and exchange body (Meeting Frequency: once a year) and endorse 
Annual Work Plan & Budget. The PSC will be co-chaired by MARDNR and MdE, and comprised of 
high level representatives of MARNDR, MdE, Ministry of Economy and Finance, Ministry of Interior, 
as well as co-financiers, Audubon Society, HTR, other key stakeholders including donors (with 
observer status). The detailed composition and mandate of the PSC will be provided in the PIM. PIU-
C General Coordinator will assure the role of PSC Secretariat. In addition, a Technical Committee – 
TC will be established and ensure regular follow-up on the implementation of RPL activities 
(Meeting Frequency: quarterly, in Nippes Department). The TC will be chaired by the General 
Coordinator of the PIU-C and comprised of local stakeholders and authorities (DDA, DDE, other 
relevant Directorates, Civil Protection Committees, Municipalities, CASEC, ASEC), selected sub-
watersheds communities’ representatives, private sector representatives, etc.).  
 

56. A detailed PIM will be adopted before Project effectiveness, which will incorporate all operational 
details at the national and local levels, including the implementation of technical activities, M&E, 
safeguard implementation and administrative and fiduciary procedures. It will include detailed TORs 
for key RPLP/PIU-C/PIU-L staff. A harmonized IRM Operational Manual for the management of the 
CERC will be prepared and validated no later than three months after the Project effectiveness. 
Detailed Project implementation arrangements are found in the PAD. 

 
Figure 2:  Project risk mitigation matrix  

 

Risk  Level Mitigation measure 

Environmental and Social risks:  
The project has substantial positive 
environmental benefits.  
Negative impacts are likely to be 
small and highly localized, and are 
largely related to the commune 
level infrastructure activities that 
will be financed under the project  

Moderate The ESMF contains a screening 
tool to screen out works that will 
have a significant impact on the 
environment as well as a table of 
potential environmental impacts 
and associated mitigation 
measures. Robust technical and 
monitoring team will be in place. 

 

Climate and Disaster Risk: 
Haiti is highly vulnerable to the 
negative impact of climate change.   

Highly vulnerable 
country 

Project is designed to address 
these risks including through an 
unallocated component to 
reallocate IDA in event of a 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 24 of 33  

 

specific disaster/emergency. 

 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

RPLP will be implemented in four sub-watersheds offering a diversity of agro-ecological conditions, yet 
geographically close, within the department of Nippes, under two municipalities : (i) Rivière Froide 
watershed; (ii) Petite Rivière de Nippes watershed; (iii) Piémont area and Baconnois Plain; and (iv) Bondeau 
sub-wastershed and its mangrove. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Nicolas Kotschoubey, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Asli Gurkan, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Felipe Jacome, Social Safeguards Specialist 
Robert H. Montgomery, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project will have an overall positive impact on 
the environment. It will promote conservation 
agriculture, agroforestry, soil and water 
conservation, water harvesting, water stewardship, 
re-afforestation and sustainable livestock grazing. 
The negative environmental impacts will be small 
and highly localized.  Such impacts may be 
associated with the construction works that 
communes will be able to finance under the project 
(rural roads, small bridges, etc) and impacts may 
include noise, waste management, worker health 
and safety issues and so on.  Other negative impacts 
may be related to improper technology transfer (e.g. 
inadvertent propagation of exotic species, expansion 
of plantations in natural forests, water harvesting 
that impacts the water table) and so on. For these 
reasons, the project is a category B and all activities, 
including those that seem environmentally harmless 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 25 of 33  

 

would need to be screened.  The completed ESMF 
provides a screening tool as well as a table of 
possible impacts and mitigation measures.  Proper 
and timely supervision from the Bank will also 
ensure that these activities are adequately 
monitored by the Environmental specialist in the 
PIU. 
 
For the sub component on planning and policy 
development, the intention is for the project to 
promote sustainability; however, the risk that a well-
intentioned plan or policy has negative impacts is 
possible, and therefore the ESMF that will be 
prepared, and the Operations Manual, will include 
measures to ensure that all plans and strategies 
prepared under the project are sustainable; support 
the preservation, maintenance and rehabilitation of 
the environment; are publicly consulted during their 
drafting process; take into account cumulative 
effects; and include measures to strengthen 
environmental management.  
 
For the CBF, for which activities are not yet clearly 
defined, and to ensure that the project does not 
indirectly finance activities with negative 
environmental impacts, the project ESMF will also 
apply. The Operation Manual will include a measure 
to ensure that the CBF adopts the ESMF as part of its 
screening mechanism.  
 
 
On the social side, no major safeguards risks are 
expected. A potential risk may include delays in 
compensation related to land acquisition. The 
project will avoid or minimize land acquisition based 
on the lessons learned. RPF will include measures to 
deal with such potential delays in payments should 
land acquisition be necessary. Another potential 
social risk may be perceived inequities in the 
selection of beneficiaries. The Project will mitigate 
this risk by focusing on citizen engagement 
measures and robust grievance redress measures.  
 
Risks linked to labor influx are expected to be 
limited. They will be mitigated by prioritizing local 
labor and ensuring clarity on where laborers coming 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 26 of 33  

 

from outside will be hosted through their stay in the 
host community and ensuring that contracts are 
consistent with ESMF and RPF provisions. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

This project will improve and support natural or 
critical habitat by increasing tree and ground cover 
with appropriate natural vegetation. It will operate 
in mangroves, forests, wetlands and other natural 
habitats and therefore the policy is triggered. Where 
infrastructure is being built, the project will ensure 
that it does not denude natural areas or remove 
cover that can expose the soil to erosional forces. 
The project will have an overall positive impact on 
natural habitats, but will ensure through applying 
the ESMF that negative impacts such as improper 
technology transfer, introduction of alien invasive 
species, etc., is not financed. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The project will finance activities related to forestry 
and improve, rather than cause destruction to forest 
cover.  Activities that involve conversion of natural 
forests or degradation of critical areas will not be 
financed. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Given that the project involves significant 
interventions in agriculture, and that the 
improvement of crop production is an ultimate 
objective, it is likely that pesticides will be used.  The 
types of activities that may require pesticides 
include dissemination of technologies for 
sustainable agricultural intensification; forestry; 
agricultural storage programs; and livestock health 
programs. All pesticides that are disseminated or 
used under the project will comply with WHO's 
list/standards for acceptable pesticide use. An 
integrated pesticide management plan has been 
prepared by the project and the document will be 
disclosed prior to appraisal. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

The project will not operate within or near known 
cultural or historical heritage sites. However, as a 
precaution, this OP is triggered in the event of 
chance finds of historical or cultural relics, which are 
numerous in Haiti, during works, soil sub-surface 
drilling or excavation. Chance finds language has 
been reflected in the ESMF. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The policy is not triggered because there are 
no groups in Haiti who meet the definition of 
IPs of OP 4.10. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes The policy is triggered given that the project will be 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 27 of 33  

 

funding the rehabilitation of existing rural 
roads/tracks, possibly new small infrastructures for 
water harvesting/storage which are usually placed 
along the roads or in gullies, as well as potential 
expansion of local offices of the Ministry of 
Agriculture. These construction works may require 
land acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement, 
including the loss of income sources and means of 
livelihood, such as the loss of fruit trees and crops. 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be 
prepared by the GOH with guidance from the Bank 
to address the triggering of OP 4.12. RPF will be 
consulted and disclosed by appraisal. Upon the 
identification of cases of involuntary resettlement, 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) or Abbreviated 
Resettlement Action Plans (Abbrev. RAPs) will be 
prepared, consulted and disclosed in accordance 
with the policy. 
 
Any activity that may potentially lead to changes in 
land-tenure agreements, result in the establishment 
of protected areas, or may cause restriction of 
access to natural resources will be excluded from 
the project. The environmental screening form, 
which will be part of the ESMF will also include 
questions on social risks and impacts. The PIU 
responsible staff received a training by the Bank on 
October 18 on how to screen OP 4.12 impacts. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The project will not finance any activities related to 
dams or the operation of dams.  The ESMF will 
screen out any dam-related activity. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The project will not be on international waters as 
defined under this policy. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The project does not take place in any Disputed 
Area. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
On the environmental side, there are no large scale, significant or irreversible impacts.  The interventions are largely 
soil conservation, tillage, tree planting and other soil enhancing activities.  Where there may be investments in 
infrastructure, these will be restricted to low impact public infrastructures such as rural and access roads, small 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 28 of 33  

 

bridges for crossing rivers and water harvesting infrastructure.  Impacts will therefore be small and highly localized. 
Other negative impacts may be related to improper technology transfer (e.g. inadvertent propagation of exotic 
species, expansion of plantations in natural forests, water harvesting that impacts the water table) and so on.  These 
can be effectively screened out and monitored, reducing the risk associated with these activities. On the social side, 
there are no large scale, significant and irreversible impacts expected. 
 
The promotion of policy and plans under the project will promote sustainable development; however, the ESMF 
prepared for the project includes measures to ensure that policies and plans developed under the project do not have 
long term negative impacts.  
 
Also, activities undertaken by the Caribbean Biodiversity Fund, which will be capitalized by the project, will be subject 
to a screening mechanism derived from the Project ESMF in order to screen out any activities with considerable 
negative environmental impacts, or mitigate impacts to an acceptable level.  
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
No potential indirect or long term environmental or social impacts are expected.  The environmental impacts will be 
small scale and limited in scope. The potential social impacts are described under OP 4.01 and OP 4.12. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
In terms of the environment, the project focuses on improving the stability of slopes and enhancing the fertility of soils 
in Haiti by introducing trees, stabilizing vegetation and so on.  The types of vegetation to be considered will be 
carefully matched with the particular environment/climate related problem that is evident in a region. For example, 
one would plant deep rooted vegetation in some cases where slopes need to be stabilized.  These are the types of 
alternatives that have been discussed and will continue to be discussed throughout preparation.  In terms of financing 
infrastructure, the project focused on key infrastructure that would support climate resilience- for example, bridges to 
allow river crossings when the river level is high and so on. The chosen infrastructure (by the commune) will be 
screened to ensure that the type of infrastructure chosen does not have significant adverse impacts on the 
environment. 
 
On the social side, any activity that may potentially lead to changes in land-tenure agreements, result in the 
establishment of protected areas, or may cause restriction access to natural resources will be excluded from the 
project.  
 
Civil works to be financed under the project are expected to be mostly of small size, and efforts will be placed on 
minimizing any possible negative effect through solid preliminary studies  and screenings allowing to clearly identify 
areas of interventions, and ensuring the adequate design, use of appropriate construction materials, and construction 
techniques etc. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The project team has prepared an ESMF, an IPMP and an RPF, which will be consulted and disclosed by appraisal.  The 
Ministry of Agriculture, MARNDR, the primary agency responsible for the implementation of the project, has managed 
other Bank-funded projects in the past and they have experience with Bank safeguards policies and instruments, 
especially on the environment side. MARNDR will be hiring a second safeguards specialist to monitor social risks and 
impacts under this project. The second ministry that will be involved in this project’s implementation, the Ministry of 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 29 of 33  

 

Environment, does not have familiarity or capacity to implement social safeguards policies.   However, they have been 
closely involved in the preparation of the ESMF, IPMP and RPF. The safeguards implementation will be the 
responsibility of MARNDR, which will house the safeguards specialists.  
 
In the event that involuntary resettlement cannot be avoided by the necessary works, the Bank team will support the 
PIU to develop and implement Resettlement Action Plans. The project will develop a citizen engagement plan and a 
Grievance Redress Mechanism. The GRM ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address 
project-related concerns. Additionally, communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a 
World Bank (WB) supported project may submit complaints to project-level grievance redress mechanism or the WB’s 
Grievance Redress Service (GRS). 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The primary stakeholders of this project are smallholder farmers and families living in the selected watersheds 
targeted by the project, that depend on agricultural production for their livelihoods. Other key stakeholders along the 
agriculture value chains are service and input providers, buyers, and retailers.  The national, regional and local 
institutions that play a role in the landscape management and agriculture services are also important stakeholders for 
this project.  
 
The Project team will conduct consultations with a group of these stakeholders at the regions, that are tentatively 
identified at this stage. The ESMF and RPF will be consulted by appraisal. with key local actors (such as local 
government staff, farmers’ organizations, regional representatives of Ministry of Agriculture and Environment) in the 
tentatively identified municipalities.  Once the sites are identified, further detailed consultations that will take place 
with direct beneficiaries during project implementation.  People affected by involuntary resettlement will be 
consulted on compensation and resettlement policies in accordance with OP4.12. 
 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements  

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 
For category A projects, date of 
distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 

06-Nov-2017 09-Nov-2017 
 

   

"In country" Disclosure   

   Haiti 
  13-Nov-2017 

Comments 

 
   

OPS_RA_D ISCL OSURE_T ABLE  

 

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process 

   

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure  



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 30 of 33  

 

06-Nov-2017 09-Nov-2017  

   

"In country" Disclosure   
   Haiti 
  13-Nov-2017 

Comments 

 
     

OPS_ PM_D ISCL OSURE_TA BLE  

 

Pest Management Plan 
 
Was the document disclosed prior to 
appraisal? Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 

Yes 06-Nov-2017 09-Nov-2017 

   
"In country" Disclosure   
   Haiti 
 13-Nov-2017 
 

Comments 

 
  

OPS_PM_ PC R_TAB LE  

 

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to 
be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.  

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 

 
 
 
 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project 
decision meeting)  
 
OPS_EA_COMP_TABLE OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
  
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes   
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report? 
Yes   
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes   

OPS_ NH_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
  



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 31 of 33  

 

Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats? 
No   
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the 
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank? 
NA   

OPS_ PM_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
  
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes   
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes   
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included in 
project design?  If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes   

OPS_ PCR_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources  
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property? 
Yes   
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts on cultural property? 
NA    

OPS_IR_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 

 
 

Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes  
 

 

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan? 
Yes  
 

 
 

 

  
OPS_F O_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 
  
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been carried out? 
NA   
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these constraints? 
NA   
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for certification system? 
No      

OPS_ PDI_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 

 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for disclosure? 
Yes   



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 32 of 33  

 

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are understandable 
and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
Yes  

 
 
All Safeguard Policies 

 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? 
Yes 

  
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 

 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

  World Bank 
 

Caroline Aurelie Plante 
Senior Livestock Specialist  

 

Nyaneba E. Nkrumah 
Sr Natural Resources Mgmt. Spec. 

  

 

  Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Ministry of Economy and Finance 

Jude Alix Patrick  Salomon 

Ministre de L’Économie et de Finances 

deshommesronald@yahoo.fr 
 

  Implementing Agencies 
 

Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

Carl Monde 

Focal point - MARNDR 

carlmonde@gmail.com 
 
 

Ministry of Environment 

Emmanuel  Philippe 



 

The World Bank  
Resilient Productive Landscapes in Haiti (P162908) 

 

 

  
Oct 25, 2017 Page 33 of 33  

 

Focal Point - Ministry of Environment 

mangofil@gmail.com 
 

 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

 

Task Team Leader(s): 
Caroline Aurelie Plante 
Nyaneba E. Nkrumah 

 

  Approved By 

Safeguards Advisor:   

Practice Manager/Manager: Preeti S. Ahuja 08-Dec-2017 

Country Director: Michelle C. Keane 08-Dec-2017 
 

    
 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects
















































World Bank Document


COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 

SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS) 

Additional Financing 
. 

                                                                                                          Report No.:  PIDISDSA21555 

Date Prepared/Updated: 6-May-2017 

I. BASIC INFORMATION 

 A. Basic Project Data 

 Country: Haiti Project ID: P163081 

  Parent Project ID : P126744 

 
Project Name: Relaunching Agriculture: Strengthening Agriculture Public Services 

II Project - Additional financing (P163081) 

 
Parent Project Name: Relaunching Agriculture: Strengthening Agriculture Public Services 

II Project (GAFSP - IDA) (P126744) 

 Region: LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN 

 Estimated Appraisal Date: 02-May-2017 Estimated Board Date: 14-Jun-2017 

 
Practice Area (Lead): Agriculture Lending Instrument: Investment Project 

Financing 

Borrower(s) Ministry of Economy and Finance 

Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

     Financing Source Amount 

 International Development Association (IDA) 0.00 

 IDA Grant from CRW 35.00 

 Financing Gap 0.00 

 Total Project Cost 35.00 

 Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment 

 Decision  

 Other Decision (as needed)  

 Is this a Repeater project? No 

 
Is this a Transferred 

project? (Will not be 

disclosed) 

No 

. 

 
 

 
. 

B. Introduction and Context 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 Country Context 

 

Haiti’s geography, people, and history provide it with many opportunities.  The third largest Caribbean 

nation by area and population (10.4 million), Haiti shares the island of Hispaniola with the Dominican 

Republic. In addition to an illustrious early history, as the first independent nation in the region and the 

first nation in the world to be led to independence by former slaves, Haiti benefits from proximity and 

access to major markets, a young labor force, a dynamic diaspora, and substantial geographic, 

historical, and cultural assets. The country possesses untapped markets and a pent-up demand for the 

private sector to explore, including agribusiness, light manufacturing, and tourism. 

 

However, almost 60 percent of Haiti’s population, or 6.3 million people, remain poor, and 24 percent 

or 2.5 million, extremely poor, with poverty highest in rural areas.  The poorest regions, which are also 

the furthest from the capital, show extreme poverty rates exceeding 40 percent and very limited access 

to basic services. Like poverty, inequality is high with a Gini of 0.6 (highest in the Americas). 

 

Natural disasters have hindered the country’s ability to overcome these poverty levels. On January 12, 

2010 a magnitude 7.0 earthquake struck Haiti, causing the death of 230,000, displacing 1.5 million 

people, and resulting in damages and losses equivalent to 120 percent of its GDP.  In the months 

following the earthquake, cholera spread throughout the country infecting 800,000 people and cusing 

9,500 deaths. Nevertheless, in the aftermath of the earthquake, Government, Partners and private 

actors together invested approximately US$3 billion in Official Development Assistance and much 

more from private flows. Over 1.2 million people returned to more permanent housing. Collapsed 

infrastructure and many affected neighborhoods have been rebuilt, education services have been re-

established and extended, and deaths from cholera driven down to below 1 percent of cases (though 

resurgences of the disease remain).  The 2015 Poverty Assessment undertaken jointly by the 

Government and the World Bank shows that the percentage of extremely poor Haitians (those who 

cannot fulfill their nutritional needs) fell from 31 percent to 24 percent between 2000 and 2012, mostly 

in urban areas and especially in the capital. 

 

On October 4, 2016, category 4 Hurricane Matthew struck Haiti, affecting over 2 million people, about 

20 percent of the country’s population. The Government of Haiti (GoH)’s Directorate of Civil 

Protection (DPC) reported  546 deaths, 128 missing, 439 injured, 175,500 people living in temporary 

shelters, and immediate humanitarian assistance needs for 1.4 million people (about 12.9 percent of 

the population).  The GoH has requested CRW support in light of the large scale of damages, losses 

and reconstruction needs, and the deep poverty of the affected region. The hurricane also caused the 

first round of Haiti’s long postponed Presidential elections to be rescheduled to November 20, 2016. 

Haitians elected Mr. Jovenel Moise, the candidate from former President Martelly’s party, in one 

round, with over 55 percent of the vote. The Electoral Council confirmed these results on January 3, 

2017. President Moise was sworn in on February 7, 2017. 

 

Situation of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraint 
Hurricane Matthew made landfall on October 4 at 7a.m. on the south-west coast of Haiti.  The 

hurricane caused maximum wind speeds of 230/km/h and rainfall of over 600mm in less than 24 

hours, and a rise in sea levels of two to three meters in the departments of Grande-Anse, Nippes and 

Sud. This is the first hurricane of this magnitude to make landfall in Haiti in 52 years.  The hurricane’s 

high wind speeds, heavy rainfall, and devastating storm surge resulted in flooding, landslides and 

extensive destruction of critical infrastructure and livelihoods, including large sections of road 

networks and bridges, with some key roads and bridges washed away.  The southern departments of 

Grande-Anse, Nippes, and Sud were especially affected, where 80 percent, 66 percent, and 65 percent 

of people respectively are poor (under the national poverty line of US$2.41 per day) and 36 percent, 

30 percent and 26 percent are extremely poor (under the national extreme poverty line of US$1.23 per 



day).  Lesser damage was seen in coastal areas in other parts of the country. 

 

On October 4, 2016, Haiti’s interim President called for an immediate emergency response in the face 

of the national crisis and humanitarian emergency. The Government appealed to the international 

community to fund US$120 million in humanitarian assistance to provide relief to 750,000 severely 

affected people. The United Nations launched a flash appeal for that amount on October 10, 2016.  On 

October 13, 2016, the Minister of Finance requested support from the World Bank and the Inter-

American Development Bank (IDB) in undertaking a Rapid Damage and Loss Assessment (DaLA).  A 

team immediately set to work. The Rapid Assessment results became available on October 26, 2016, 

showing a massive impact on the Southern regions.  The Bank also participated in the subsequently 

launched Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA). 

 

Total damages and losses were initially estimated by the DaLA Rapid Assessment at US$1.9 billion, 

the equivalent of 22 percent of GDP, and later to the equivalent of US$32% by the PDNA, with 

impacts largely concentrated in areas with poverty rates higher than the national average (Grande-

Anse, Nippes, and Sud departments).  The agriculture and housing/urban sectors were the hardest hit. 

Up to 90 percent of crops and livestock were lost in coastal areas, including stable food crops, but also 

cash and tree crops such as coffee, cocoa and vetiver.  Thousands of structures were damaged and 75 

percent of structures in the heaviest hit communities in Grande-Anse were entirely destroyed. More 

than 100,000 houses were heavily damaged or destroyed, half of which were Grande-Anse. 

 

Given the magnitude of the disaster, the GoH requires significant support to respond”, and to enhance 

the country’s overall resilience to disasters.  In the wake of Hurricane Matthew, emergency funding 

was sought from the IDA17 Crisis Response Window (CRW) in the amount of US$100 million toward 

recovery and reconstruction. of which US$35 million for the Agriculture Sector.  will support the 

country’s recovery needs under the Project.  Given the urgency to respond to the disaster, the Project 

would be processed invoking the Condensed Procedures set out in para 12 of OP 10.00 (Projects in 

Situations of Urgent Need of Assistance or Capacity Constraints). The Safeguards Action Plan 
setting forth the sequence for the preparation of the relevant safeguards instruments is annexed to the 

project paper.  

 Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 

Haiti remains extremely vulnerable to natural disaster with 96 percent of the population at risk. On 

October 4, 2016, Hurricane Matthew, a category IV hurricane, landed in Haiti and caused a large scale 

disaster affecting over 2.1 million people (almost 1/5 of the population) and leaving almost 1.4 million 

people in need of lifesaving assistance in the southern part of the country. Winds speeds up to 140 

mph and torrential rain for 48 hours (around 1,016 mm) triggered widespread flooding and numerous 

landslides and caused severe damage to all sectors - water, electricity, education, health, food security, 

and livelihoods - particularly in the Departments of Sud, Grande-Anse, and Nippes. It is estimated that 

Hurricane Matthew caused losses and damages equivalent to 22 percent of the Gross Domestic 

Product, killed 500 people and triggered humanitarian assistance for 1.4 million people (12.9 percent 

of the population). The impact of Hurricane Matthew on the agricultural sector is estimated at 

US$603.0 million, including US$213.0 million in losses and US$390.0 million in damages, making 

Hurricane Matthew one of the most devastating events of the past decades. 

 

Agriculture plays a significant role in the Haitian economy, contributing to more than 25 % of the 

country’s GDP. The sector employs about 57% percent of the active population, while providing 66% 

of employment in rural areas and 75% of employment to low-income rural households, thus 

representing the main source of income in rural areas. National agricultural production provides about 

50% of food availability, which is complemented by commercial imports (45%) and food aid. The 



departments struck by Hurricane Matthew had under cultivation 85% of the national production of 

maize and 37% of the national fruit production. These areas also accounted for about one third of the 

country’s stock of cattle, pigs and goats and poultry. 

 

In urgent need of assistance because of a natural disaster, the approval of this Additional Finance 

would allow to quickly mobilize the resources needed to provide much needed support to farmers in 

the areas affected by Hurricane Mathew. The task team has discussed alternatives to the proposed AF 

with the GOH and it was agreed that the proposed RESEPAG II AF is the most appropriate 

mechanism for a rapid mitigation response.  Indeed, the activities will primarily target areas already 

covered under the original project, the same profile of producers and tools to engage these producers, 

and use identical delivery mechanisms.  It will also be possible to use the current institutional 

arrangements and staff already in place. 
. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s) 

 Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent 

 

The PDOs are to strengthen the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development's 

(MARNDR) capacity to define and implement the National Agriculture Extension Strategy, to 

increase access of small farmers to agriculture extension services and training on animal and plant 

health in priority regions, and to provide financial assistance in the case of an agriculture sector 

emergency. 

 Current Project Development Objective(s) - Parent 

 

The development objectives of the Project are to: (a) reinforce the capacity of the Ministry of 

Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development to provide or facilitate access to services in the 

agricultural sector; (b) increase market access to small producers and food security in Selected Areas; 

and (c) provide financial assistance in the case of an Agriculture Sector Emergency. 

 Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing 

 

The new proposed PDO is: to (a) reinforce the capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural 

Resources and Rural Development to provide or facilitate access to services in the agricultural sector; 

(b) increase market access to small producers and food security in Selected Areas; (c) improve 

livelihood in areas affected by Hurricane Matthew and (d) enable the Government to respond promptly 

and effectively to an eligible emergency. 

 Key Results  

 
The proposed AF would allow to support 41,000 households affected by the hurricane. It would bring 

the total number of beneficiaries of the project (parent and AF) to 60,000, of which 40% of female.  
. 

  

 

D. Project Description 
 
Following the devastation caused by Hurricane Matthew, the project expects to receive US$35M 

Additional financing (AF) from the IDA Crisis Response Window to help restore productive assets 

lost, rehabilitate damaged or destroyed infrastructures, and support livelihoods to victims of Hurricane 

Matthew. The AF would (i) provide emergency assistance to allow more than 8,000 farmers to carry 

out winter 2016 and spring 2017 planting campaigns to secure food production; and to increase the 

number of beneficiaries of the pre-existing voucher schemes by 7000 (increasing from 8,000 to 15,000 

farmers) while fostering more resilient production systems; and (ii) introduce new activities to 

restore/rehabilitate irrigation systems through cash-for-work programs and larger infrastructure civil 



works allowing at least 3,500 hectares of agriculture land to recover access to irrigation and providing 

temporary jobs to at least 21,000 persons; and help restock part of the small animals lost by around 

6,000 poor households. 

 

In the Proposed AF, the emergency assistance and extension of the voucher scheme program activities 

would remain in the department of Sud, although more municipalities would be targeted. Irrigation 

works would be also conducted in the department of Sud, and would be closely related to the voucher 

schemes areas to ensure the adequate access to irrigation services of farmers benefiting from voucher 

schemes. Lastly, activities related to livestock restocking would concern the western areas of the 

department of Sud and Grande-Anse. 

 

Changes to the original project as part of the level 1 restructuring include: (i) Revision of the Project 

Development Objective (PDO) wording to reflect activities in the affected areas and an increase in 

scope of the Emergency Response Contingency (ERC); (ii) Activation of the Involuntary Resettlement 

Policy (OP/BP 4.12) to anticipate the possibility of an involuntary resettlement in the affected areas; 

(iii) Upgrading of the Results Framework to reflect adjusted outcomes and targets, and emerging good 

practices in climate resilience; (iv) Extension of the original grant closing date of to align it with the 

closing date of the Additional Financing; and (v) a reallocation between disbursement categories. 

 

The AF will trigger Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). While the implementation of RESEPAG 

II has thus far not involved any resettlement of families or economic restrictions, rehabilitation of 

irrigation and water management infrastructure may result in involuntary resettlement. A Resettlement 

Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared in accordance with OP4.12 to ensure application of the 

appropriate safeguard policies. The completion of social safeguards instruments was deferred to the 

implementation stage in line with the flexibility afforded by OP 10.00 paragraph 12.  Consultation in 

the affected areas will include outreach to main stakeholders and the affected communities to the 

extent possible.  Once sites where project activities will be implemented are identified, Resettlement 

Action Plans (RAP) or Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (Abbrev. RAP) will be prepared 

consulted and disclosed for sites with resettlement impacts in accordance with the policy. Any 

compensation or livelihood restoration efforts that may be needed will be completed prior to 

commencement of the works. 

 

Closing Date 

 

The proposed AF would extend the current closing date of the original Grants from 30-June-2018 to 

31-Dec-2019. The Financing Agreement of the parent project would be amended accordingly.  This 

extension would allow for the completion of the activities under the Parent project so as to allow for 

emergency recovery and reconstruction activities as described under the components listed below and 

in more detail under the Project Paper. 

 

Component Name 

 

The project will maintain its structure around four components: Component 1: Agricultural support 

services; Component 2: Direct support to producers and associations; Component 3: Emergency 

Response Contingency Reserve; and Component 4: Institutional strengthening, monitoring and 

evaluation, project management and studies. 

 

The proposed AF will finance the scale up and the implementation of new field activities under 

Component 2 only, which will increase in cost by US$28.7M; Component 3 will receive an additional 

allocation of US$ 2.4M to compensate for expenses already incurred immediately after the Hurricane, 



and Component 4 will receive and additional allocation of US$ 3.9M to account for additional 

operational and monitoring costs. 

 

PHCOMP  

Component Name: 

Component 1 Agricultural Support Services (Total: US$ 11, IDA-H7410 US$ 1, GAFSP TF-11396 

US$ 10, US$ 0 IDA/AF). 

Comments ( optional) 

This component will not change. 
 

 

PHCOMP  

Component Name: 

Component 2: Direct Support to Producers and Associations (Total: US$ 54.2, IDA-H7410 US$ 

25.5, GAFSP TF-11396 US$ 0, US$ 28.7 IDA/AF). 

Comments ( optional) 

The activities planned under the Parent project (voucher schemes and matching grants) will not be 

modified. The Additional financing will (i) scale up the provision of vouchers under this 

component;  it will broaden the current geographical scope for this activity (Centre and Sud) with 

the inclusion of new municipalities within the Department of Sud and it will use the same delivery 

mechanisms as the Parent project reaching an additional 7,000 beneficiaries; (ii) add two new sub-

components: (a) Animal Husbandry and (b) Irrigation Rehabilitation and Micro-catchment 

protection. 
 

 

PHCOMP  

Component Name: 

Component 3: Emergency Response Contingency Reserve (Total: US$ 3.9, IDA-H7410 US$ 1.5, 

GAFSP TF-11396 US$ 0, US$ 2.4 IDA/AF). 

Comments ( optional) 

This component will change in title to “Emergency Response Contingency (ERC)”. Through this 

component uncommitted project funds, rather than an established upfront reserve amount, will be 

channeled to facilitate a timely response in case of an eligible emergency. 
 

 

PHCOMP  

Component Name: 

Component 4: Institutional Strengthening, Monitoring and Evaluation, Project Management and 

Studies Services (Total: US$ 11, IDA-H7410 US$ 7.1, GAFSP TF-11396 US$ 0, US$ 3.9 

IDA/AF). 

Comments ( optional) 

This component will not change in its design. However, to take into account the increased technical 

and geographical scope, and the increased in financial resources, additional allocation are being 

considered for equipment, vehicles, staff and consultancies. 
 

 
E. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if 

known) 

 

Parent Project 

Component 1, 3 and 4 activities are conducted nationwide. Component 2 activities are implemented in 

specific areas located in the Sud and Centre department for the voucher schemes; and Sud, Nord and 

Nord-Est departments for the matching grant schemes. 

 

Additional Financing (AF) 

The Haitian government carried out a Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) identifying the areas 

most affected by Hurricane Matthew, and prioritized the most pressing interventions to ensure food 

production in the season following the disaster. The emergency assistance program and extension of 

the voucher scheme program activities would remain in the Sud department, although more 

municipalities would be targeted. Irrigation rehabilitation works would be also conducted in the 

department of Sud, and would be closely related to the voucher scheme areas to ensure optimization of 

benefits. Lastly, activities related to livestock restocking would concern the western areas of the 



department of Sud and Grande-Anse. 

 

Salient physical characteristics relevant to environmental and social safeguards under the RESEPAG 

II AF relate to high variability of landscapes, biodiversity and climatic zones, extreme weather, 

advanced deforestation, earthquake activity and climate change. Alternating topography of mountains 

and valleys create variability in rainfall varying from 550 mm on leeward slopes to 2,700 mm on 

northern and windward slopes. The heterogeneity of the territory is a determining factor for crop types, 

cropping season, land use and forest cover. 

 

Haiti is subject to extreme weather events such as droughts, hurricanes and tropical storms.  

Deforestation and steep slopes have intensified these risks. Loss of forest to charcoal and timber 

production and to agriculture since colonial days has reduced forest cover from 75% to 1.5%. 

Deforestation has contributed to high runoff, erosion, landslides, flooding, dust, loss of agricultural 

productivity, reduced rainfall, siltation of waterways and degradation of coral reefs and mangroves. An 

estimated 36 million tons of topsoil are lost in Haiti annually. 

 

Haiti is seismically active as it sits astride two shallow fault lines; it is vulnerable to earthquakes, 

especially in built-up areas. 

 

Although degraded, Haiti’s natural environment still contains areas with notable concentrations of 

globally or regionally threatened species, including numerous endemic ones. These Key Biodiversity 

Areas (KBAs) occur throughout Haiti. 

 

With predicted climate change, temperatures are projected to increase and rainfall is projected to 

decrease, which is likely to intensify droughts in the center of the country. Sea level is projected to rise 

between 0.13 and 0.56 m by 2090, which would threaten coastal zones. Future increases in number 

and intensity of tropical storms and hurricanes are likely, with associated increases in highly erosive 

rainfall, floods and storm surge levels. 

 

The project expands access to agricultural extension services and promotes environmentally friendly 

investments and practices in agriculture. The project aims to have a positive impact on agriculture, 

resource use and surrounding landscapes. It does not support any activities that have large-scale, 

significant or irreversible adverse impacts on the environment. The project provides agricultural 

extension services to existing agricultural lands, and will discourage the clearance of new lands.. 
. 

 F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 Asli Gurkan( GSU04 ) 
 

 Felipe Jacome( GSU04 ) 
 

 
Nicolas Kotschoubey( GEN04 ) 

 
 

II. IMPLEMENTATION 

The proposed AF will be implemented under the same institutional arrangements of the parent 

project. The closing date of the proposed additional grant would be December 31, 2019 to 

ensure that all additional planned activities would be satisfactorily completed in accordance 

with the revised and updated implementation plan. The date of the original grant would also be 

extended to December 31, 2019. 
 

. 



III. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 

4.01 
Yes This policy will continue to be triggered under 

the AF as original activities under the parent 

project will not change; and animal husbandry 

and rehabilitation of irrigation canals activities 

will be added. 

 

Environmental impacts under the Parent 

Project have been low, and safeguards 

performance has been satisfactory. The project 

was designed to avoid the financing of 

activities with significant environmental 

impact and promote environmental good 

practice such as reforestation and soil 

conservation.  In the control of agricultural 

pests, the project has focused on integrated 

pest management. 

 

In summary, impacts observed include 

inadequate sanitation in sub-projects (poor 

design of latrines and septic tanks) in several 

sub-projects, as well as limited clearing of 

existing land of trees and shrubs for market 

gardening, as expected in an agricultural 

project. Poor sanitary practices in food 

production (e.g., dairy production) also posed 

potential risks, although no incidences of 

contamination has been recorded. 

 

Several positive activities were financed under 

the project, including use of biological control 

methods against the mealybug, a parasite of 

pea, bean and groundnut; planting of trees as 

part of productive landscapes (for cover as 

well as for fruit production); and planting of 

mangroves to compensate losses resulting 

from expansion of salt ponds. 

 

E&S impacts were adequately managed using 

the Environmental and Social Management 

Framework (ESMF) and Integrated Pest 

Management Plan (IPMP) prepared for 

RESEPAG II. No new, significant impacts are 

expected under the AF. 

 

The MARNDR will make minor updates and 

modifications to the ESMF and IPMP, to 

identify and manage the potential adverse 



impacts under the AF, which include:  

(i) animal husbandry, mostly small scale, 

resilience-oriented, mixed agriculture-

livestock systems, with very limited inputs, to 

around 6,000 households: includes training, 

production of forage, preparation of 

enclosures (for goat keeping), provision of 

beehives and protective equipment (for bee-

keeping). Impacts would be limited and 

include production of waste (animal waste), 

cutting of vegetation (for feed), overgrazing, 

and damage to riparian habitat. Mitigation will 

include effective waste management, control 

of water discharges, prevention of animals’ 

access to surface water bodies and prevention 

of free-grazing by raising animals in closed 

systems and provision of feed via forage tree 

planting and harvesting; and 

(ii) Irrigation Rehabilitation and Micro-

catchment protection: cash for work for small-

scale rehabilitation works (off-farm 

infrastructures); and civil works on river 

intakes, rivers embankments, sections of 

canals and drains, protection of infrastructure 

(mainly bridges and access roads). Impacts are 

likely to include health and safety of workers, 

construction waste (cement, metal and timber 

scraps, etc.), noise, dust, water quality 

(turbidity). Mitigation will include generic 

workplace design good practice, providing 

adequate protection equipment to workers, 

adequate waste management systems, etc.  

 

The project was rated category B because 

potential adverse impacts on the environment 

were moderate and easily identified, mitigated 

and managed. The project will remain 

Category B. 

 

Social risks and impacts: On the social side, 

no major safeguards risks are expected. 

Potential risks may include delays in 

compensation related to land acquisition or 

lack of appropriate consultations on relevant 

project information. The project will avoid or 
minimize land acquisition based on lessons 

learned. The RPF will include measures to 

deal with such potential delays in payments 

should land acquisition be necessary.  The 

communication activities will particularly 



target matching grants and voucher schemes 

activities, which may be open to speculation 

of corruption and unfairness unless the project 

team clearly explains the rules and procedures 

for distributing project benefits.  Risks linked 

to labor influx are expected to be limited. 

They will be mitigated by prioritizing local 

labor and ensuring clarity on where laborers 

coming from outside will be hosted through 

their stay in the host community and ensuring 

that contracts are consistent with ESMF and 

RPF provisions. The revised ESMF will 

include an annex with a social assessment 

targeted to new locations and sub-projects to 

be covered under the AF. 

 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes This policy will continue to be triggered under 
the AF as original activities under the parent 

project will not change; and animal husbandry 

and rehabilitation of irrigation canals activities 

will be added. 

 Because the project focuses on capacity 

building and provides agricultural extension 

services to existing agricultural lands, it does 

not support the clearance of new lands and 

such activities are not eligible for direct 

support. No agriculture activities that require 

the clearing of forested land or that damage 

freshwater habitat are supported. 

Nevertheless, because of the potential for 

indirect impacts on natural habitats, 

particularly if some agricultural activities are 

carried out around protected areas or KBAs, 

this safeguard policy has been triggered.  

 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes This policy will continue to be triggered under 
the AF as original activities under the parent 

project will not change; and animal husbandry 

and rehabilitation of irrigation canals activities 

will be added in the revised ESMF. 

 Because of the project’s potential to indirectly 

influence the management of natural forests, 

particularly in silvo-pastoral landscapes, this 

safeguard is triggered. A section in the ESMF 

requires the development of a Forest 

Management Plan (FMP), should any project 

activities affect such forest landscape.  

 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes The project supports investments related to 
agricultural extension services. These 

investments include the procurement, 

handling, storage and use of pesticides for plot 



demonstration and emergency interventions of 

insect pest outbreaks. Only approved 

pesticides under national or international law 

(including World Health Organization – 

WHO) will be supported under project 

financing. A list of pesticides that fall under 

these categories or are otherwise ineligible for 

support are included in the IPMP. 

 

In line with the approach taken under 

RESEPAG II, activities under the AF will 

avoid the intensive use of pesticides and 

instead will support an approach that includes 

IPMP: (a) avoiding the use or promotion of 

pesticides in WHO toxic categories I (Ia and 

Ib) or II (except under strict supervision of a 

trained and certified “Pest management 

Specialist”); (b) reduce reliance on synthetic 

chemical pesticides; (c) promote the use of 

biological or environmental pest control 

methods based on prevention, surveillance and 

monitoring; (d) favoring the use of multiple 

strategies (e.g. crop rotation, cultural 

practices, host plant resistance, biological 

control methods, chemical control); (e) pest 

control that increases natural enemies of 

parasites; (f) applying products only when 

infestation levels are critical; (g) avoiding the 

use of herbicides and pesticides near water 

sources and their contamination with pesticide 

residues when cleaning the equipment used; 

and (h) training producers, technicians, and 

farm workers to responsibly manage pesticide 

products, equipment, and containers to avoid 

their own contamination or that of livestock 

food or produce. 

 

Under the AF, the project will continue to 

implement the IPMP developed under the 

guidance of the ESMF, including screening 

criteria to exclude pesticides that are 

prohibited under the Bank’s policies. A 

specific plan is included in the IPMP to 

provide for screening, no-objection and 

monitoring during the procurement of 

pesticides. The IPMP also includes guidelines 

on the relevant aspects of integrated pest 

management that are part of the extension and 

training services provided under the project. 

 Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP No This policy will not be triggered since the new 



4.11 activities (irrigation) will not have additional 
impact on physical cultural resources. 

 
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No The policy is not triggered because there are 

no groups in Haiti who meet the definition of 

IPs of OP 4.10. 

 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes This policy was not triggered in the original 
project as no involuntary displacement of 

people or land acquisition was foreseen. 

 

The AF will trigger Involuntary Resettlement 

(OP/BP 4.12). While the implementation of 

RESEPAG II has thus far not involved any 

resettlement of families or economic 

restrictions, rehabilitation of irrigation and 

water management infrastructure may result in 

involuntary resettlement. 

 

A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will 

be prepared, consulted and disclosed at project 

implementation stage in accordance with 

OP4.12 to ensure application of the 

appropriate safeguard policies. The deferral of 

the completion of safeguards instruments to 

the implementation stage was granted in line 

with the flexibility afforded by OP 10.00 

paragraph 12. This will ensure adequate time 

to prepare, consult, and disseminate the RPF 

and other safeguard-related documents 

following the Safeguards Action Plan annexed 

to the Project Paper. 

 

Consultation in the affected areas will include 

outreach to main stakeholders and the affected 

communities to the extent possible.  Once 

sites where the project activities will be 

implemented are known, Resettlement Action 

Plans (RAP) or Abbreviated Resettlement 

Action Plans (Abbrev. RAP) will be prepared 

consulted and disclosed for sites with 

resettlement impacts in accordance with the 

policy.  Any compensation or livelihood 

restoration efforts that may be needed will be 

completed prior to commencement of the 

works. 

 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No This policy will not be triggered since no 
dams, nor will irrigation systems dependent on 

dams, per the WB definition, be restored or 

rebuilt. 



 

Projects on International Waterways 

OP/BP 7.50 
No This policy will not be triggered since neither 

the parent project, nor any activities under the 

AF, will take place on international 

waterways, per the WB definition. 

 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 

7.60 
No This policy will not be triggered since neither 

the parent project, nor any activities under the 

AF, will take place in disputed areas, per the 

WB definition. 
. 

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management 

 A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 

 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and 

describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts: 

 

Safeguards Implementation under the Original Project 

 

Component 1, SPS activities: impacts from handling and use of testing material, disposal of 

animal carcasses, disposal of syringes from vaccination campaigns and occupational health 

and safety concerns were adequately managed.  

Component 2, Support to Producers: the project targets improved, environmentally friendly, 

climate smart agriculture. The voucher program which has not started field-based activities 

had no impact. Impacts from inadequate sanitation in sub-projects under matching grants 

(e.g., poor design of latrines, septic tanks), cutting trees and shrubs for land clearing for 

market gardening, poor sanitary practices in food production (e.g., milk production), were low 

and properly managed. In addition, an integrated pest management plan waste management 

plan was prepared to manage agrochemicals. 

 

Components 3 and 4 had no recorded adverse impacts. 

 

The Social safeguards ratings under the Parent project have been consistently satisfactory. OP 

4.12 was not triggered under the Parent project and there were no resettlement impacts or any 

other major social risks or issues that occurred to date. Under the Parent project, an 

involuntary resettlement screening form has been used to properly detect and exclude any 

investments with OP 4.12 related impacts.  Under RESEPAG I, a social assessment was 

carried out based on extensive consultations with both Ministry of Agriculture (MARNDR) 

staff and community members in the pilot areas as well as a stakeholder analysis. The results 

of this assessment have served as the basis for the design of RESEPAG II. Under the AF, the 

ESMF update will include an annex with a social assessment targeted to new localities and 

new activities covered by the AF. MARNDR has started  to consult with people that would be 

potentially affected by the future AF activities.  

 

A gender review has been carried out during RESEPAG I. Consultations with women during 

the project preparation phase ensured women’s inclusion at the policy and program levels. A 

resultant just-in-time grants series “Fostering Economic Empowerment for Women 

Agricultural Producers in Haiti” is working to integrate gender, particularly women’s issues, 

within the Ministry of Agriculture. A collaboration between the gender specialist and the 



Ministry of Women Condition allowed to consider gender inclusion during the design of 

RESEPAG II. The Ministry of Agriculture has also hired a gender specialist to ensure that 

gender is being respected in the different parts of the project implementation. The Ministry of 

Women Condition has been a key stakeholder in the implementation of the matching grant 

component allowing the project to reach almost 50% of women participation. Under the 

Additional Financing the inclusion of women will remain important to at least 40% with some 

of the activities reaching 80% notably with the livestock packages. 

 

In terms of capacity for managing social safeguards,  the project team has a good presence in 

the field and is regularly in contact with the project beneficiaries. The project team has been 

holding consultations about the project activities and preparing minutes of these consultations.  

There is no social safeguards specialist under the parent project. However, the environmental 

specialist have attended several safeguards trainings. He is familiar with the OP 4.12 

requirements and have used screening forms to detect any resettlement related impacts. Under 

the AF, a second safeguards specialist will be hired, to be in charge of monitoring social risks 

and impacts. The person hired by the PIU will have documented social expertise, particularly 

given the fact that resettlement action plans may have to be implemented under the project. 

 

Additional Financing to Respond to Hurricane Matthew 

 

Under the AF, most of the planned activities would restore or improve pre-existing 

agricultural production conditions, and therefore are not expected to create any significant 

additional adverse environmental or social impact. However, (i) animal husbandry and (ii) the 

rehabilitation of damaged irrigation canals, water intakes, and water reservoir infrastructures 

may imply some minor environmental and social impacts related to: (i) additional waste 

(animal waste), vegetation harvesting, overgrazing, damage to riparian habitat, etc. Because 

the production systems in Haiti to be supported by the AF are of very small scale, point 

source pollution of wastewater, ammonia, odor, nuisances, etc., typically associated with 

intensive production systems, are not expected to be encountered; and (ii) construction, 

especially around water bodies (streams, canals) may impact health and safety, and result in 

waste production, noise, reduced water quality (turbidity), increase level of dust, or result in 

loss of vegetation cover, etc.). These potential negative impacts are however expected to be 

moderate, localized,  and can be mitigated through (i) for animal husbandry system promoting 

enclosure of goats, training and technical assistance that goes with the livestock will be the 

principal vehicle to effective management of waste, wastewater, preventing animals’ access to 

surface water bodies, production of forage trees for feed,  etc.; (ii) for irrigation rehabilitation, 

mitigation will be through the application of good construction and management practices and 

with close supervision of contractor performance by field engineers and in close consultation 

with local communities. The potential impacts and mitigation measures will be identified and  

included in  the ESMPs (and RAPs when relevant) for each subproject. 

 

The AF triggers the Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP 4.12) as works along riverbanks and 

irrigation systems may require a minimal degree of land acquisition and cause economic 

impacts, such as impact on fruit trees or damaged crops. These works will not be large-scale, 

significant or have irreversible adverse impacts on the population. Because of the deferral of 

preparation of the safeguards instruments, the project will prepare, consult and disclose a 



Resettlement Policy Framework at project implementation stage. 

 

Lessons learned on social safeguards from RESEPAG II: 

 

Lesson 1:  It is important to have a dedicated social specialist as part of the PIU to track and 

document social issues and impacts. Under the AF, there will be a second safeguards 

specialist hired to focus on social safeguards and social issues at large. 

Lesson 2:  A well-functioning Grievance Redress mechanism is needed to keep track of 

beneficiaries’ concerns and provide timely response. Under the parent project, there is a 

hotline established under the Ministry of Agriculture. 10 complaints were received, mostly 

coming from agricultural producers whose proposals were not accepted. Under the AF, the 

hotline will be coupled with a communication strategy focusing some specific social risks. 

(Eg.to explain to the farmers the eligibility criteria, targeting strategy and the voucher system 

that the project is implementing). The Ministry of Agriculture will designate one focal point 

from the Ministry in each Department to act as liaison for managing safeguards-related issues 

and address grievances. The Focal Points would resolve issues, and escalate them to the staff 

in Port-au-Prince as needed. Meetings will be held every two months between staff in capital 

city and the regional Focal Points to exchange information. 

Lesson 3:  Even in projects that have not triggered OP 4.12, the involuntary resettlement 

screening form is a useful tool as part of ESMF to detect potential resettlement risks upfront. 

Under the AF, this practice will continue as part of first environmental screening and a RAP 

will be prepared when potential impacts are detected. No activities will be able to start before 

the RAP is effectively implemented and the project affected people have received their 

compensation. The safeguards specialists under AF will receive a refresher training on OP 

4.12 as well as how to screen out social impacts beyond resettlement. 

 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 

the project area: 

 

The project has potential indirect impacts on natural habitats if some agricultural activities are 

carried out around protected areas or Key Biodiversity Areas (KBAs). Also, the project has 

the potential to indirectly influence the management of natural forests, particularly in mixed 

land use landscapes (forestry and grazing). 

 

However, the project is designed to avoid the financing of activities with significant 

environmental impact and promote environmental good practice such as reforestation and soil 

conservation.  The ESMF has provisions to prepare a Forest Management Plan (FMP) should 

any project activities affect such forest landscape. 

 

In the control of agricultural pests, the project has focused on integrated pest management: 

use of approved pesticides only; reduce reliance on synthetic pesticides; promote biological 

pest control; utilize multiple strategies (crop rotation, resistant varieties, and biological 

control); natural predators of parasites; critical use of products; protect water sources; and 

training operators. 

 

Furthermore, the ESMF and the capacity building provided to the Environmental Cell in 

MARNDR will enhance the ability of the Ministry to optimize environmental outcomes in the 



project area. 

 

No potential indirect or long term social impacts are expected. Resettlement, land acquisition 

and loss of economic livelihood are unlikely. The project will avoid or minimize land 

acquisition based on the lessons learned regarding delays and complications with land titles. 

RPF will include measures to deal with such potential delays in payments should land 

acquisition be necessary.   

 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 

impacts. 

 

The project design is broad and includes many components. It takes into consideration the 

role played by the agricultural sector in employment (57% percent of the active population; 

66% of rural employment; and 75% of employment to low-income rural households); the 

variability of the topography and climate; environmental degradation; and social vulnerability. 

Project design considered the current alternative, which avoids funding activities with a 

significant environmental impact, commercial crops, monoculture and export-oriented crops, 

but promotes good environmental practices such as reforestation and soil conservation at the 

micro-producer level. 

 

Most of the planned activities under the AF are not expected to create any significant adverse 

environmental or social impact, as they will be restoring or improving pre-existing 

agricultural production conditions, and will put a particular emphasis on the quality and 

resilience of these structures and systems. As the proposed project would support the 

rehabilitation of damaged irrigation canals, water intakes, and water reservoir infrastructures, 

including river embankments, this may imply some minor temporary environmental and 

social impacts. These civil works are expected to be mostly of small size, and efforts will be 

placed on minimizing any possible negative effect through solid preliminary studies allowing 

to clearly identify areas of interventions, avoiding if possible to modify any previous canal 

routes, and ensuring the adequate design, use of appropriate construction materials, and 

construction techniques etc. Clearing canals and areas of interventions may produce some 

solid wastes that could present disposal issues. Adequate management of waste and debris 

would be embedded in the Terms of reference and contractual obligations for the contractors.  

 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 

assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 

 

Parent Project 

 

The Borrower has prepared all the required safeguard instruments (ESMF and IPMP). The 

ESMF is the instrument used to identify when additional Environmental and Social 

Management Plans (ESMPs) are necessary and includes a procedure to screen out projects 

that will (i) negatively impact critical natural habitats; (ii) adversely affect the management of 

natural forests, or (iii) an IPMP that will address an increase in the use of, or the storage of, 

application or handling of, pesticides in categories I and II of the WHO Recommended 

Classification of Pesticides. The project design emphasizes the adoption of environmentally-

friendly technologies and others that favor increased productivity over simple land expansion. 

 

The MARNDR is experienced in implementing donor-funded projects (including World 



Bank, the IDB and IFAD) and managing the requisite safeguard actions. To strengthen their 

capacity, the MARNDR with the support of the RESEPAG II project has created an 

Environmental Cell within the Ministry to manage environmental risks within the agricultural 

sector more broadly. The project is supporting the development and operationalization of this 

Cell. The preparation, implementation and oversight of safeguard actions will continue to be 

provided by this Environmental Cell during implementation. 

 

To assist the Environmental Cell, the ESMF includes indicators to monitor compliance as 

well as a training and dissemination program to build capacity within the Cell and to build a 

constituency for environmental awareness in the agricultural sector more broadly. The Bank 

(external consultant) will closely monitor environmental compliance to identify opportunities 

to enhance environmental outcomes and better manage adverse impacts. 

 

The environmental and social capacity of the RESEPAG II project team has been largely 

adequate; it consists of an environmental specialist/agronomist; an economist/social specialist; 

and a social/gender specialist, who work on safeguards issues on a part-time basis.  

RESEPAG II staff is acquainted with the Bank´s policies after attending several safeguards 

workshops organized in country. 

 

Additional Financing to Respond to Hurricane Matthew 

 

Under the AF, the ESMF, and its attached IPMP, will be updated to reflect the new 

components added to the project; reference will be made to the World Bank Group ESHS 

guidelines.   

 

Under the AF, given that OP 4.12 is being triggered to address potential involuntary 

resettlement, the project concluded that the capacity of the PIU will need to be enhanced and 

that an additional specialist would be required to complement the current team. The Task 

Team recommended that the MARNDR/RESEPAG II hire a full-time, entry-level socio-

environmental specialist to complement the team, to be in charge of monitoring 

environmental and social risks and impacts, and receive training by the team on an ongoing 

basis. Given the urgency of the emergency works the environmental specialist at the PIU will 

be trained to screen works for potential involuntary resettlement. The Bank will assist the 

MARNDR in preparing the TORs and in selecting the socio-environmental specialist. 

 

The Project will also hire the services of a second Socio-Environmental Specialist in the 

coming months to prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to ensure the compliance 

of involuntary resettlement safeguards, as well as a social assessment annex to the ESMF. 

  

Social safeguards rating under the Parent project has been satisfactory. OP 4.12 was not 

triggered under the Parent project and there were no resettlement impacts or any other major 

social risks or issues that occurred to date. Under the Parent project, a rubric in the ESMF 

screening form covering involuntary resettlement has been used to properly detect and 

exclude any investments with OP 4.12 related impacts. 

 

In terms of capacity for managing social safeguards, the project team has a good presence in 



the field and is regularly in contact with the project beneficiaries. There is no social 

safeguards specialist under the parent project. However, the current environmental specialist 

have attended several safeguards trainings. He is familiar with the OP 4.12 requirements and 

have used screening forms to detect any resettlement related potential risks. Activities likely 

to cause involuntary resettlement were excluded. 

 

In the event that involuntary resettlement cannot be avoided by the necessary works, the Bank 

team will support the PIU to develop and implement Resettlement Action Plans. The Bank 

Task Team will provide an additional safeguards training for relevant PIU staff before the 

beginning of AF activities. A second training will be provided 6 to 10 months into the 

implementation of the AF. 

 

The AF will reinforce the existing Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRM) established by the 

Parent Project. The GRM ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to 

address project-related concerns. Additionally, communities and individuals who believe that 

they are adversely affected by a World Bank (WB) supported project may submit complaints 

to existing project-level grievance redress mechanisms or the WB’s Grievance Redress 

Service (GRS). 

 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on 

safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 

 

The rural population depending on the Agricultural sector for their livelihood in Haiti is 

estimated to be around 5 million. The main stakeholders are the segment of this population 

who live and work in the regions supported by this project. Among this population, the project 

will pay special attention to women. Studies from RESEPAG I show that while women 

undertake a large part of agricultural activities and participate in many productive 

organizations, they are disadvantaged compared with the men in terms of decision-making, 

control over resources, and access to economic benefits. Other stakeholders include the 

Ministry of Agriculture central and regional staff, local government officials, extension 

service providers, both public and private, as well as the general public who will benefit from 

improved agricultural output (in quantity and quality), as well as from the reduced risk of 

disease transmission through improved plant and animal health safety. 

 

The Project team will conduct consultations in beneficiary communities affected by Hurricane 

Matthew areas to inform beneficiaries of project activities, opportunities to participate, 

potential adverse short-term impacts, and the grievance redress mechanism available to them. 

These consultations will be key in engaging the population in the emergency response 

programs, reconstruction works and cash-for-work activities. Specifically, the content of 

voucher programs will be consulted and validated with the beneficiaries; the beneficiaries of 

livestock replacement will be identified through community participatory engagement; 

irrigation infrastructure will be identified through community mapping; and cash-for-work 

schemes will be established through participatory processes. People affected by involuntary 

resettlement will be consulted on compensation and resettlement policies in accordance with 

OP4.12. 
. 

 
B. Disclosure Requirements (N.B. The sections below appear only if corresponding safeguard policy 

is triggered) 



 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/OtherPHEnvDelete 

 Date of receipt by the Bank 26-Jul-2011 

 Date of submission to InfoShop 03-Aug-2011 

 
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the 

EA to the Executive Directors 
 

 "In country" Disclosure 

 

PHEnvCtry  

Haiti 03-Aug-2011 

Comments: 
 

 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy ProcessPHResDelete 

 Date of receipt by the Bank 07-Sept-2017 

 Date of submission to InfoShop 14-Sept-2017 

 "In country" Disclosure 

 

PHResCtry  

Haiti 14-Sept-2017 

Comments: 
 

 

PHIndCtry  

Haiti  

Comments: 
 

 Pest Management PlanPHPestDelete 

 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes 

 Date of receipt by the Bank 26-Jul-2011 

 Date of submission to InfoShop 03-Aug-2011 

 "In country" Disclosure 

 

PHPestCtry 

Haiti 03-Aug-2011 

Comments: 
 

 
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 

respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental 

Assessment/Audit/or EMP. 

 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:: 

  
. 

 

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is 

finalized by the project decision meeting) (N.B. The sections below appear only if corresponding 

safeguard policy is triggered) 
PHCompliance 

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 

Does the project require a stand-alone EA 

(including EMP) report? 
Yes [] No x NA [] 



If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit 

or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve 

the EA report? 

Yes [] No [] NA x 

Are the cost and the accountabilities for the 

EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes x No [] NA [] 

 

PHCompliance 

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 

Would the project result in any significant 

conversion or degradation of critical natural 

habitats? 

Yes [] No x NA [] 

If the project would result in significant 

conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) 

natural habitats, does the project include 

mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank? 

Yes [] No [] NA x 

 

PHCompliance 

OP 4.09 - Pest Management 

Does the EA adequately address the pest 

management issues? 
Yes x No [] NA [] 

Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes x No [] NA [] 

If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and 

approved by a safeguards specialist or PM?  

Are PMP requirements included in project 

design?If yes, does the project team include a 

Pest Management Specialist? 

Yes x No [] NA [] 

 

PHCompliance 

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 

Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy 

framework/process framework (as appropriate) 

been prepared? 

Yes [] No x NA [] 

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for 

safeguards or Practice Manager review the 

plan? 

Yes [] No [] NA x 

Is physical displacement/relocation expected? 
Yes [] No x TBD [] 

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of 

assets or access to assets that leads to loss of 

income sources or other means of livelihoods) 

Yes x No [] TBD [] 

 

PHCompliance 

OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 

Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and 

institutional issues and constraints been carried 

out? 

Yes [] No x NA [] 

Does the project design include satisfactory 

measures to overcome these constraints? 
Yes [] No [] NA x 



Does the project finance commercial 

harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions 

for certification system? 

Yes [] No x NA [] 

 

PHCompliance 

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 

Have relevant safeguard policies documents 

been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop? 
Yes x No [] NA [] 

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-

country in a public place in a form and language 

that are understandable and accessible to 

project-affected groups and local NGOs? 

Yes x No [] NA [] 

 

PHCompliance 

All Safeguard Policies 

Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear 

institutional responsibilities been prepared for 

the implementation of measures related to 

safeguard policies? 

Yes [X] No [] NA [] 

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures 

been included in the project cost? 
Yes [X] No [] NA [] 

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of 

the project include the monitoring of safeguard 

impacts and measures related to safeguard 

policies? 

Yes [X] No [] NA [] 

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements 

been agreed with the borrower and the same 

been adequately reflected in the project legal 

documents? 

Yes [X] No [] NA [] 

 

 

V. Contact point 

World Bank 

 

PHWB 

Contact:Norman Bentley Piccioni 

Title:Senior Rural Development Specialist 
 

. 

. 

 Borrower/Client/Recipient 

 

PHBorr 

Name:Ministry of Economy and Finance 

Contact:Jude Alix Patrick Salomon 

Title:Ministre de L'Economie et de Finances 

Email:hermann.augustin@agriculture.gouv.ht 
 

. 

. 

. 

 Implementing Agencies 

 

PHIMP 

Name:Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development 

Contact:Jules Cesaire YAGANZA 

Title:Directeur du Departement Techniques Industrielles et Exploit 

Email:legrand_cesar@yahoo.fr 
 



. 

. 

. 

VI. For more information contact: 
. 

 The World Bank 

 1818 H Street, NW 

 Washington, D.C. 20433 

 Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

 Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects 

 


















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 
 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 1 of 16  

     

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 29-Nov-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA24700 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 2 of 16  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Jamaica P166279 Jamaica Rural Economic 
Development Initiative-
Second Phase 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN 12-Nov-2018 26-Feb-2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Jamaica Jamaica Social Investment 
Fund (JSIF), Ministry of 
Finance and Public Sector 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 

To enhance access to markets and to climate resilient approaches for targeted beneficiaries. 

 
Components 

Climate Resilient Agriculture and Community Tourism Investment Subprojects for Rural Enterprises 
Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building of Public Sector Entities 
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation 
Contingent Emergency Response 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 42.00 

Total Financing 42.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 40.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 40.00 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 3 of 16  

 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 2.00 

          LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 2.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

1. The Jamaican economy has historically been characterized by low growth and high public debt, but 
fiscal and structural reforms launched in 2013 are helping to reverse the trend. Real gross domestic product 
(GDP) per capita grew by only 0.5 percent on average per year between 1990 and 2016. Fiscal restraints, higher 
tax revenue, and well-timed liability management operations have reduced the debt-to-GDP ratio by around 25 
percentage points. GDP growth has seen a modest acceleration since the start of reforms, rising to 1.4 percent 
in 2016. The informal sector continues to be large in relative terms, accounting for 43% of official GDP according 
to an ILO 2014 study. The economy remains vulnerable to external shocks.  

2. Rural poverty has remained consistently higher than urban poverty, with an increasing urban-rural gap. 
The national incidence of poverty for 2015 was 21.2 percent, with an urban-rural gap of 14 percentage points 
(28.5 percent in rural areas1 compared to 14.3 percent in the Kingston Metropolitan Area). Socio-economic 
disparities for women and youth continue to contribute to the higher level of rural poverty. If Jamaica is to 
achieve “Developed World” status, as is the goal of the GOJ’s Vision 2030 plan, development of rural areas needs 
to keep pace with development in urban areas. The tourism and food/agriculture sectors hold significant 
potential for rural growth and development because of their importance to the economy overall as well as their 
potential reach into rural areas. 

3. Jamaica is highly vulnerable to climate change and faces significant environmental threats due to its 
geographical location. Between 2004 and 2008, five major storm events caused damages and losses estimated 
at US$1.2 billion. Evidence suggests that Jamaica will likely see increases in severe weather events, such as 
droughts, extreme precipitation, flooding, and increases in the intensity and frequency of hurricanes2. 
Additionally, Jamaica’s vulnerability to sea level rise is more pronounced than in other regions due to the 
potential impact of storm surges from tropical storms and hurricanes on the coast. 

                                                           
1 Jamaica Survey of Living Conditions 
2 Ivan, Dennis and Emily (2004-2005), Dean 2007, Sandy (2012), tropical storms Gustav (2008) and Nicole (2010)) and droughts (2005-2014). 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 4 of 16  

 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 

Agricultural Sector 

4. The agricultural sector is an important contributor to the country’s economic development and is 
recognized as a priority in the GOJ’s mid-term plans. The agricultural sector accounts for 8.0 percent of Jamaica’s 
GDP, and employs 18.7 percent of the active population (of which 44.7 lives in rural areas). Agriculture and agro-
processing in Jamaica are characterized by a few sub-sectors with relatively tight value chains and high-quality 
standards serving export markets and the tourism industry, along with domestic production sub-sectors serving 
local parish markets and supermarkets. Traditional export crops (sugar, bananas, coffee, and citrus) are in 
decline. The “non-traditional” export sector showing strong growth and market potential includes agricultural 
products such as preserved fruits (e.g. ackee) and sauces, condiments, and mixed seasonings (e.g. jerk sauces). 
Jamaica is a net importer of livestock commodities (dairy and meat products). 

5. The small-scale agricultural and food products sector exhibits significant potential for growth, but 
significant challenges remain to be addressed.  Small-scale agriculture has ample potential for serving domestic 
markets but needs to become more competitive with respect to imports by increasing land and labor 
productivity, the quality and reliability of distribution, and climate resiliency.  Small-farmers and micro and small-
sized agri-businesses enterprises tend to be at a comparative disadvantage in accessing higher value markets due 
to lack of market information, inefficient production practice, outdated technologies, lack of value addition, 
diseconomies of scale, and high logistics costs. Limited access to financing is among the key challenges to 
agriculture competitiveness and related MSMEs. Weaknesses in the connectivity of rural areas is also limiting 
marketing opportunities and access to potentially attractive inland tourism sites.   

6. The natural environment exposes the agriculture and food sector to frequent weather shocks and high 
levels of climatic variability – further exacerbated by climate change.  Climate change has caused a trend of 
rising temperatures, worsening rainfall variability, and droughts, and here the frequency and intensity of extreme 
events is likely to rise in the future.  This will make soil and crop management more difficult, especially in coastal 
areas, which are threatened by a decline in fertility or being washed away. Crops need to be able to withstand a 
more extreme and diverse set of environmental challenges, including worsening of pests and disease occurrence. 
In the livestock sub-sector, these weather trends may put additional strains on cattle, adding to the vulnerability 
of livestock facilities.    

Tourism Sector 

7. Tourism is also a critical driver of the Jamaican economy.  The tourism sector accounted for 9.3 percent 
of the national GDP in 20163.  This sector is considered mature, with international arrivals still growing more 
rapidly than elsewhere in the region. Jamaica’s tourism strategy4 sets a target of 5 percent annual growth for the 
sector for the years 2017 to 2022, as well as 5 million visitors with US$3.5 billion in total earnings annually from 
visitor spending. The goal is also to reduce significantly the amount of leakage that results from the large amount 
of imports used in the sector. Jamaica retains about 30 percent of every dollar spent by tourists, while the target 
set by The Ministry of Tourism (MOT) is 50 percent. As such, Tourism has the potential to be strongly linked to 
agriculture and small-scale production: Sandals Resorts in Jamaica reports that 90 percent of produce purchased 
in Jamaica annually are locally produced by a network of around 180 farmers5.   

                                                           
3 World Travel & Tourism Council (2017). Travel &Tourism: Economic Impact 2017 Jamaica  
4 The Master Plan for Sustainable Tourism Development and the National Development Plan – Vision 2030 are the main guides determining Jamaica’s 
tourism strategy. 
5 Jamaica Observer (2017) http://www.jamaicaobserver.com/business-report/sandals-consumes-whopping-5-million-pounds-of-local-farm-produce-
yearly-buy-local-first-before-looking-overseas-stewart-instructs-resorts_136430 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 5 of 16  

 

8. Jamaica’s tourism market has traditionally focused on the “sun, sea and sand” concept model but more 
diversification is being pursued. Attempts are being made by the GOJ and the private sector to provide a more 
diversified visitor experience through new product offerings targeted to wider groups of visitors.  The MOT 
intends to move towards a more inclusive tourism model to spread the benefits of tourism, provide more 
entrepreneurship opportunities, and deepen economic linkages in rural areas. This policy is laid out in the 
National Community Tourism Policy and Strategy, which was funded under the previous REDI project. Many 
challenges to the further development of community tourism in rural areas remains They include: (a) excessive 
licensing and standards that are too complex for small NGOs and Community Tourism Enterprises (CTEs) to 
manage; (b) low levels of available capacity and resources for expanding community tourism operations; and 
(c) poor marketing support and inadequate connections to the tourism supply chain, operators, and hotels.  

9. Climate resilience is also important for the tourism sector. More severe storms and hurricanes, rising sea 
levels, droughts, and heatwaves can degrade tourism assets such as coral reefs, shorelines, freshwater supply, 
and ecosystems, and can damage tourism infrastructure and destination communities with potentially 
significant losses to GDP and employment.  Changing weather conditions and milder winters in various parts of 
the world may also affect tourist demand, underscoring the need for sun, sea, and sand destinations to diversify 
their offerings.  

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
To enhance access to markets and to climate resilient approaches for targeted beneficiaries. 
 

Key Results 
10. The results of the proposed Project will be measured through the following set of outcome indicators: 

• Percentage of participating rural enterprises that have accessed new markets;  

• Percentage of participating rural enterprises operating on or above the projections (gross sales value) 
of their corresponding business plan; and 

• Number of targeted beneficiaries reached with climate resilient approaches supported by the project 
(of which number of rural enterprises and public institutions). 

 
D. Project Description  

 
11. Enhancement to the REDI I approaches. Building on the experience and results of REDI, the new Project 
will focus on strengthening value chains6  and tourism clusters development, placing emphasis on the linkages 
between producers/service providers and buyers, to improve economies of scale for small agricultural and 
tourism enterprises and to mainstream climate resilience.  

A. Project Components 

12. Component 1. Climate Resilient Agricultural and Community Tourism Investments Subprojects for Rural 
Enterprises (Total US$ 28.0 million, IBRD US$26.0 million).  The objective of this component is to promote the 
development of agricultural/community tourism enterprises that are better integrated in productive 

                                                           
6 Value chain is defined as interlinked value-adding activities that help competitive advantage. Typically, it includes: (a) procurement and input logistics; 
(b) operations that may include, in the case of this project, farming and agricultural research, basic tourism infrastructure such as eco-trails; (c) training 
and other form of human resource development activities; (d) transportation of outputs and any investment in infrastructure to decrease costs or 
improve quality of the outputs (such as cold storage); and (e) corporate activities including marketing and sales. 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 6 of 16  

 

partnerships or “alliances" and operate more competitively in selected value chains, with more reliable linkages 
with buyers and markets and increased capacity to manage climate risks.  

13. This component will finance consulting and non-consulting services, good, works and operating costs 
(through matching grants) for demand-driven and competitively selected agriculture/fisheries or community 
tourism subprojects presented and implemented by participating rural enterprises to increase their production 
and to capture and/or increase their market share and level of profits.  Financed activities will support the 
promotion, identification, design, feasibility, and implementation of competitive and climate resilient 
investment subprojects for business ventures established by beneficiary enterprises (small farmer/fisher 
associations – cooperatives, friendly or benevolent societies, or any formal form of legally established 
associations – as well as, agribusinesses, community tourism operators, and related entrepreneurs such as craft 
makers).  

14. Investments proposals will be prepared in response to calls for proposal and submitted by the beneficiary 
rural enterprises. They will be appraised and competitively selected for project support and funding considering 
pre-established criteria assessing, inter-alia: market demand, product quality, technical and financial feasibility, 
environmental and social sustainability; approaches to enhance climate resiliency and the potential for local 
impact; and the level of participation by women and youth.  It is estimated that a total of 90 investment 
subprojects will be supported through this component, benefitting directly around 200 rural enterprises. As 
such, around 20,000 individual members of these rural enterprises will benefit directly from these investments 
(of which 40 percent will be females and 30 percent youth).  

15. Component 2.  Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building for Relevant Public Entities (IBRD 
US$8.0 million).  This component aims to strengthen the capacity of relevant public-sector institutions (MICAF, 
MOT, and JSIF) and associated entities (RADA, TPDCo, and others) to provide public infrastructure and quality 
services needed to promote inclusive rural development (based on the agriculture and tourism nexus) and to 
ensure the sustainability of the rural enterprises and productive partnerships supported by the project. It is 
organized in the following two subcomponents: (i) 2.1 –Public Infrastructure Investments (IBRD US$ 6,0 million) 
will finance civil works, goods, and consulting services for priority public infrastructure investments (new or 
rehabilitated) that are needed for improving the efficiency and climate resilience of targeted agri-food and 
tourism value chains; and (ii) 2.2: Technical Assistance and Capacity Building (IBRD US$2.0 million. will finance 
technical assistance (consultant and non-consultant services, goods, training, workshops, and study tours) to 
strengthen the capacity of relevant national organizations and other relevant partner entities responsible for 
assisting the agricultural and community tourism enterprises.  

16. Component 3. Project Management (IBRD US$6.0 million).  This component will finance incremental 
costs associated with the management, supervision, and monitoring and evaluation of project implementation 
by JSIF and its technical Project Management Team (PMT) for REDI II. Cost to be financed include technical 
expertise (agriculture, tourism, business development, monitoring and evaluation, etc.), staff training, annual 
audits, vehicles, office equipment, and other operating costs. This component will also ensure that effective 
safeguards, fiduciary, and M&E arrangements are in place during implementation.   

17. Component 4.  Contingent Emergency Response (US$ 0).  This component will allow for a reallocation of 
loan proceeds from other components to provide emergency recovery and reconstruction support following an 
eligible crisis or emergency at the national or sub-national level. Considering the Project design, the CERC is 
expected to be operationalized through a reallocation from component 1 to provide emergency recovery and 
reconstruction support.  To ensure that there is capacity, the Project Operations Manual includes a CERC annex 
applicable to eligible disasters, detailing fiduciary, safeguards, monitoring and reporting, and any other 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 7 of 16  

 

necessary implementation arrangements. 

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

18. Implementing Agency for REDI II.  Building on the REDI I experience, the Jamaica Social Investment Fund 
(JSIF) will be the lead implementing agency for REDI II and will work in close coordination and under the technical 
leadership of the Ministry of Industry, Commerce, Agriculture and Fisheries (MICAF), ,the Ministry of Tourism 
(MOT), and their respective operational agencies RADA and TPDCo. JSIF will have overall responsibility for the 
coordination and management of project implementation. JSIF will establish a Project Management Team (PMT) 
that will be responsible for overall technical implementation and will coordinate with all relevant national 
institutions on component implementation. The implementation period is expected to be six years. 

19. Project Oversight: Inter-Ministerial Project Steering Committee. This committee will be responsible for 
ensuring that the Project is in line with national development priorities.  The Committee will be chaired by the 
Planning Institute of Jamaica (PIOJ) with membership to include representatives from MICAF and MOT and other 
relevant agencies i.e. Office of the Prime Minister, Rural Agricultural Development Authority (RADA), Tourism 
Product Development Company (TPDCo), JSIF, and Ministry of Finance and Public Service (MOF&PS). 

20. Beneficiary Rural Enterprises in the agriculture and community tourism sectors will be eligible for 
subproject financing and responsible for the operating, maintenance, and sustainability of the corresponding 
investments. 

 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project will take place nationally in Jamaica and specifically in rural agricultural and tourism landscapes. 
Specific location details are unknown at this time because the sub-projects will be demand driven. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Gibwa A. Kajubi, Social Specialist 
Nyaneba E. Nkrumah, Environmental Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 
The project is rated as a Category B in terms of its 
risk profile.  
 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 8 of 16  

 

Component 1 will finance rural agricultural and 
tourism subprojects that support revenue 
generating activities including support to rural 
producers (inputs, equipment, seeds, water access, 
drip irrigation, greenhouses etc.) as well as support 
to tourism operators and enterprises (marketing, 
small renovations such as painting and refurbishing 
guest housing, equipment for craft making, etc.). 
Component 2 finances small scale public 
investments aimed at improving the efficiency of 
priority value chains for selected products (e.g., 
storage facilities, cold chain supply infrastructure 
equipment at the regional level as well as at 
airports/ports, fresh products grading, clearing hubs, 
agricultural research and development, 
seeds/seedling production and certification 
activities}.    Most of the impacts related to the 
implementation of Component 1 and 2 are minor, 
short-term and highly localized and thus easily 
mitigated. No cumulative impacts are expected. Any 
impacts are therefore easily mitigated through 
standard mitigation measures. .    
 
Subcomponent  2.2:  Technical Assistance and 
Capacity Building will finance TA and capacity 
building for key organizations and agencies that 
deliver support services in agriculture and rural 
tourism at the local level. While the TA activities 
themselves do not have direct adverse 
environmental or social impacts, the Bank team will 
integrate environmental and social principles and 
objectives as an integral part of the terms of 
reference and supervision of the TA.   
 
JSIF has prepared an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) that outlines 
potential risks and guidelines to mitigate potential 
impacts, outlines roles and responsibilities of key 
actors, provides budget and costs for mitigation and 
training (where needed) and gives guidance to 
contractors and PIU environmental specialists in 
terms of managing contracts with firms.  The ESMF 
also serves as the guiding document for any site-
specific Environmental and Social Management 
Plans (ESMPs).  This document has been reviewed 
and cleared by the bank and was recently disclosed 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 9 of 16  

 

to stakeholders in Jamaica and on the Bank's 
website. A separate integrated pest management 
plan was prepared and also disclosed similarly under 
the project. Institutional arrangements outlined 
within the document will guide the use of pesticides 
according to OP 4:09.  During implementation, each 
subproject will be screened to determine its risk 
profile and, accordingly, it will be determined 
whether further documents (ESMPs) will need to be 
developed to manage these risks.  Any activity that is 
rated Category A will be screened out.  
The ESMF points to additional guidance, as 
applicable, in the General EHS Guidelines and the 
Industry Sector Guidelines specifically guidelines for 
AGRIBUSINESS/FOOD PRODUCTION and FORESTRY 
http://www.ifc.org/ehsguidelines.  

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No This is not a private sector activity. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Given the scale of the activities, it is unlikely that 
natural habitats will be impacted.  However, the 
locations are unknown and are in the rural areas of 
Jamaica, which has significant natural resources. For 
this reason, the OP is triggered as a precaution.  
However, every effort will be made to avoid working 
in or impacting critical natural habitats. The ESMF  
includes measures to avoid/mitigate the alteration 
of critical or sensitive areas. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The project activities are highly localized and are 
unlikely to impact forests but the project will 
operate in a rural landscape and therefore it is 
possible that some activities may impact tree 
clusters. For this reason, OP 4.36 is triggered as a 
precaution.  All subprojects will  be screened and 
any impacts on forests, or tree clusters, quantified.  
Alternatives will be considered as a means to avoid 
negative impacts on any forests or significant tree 
clusters. The ESMF includes specific screening tools 
to identify any potential negative impacts on forests 
or tree clusters. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

Given that support is provided to producer 
organizers, pesticides may be supported.  However, 
World Bank guidance regarding the use of pesticides 
and  IPM will be observed, and a pesticide 
management plan has been prepared. 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 10 of 16  

 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

This OP is not triggered because the project will not 
operate in culturally sensitive areas.  However, 
during implementation, small rehabilitation works 
and minor mitigation works may result in the chance 
find of culturally significant objects. The ESMF 
includes procedures to address chance findings of 
archeological and cultural resources during 
construction works. 
  

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
The policy is not triggered because there are no 
groups in Jamaica who meet the definition of IPs 
under OP 4.10. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The policy will be triggered for activities under 
Component 2. The activities under Component 1 are 
small in scale and scope and therefore unlikely to 
have long-term or cumulative impacts. The JSIF 
evaluation found no sub-project activity financed 
under the REDI I that required physical involuntary 
resettlement. The CDD-type of activities/sub-
projects proposed under Component 1 will exclude 
Involuntary Resettlement as a result of land take 
and/or the physical relocation of households as the 
costs and complexity could easily outweigh the 
benefits and costs of the sub-projects project.  
Under Component 1 a negative list will be developed 
in the ESMF including clear criteria for excluding 
Category A high-risk activities. 
 
While OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement was not 
triggered for REDI I there may be investments under 
REDI II Component 2: Support to Critical Public 
Infrastructure that could result in involuntary 
resettlement through land acquisition. Component 2 
finances medium scale public investments aimed at 
improving the efficiency of priority value chains for 
selected products. There is scope within the project 
to also finance other public investments that are 
outside the scope of agriculture or tourism yet are 
needed to improve competitiveness and enhance 
access to markets in the two sectors.  Specific 
location details are unknown at this time and sub-
projects will be demand driven. As a result, a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been 
prepared to guide the selection and compensation 
aspects under Component 2 which will be disclosed 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 11 of 16  

 

prior to appraisal. The project has also prepared 
guidelines for Voluntary Land Donation.  Upon 
identification of cases of involuntary resettlement, 
resettlement action plans (RAPs) will be prepared, 
consulted on, and disclosed in accordance with the 
policy. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 

This policy will not be triggered because the project 
will not support the construction or rehabilitation of 
dams nor will it support other investments which 
rely on the services of existing dams. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
This policy will not be triggered because the project 
will not affect international waterways as defined 
under the policy. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
This policy will not be triggered because the 
proposed project will not intervene in disputed areas 
as defined under the policy. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The possible activities to be financed are small in scale and scope and therefore unlikely to have long-term or 
cumulative impacts. Any impacts would be short-term, highly localized, and therefore easily mitigated through 
standard mitigation measures.  The ESMF prepared by the Government has been reviewed by the Bank and has been 
found satisfactory.  That document outlines the procedure for minimizing risks within the project.  For Component 1 
which has many subprojects (e.g. greenhouses, water harvesting, expansion of efficient irrigation methods, integrated 
pest management, introduction of new crop varieties, development of integrated landscape models, improvement in 
stock breeding, and small group marketing infrastructure) the ESMF outlines a screening mechanism to categorize 
each subproject according to its risk profile.  ESMPs will also be developed for certain higher risk subprojects (cleared 
by the Bank and disclosed publicly) prior to implementation of the subcomponent.  For Component 2 which supports 
critical public infrastructure negative impacts will include construction related impacts such as   noise, occupational 
health and safety risks, waste management issues and so on.  In terms of safeguard however, these impacts are all 
small scale and reversible.  None of the project's activities in Component 1 are likely to result in large scale, significant 
or irreversible  impacts. 
 
There may be investments under REDI II Component 2: Support to Critical Public Infrastructure that could result in 
involuntary resettlement through land acquisition. Component 2 finances medium scale public investments aimed at 
improving the efficiency of priority value chains for selected products. These could include building storage facilities, 
processing areas, cold chain supply infrastructure equipment at the regional level as well as at airports/ports, fresh 
products grading, clearing hubs, agricultural research and development, seeds/seedling production and certification 
activities. There is scope within the project to also finance other public investments that are outside the scope of 
agriculture or tourism yet are needed to improve competitiveness and enhance access to markets in the two sectors.  



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 12 of 16  

 

Specific location details are unknown at this time and sub-projects will be demand driven. As a result, a Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared to guide the selection and compensation aspects under Component 2 and 
has been consulted upon and disclosed. Upon identification of cases of involuntary resettlement, resettlement action 
plans (RAPs) will be prepared, consulted on, and disclosed in accordance with the policy. 
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
Most of the impacts related to the implementation of the project are anticipated to be minor, short-term and highly 
localized and thus easily mitigated through standard mitigation measures.    
 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
The project has already been able to examine alternatives through lessons learnt from REDI which was the previous 
project that supported similar activities.  The successful aspects of the first project have become a core aspect of the 
current project. Safeguard implementation under the first project was deemed very successful due, in part, to a 
trained PIU- the same PIU that will manage this current project. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Borrower capacity is relatively high.  The JSIF will establish a Project Management Team (PMT) that will be responsible 
for overall implementation and will coordinate all the actors involved in the Project’s execution. The JSIF will be 
responsible for financial management, procurement and compliance with safeguards. The JSIF managed the recently 
closed project (Jamaica REDI (P10522)) and the ICR noted that its management of safeguards was highly satisfactory.  
In terms of social implementation, some activities may be undertaken on land that has been donated voluntarily from 
the state (through a lease and nominal peppercorn rent) or though private individual (s). Voluntary Land Donation 
(VLD) will be applied according to good global practice and in line with the World  Bank guidelines on VLD including 
that VLD applies directly to project beneficiaries and that impacts are minor.  The protocols and guidelines to be 
applied to the Voluntary Land Donation (VLD) are included in the RPF. The project has also prepared a Worker's Code 
of Conduct for all workers and contractors working on the project and a Grievance Redress Mechanism.  
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The ESMF has been completed, reviewed by the Bank and disclosed in Jamaica (November 12th, 2018) and on the 
Bank's website (November 15th, 2018).  Consultations were held with the relevant Government officials and Ministries 
and a with a subset of the project's estimated 50,000 beneficiaries.  Disclosures in Jamaica have occurred on relevant 
websites including JSIFs and further disclosures will occur through discussions during the launch meetings and follow 
up meetings with project beneficiaries. The Ministry of Tourism (MOT) and TPDCo will be a lead partner with JSIF.  
The RPF has been completed, consulted upon and disclosed in country on November 12, 2018 and on the Bank's 
website on November 20, 2018. 
 
 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 13 of 16  

 

B. Disclosure Requirements  

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 
For category A projects, date of 
distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 

02-Oct-2018 15-Nov-2018  

   

"In country" Disclosure   
 

  
OPS_RA_D ISCL OSURE_T ABLE  

 

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process 

   

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure  

12-Nov-2018 20-Nov-2018  

   

"In country" Disclosure   
   Jamaica 
  12-Nov-2018 

Comments 
 

     
OPS_ PM_D ISCL OSURE_TA BLE  

 

Pest Management Plan 
 
Was the document disclosed prior to 
appraisal? Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 

Yes 12-Nov-2018 15-Nov-2018 

   
"In country" Disclosure   
   Jamaica 
 12-Nov-2018 
 

Comments 
 

  
OPS_PM_ PC R_TAB LE  

 

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to 
be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.  

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 14 of 16  

 

The ESMFand RPF have been completed and have been disclosed November 15, 2018 and November 20, 2018 
respectively. 

 
 
 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project 
decision meeting)  

 
OPS_EA_COMP_TABLE OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
  
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes   
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report? 
Yes   
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes   

OPS_ NH_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats 
  
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats? 
No   
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the 
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank? 
No   

OPS_ PM_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
  
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes   
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes   
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included in 
project design?  If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
Yes     

OPS_IR_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 

 
 

Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes  
 

 

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan? 
Yes  
 

 

 
 

  
OPS_F O_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP/BP 4.36 - Forests 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 15 of 16  

 

  
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been carried out? 
No   
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these constraints? 
NA   
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for certification system? 
NA      

OPS_ PDI_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 

 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for disclosure? 
Yes   
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are understandable 
and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
Yes  

 
 
All Safeguard Policies 

 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? 
Yes 

  
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 

 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

  World Bank 
 

Garry Charlier 
Lead Agriculture Specialist 

  

 

  Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Jamaica 

 



 

The World Bank  
Jamaica Rural Economic Development Initiative-Second Phase (P166279) 

 

 

  
Oct 05, 2018 Page 16 of 16  

 

 

 
 

  Implementing Agencies 
 

Jamaica Social Investment Fund (JSIF) 

Omar Sweeney 

Managing Director 

Omar.Sweeney@jsif.org 
 
 

 

Loy Malcom 

General Manager - Project Management 

Loy.Malcolm@jsif.org 
 
 

Ministry of Finance and Public Sector 

Audley Shaw 

Minister of Finance and the Public Service 

info@mof.gov.jm 
 

 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

 

Task Team Leader(s): Garry Charlier 
 

  Approved By 

Safeguards Advisor:   

Practice Manager/Manager: Preeti S. Ahuja 29-Nov-2018 

Country Director: Yelena Fadeyeva 30-Nov-2018 
 

    
 
 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects

















































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 7

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA20918

Project Name Forests and Communities (P132846)
Region LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN
Country Argentina
Sector(s) Forestry (80%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector 

(20%)
Theme(s) Gender (20%), Indigenous peoples (20%), Rural non-farm income 

generation (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%), Other 
envir onment and natural resources management (20%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P132846
Borrower(s) Argentine Government
Implementing Agency SAyDS
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 03-Feb-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 10-Feb-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

20-Feb-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

07-Apr-2015

Decision

I. Project Context
Country Context
After rebounding from the economic crisis of 2002, Argentina has been one of the top two 
performers in the Latin America and Caribbean region in reducing poverty and sharing the gains of 
rising prosperity by expanding the middle class.  Total poverty (measured at US$4 per day) 
declined from 31.0 percent in 2004 to 10.8 percent in 2013, while extreme poverty (measured at US
$2.50 per day) fell from 17.0 percent to 4.7 percent.  Income inequality, measured by the Gini 
coefficient, fell from 50.2 in 2004 to 42.5 in 2012. Argentina’s poverty rate and Gini coefficient are 
among the lowest in the region. At the same time, the middle class in Argentina grew by 68 percent 
between 2004 and 2012, reaching 53.7 percent of the population.  
 
However, significant regional disparities persist with respect to poverty and access to basic 
services. The gap between regions has grown since the 2002 crisis, with Patagonia far outpacing 
Northeast and Northwest regions. The Northern provinces have poverty rates two to three times 
higher than the national average and lag behind the rest of the country in social services and basic 
infrastructure. In addition, disparities exist among and within provinces in terms of levels of 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



Page 2 of 7

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

economic and social development and access to high-quality basic services (see figure 1), such as 
education, health, roads, and water, which in turns limit the ability of the poor to participate in 
economic activities, particularly in rural areas. Improving basic services in impoverished rural 
communities is critical for human capital formation and building pathways out of poverty. 
 
Indigenous people are one of the largest and most vulnerable groups of rural poor in Argentina. 
Indigenous people (2.5 percent of the population) are present in all provinces of Argentina but more 
so in the northern provinces of Salta, Jujuy, Chaco, Formosa, Santa Fe, and Tucuman. In access to 
services, 23.5 percent of indigenous households have unsatisfied basic needs, compared to 13.8 for 
the rest of the population. 
 
Today, more than 40 percent of the Argentine population remains at risk of falling into poverty.  
Three challenges stand out for the poor and vulnerable population. First, the greatest vulnerability 
to poverty arises in periods of economic crises or prolonged sluggish growth, which reduce 
employment and earnings and limit the ability of the Government to finance social programs that 
directly support the poor. Second, although Argentina is a broadly inclusive society, endowments 
and opportunities continue to vary for different groups in society and across regions. Poverty risks 
are highest among those with limited access to, and command of, human and basic infrastructure 
assets. Third, Argentina’s economy depends on natural capital, and environmental degradation 
represents a significant cost to the economy, threatening livelihoods, especially for the poorest rural 
households that are the most dependent on these resources. 
 
Strong economic growth over the last decade was accompanied by rising macro-imbalances. Key 
macroeconomic challenges include the existence of inflationary pressures, deficits in fiscal and 
current accounts and falling international reserves. Argentina has relatively modest fiscal and 
current account deficits as well as low public sector debt to GDP. Nonetheless, given the limited 
access to international capital markets, they create pressures on the economy. These imbalances 
need to be resolved in order to avoid unwanted effects on the medium-term sustainability of the 
gains in equity and development achieved during the last decade. In this regard, the Government of 
Argentina (GoA) has recently implemented various public policy interventions aimed at resolving 
key macroeconomic imbalances. It must be noted, however, that continued and consolidated efforts 
are required for achieving the desired results.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
A third of Argentina’s continental territory is covered with natural grasslands, and another third 
with crops and forest plantations. Only around 11% of its territory is covered with natural forest 
totaling approximately 31.4 million hectares. Two thirds of this area is situated in the Chaco Eco-
Region (21.7 million ha), which also has around 13.4 million ha of forest and shrub land in various 
stages of degradation due to overgrazing and unregulated timber and fuel-wood extraction.  The 
Chaco Forest Biome occurs in  12 Argentinean provinces, four of which, Chaco, Salta, Santiago del 
Estero and Formosa account for 87 % of the total area (19.1 million ha) and produce 98 % of 
registered round wood, firewood and poles of the whole Chaco Eco-Region. 
  
The Chaco Eco-Region produces around 90% of all natural forest products in Argentina (mainly 
poles, tannin, firewood and charcoal), or around 6.3 million tons per year. Although the population 
of the 12 Provinces that make up the Chaco Eco-Region amounts to only 18% of the national total, 
they consume more than 50% of the total fuel wood in the country. Eight out of ten rural 



Page 3 of 7

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

households in the most critical areas  of the Chaco Eco-Region use wood or charcoal to cook their 
food. The illiteracy rate there is three times higher than the national average and more than a third 
of its population lives with unsatisfied basic needs. 
  
Most deforestation in Argentina takes place in the fragile Chaco Eco-Region where a combination 
of limited development options, poverty and weak institutions combine to make the area extremely 
vulnerable both economically and environmentally. Between 2006 and 2011 more than 1.5 million 
ha of natural forest were destroyed, with conversion to agriculture and uncontrolled (often illegal) 
forest exploitation causing deforestation at a rate of 1.2% per year biodiversity has been lost, soil 
and water resources have been degraded, and carbon emissions have increased.  
 
Rationale for the World Bank’s Involvement. The Bank has maintained a partnership with the GoA 
by supporting work on sustainable natural resources management since at least 1995. Previous 
Bank supported forestry operations, have demonstrated that SAyDS and the provinces are 
committed to sustainable forest management. However institutional capacity and collaboration 
among the national, provincial and local levels are still modest compared to the magnitude and 
complexity of the task. Developing an effective working relationship with local communities and 
indigenous peoples in the area is still a work in progress. The Bank and the FAO, through its 
Cooperative Program (FAO/WB-CP), are uniquely placed to assist the GoA in this effort because of 
their twenty-year working relationship in forestry conservation, agriculture and demand-driven 
sustainable development in the country.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
The PDO is to improve forest management and increased access to markets and basic services by 
forest dependent communities and small producers – indigenous and criollos – in Northern 
Argentina.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Sustainable Livelihoods
Comments (optional)
Financing for preparation and implementation of management plans for land and forests in 
approximately 250 Communities. Integrated Community Plans (Planes Integrales Comunitarios) 
will be designed to raise incomes and increase resilience to drought through demand-driven 
investments including both service delivery (among other, improving forest management planning, 
increasing dry season water availability, strengthening tenure, improving efficiency of wood energy 
systems) and locally-managed subprojects (among other, increasing production, processing and 
marketing of timber and non-timber products and installation/monitoring of improved cook stoves 
and charcoal kilns). Forest management plans prepared under this component will be considered for 
certification and for financing.

Component Name
Natural Forest Management and Civil Society
Comments (optional)
Financing for (a) a national forest and climate awareness campaign to expand and maintain support 
for implementation of the Forest Law and (b) the establishment or expansion of existing community 
radio stations in a total of 25 locations to distribute informationlocally and in native languages. The 
campaign would highlight, among other things, the importance of the conservation of natural forest 



Page 4 of 7

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

for agriculture (and agro-exports) due to their ecological functions (regulating hydrologic cycles, 
contributing to soil fertility and biodiversity conservation), and emphasize the important role that 
forests play in supporting rural livelihoods and maintaining the cultural values of the indigenous and 
criollo populations.

Component Name
Skills and Technology Transfer
Comments (optional)
Financing strengthening the technical and managerial skills of (a) indigenous and criollo community 
members, (b) small private forest owners, and (c) technical service providers and extension agents 
working in the project area. The training delivered under this component will cover project related 
topics; such as, sustainable forest management, improved production, climate resilient agricultural 
and livestock production, value addition and tenure security. Short training courses will be delivered 
through both classroom and community level instruction. Classroom instruction will be delivered to 
both community members and Rural Development Agencies (RDA) staff and others involved in 
project related service delivery.

Component Name
Forest Information and Monitoring Systems
Comments (optional)
Financing the expansion of SAyDS technical and institutional capacity to manage forest information 
and monitor changes in forest cover. The component would finance (a) expanding coverage of the 
Forest Administration, Control and Verification System (SACVEFOR) to 10 Provinces in Northern 
Argentina, (b) establishment of a national Deforestation and Forest Degradation Early Warning 
System, and (c) the planning and establishment of a National Grid of Permanent Sample Plots. The 
component would finance consultant and non-consultant services, training, and equipment.

Component Name
Project Management and Impact Monitoring
Comments (optional)
Financing (a) the technical and administrative coordination of the project, (b) hiring consultants to 
staff the National Project Executing Unit (NEU) and (c) operational costs, training and equipment. 
This component also would support the development of an impact evaluation to identify changes in 
outcomes directly attributable to project activities. The impact evaluation is expected to help 
identify strengths and weaknesses in the design and implementation of existing policies and 
regulations related to forest management and forest tenure in Argentina and inform future decisions 
and regulatory revisions including during project implementation.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 62.80 Total Bank Financing: 58.90
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
Borrower 3.90
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 58.90
Local Communities 0.00
Total 62.80



Page 5 of 7

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

V. Implementation
A.  Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 
Implementing Agency. The project will be implemented under the Ministry of Environment by the 
Secretariat of Environment and Sustainable Development (SAyDS). During implementation of the 
preparatory activity (BIRF-7520-AR) SAyDS established a National Executing Unit (NEU) in 
Buenos Aires integrated into its line functions.  
 
Project Management. The existing NEU includes an Executive Coordinator responsible for 
oversight of the Project and its operations, and the NEU will recruit individual thematic specialists 
acting as managers for each of the four technical components. By utilizing the NEU’s established 
administration and management capacity, systems and procedures initial costs and time frame for 
launching the project should be greatly reduced. The NEU led the development of the technical and 
institutional design of the proposed Project. The team of the NEU will be completed by M&E, 
safeguards, accounting, and procurement specialists and administrative assistants. Consultants will 
be recruited to fill knowledge gaps as they arise. 
 
Technical Implementation. Local Executing Units (LEU) located in the eight selected departments 
will include one specialist in charge of each of the following technical areas; (a) Community Forest 
Management, (b) Participatory Land Use Planning (PICs), (c) Land Tenure and Rights 
Strengthening, and (d) Marketing of Forest and NTFP. One of the specialists will act as coordinator 
in each LEU. LEU’s will also include administrative and M&E support officers (see Organogram 
Annex 3, Figures 2 and 3). Component 1 will be implemented in close collaboration with national, 
provincial and local Rural Development Agencies (RDA) that already work with targeted 
indigenous and criollo communities in the Project area. Selected RDAs will include public agencies, 
non-governmental organizations, and academic institutions. 
  
Consultation Committees. Each LEU will work closely with provincial institutions responsible for 
forest, tenure, social development, and indigenous peoples’ issues. To facilitate information 
exchange and coordination a Local Project Consultation Committee (LPCC) will be set up in each 
Department with representatives from local agencies, NGOs, and communities Project Consultation 
Committee should include IP and Criollos organization representatives.  
 
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation 
 
The results framework (Annex 1) details performance indicators by component and sub-component. 
Monitoring and evaluation efforts will include (a) biannual progress reports with performance 
indicator updates and (b) a project-specific impact evaluation designed in consultation with the 
Development Impact Evaluation Initiative (DIME) . SAyDS has gained experience reporting on 
progress during the ongoing operation (LN 7520) however with a greater number of field activities 
and a larger number of implementation partners, SAyDS will need to rely more on Local Executing 
Units (LEU) and ensure that they follow established methodologies for reporting progress. An M&E 
strategy will be included in the operational manual and a M&E specialist will be providing support 
and capacity development at all levels (See Organogram Annex 3, Figure 3) The implementing 
agency was involved in the development of the results framework and plans to collect disaggregated 
data on gender and ethnicity. 
 
M&E reports, including environmental and social monitoring results, will be produced quarterly at 



Page 6 of 7

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

the LEU level, and every six months at the NEU level. The data collected at the field level would be 
consolidated and analyzed at the LEU level and consolidated by the NEU for reporting and 
feedback. Annual evaluation and impact monitoring reports will facilitate adaptive management, 
allowing for the identification of issues and lessons that could help adjusting the operational 
strategy. The format and content of the annual monitoring report will be defined in the Project 
Operational Manual. The mid-term review of the Project would occur no later than 30 months after 
effectiveness. 
 
C. Sustainability 
 
The proposed project design will increase the availability of key technical and managerial skills at 
both departmental and community levels and address shared prosperity by improving small-
producers’ access to financial resources for sustainable forest management (through links to the 
Forest Fund under the Forest Law). Adoption of a community driven approach ensures that 
beneficiary communities will acquire skills needed to advocate for improved natural resources 
management and access forest management funding through provincial authorities on an ongoing 
basis, after project completion, though the Forest Fund. Engaging a number of RDAs will contribute 
to inter-agency coordination and cooperation and spread the implementation burden across 
participating institutions allowing selected provinces and departments to meet a wide range of 
beneficiary needs (land tenure, water, and resilient agriculture). Investments in forest monitoring, 
early warning systems, publicity campaigns and community radio are expected to increase public 
awareness and cooperation with indigenous people and criollo communities’ efforts to manage 
natural resources sustainably.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

Comments (optional)

VII. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Peter Jipp
Title: Sr Natural Resources Mgmt. Spe
Tel: 473-8915
Email: pjipp@worldbank.org



Page 7 of 7

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name: Argentine Government
Contact:
Title:
Tel:
Email:

Implementing Agencies
Name: SAyDS
Contact: Ruben Manfredi
Title: Coordinator NEU
Tel: 11-4348-8640
Email: mendoza1609@gmail.com

VIII. For more information contact:
The InfoShop 
The World Bank 
1818 H Street, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20433 
Telephone: (202) 458-4500 
Fax: (202) 522-1500 
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop


















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 1 of 15  

     

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 04-Nov-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC25608 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 2 of 15  

     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Honduras P168385  Integrating Innovation 
for Rural 
Competitiveness in 
Honduras - COMRURAL 
II (P168385) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND 
CARIBBEAN 

Jan 22, 2019 May 31, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Honduras Inversion Estrategica - 
Honduras (INVEST-H) 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The PDO is to improve access to markets and climate-smart practices and contribute to the economic inclusion of 
targeted beneficiaries in select agricultural value chains. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 330.00 

Total Financing 330.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 150.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 150.00 

          IDA Credit 150.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 30.00 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 3 of 15  

     

          LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 30.00 

     Commercial Financing 150.00 

          Unguaranteed Commercial Financing 150.00 

   
 

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B - Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
1. High rates of poverty and inequality remain a persistent development challenge in Honduras. Poverty reduction 
in Honduras over the last decades has been slow compared to regional averages for Central and Latin America. Of 
Honduras’ national population of about 9.1 million people, 70 percent live at or below the national poverty line and about 
1 in 6 of the total population lives in extreme poverty (less than US$ 1.90 per day). Honduras’ rate of economic inequality 
is among the highest in Latin America, with a Gini Index of .50. World Bank data indicate that about 54 percent of income 
in Honduras is held by the highest-earning 20 percent of the population and only 3 percent of income is held by the 
lowest-earning 20 percent.  Unemployment in 2017 was estimated at 4.5 percent, with unemployment among youth at 
8.2 percent. 
 
2. The absence of a robust economic base for generating more and better jobs remains a central challenge for 
poverty and inequality reduction in Honduras.  Average earnings per worker vary widely across and within sectors in 
Honduras, with self-employment in agriculture as the least remunerative activity of all (average monthly earnings of  
L 2,404 per person in 2016, in contrast to formal wage work at an average of L 9,300). Informal work persists across all 
sectors (agriculture, industry, services) and in both urban and rural settings, and is characterized not only by low earnings 
but also by low quality and productivity, undermining GDP growth. Inclusive approaches to rural growth will require 
promoting diversification of rural incomes through combining formal and informal work, non-farm activities, and the 
intensification of agricultural activities.  
 
3. Honduras is considered significantly vulnerable to climate and weather events, with poorer populations in 
particular having a low capacity to cope and adapt. Honduras is seen as one of the countries most affected by extreme 
weather events and has increasingly felt the impacts of climate change, El Niño, and other weather-related events that 
have affected landscapes and infrastructure (communications, housing, public health, etc.). In 1998, Hurricane Mitch 
generated economic damages estimated at around 81 percent of GDP.  In addition, the 2015 drought season affected 1.3 
million people and small-scale farmers had an average loss of agricultural production of about 80 percent. Several 
underlying factors limit capacity to cope with these impacts, including a lack of means to recuperate lost assets, limited 
livelihood options, and lack of basic support services.  
 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 4 of 15  

     

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

4. The agriculture sector continues to be a strong pillar of economic growth in Honduras.  Underpinned by 
favorable agro-ecological conditions, agriculture, forestry, and fishing together the sector grew by 10.7 percent in 2017, 
accounting for 12.9 percent of GDP (primary production only) and representing a 5-year peak in sector growth. This figure 
understates the importance of agriculture in the Honduran economy, however, as it does not reflect the many backward 
and forward linkages between primary agriculture and other sectors, both upstream and downstream. Based on 
experiences from other countries in the region, the contribution to Honduras’ GDP of its broader food and agriculture 
system would be about 1.5 times higher than that of primary agriculture alone. 
 
5. Notwithstanding strong agriculture sector performance in recent years, much more needs to be done given the 
scale of poverty and food and nutrition insecurity in rural areas. In Honduras, more than half of the poor, and two-thirds 
of the extreme poor, live in rural areas. Rural poverty is most heavily concentrated in the western and southern areas of 
the country, known as the “Dry Corridor” (Corredor Seco). The rural poor overwhelmingly rely on agriculture as their 
principal livelihood source, with an estimated 72 percent of agricultural families in Honduras engaged in semi-subsistence 
farming. This type of farming is typically characterized by low productivity and competitiveness, low revenue generation, 
and high vulnerability to shocks.  
 
6. Climate change and the increasingly frequent occurrences of extreme weather events are widely recognized as 
one of the most important risks affecting the Honduran agriculture sector. Honduras’ endowment of water, fertile soils, 
forests, and other natural capital is a central foundation for much of the country’s economic activity. However, the health 
of these resources is highly vulnerable to climate change, El Niño, and other weather-related events, as well as to 
environmental mismanagement. These vulnerabilities exacerbate rural poverty and food and nutrition insecurity.  
 
7. Investing in rural productivity, resilience, and innovation to boost export competitiveness will be a critical 
component of efforts in Honduras to reduce poverty and inequality. While the 2008 launching of the Dominican 
Republic–Central America Free Trade Agreement (DR-CAFTA) has increased access to foreign markets, it has also exposed 
rural producers to new and increasingly competitive markets. Honduras benefits from strong comparative advantages in 
the agriculture sector: proximity to major regional and international markets, and agro-ecological conditions favorable 
to diverse agricultural value chains that are capable of meeting market quality demands. 

 
8. The COMRURAL project is currently GoH’s flagship project for promoting agricultural competitiveness and 
exports in Honduras. COMRURAL, approved by the World Bank Board of Executive Directors in 2008 and extended 
through an Additional Financing in 2017, is widely recognized throughout Honduras for its success in linking smallholder 
farmers to domestic and international markets. This success has been achieved through support to commercial 
production and post-harvest value addition structured under the “productive alliances” model.  

 
9. The decade-long implementation of COMRURAL has shown that Honduras needs to work on several fronts to 
enhance its business-enabling environment and promote agribusiness development.  Regulations and financial services 
that enable and incentivize entrepreneurship in the agriculture sector have not been a subject of sufficient public-sector 
attention. The modernization of critical public services is required for governance and the agricultural business climate 
to be stronger. The National Service for Agri-food Health and Safety (SENASA: Spanish acronym) and the Sanitary 
Regulation Agency (ARSA: Spanish acronym) are also in need of modernization. The public sector in Honduras can 
significantly improve its efficiency and the returns of agriculture public expenditures, and there is a general need to 
redefine the spaces for public-private coordination and partnerships in agribusiness, potentially by drawing on the 
concept of “Maximizing Financing for Development” (MFD). 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 5 of 15  

     

 
10. Poor agro-logistics has also shown to be a critical barrier to improving agricultural competitiveness in Honduras.  
Lack of adequate agro-logistics, both hard (infrastructure) and soft (services), is a major bottleneck. The 2018 World Bank 
Logistics Performance Index awarded Honduras an aggregate ranking (according to 6 dimensions of logistics over the 
period 2012 to 2018) of 106 out of 167 countries, based on evaluations by its international trading partners. Honduras 
ranked particularly low, including lower than the regional averages for Latin America, in terms of customs regulations 
and timeliness. Investing in the upgrading of agro-logistics infrastructure will be critical for enabling Honduran farmers 
to diversify into higher-value, often perishable agriculture products that cannot thrive under the country’s current agro-
logistics infrastructure. 

 
11. Harnessing recent innovations in technology and data collection will be critical for improving competitiveness 
and creating new employment opportunities. Developing countries around the world are improving the competitiveness 
of their products through well-established research programs as the basis to promote the use of innovation, big data 
analysis and the Internet of Things. Honduras ranks 129 on the information and communications technology (ICT) 
Development Index 2017 (out of 176 countries worldwide). According to the International Food Policy and Research 
Institute (IFPRI), the total agricultural research spending index is US$ 8.0 million and the spending as a share of 
agricultural GDP for Honduras is 0.17 percent, the lowest in LAC. Honduras’ rapidly growing Information Technology 
Services sector may position it well for developing similar agricultural “intelligence” services and other innovative 
platforms to modernize and innovate in the agriculture sector.  

 
12. The Government of Honduras (GoH) through the 2020 Plan has defined a new development strategy to promote 
the transformation and modernization of the agro-industrial and agribusiness sectors, showing a keen appreciation 
for needs on the ground as well as strong commitment to supporting agriculture sector development. A recent GoH 
exercise identified and prioritized value chains based on the commercial potential and the country’s comparative 
advantages, as well as their impact on the generation of new jobs and income for rural families. Primary value chains 
prioritized include: livestock (beef), avocado, soy, cocoa, coffee and specialty coffee, black and red beans, cashew, 
vegetables, pitahaya, tilapia, coconut and agro-forestry initiatives, which all together have a required investment 
program estimated at US$ 1,200 million. The development of these value chains requires a business model guided by 
private public initiatives, and GoH's vision for these value chains includes the generation of up to 120,000 new full-time 
jobs. 

 
13. GoH considers the continuation of the COMRURAL approach to be one of the pillars to support implementation 
of the 2020 Plan. As requested by GoH, the proposed project – informed by valuable lessons learned during 10 years of 
COMRURAL implementation – will help to fulfill the 2020 Plan objectives by expanding the “productive alliance” model 
to agribusiness initiatives in additional regions and value chains and deepening the participation of the private financial 
sector in financing small rural producers.  
 
Relationship to CPF 
 
14. The proposed project is in line with GoH’s vision and the with all the focus areas of the World Bank Group's 
Honduras Country Partnership Framework FY16-FY20 (CPF) Report No. 98367-HN, as discussed by the Executive 
Directors on December 15, 2015. The World Bank’s strategic engagement for reducing poverty and inequality in Honduras 
are structured into the following three pillars: (i) fostering inclusion; (ii) bolstering conditions for growth; and (iii) reducing 
vulnerabilities to enhance resilience. The proposed project will contribute to all three of these focus areas by supporting 
financial inclusion, technical assistance, and market access for small rural producers, improving the enabling conditions 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 6 of 15  

     

for agribusiness and rural entrepreneurship, and reducing agriculture sector resilience to climate change and other 
weather-related threats. 
 
15. The proposed Project is aligned with the IDA18 overarching theme, “Towards 2030: Investing in Growth, 
Resilience and Opportunity” and with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).  The Project will contribute to 
implementing several themes prioritized by the World Bank Group: (i) Maximizing Finance for Development, (ii) climate 
change; (iii) gender; (iv) jobs and economic transformation; and, (v) governance and institutions, which present specific 
development challenges in the case of Honduras.   

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
The PDO is to improve access to markets and climate-smart practices and contribute to the economic inclusion of 
targeted beneficiaries in select agricultural value chains. 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
The achievement of the project development objective would be measured through the following indicators: 
 

• Number of beneficiaries (farmers and agri-entrepreneurs) adopting climate-smart practices promoted by the 
project, disaggregated by gender, youth, Indigenous, Afro-descendants (“climate-smart” indicator) 

• New jobs created under subprojects financed by the project (“economic inclusion” indicator) 

• Percentage increase in the value of gross sales of agricultural enterprises based on implementation of the 
business plans approved in the first 3.5 years of project implementation (“access to markets” and “economic 
inclusion” indicator) 

• Percentage of rural producer organizations (RPOs) working under a productive alliance approach 24 months 
after first disbursement (“sustainability” and “access to markets” indicator) 

 
D. Concept Description 

 
A. Concept 
 
Description 

 
16. The proposed project is an Investment Project Financing (IPF), comprising an IDA credit of US$ 150 million that 
is expected to leverage an expected additional US$ 150 million in private commercial finance and US$ 30 million in 
Rural Producer Organization (RPO) contributions. The proposed IPF will be implemented over an 8-year period and 
modeled on the well-established success of COMRURAL. The total project cost is estimated to be US$ 330 million. 

17. The proposed project aims to improve access to markets and climate-smart practices and contribute to the 
economic inclusion of targeted beneficiaries in select agricultural value chains. Innovation, defined as approaches that 
are new and/or different for project beneficiaries, will play an important role in achieving this objective in the form inter 
alia of practices, technologies, and systems. Moving beyond a focus on specific value chain nodes or aspects, the project 
will promote competitive improvements along the full spectrum of backward and forward value chain linkages.  

 
Beneficiaries 
 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 7 of 15  

     

18. The proposed project will benefit farmers and agri-entrepreneurs in the Honduran agriculture sector directly 
and indirectly. The direct beneficiaries will be: (i) members of the agricultural or agribusiness enterprises (formal groups, 
associations, or cooperatives of small/medium size producers and agri-entrepreneurs) participating in subprojects (about 
100,000 farmers and their families); and (ii) other agricultural enterprises (either other groups/cooperatives or private 
individual firms) participating as partners/allies in the proposed subprojects (as agro-processors, aggregators, 
wholesalers, traders, etc.) or providing essential services for their successful operation (e.g. the rental of agricultural or 
processing specialized equipment etc.) and receiving matching grant funds. The project will also have secondary 
beneficiaries: participating public sector agencies and their staff (the capacities of which will be strengthened and 
modernized by the project) and participating private commercial financiers (who will gain capacity through the project 
for engaging with the agriculture sector). The proposed project will also have indirect benefits for a much broader range 
of stakeholders in the agriculture sector through enhancing the overall agriculture sector business environment and 
through strengthening and modernizing the public entities that provide services to those engaged in the agriculture 
sector (nearly one million Hondurans). 

 
19. The project will be national in scope and will target select GoH-prioritized value chains. The institutional 
strengthening and business climate enhancing activities (as in Component 1) will have a national coverage. For 
Component 2, project interventions will be identified through a geospatial approach to prioritizing value chains and 
agribusiness initiatives by region. 

 

20. The PDO will be achieved through the following Components: 
 

21. Component 1: Support to the Modernization of Honduras’ Agribusiness Environment The purpose of this 
Component will be to contribute to the modernization and strengthening of select public sector services and institutional 
capacity to enable and promote competitiveness in the agriculture sector. This Component will finance works, goods, 
technical assistance, consulting and non-consulting services, and operational costs to support: (i) institutional 
modernization of the Secretariat of Agriculture and Livestock (SAG: Spanish acronym), National Service for Agri-food 
Health and Safety (SENASA: Spanish acronym), and Agency of Sanitary Regulation (ARSA: Spanish acronym) for the 
improved provision of public services and governance structures in the agricultural sector; (ii) operation of the National 
Agricultural Council and its technical unit, including for the provision and adoption of ICT and facilitate uptake of other 
innovative solutions for market intelligence, agro-climate systems, agro-finance, and agro-logistics to promote a better-
informed decision-making process for effective policy dialogue; and (iii) increasing the quantity and quality of the 
agricultural man-/woman-power required for enabling the agribusiness environment in project areas by supporting the 
modernization of agricultural technical training facilities, e-learning training programs, innovation labs and incubation 
centers, among others.  
 
22. Component 2: Support to enhance the competitiveness of agribusiness initiatives. The purpose of this 
Component is to support competitive agribusiness initiatives (“subprojects”) in prioritized agricultural value chains. This 
would be achieved through improving and expanding the productive alliances model, increasing complementarity 
between public and private investments, as well as expanding the participation of private commercial banks and micro 
finance institutions in financing small rural producers. Specifically, this Component would finance: (i) works, goods, 
technical assistance, and services for the selection, preparation, and implementation of selected subprojects by 
participating partners; (ii) incentives for the adoption of innovative agribusiness practices and technologies to improve 
productivity, market access, and climate resilience, and (iii) complementary investments in small-scale agro-logistics 
services and infrastructure. These subprojects will contribute to improved management of water resources in project 
activities, particularly in the Dry Corridor, to ensure the viability and sustainability of the agribusinesses that they support. 
A minimum threshold for women and youth participation will be determined, and separate procedures to promote the 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 8 of 15  

     

inclusion of Indigenous and Afro-descendant communities as beneficiaries in more favorable conditions, and adapted to 
their sociocultural reality, will be included. In addition, the proposed project will target a minimum number of small 
farmers with sufficient potential to exit PROSASUR (which focuses on the extreme poor in the Dry Corridor) as well as 
bring in poor farmers beneficiaries from the social protection program mainly known as Vida Mejor. 
 
23. Component 3: Project management support.  This Component will finance the overall project management, 
coordination, and implementation. 

 

24. Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response (CER). This Component will provide immediate response to 
eligible emergencies. As such, in the event of such an eligible emergency (as defined in the Contingency Emergency 
Response (CER) Operational Manual prepared and adopted by the GoH), this Component would finance emergency 
activities and expenditures through the reallocation of funds from the Project. 

 
 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The project will be national in scope focusing on rural areas of Honduras. Priority agricultural products have been 

identified as coffee, cattle, cacao, avocado, cashew, leaf vegetables, fruit and non-traditional products, among others. 
The specific locations of the specific subprojects to be financed will not be known during the preparation of the project, 
but it is highly likely that indigenous peoples and afro-descendant communities may be present in the area of influence of 
the project, particularly in areas such as La Esperanza and Copan. There is a significant incidence of crime and violence in 
the country. This project will include private sector funds contributing to the co-financed resources for the project. In that 
regard, the environmental and social requirements will apply to all the funds administered under the COMRURAL II. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The main agency involved in the implementation of the project, INVEST-H, has experience implementing safeguards 

policies and World Bank procedures because of their implementation of the COMRURAL I and its additional financing 
project since 2007 (P101209). COMRURAL I has a tracking system for the subprojects, and beneficiary organizations are 
required to have environmental management plans. The environmental and social management capacity of INVEST-H, 
however, will be assessed during project preparation, and it is expected that the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be 
improved based on the results of the due diligence, strengthening their procedures and frameworks for monitoring 
environmental and social sustainability to enhance effective implementation and monitoring of the safeguards 
instruments that will be developed. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Andrew Francis Drumm, Environmental Specialist 
Rodolfo Tello Abanto, Social Specialist 

 
D. Policies that might apply 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 9 of 15  

     

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The aim of the project is to support the development 
of increased economic benefits for small farmers in 
particular, through the creation of strategic alliances 
with technical service providers, financial institutions 
and markets, and to increase agricultural productivity 
through capacity building and value chain integration. 
Component 1 activities are expected to mostly finance 
the rehabilitation of existing infrastructure and the 
acquisition of equipment for activities like the 
modernization public agricultural schools and public 
agricultural universities. Component 2 will fund 
agribusiness initiatives across the country, such as 
water harvesting and water storage, construction of 
small-scale irrigation and drainage schemes, on-farm 
irrigation technologies, low-cost pumping systems 
(including solar), the acquisition of agricultural 
machinery and vehicles the construction of modules to 
store agricultural products and the maintenance of 
vehicles, mounting structures, etc. The infrastructure 
to be funded is expected to be small-scale only. The 
overall impact of the project is expected to be positive 
and the foreseen activities are not expected to 
generate significant risk or irreversible adverse 
impacts. As such, based on the available information 
this project has been classified as Category B. 
 
Potential adverse environmental impacts include 
degradation of natural habitat, including forests, 
streams and rivers and health and safety of farmers 
through pesticide mismanagement. The main social 
impacts and risks of the project associated with OP 
4.01 are related to community health and safety, 
particularly in relation to health risks for local 
populations in areas surrounding the agricultural 
projects (including health impacts associated with the 
use of pesticides), as well as labor conditions, 
including those related to the working conditions of 
agricultural employees, including those in the supply 
chains, and the possibility of situations involving child 
and/or forced labor, migrant workers, and potential 
gender exclusion. 
 
To manage the impacts and risks of the project, the 
Borrower will prepare, prior to Appraisal, a Social 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 10 of 15  

     

Assessment (SA), with a strategic focus on the 
agricultural sector, with an emphasis on the issues 
mentioned in the previous paragraph, and the 
identification of vulnerable and disadvantaged 
populations, with a gender, ethnic, and generationally 
sensitive approach. The SA will include potential risks 
related to threats to human security through the 
escalation of personal, communal or interstate 
conflict, crime or violence. The SA will build upon the 
SA prepared for the COMRURAL I project in 2007 
(P101209) and for its additional financing (2016). The 
SA will also identify and analyze the main social risks 
identified in the COMRURAL I project and its social 
management measures, incorporating the lessons 
learned in that operation. Agribusiness subproject 
allocation will be demand-driven and that subprojects 
will be selected during implementation. Since the 
specific locations and impacts of the subprojects 
cannot be clearly defined during project preparation, 
the Borrower will prepare an Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF), in consultation with 
stakeholders, to identify, manage and mitigate 
potential adverse impacts during implementation, and 
guide the preparation of specific EAs, SAs, and ESMPs 
for each of the subprojects to be defined during 
project execution. The ESMF will guide the 
strengthening of elements like a Grievance Redress 
Mechanism, gender strategy, labor influx, and the 
system to track the environmental and social aspects 
in the subprojects. The ESMF will include guidelines 
for the development of labor management procedures 
(to prevent forced and child labor) and community 
health and safety plans for the subprojects. The ESMF 
will also include a screening mechanism to assess the 
environmental and social impacts of the subprojects, 
and will exclude from project funding subprojects 
likely to cause irreversible or significant environmental 
or social impacts (Category A), excluding activities that 
would impact protected areas, key biodiversity areas, 
and other terrestrial and aquatic natural habitats. 
High-risk agribusiness activities, such as palm oil 
plantations, will be also excluded from the program. 
The ESMF will also incorporate criteria for the use of 
water resources, taking the analysis of watersheds in 
the analysis. The ESMF will also include a table of 
mitigation activities, implementation arrangements, 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 11 of 15  

     

capacity building plan, and a monitoring and 
evaluation framework as well. The ESMF will also 
include a specific section describing the requirements 
for preparing the safeguard aspects of the CERC 
(Component 4), describing the potential emergencies 
and the types of activities likely to be financed and 
providing a preliminary identification of potential risks 
and mitigation measures associated with them, taking 
into account the Bank Guidance on Contingent 
Emergency Response Components. The ESMF will 
include the WBG EHS General Guidelines, and the 
specific Guidelines on Annual Crop Production 
 
The project will also promote the participation of the 
local communities and other relevant stakeholders, 
preparing and implementing a Stakeholder 
Engagement Plan (SEP), to guide the stakeholder 
engagement process throughout preparation and 
implementation, strengthening the existing 
Participation Plan. The SEP will build upon the Social 
Participation Plan prepared for COMRURAL I in 2007. 
The ESMF and SEP will be disclosed and consulted 
prior to appraisal. The disclosure arrangements will 
include virtual disclosure and availability of physical 
copies of such instruments in accessible locations. 

Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No 
The project will not finance activities that are 
implemented by a private entity. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

Project activities will not involve significant loss or 
degradation of natural habitats. In fact, prioritization 
of investments in organic production will enhance 
positive impacts on aquatic habitats, particularly in 
areas that currently have issues with pesticide and 
fertilizer runoff. 
 
Any investment funded under the project will be 
screened for its potential to cause negative impacts to 
natural habitats under the ESMF procedures, including 
critical natural habitats. Any activity likely to cause 
irreversible or significant damages to habitats will be 
excluded from project funding.  

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

The ESMF will guide assessment of potential impacts 
of the planned productive investments upon forests. It 
will include a negative list of activities/impacts that 
could lead to degradation or conversion of forests to 
exclude them from financing. In general, the project 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 12 of 15  

     

promotes use of agroforestry and silvo-pastoral 
practices on already cleared land. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project finances agricultural activities expected to 
involve use of different types, quantities and 
management styles of agrochemicals or natural 
products/measures for pest management. The project 
will emphasize Integrated Pest/Crop Management 
through technical assistance. The ESMF will provide 
the necessary initial guidance for related screening 
and good practices. Procurement will screen any 
proposed purchases of agrochemicals to secure 
exclusion of red or yellow label chemicals and those 
prohibited by national regulations. During 
implementation, proposed business plans will be 
assessed in detail and managed based on good IPM 
practices. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) will outline 
the various elements of and actions needed to be 
taken to adequately address concerns during project 
implementation. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

Project activities are not expected to involve any 
major civil works. No major movement of earth or 
excavation is anticipated, nor is it expected that 
natural features and landscapes with some level of 
cultural significance might be adversely impacted by 
the project. As such, it is unlikely that known physical 
cultural resources will be impacted. Nevertheless, as a 
precautionary measure, chance finds provisions will be 
included in the ESMF. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Given the presence of Indigenous Peoples such as 
Lenca, Maya- Chortis, Tolupan, Misquito, Pech, 
Tawakas o Sumos located in specific areas of the 
country, as well as afro-descendant communities, and 
considering that agribusiness subprojects will be 
demand-driven and will be selected during 
implementation, an Indigenous Peoples and Afro-
descendants Planning Framework (IPAPF), which will 
be prepared and disclosed as a standalone document, 
will define the guidelines for the development of 
separate procedures to promote the inclusion of 
indigenous communities as beneficiaries of the project 
in more favorable conditions, adapted to their 
sociocultural reality and with provisions to reduce the 
potential impoverishment risks for the indigenous and 
afro-descendant beneficiaries. The IPAPF will build 
upon the Indigenous Peoples Development Plan 
prepared in 2007 for the COMRURAL I project 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 13 of 15  

     

(P101209) and for its additional financing prepared in 
2016. The SA to be prepared will include OP 4.10 
requirements specific for IPs and will to inform project 
design and preparation of the IPAPF. The IPAPF will 
define the criteria and procedures for the preparation 
of specific Indigenous Peoples and Afro-descendent 
Plans (IPAP), through open, fair and culturally 
appropriate processes, including free, prior and 
informed consultation processes leading to broad 
community support for the sub-projects. The IPAPs 
will assess the potential impacts to Indigenous Peoples 
and define the necessary mitigation measures, as well 
as provide information on practical ways in which the 
Indigenous Peoples and Afro-descendants can become 
project beneficiaries, and to ensure that they do so in 
a culturally appropriate manner. 
 
Gender considerations will also be addressed so that 
indigenous women and men are able to benefit from 
the project. The IPAPF and IPAPs will also identify 
culturally-specific mechanisms that can be adopted to 
address any grievances that may arise through project 
implementation, as part of the project’s Grievance 
Redress Mechanism. The IPAPF will be prepared, 
disclosed and consulted with Indigenous Peoples 
Organizations at the national and regional levels prior 
to appraisal. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Project activities are not likely to involve involuntary 
resettlement. Subproject allocation will be demand-
driven and that subprojects will be selected during 
implementation. Since project locations are not know 
yet, the project will include a Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF) to guide the preparation of specific 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) or Abbreviated 
Resettlement Plans (ARAP) to address the cases of 
involuntary resettlement and land acquisition if they 
are identified during project execution. The RPF will be 
disclosed and consulted prior to appraisal as a 
standalone document, along with the ESMF 
consultation process. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
Project activities will not involve dams and project 
activities will not rely on the performance of any dam. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

TBD 

The locations of Project activities is not yet known so it 
cannot yet be determined if activities will  take place 
in 
international waterways. 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 14 of 15  

     

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
Project activities will not be located or take place in 
disputed areas. If an area were to be in dispute, it 
would not be eligible for financing under the project. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Jan 15, 2019 
 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Some environmental and social safeguards related studies and management instruments will be prepared during the 

project preparation process (October 2018 - January 2019), while others will be prepared after project approval. The 
safeguards instruments to be prepared alongside the project, and disclosed and consulted before the project’s appraisal 
process has concluded, are the following ones: SA, ESMF, SEP, IPAPF, and RPF. The safeguard instruments to be prepared 
after project appraisal or approval, when the subprojects have been preliminarily defined but before finalizing their 
approval process, are the following ones: SAs and ESMPs for each of the specific subprojects, which will provide the 
necessary information to determine if additional social management instruments, such as PMPs, IPAPs, RAPs or ARAPs, 
will need to be prepared. 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

World Bank 

Augusto Garcia 

Sr Agricultural Spec. 
 

 

Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Republic of Honduras 

 

 

 
 

 

Implementing Agencies 
 

Inversion Estrategica - Honduras (INVEST-H) 

Marco  Bogran 

Director Ejecutivo 

mbogran@mcahonduras.hn 
 
 



 
The World Bank  
Integrating Innovation for Rural Competitiveness in Honduras - COMRURAL II (P168385) 

 
 

  
Sep 14, 2018 Page 15 of 15  

     

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

Task Team Leader(s): Augusto Garcia 
 

  Approved By 
APPROVALTBL 

Practice Manager/Manager: Michael Morris 03-Nov-2018 

Country Director: Andrea C. Guedes 16-Nov-2018 
    
 
 
 
 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects

















































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 8

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.: PIDC13820

Project Name Ecuador - Sustainable Family Farming Modernization Project (P151963)
Region LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN
Country Ecuador
Sector(s) General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (56%), Irrigation and 

drainage (37%), Agricultural extension and research (4%), Agr o-industry, 
marketing, and trade (3%)

Theme(s) Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Water resource management 
(20%), Rural markets (20%), Climate change (10%)

Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P151963
Borrower(s) REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR
Implementing Agency Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Aquaculture and Fisheries
Environmental 
Category

B-Partial Assessment

Date PID Prepared/
Updated

30-Oct-2014

Date PID Approved/
Disclosed

03-Nov-2014

Estimated Date of 
Appraisal Completion

18-Feb-2015

Estimated Date of 
Board Approval

02-Jul-2015

Concept Review 
Decision

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

I. Introduction and Context
Country Context
1. During the last decade, Ecuador has seen a period of relative political stability. The 
Government of Ecuador (GoE) has invested heavily in infrastructure and social sectors in an effort 
to stimulate growth, reduce inequality and promote inclusion for a total population of slightly more 
than 15.7 million inhabitants.  
 
2. The Ecuadorian economy relies largely on the extraction and export of oil, and on the 
export of natural resource-based products and services. The agricultural sector accounted for 7.8 
percent of the GDP in 2013. With more than 60 percent of its agricultural production destined for 
export, Ecuador could benefit significantly from stimulating productivity through integrated rural 
development approaches. 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



Page 2 of 8

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

 
3. Growth combined with falling inequality has led to important gains in reducing poverty and 
promoting shared prosperity. Over the last decade (2003-13), GDP per capita growth in Ecuador 
was above regional average levels (2.7 percent vs. 2.5 percent), while progress in reducing 
inequality has exceeded regional trends. Income distribution was significantly improved, as 
expressed by the Gini coefficient, declining from 0.54 in December 2006 to 0.49 in June 2014. 
Likewise, between 2006 and 2014, income poverty at the national poverty line fell from 37.6 
percent to 24.5 percent, while extreme poverty fell from 16.9 percent to 8 percent.  
 
4. Despite the significant reduction in poverty and growth of the middle class, more than half 
of the population in Ecuador remains poor or vulnerable to falling back into poverty, particularly in  
rural areas. In 2014, 4.2 percent of the urban population lived in extreme poverty compared to the 
16 percent for the rural population. The difference was less pronounced at the moderate poverty 
line, but even in this case the rural headcount was more than twice the urban headcount (41.7 
percent versus 16.3 percent).

Sectoral and Institutional Context
5. The proposed project is fully aligned to the National Development Plan for 2013-2017, the 
National Strategy for Diversification of the Productive Matrix, the institutional objectives of 
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Aquaculture and Fisheries (MAGAP) and with the Irrigation 
National 2012-2027 Plan, which are: (i) to improve the lives of farmers and rural communities 
through the strategies: social inclusion of small and medium producers; (ii) to promote the 
modernization of agriculture; and (iii) to strengthen capacity of the Autonomous Decentralized 
Provincial Governments (GADPs) to assume the transferred competencies of constructing, 
operating and maintaining irrigation systems and promoting agricultural activity. 
 
6.  Ecuador has 1.1 million agricultural households with land size between 1 ha and 20 ha, 
regarded as small and medium producers, who own about 1.6 million hectares (25% of total area at 
national level). This segment of farmers is crucial for many value chains such as rice (49% of 
national production), potatoes (64%), maize (76%) and onions (80%). Nevertheless, the 
development of this segment of farmers and its capacity to contribute to the diversification of 
productive matrix at national level are limited by the size of land, the access to market, and by the 
poor access to efficient water management in agriculture. Out of the 304,000ha irrigated by small 
and medium producers, 284,000ha are still under traditional irrigation methods with very low water 
efficiency and limited water storage capacity. The proposed project aims at supporting MAGAP’s 
initiative to strengthen this category of farmers in their effort for intensification and modernization 
of agriculture. 
 
7. The 2008 Constitution of the Republic of Ecuador defined the decentralization framework 
recognizing the political, administrative, and financial autonomy of the Decentralized Provincial 
Autonomous Governments (GADPs) at their different levels (canton, province, and parish). This 
decentralization grants each province jurisdiction to plan, build, and maintain the infrastructure 
(transportation, water, and sanitation) under its competencies and to promote the development of the 
productive sector within its territory. 
 
8. Within the competences of Provincial Governments under the current Constitution are: (i) 
planning, building and maintaining the road system at provincial level; (ii) planning, constructing, 
operating and maintaining irrigation systems and; (iii) promoting agricultural activity. Therefore, 



Page 3 of 8

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

the implementation of new development projects and the sustainable operation of existing irrigation 
projects are limited by the level of capacity for project preparation, implementation and financing 
by the Provincial Governments.

Relationship to CAS
9. The World Bank Group's Interim Strategy Note (ISN) for Ecuador approved on April 9, 
2013, identified agriculture and rural development as key priorities for the Government and the 
Bank to contribute to the country's goal for inclusive and sustainable growth. 
 
10. The proposed Project is fully consistent with the World Bank’s ISN for Ecuador for the 
period 2014-2015, which focuses on investment project financing in three strategic areas: (i) Pillar I 
-  Sustainable and Inclusive Growth; (ii) Pillar II - Access to Social Protection and Quality Services 
for All, and (iii) with the country’s Plan Nacional para el Buen Vivir, where five out of twelve key 
objectives outline the importance of enhancing the productive water access in a sustainable manner 
as key intermediate priorities to ensure quality of life and social cohesion for its farmers and rural 
communities. 
 
11. It is expected that the proposed Project will contribute to the reduction of extreme poverty, 
to the increase of shared prosperity and equality of access to opportunities in targeted provinces 
across the country by increasing agricultural revenues and resilience of Ecuador's family farming 
sector, promoting diversification and increase of agricultural production, and improving access to 
markets for smallholders and their organizations.

II. Proposed Development Objective(s)
Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
12. The project development objective is to enhance the profitability and sustainable production 
of small and medium farmers in targeted areas by improving productivity and by supporting more 
efficient and climate-smart uses for land and water. 
 
13. To reach its objective, the project will support technical assistance, capacity-building 
activities, on-farm and complementary off-farm investments geared toward a more efficient use of 
natural resources, especially water, an increased adaptation to climate change, improvement in 
productivity and market access. On-farm investments are made within the farmer's plot. Off-farm 
investments are referring to interventions on irrigation and drainage networks upstream of the intake 
of the farmer’s plot. 
 
14. Project beneficiaries. The project beneficiaries are small and medium-sized family farmers, 
including indigenous communities. Small and Medium farmers are established by MAGAP 
according agroclimatological regions:  
• Sierra: 0 - 5 ha. (small farmers) – 5 to 20 ha. (medium farmers)  
• Costa: 0-20 ha. (small farmers) - 20 to 40 ha (medium farmers)  
 
15. Project areas. While the project is national in scope, the Sierra Central and the Coastal 
regions are the main target areas for investment subprojects where climatological conditions justify 
investments in water storage and irrigation to foster diversification and intensification of agriculture.

Key Results (From PCN)
16. The key indicators at the beneficiary level would measure changes in: (i) profitability of 



Page 4 of 8

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

agricultural activities and; (ii) climate-resilience and sustainability of the improved production 
systems.  
 
17. Intermediate outcome indicators would include: (i) Profitability (margin) by unit of land 
(hectare), by unit of water (cubic meters) and by household (family); (ii) Reduced volatility of yield 
from year to year for main crops; (iii) Hectares of areas and number of beneficiaries with new/
improved irrigation and drainage services like drip or sprinkler (core indicator); (iv) Number of 
clients who have adopted an improved agricultural technology promoted by the project (core 
indicator); (v) Number of Operational Water User Associations created and/or strengthened (core 
indicator); (vi) Sub-projects for which arrangements for community engagement in post-project 
sustainability and/or operation and maintenance are established (core indicator) and; (vii) Hectares 
of area with change in land use (increase of cropping intensity and diversification of crops).

III. Preliminary Description
Concept Description
18. The Project supports a framework program to strengthen sustainable modernization and 
intensification of agriculture systems with an emphasis on beneficiary and community participation. 
The Project will support: (i) demand-based investment subprojects; (ii) capacity-building activities 
that strengthen national and local institutions (MAGAP, GADP, mainly) and farmers’ organizations; 
(ii) climate-smart project planning; (iii) training and technical assistance to enhance productivity, 
increase value-added and improve market access; and, (iv) small investments to protect natural 
resources linked to the subprojects (see details of Project Concept in Annex 3). 
 
19. In order to maximize the positive impact and sustainability of activities, the project will 
seek to coordinate its actions with existing government programs aimed at agricultural development 
such as the MAGAP’s Hombro a Hombro Program (national extension program for family farming) 
and the agricultural component of the Plan Nacional Buen Vivir 2013-2107; as well as programs 
developed by Provincial Governments in thematic support agricultural production and marketing. 
The project should also ensure that rural credit programs and/or micro-credit (Cooperative Savings) 
will be accessible to project beneficiaries. 
 
20. The proposed Project will build on the successful model of the PIDD (see details of project 
description and main lessons learned in Annex 3). The PIDD or Proyecto de Inversiones de 
Desarrollo Productivo (P094784), which closed in June 2014, financed subprojects of 
modernization works for 55 small and medium scale collective irrigation systems, benefiting 4,685 
ha and 7,900 families. The most important lessons learned from the PIDD, taken into account in the 
proposed project’s design are the following (details in Annex 4): 
a) Combining physical investments with capacity building. The PIDD followed an integrated 
approach with rehabilitation and modernization of irrigation systems and strengthening of the 
capacity of Water Users Association and improving farmers’ irrigation and agricultural practices 
and the commercialization of agricultural produce.  
b) Frontloading technical assistance and training to the institutional stakeholders. This capacity 
building needs to be done in technical screening, design, supervision of sub-projects), and fiduciary 
aspects (procurement, in financial management and safeguards). 
c) Increasing ownership and sustainability. Irrigation component follows a demand-driven and 
participatory approach in which WUAs/farmers’ groups participate in subproject design, financing, 
execution and supervision and are fully responsible for Operation & Maintenance. This approach, 



Page 5 of 8

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

by ensuring subproject ownership, increases subproject sustainability and effective use and will be 
used for the new operation.  
d) Thinking scalability. The project cycle developed by the PIDD, especially the effective 
participation of beneficiaries from the design to the construction, has been adopted by the Provincial 
Government of Chimborazo as a public policy to develop any investment intervention in the future.  
e) Building Partnerships. Several partnerships between different organizations and institutions 
at local, national and international level have been developed during the preparation and 
implementation of the PIDD, and will be replicated in the new operation.  
 
21. The proposed project will also be designed taking into account some lessons learned from 
other similar operations in the region such as, for example, the PSI Sierra in Peru (P104760), which 
has very similar scope, activities and target group, or the PROSAP (P106684) in Argentina, which 
can bring experie nce on the construction of the project framework and the progressive process of 
delegating responsibilities to the sub-national level (Provinces). 
 
22. The proposed project (US$60 million in IBRD financing) will be implemented over a 
period of five years and comprises four components: (1) Investments for productive sub-projects; 
(2) Capacity building for institutional stakeholders and beneficiaries’ organizations; (3) Natural 
Resources Management Enhancement and; (4) Project Management. 
 
23. Component 1: Investments for productive sub-projects (estimated amount US$ 50M.). This 
component will finance subprojects aligned with the project objective and provincial priorities 
related to the following investments: (i) individual and/or collective small water storages (ponds); 
(ii) collective and/or individual on-farm investments for modernization of irrigation techniques 
(drip, sprinkler or modern gravity techniques) and; (iii) complementary works aiming at improving 
off-farm irrigation and drainage networks.  
 
24. Subproject proposals will be reviewed against a set of objective criteria in order to be 
eligible for financing, including consistency with project objectives and scope. To ensure the 
balanced and equitable allocation of public funding, subproject preparation will include specific 
selection criteria to be applied early on in the selection and approval process, which will include: (i) 
demand expressed by the potential beneficiaries, which should have sufficient organizational 
capacity to manage sustainable infrastructure; (ii) formal prioritization by the relevant Provincial 
Government preferentially in their Provincial Irrigation Plan; (iii) compliance with the requirements 
of beneficiaries’ profile (small and medium farmers); (iv) valid water use concession granted by 
SENAGUA; (v) financial profitability presented in the project profile and validated by the Project 
Implementation Unit (PIU) of the Project; (vi) social and environmental sustainability justified in 
the project profile and validated by the PIU; (viii) compliance with investment criteria (e.g. - 
investment ceiling per beneficiary family, per hectare, per sub-project, etc.); (ix) financial 
contribution of beneficiaries to investment costs and; (x) subproject activities that may affect 
International Waterways will not be eligible. Details will be elaborated in the implementation 
manual. 
 
25. Component 1 will finance works, consulting and non-consulting services, training and 
workshops and goods and equipment. Retroactive Financing may be provided for this Component 
under BP 10.00 for a selection of subprojects. The selection will be done during appraisal stage 
within the current MAGAP’s pipeline of subprojects and will be subject to the criteria identified in 
the operation manual.  



Page 6 of 8

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

 
26. Component 2: Capacity building for institutional stakeholders and beneficiaries’ 
organizations (estimated amount US$ 5 M.). This component will support a range of services that 
provide support for: (i) agricultural modernization and intensification to the beneficiaries and their 
organizations (Water Users Organizations and Farmers Organizations) and; (ii) institutional 
strengthening to the main institutional stakeholders (MAGAP central and regional offices, 
Provincial Governments / GADPs). 
 
27. Component 2 will finance consulting and non-consulting services, training and workshops 
and goods and equipment. Activities will include: (i) Extension services, training and Technical 
Assistance and; (ii) Institutional and organizational capacity building (see details in Annex 3). This 
training will be focused on improving and supporting the outcomes r elated with the subproject 
investments. 
 
28. Component 3: Natural Resources Management Enhancement (estimated amount US$ 1.5 
M.). This component aims at laying the foundations for conservation and sustainable management 
of watersheds and natural resources, in areas where investments on irrigation sub-projects will be 
developed. 
 
29. Component 3 will finance small investment and management subprojects of natural 
resources protection (reflorestation, protection of páramos, and conservation of watersheds) linked 
to the subprojects of Component 1. The component will adopt an integrated and participatory 
approach to watershed management intended to make rural populations more accountable and 
encourage them to manage their land and natural resources in a more sustainable manner. Thus, the 
component would contribute to: (i) protect watersheds by reducing or preventing erosion and 
sedimentation; (ii) increase the productivity and sustainability of agricultural production based on 
agroecological and agroforestry technologies; and (iii) strengthen the management of natural 
resources to improve the environment and living conditions.  
 
30. Component 3 will finance small works, consulting and non-consulting services, training and 
workshops and goods and equipment (see details in Annex 3). This component will be placed under 
the responsibility of the regional offices of MAGAP who, depending on the local capacities and the 
existence of services, will enter into agreements with the GADPs, consulting firms, local ONGs or 
community organizations for the preparation and implementation of subprojects. The procedures 
will be detailed in the operation manual. 
 
31. Component 4: Project Management (estimated amount US$ 3.5 M.). This component will 
support the functioning of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to be installed within the Sub-
Secretary of Irrigation and Drainage in the MAGAP in Quito and some eligible costs related to the 
Project on the regional offices of MAGAP and Provincial Governments/GADPs. The component 
will also finance Monitoring and Evaluation, impact evaluations, progress reports, and audits.  
 
32. The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be responsible for the overall administration of 
the Project, within the MAGAP in Quito. Component 4 will finance: consulting and non-consulting 
services, training and workshops, small works, goods and equipment and operating costs.

IV. Safeguard Policies that might apply



Page 7 of 8

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No TBD
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖

V. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 77.30 Total Bank Financing: 60.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
Financing Source Amount
 Borrower 6.00
 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 60.00
 Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country 6.15
 LOCAL  BENEFICIARIES 5.15
 Total 77.30

VI. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Remi Charles Andre Trier
Title: Sr Water Resources Spec.
Tel: 473-5572
Email: rtrier@worldbank.org

Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name: REPUBLIC OF ECUADOR
Contact:
Title:
Tel:
Email:

Implementing Agencies
Name: Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, Aquaculture and Fisheries
Contact: Dennis Garcia
Title: Sub-secretary of Irrigation and Drainage



Page 8 of 8

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Pu
bl

ic
 D

is
cl

os
ur

e 
C

op
y

Tel:
Email: dgarciav@magap.gob.ec

VII. For more information contact:
The InfoShop 
The World Bank 
1818 H Street, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20433 
Telephone: (202) 458-4500 
Fax: (202) 522-1500 
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/infoshop


















































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 14

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA20550

Date Prepared/Updated: 15-Dec-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Bolivia Project ID: P158532
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P127743

Project Name: Additional Finance BO Rural Alliances Project II (P158532)
Parent Project 
Name:

Rural Alliances Project II (P127743)

Region: LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

14-Dec-2016 Estimated 
Board Date:

23-Feb-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): GOVERNMENT OF BOLIVIA
Implementing 
Agency:

EMPODERAR

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
Borrower 0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 100.00
Local Farmer Organizations 29.30
Financing Gap -4.30
Total Project Cost 125.00

Environmental 
Category:
Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision: The Environmental Category of the parent project (B) remains unchanged, since 
there is no significant variation with respect to parent project; no major negative 
environmental impacts are expected; it is a low-risk project.

Is this a No

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



Page 2 of 14

Repeater 
project?

B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
Bolivia's recent economic growth, one of the highest in Latin America, has brought about 
significant benefits to the poor, with poverty decreasing from 63 to 39 percent in the last decade. 
As in other Latin-American countries highly dependent on extractives industries, Bolivia's 
economy has been affected by multiple global factors, particularly by low commodity prices. The 
overall economy slowdown will make it difficult for countries like Bolivia to maintain the levels 
of investment that characterized the previous decade. Furthermore, damaging weather events, 
such as floods in 2013 and a severe drought in 2016, have taken a huge toll on Bolivia➢❨ s 
economy, particularly in the agricultural sector, where prices of domestic staple products have 
risen considerably, disproportionately affecting urban and rural poor. Changes in climate patterns 
will exacerbate climate variability, and therefore, their impacts on vulnerable populations.
Sectoral and institutional Context
The proposed AF, with its scale-up to reach poor producers countrywide, is consistent with WBG 
and GoB development agendas for 2016-2020, which prioritize inclusive economic growth, 
reducing poverty and inequality, and building capacity to cope with climate change. The AF is 
aligned with the World Bank Group Country Partnership Framework (CPF- 2016-2020) for 
Bolivia, Pillar 1 (Promoting broad-based and inclusive growth), particularly under Objective 3 
(Improving opportunities for income generation, market access, and sustainable intensification); 
and also supports Pillar 2 (Addressing environmental sustainability and resilience to climate 
change). In relation to government priorities, PAR II will contribute to reaching the targets set 
forth in the General Economic and Social Plan (PGDES), particularly under Pillar 1, Result 2 
(reducing moderate poverty), and under Pillar 6 (sovereignty with productive diversification). It is 
important to note, that as part of its Intended Nationally Determined Contribution (INDCs), the 
Government of Bolivia has committed to triple the irrigation area and double food production 
under irrigation by 2020; the Project is also aligned with those priorities. 
 
Key results. The AF will scale up activities to enhance the impact of a well-performing project 
that has proven effective in improving rural income and reducing poverty; the alliance approach 
will also help small-scale producers cope with climate variability. With an expanded geographical 
area countrywide, the AF will reach directly an additional 30,000 rural and majority-indigenous 
households, via supporting about 850 productive alliances. Public infrastructure subprojects will 
reach out to about 70,000 indirect beneficiaries. As in the original project, the AF will continue 
promoting strong engagement by women in the subprojects. Maintaining the menu of activities of 
the original project, the AF will make extra efforts to improving efficiency in water use. As a 
result, the bulk of additional funds (up to 75%) allocated to alliances will not only serve to 
improve access to markets, as PAR has been doing over the past ten years, but also strengthen 
resilience to a harsher climate.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
The objective of the Project is to improve accessibility to markets for small rural producers in the 
Selected Areas by: (a) promoting productive alliances between different small rural producer 



Page 3 of 14

organizations and purchasers; (b) empowering rural producers through the establishment and 
strengthening of self-managed grass-root organizations; (c) increasing access to productive assets, 
technologyand financial services;  (d) promoting more effective, responsive and accountable 
service organizations at the local level; and (e)enhancing environmental sustainability of 
productive practices. The Project is a follow on operation to the successful PAR I, whichtested the 
model for improving market access.

Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing
The re-written PDO would be: ➢❨ The Objective of the Project is to improve accessibility to 
markets and climate resilience for small-scale rural producers in the country➢❨ 

Key Results 
The Project will track progress against the PDO through the following indicators: 
 
- Increase in the average volume of sales of the product(s) involved in the alliance 
- Producer Organizations (SPOs)➢❨ s members that apply climate -related resilience practices/
measures as defined in the business plans 
- Producer organizations that maintain or improve their commercial relations (alliances) for at 
least two productive cycles 
- Direct project beneficiaries (disaggregated by men and women): Direct producer beneficiaries 
from SPOs (disaggregated by men and women) and Beneficiaries of public investment sub-
projects (there is not disaggregation).

D.  Project Description

PAR II project aims at strengthening market access and climate resilience for small scale 
producers by: supporting producers➢❨  collective action via the establishing and strengthening of 
small producer-based self-managed grass-root organizations; strengthening farmers➢❨  linkages 
with buyers; and increasing their access to productive assets, climate-resilience technologies/
practices, knowledge, and financial resources. As in the parent project, Small Producer 
Organizations (SPOs) will identify opportunities for business upgrades; consolidate those 
opportunities into Business Plans (BPs); and co-fund and implement those plans. Although the 
Project will maintain its demand-driven focus, it will introduce mechanisms to contribute to shape 
the demand by SPOs, in alignment with the increased resilient emphasis of the project's 
investments. In fact, in the AF phase, the Project will more strategically support climate resilient 
investments via irrigation modernization and climate smart practices. Investments under the BPs 
will be complemented with off-farm investments under Municipal Subprojects to improve 
productive infrastructure and facilitate market linkages. 
 
PAR II safeguard performance has consistently been rated as satisfactory. The track record of 
EMPODERAR carrying out PAR and PAR II, confirms strong capability to monitoring 
compliance with environmental and social safeguards throughout the lifespan of subprojects. 
Over the years, the PIU has put in place a set of standards and procedures, which has proven 
effective in diverse environments and social contexts, and which form the basis for the 
instruments that the PIU will use countrywide in the AF. These tools are included in the Social 
Assessment & Management Framework, the Resettlement Policy Framework, and the 
Environmental Management Framework, and will allow the PIU to conduct permanent social and 
environmental analysis, reinforce information and consultation, strengthen women➢❨ s 



Page 4 of 14

participation, and define site-specific mitigation measures, among other multiple actions.

Component Name
Institutional Strengthening
Comments (optional)
This component will continue supporting pre-investment activities for the creation and 
strengthening of Rural Alliances. As in the parent project, this component will support alliance 
pre-investment activities to: (i) promote the project concept and outreach, viacommunication and 
dissemination campaigns; (ii) strengthen capacities of eligible Small Producer Organizations to: 
form Rural Alliances, identify potential business opportunities, fully prepared business plans, 
formalize their organizations, and improve their marketing and business skills; (iii) strengthen 
capacities of service providers and local governments; and (iv) appraise alliances.

Component Name
Implementation of Rural Alliances
Comments (optional)
This component would provide grants to co-finance investments found technically and financially 
feasible under component 1. These include grants to co-finance the implementation of 
competitively selected business plans / rural alliances (Subcomponent 2a); and co-finance the 
implementation of public infrastructure subprojects (Municipal Subprojects Subcomponent 2b). 
Support to SPO via advisers (acompanantes) would be provided under Subcomponent 2c.

Component Name
Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation
Comments (optional)
This component would support the incremental costs associated with project administration and 
monitoring, to support project activities, such as: updating and operation of the Geo-referenced 
Management Information System (SIGG, for its acronym in Spanish) and of the public 
information system; baseline information collection and the impact evaluation of the Project. The 
component will also support the undertaking of studies.

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

In the additional financing phase, PAR II will expand opportunities to farmers countrywide. The 
expanded geographical coverage of the project, includes a variety of six ecological regions 
spanning from high-altitude valleys to tropical humid forests. The Borrower has finalized an 
Environmental Assessment (EA) including a guide of good environmental practices that 
complements and updates the earlier assessments of environmental characteristics and problems 
relevant to the Project by each ecological region, including projected concerns of climate 
vulnerability. The Borrower conducted a complementary social assessment (SA) for the extended 
project area. The SA analyzed the particular social, cultural, and productive features in each of the 
eco regions, with emphasis on the TCO/TIOCs and their regulations. The social instruments that 
were part of the original SA in the parent project (e.g. those for detecting potential social 
dynamics that might affect the subproject) were revised taking into account the new project area.  
 
To facilitate the application of the social tools, the Social Assessment was broken down into 3 
items.  



Page 5 of 14

- The Social Assessment (Part I) includes the analysis of social context, poverty aspects, cultural 
diversity, gender and cross-generation issues in the 6 eco regions (Amazonia, Yungas, Altiplano, 
Valles, Oriente and Chaco), covering 339 municipalities. The preparation of this document also 
included a systematic consultation process, which was based on an initial stakeholder analysis.  
- The Social Management Framework (Part II) provides technical criteria and customized tools 
for assessment of feasibility of alliances through social lens; systematizes pertinent information 
for social monitoring and evaluation; and includes criteria to retro-feeding the beneficiaries➢❨  
organizations with valuable recommendations to ensuring cohesion and sustainability.  
- The Social Management Framework (for Indigenous Peoples/Part III) includes specific tools and 
procedures to strengthen consultation processes with indigenous peoples; those tools are 
particularly useful to analyzing the conditions and specific regulations of minority groups located 
in the TCO/TIOCs and conducting Free, Prior and Informed Consultation processes 
- The Resettlement Policy Framework has been updated to reflect the geographic expansion of the 
project. A land donation protocol has been included to address the land cession for municipal 
infrastructure subprojects. 
  
Overall the institutional arrangements of the Parent project will remain unchanged, including 
responsibilities in the supervision of environmental and social aspects. To strengthen 
implementation capacity, with the expansion of project coverage, the PIU will hire additional 
safeguard specialists for the Departmental Units and provide them with pertinent training, with 
support from the Task Team.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Angela Maria Caballero Espinoza (GSU04)

Juan Carlos Enriquez Uria (GEN04)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
In order to streamline the implementation of subcomponent 2.2 (Municipal Subprojects), in the AF, 
the National Fund of Productive and Social Investment (FPS) would take responsibilities in the 
administration of financing resources aligned with Subcomponent 2.b activities.  Under the original 
design, EMPODERAR performs most of the activities for subcomponent 2b, such as: defining the 
Municipal Subprojects pipeline; funding the preparation of pre-feasibility/feasibility studies, and 
paying contractors. Meanwhile, the FPS was only assigned with the function of appraising the 
Municipal Subprojects, and procuring and overseeing (from a technical and safeguard perspective) 
the civil works. 
 
The proposal to assign fiduciary responsibilities to the FPS in the implementation of subcomponent 
2.b activities derives from recent changes in public procurement rules, which are slowing-down the 
implementation of Municipal Subprojects, particularly resulting from cumbersome registration 
procedures and new requirements for registering procurement processes. To reverse these unforeseen 
obstacles that emerged during implementation, EMPODERAR will hand over to FPS the 
responsibility of managing the financing resources for Subcomponent 2b, including the payment for 
contractors that perform the civil works. This will allow FPS to register the budget for subprojects 
and manage the procurement in a more straightforward manner. It is important to note that, besides 
this change, the AF will maintain the same distribution of roles and responsibilities as in the Parent 



Page 6 of 14

project.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental 
Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes As in the original project, no large-scale impacts are expected 
given the limited, producers-based nature of Project activities. 
In the AF phase, most of the alliances will be devoted  
to agricultural /livestock primary production. A number of 
associated small municipal public works will also be financed 
such as road rehabilitation and improvement and small 
vehicular bridges. The AF will place strong emphasis on 
irrigation and water management both on-farm and in 
municipal subprojects. To account for it the project has 
triggered OP/BP 4.37 (Safety of Dams) and OP/BP 7.5 
(Projects in International waterways). An EA was conducted 
by the Borrower to reflect the expanded coverage area (six 
eco-regions). The EA report includes an updated 
Environmental Management Framework (EMF) at the Project 
level reflecting management measures in compliance with OP 
4.37 (Safety of Dams), instructed in the Environmental 
Management Manual. The updated EMF will be included as an 
annex to the Operational Manual.

Natural Habitats OP/
BP 4.04

Yes The updated EMF includes a comprehensive exclusion list to 
be applied at the early stage of subproject evaluation in order 
to prevent any negative impacts on natural habitats. No 
activities will be eligible within the core zones of protected 
areas, but specific activities such as beekeeping can be 
financed within their buffer zones, provided pertinent 
authorizations have been obtained and the activities are 
compatible with the area's Management Plan.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes As in the original project, the updated EMF contemplates 
deforestation risks of humid or dry forests related with 
expansion of croplands or pastures that might be induced by 
some of the beneficiary rural alliances or other Project effects. 
On the other hand, rural alliances focused on eco-tourism and 
gathering of non-timber forest products could effectively 
promote natural habitat conservation by rural producers. PAR 
II, has however, financed very little (if any) of these types of 
productive activities.

Pest Management OP 
4.09

Yes As in the original project, Pest management is expected to be 
one of the main risks to environmental management. To 
minimize this risk, the PIU revised and improved the pest 
management plan, which is part of the EMF, taking into 
account the extended project area (and new crops).

Physical Cultural 
Resources OP/BP 

Yes Considering the portfolio of investments supported by the 
original project and expected to be financed in the AF, the 



Page 7 of 14

4.11 major risks regarding OP/BP 4.11. are associated with civil 
works such as roads and irrigation canals that could possibly 
uncover significant cultural property. This risks did not 
materialize in the original project. As in the original project, 
management plans in individual subprojects will be developed 
to manage specific issues if identified. It is possible that 
excavations could unearth cultural artifacts. The ESMF 
includes measures to ensure that chance finds are timely 
determined and respected before proceeding with approval of 
municipal subproject financing.

Indigenous Peoples 
OP/BP 4.10

Yes Given the fact that most of the potential beneficiaries identify 
themselves as indigenous (58% of the targeted population), 
PAR II AF will operate further as an Indigenous People 
Project in compliance with the OP/BP 4.10. 
The PIU will encourage minority groups inthe lowlands to 
benefit from the intervention. Project documents and the 
Operational Manual will include key procedures and activities 
to ensure culturally adequate implementation, which 
essentially consists of using their native languages to the 
greatest extent possible, as well as respecting their traditional 
and functional social structures and deliberation forms. 
Furthermore, the project will include regular consultations at 
the local, regional and national levels, following the principle 
of Free, Prior and Informed Consultation processes.  
Finally, the project will pay special attention to the traditional 
and valid gender roles in production. By doing so, the PIU 
seeks to avoid any negative impact derived from the 
interference or disruption of social and productive traditional 
networks. IP rights and women rights will be mapped during 
all the project cycle.

Involuntary 
Resettlement OP/BP 
4.12

Yes As in the parent project, the Involuntary Resettlement Policy 
(OP/BP 4.12) will continue triggered in the AF because of the 
possibility of minor physical impacts on land (up to 5% of the 
property) and assets,  in complementary municipal 
infrastructure investments. The PIU updated the Resettlement 
Policy Framework (RPF) to reflect the new project area and 
included more specific mitigation measures related to access to 
services, natural resources and physical impacts on land, 
infrastructure and assets. A land donation protocol has been 
included to address land cession for municipal infrastructure 
subprojects.

Safety of Dams OP/
BP 4.37

Yes Although PAR II does not finance the building of any large 
dam, this policy is newly triggered in the AF because of the 
emphasis on irrigation. In the event that a subproject depends 
on water supplied from an existing dam, the EMF stipulates 
that, before financing the subproject, the PIU will require a 
preliminary specialized dam safety assessment.



Page 8 of 14

Projects on 
International 
Waterways OP/BP 
7.50

Yes This policy is newly triggered because of the renewed 
emphasis of the AF on supporting irrigation investments. The 
exception to riparian notification has been requested because 
the project will essentially rehabilitate and improve efficiency 
in existing irrigation systems. Moreover, the proposed project's 
activities are not likely to damage the quality or quantity of the 
water flowing to downstream riparians; similarly, the Project 
will not be affected by other riparians' possible water use.

Projects in Disputed 
Areas OP/BP 7.60

No No project activities are contemplated in disputed areas.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
It is not anticipated that the AF would generate negative environmental impacts, based on the 
experience of the original project. As in the parent project, the bulk of the investments in the AF 
will continue to be of a small scale and be led by the beneficiaries themselves. In addition, the 
projected investments in irrigation, both on-farm and off-farm, will focus on improving efficiency 
of water use and, therefore, are likely to generate positive environmental impacts. Based on the 
experience gained with PAR I and PAR II, the PIU has incorporated into the revised EMF multiple 
good practices that have proven effective in minimizing environmental impacts, such as crop 
rotation, terracing, reforestation, and soil protection. 
 
By applying the revised EMF, PAR II AF is likely to result in positive long-term environmental 
impacts, at least, on the following three fronts: (i) reducing risk of soil erosion through the 
adoption of practices such as crop rotation, pasture management and terracing; (ii) reducing 
negative effects of pesticides on health and environment as a result of the reduction of toxicity of 
products used and through awareness-building training; and (iii) improving efficiency in water use 
through implantation of modern irrigation systems. 
 
 
Findings from the consultations for the AF phase, highlighted the importance of continue 
strengthening women participation in project activities. In Amazon and Chaco regions, the 
participation of women in the project activities is lower as a result of diverse constraints that they 
face. Under these considerations the project will continue promoting the participation and 
empowerment of women in the 6 ecoregions but particularly in the Amazon and Chaco ecoregions 
by improving the access to opportunities of training and decision making in the Alliances. The 
project will continue promoting women participation and empowerment by, among others, 
facilitating their access to and engagement in training and decision making in the subprojects. In 
particular, the PIU will make extra efforts to hire more female technical staff for training, technical 
assistance and technology transfer, so that the project can reach out to women in a more effective 
manner. 
 
Additionally, in alignment with the up-coming new safeguard requirements, the SA includes 
instruments to better understand the possible risks of the project associated with child labor issues 
and possible mitigation measures to address them if identified. The prohibition of the management 



Page 9 of 14

and use of pesticides by minors is introduced. 
 
EMF, including subproject screening, has been updated to mitigate potential risk.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
AF is expected to benefit approximately 850 new SPOs in nine Departments. The ongoing project 
experience shows that PARII has the ability to significantly increase capacity building in the 
SOPs, and promotes inclusion by women and youth. In the original financing, women➢❨ s 
participation in subproject identification and implementation was strengthened. As a result, 30 
percent of the participants in alliances were women. However, the SA recommend strengthening 
gender-related activities in some regions (Amazons and Chacho).

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
It is expected that the social impact of the project in general is positive. Mitigation measures 
incorporated into the project design and/or reflected in the Operations Manual of the project 
include mechanisms for: a) improving information and transparency, and adopt participatory 
monitoring at the SPO level; b) integrating vulnerable groups within farmers' groups to the 
processes of decision-making on priority needs, as well as the implementation, maintenance and 
equal access to benefits of subprojects, and c) promote the inclusion of women.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Based on previous experience, for the PAR II project, EMPODERAR has developed a series of 
criteria and instruments for the environmental management, monitoring and control process. The 
instruments developed serve to identify and assess possible environmental impacts and establish 
mitigation and control measures that are necessary for each type of activities. In the same way, it 
has developed instruments for the process of control and monitoring of climate threats and 
measures to adapt to climate change. In the case of Municipal Subprojects, FPS will have the 
responsibility to follow and comply with the EMF. 
 
EMPODERAR has in place reasonable standards and procedures for the implementation of the 
social safeguards policies. In the AF, the PIU will take advantage of those instruments to ensuring 
information and consultation for indigenous minorities during the project cycle. The use of those 
instruments will be an integral part of  the assessment of proposals from the social perspective.  
In addition, the PIU will identify opportunities to strengthening women's participation and 
developing further the existing GRM mechanisms, which thus far comprise the following three 
elements:  
(i) The regional units use a protocol to assessing and, to the extent possible, solving conflicts by 
identifying key stakeholders and their views, interests and needs; this tool seeks to anticipate risks 
and tensions that can either strengthen or weaken the Alliances, and to handle expectations and 
possible conflicts before escalating.  
(ii) The regional units also offer an open space, where individuals can file complaints, affectations 
or recommendations; The NCU receives and processes the claims. To strengthen this mechanism, 
each regional unit will make available a Community Book of Complaints.  
(iii) The PIU will put in place a public transparency platform to track beneficiaries' satisfaction 
and provide public information; the NCU will monitor the system on a regular basis.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.



Page 10 of 14

The key stakeholders of the project are community members, including ingenuous populations, 
women, government agencies, and the private sector. 
 
In the AF phase, extensive stakeholder consultation took place during project preparation, and will 
continue through implementation. Particularly vulnerable groups, such as women and minority 
indigenous groups, were specifically targeted. This process included six consultation workshops 
and various group interviews held in the following ecoregions (Valles (Cochabamba), Altiplano 
(La Paz), Yungas (Chimore) and Amazon (Rurrenabque). Each consultation comprised two stages: 
(i) discussion on the project concept, its development objectives and eliciting suggestions, the 
project components and discussion on how best to implement and develop partnerships, and (ii) 
discussion on potential risks and how to avoid or mitigate them, listening and answering to 
consultations. As a result, the exercise made it possible to gather a comprehensive set of 
recommendations, in particular with respect to  minority indigenous groups  and gender issues. 
 
Consultations with a total of 496 participants were held between August and September 2016. In 
addition, through structured interviews and questionnaires the PIU collected and analyzed valuable 
socio-economic data for the social assessment. In addition to these primary sources of data and 
inputs from stakeholders, secondary sources such as existing studies and project reports were  
reviewed to ensuring appropriate design and targeting in terms of indigenous groups, gender, cross 
generation needs and priorities, and mitigation of social risks and impacts.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 08-Dec-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 14-Dec-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure
Bolivia 14-Dec-2016
Comments:

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank 13-Dec-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 14-Dec-2016
"In country" Disclosure

Bolivia 14-Dec-2016
Comments:

Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank 08-Dec-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 14-Dec-2016
"In country" Disclosure



Page 11 of 14

Bolivia 14-Dec-2016
Comments:

Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank 08-Dec-2016

Date of submission to InfoShop 14-Dec-2016
"In country" Disclosure

Bolivia 14-Dec-2016
Comments:

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) 
report?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice 
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated 
in the credit/loan?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or 
degradation of critical natural habitats?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

If the project would result in significant conversion or 
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the 
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Is a separate PMP required? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a 
safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included 
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest 
Management Specialist?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural 
property?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the 
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]



Page 12 of 14

OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework 
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected 
Indigenous Peoples?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or 
Practice Manager review the plan?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design 
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social 
Development Unit or Practice Manager?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or 
Practice Manager review the plan?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Is physical displacement/relocation expected? 
 
 Provided estimated number of people to be affected

Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ ]

Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to 
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of 
livelihoods) 
 
 Provided estimated number of people to be affected

Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ ]

OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues 
and constraints been carried out?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Does the project design include satisfactory measures to 
overcome these constraints?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, 
does it include provisions for certification system?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent 
Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the 
Bank?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and 
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the 
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal 
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Has the RVP approved such an exception? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information



Page 13 of 14

Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the 
World Bank's Infoshop?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public 
place in a form and language that are understandable and 
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included 
in the project cost?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project 
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed 
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in 
the project legal documents?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

V. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Luz Berania Diaz Rios
Title: Senior Agribusiness Specialist

Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name: GOVERNMENT OF BOLIVIA
Contact: Jules Cesaire YAGANZA
Title: Directeur du Departement Techniques Industrielles et Exploit
Email: legrand_cesar@yahoo.fr

Implementing Agencies
Name: EMPODERAR
Contact: Jules Cesaire YAGANZA
Title: Directeur du Departement Techniques Industrielles et Exploit
Email: legrand_cesar@yahoo.fr

VI. For more information contact:
The World Bank 
1818 H Street, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20433 
Telephone: (202) 473-1000 
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

VII. Approval
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Luz Berania Diaz Rios
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor: Name: Noreen Beg (SA) Date: 15-Dec-2016



Page 14 of 14

Practice Manager/
Manager:

Name: Garry Charlier (PMGR) Date: 15-Dec-2016

Country Director: Name: Emmy Silvya Yokoyama Tsuchikame 
(CD)

Date: 05-Jan-2017


















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Productive Alliances Project (P168153) 

 
 

  
Oct 29, 2018 Page 1 of 12  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 12-Nov-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSC25297 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 
The World Bank  
Productive Alliances Project (P168153) 

 
 

  
Oct 29, 2018 Page 2 of 12  

     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Paraguay P168153  Productive Alliances 
Project (P168153) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND 
CARIBBEAN 

Jun 03, 2019 Oct 08, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Republic of Paraguay Ministry of Agriculture and 
Livestock Production 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
To enhance access to markets and adoption of climate risk management approaches by project beneficiaries in a 
sustainable manner. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 120.00 

Total Financing 120.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 100.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 100.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 20.00 

          Municipalities of Borrowing Country 1.00 

          Local Farmer Organizations 19.00 

   



 
The World Bank  
Productive Alliances Project (P168153) 

 
 

  
Oct 29, 2018 Page 3 of 12  

     

 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Substantial  Track I-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

1. Over the past decade, the expansion of export-oriented agriculture production has significantly contributed to 
GDP growth and poverty alleviation. During the period 2004 and 2016, Paraguay’s average growth was 4.7 percent per 
year, with high volatility. Key drivers of growth were the agriculture and hydroelectric power sectors. Crops alone 
contributed to one-quarter of total growth, with expanded agriculture (comprising backward and forward linkages) 
contributing a higher share to overall GDP growth. Agricultural products constitute the bulk of Paraguay’s exports. There 
is a strong duality in the sector with a significant share comprised of a lagging subsistence farming component, but in 
parallel there is a vibrant and substantial commercially-oriented agricultural industry segment (individuals, cooperatives 
and corporations), which engage in value chains such as soybean and meat. Capitalized agriculture uses about 70 
percent of the country’s productive area. Since 2003, the boom in export-oriented production has contributed to a 
significant fall of national poverty rates: 45 to 20 percent in urban areas, and 58 to 36 percent in rural areas. These 
prosperous years have also resulted in an increase in income for the bottom 40 percent and in the expansion of the 
middle class, which currently comprises 38 percent of Paraguay’s population.    
 
2. However, a large rural population accompanied by extensive rural poverty are among the salient features of 
Paraguay. In 2017 Paraguay’s population was estimated at 7 million inhabitants, with 40 percent of the population –
roughly 2.8 million-- living in rural areas. This represents the highest percentage of rural population of any country in 
South America, and among the highest in all of Latin America. About 97 percent of Paraguay’s population live in the 
Eastern Region, roughly 40 percent of the total territory, whereas only 3 percent of the population reside in the Western 
Region (Chaco). Most of the total poor live in rural areas, with a fair share engaging in agriculture-related activities, with 
informality as the hallmark.   
 
3. To build on the gains during the past decade in terms of growth and poverty alleviation, Paraguay must focus 
on creating sustainable economic opportunities for the poor and vulnerable population. Approximately 60 percent of 
Paraguay’s population are considered either poor or vulnerable, that is, they are at risk of falling back into poverty. 
Indigenous peoples, slightly under 116,000 inhabitants –a 2 percent of the total Paraguayan population, are one of the 
most vulnerable population groups. Indigenous peoples are essentially rural and have very limited access to basic 
infrastructure and services. For instance, not more than 6 percent of indigenous households are connected to a supply 
system of potable water. Among indigenous groups, monolingual Guaraní speakers are particularly disadvantaged. 
Another important vulnerable group is made up of subsistence producers and small or medium-sized producers in 
transition to commercial schemes. This group forms the end of a spectrum of farmers, which as noted above, at the 



 
The World Bank  
Productive Alliances Project (P168153) 

 
 

  
Oct 29, 2018 Page 4 of 12  

     

other end, includes the highly capitalized farmers and corporations. This group of producers who are primarily poor and 
vulnerable, comprise at least 200,000 households; they are particularly affected by the lack of access to markets, 
finance, technology, land, human capital, and connectivity, and are harshly impacted by extreme weather events and 
the risks posed by climate change. They have not succeeded in keeping up with the pace of modernization of Paraguay’s 
agriculture, led by the large farmers and corporations. A third group that is considered vulnerable is the youth. Half of 
the young people that neither study nor work reside in rural areas, with many of them performing unpaid family labor in 
agriculture-based activities gender. Despite the progress made in Paraguay in recent years, creating economic 
opportunities for these groups is an unfinished agenda. Efforts must focus on improving incomes and reducing 
vulnerability through creating conditions to enable opportunities for self-employment and access to jobs, which are 
indispensable for reducing poverty in Paraguay.    
 
4. Paraguay enjoys many innate advantages which provide it with a great potential for driving pro-poor growth 
through the development of a resilient and responsible agro-industrial sector.  To do so however, it must overcome 
the inter-linked challenges of creating economic opportunities while conserving its natural endowments and 
improving resilience to climate change. Recent growth in Paraguay has taken a toll on its natural resource base. For 
example, logging and clearing land for crops, cattle ranching, and charcoal/biomass have resulted in extensive forest 
degradation and deforestation.  Combined with lack of planning around soil and water resources management, this is 
contributing to increasing the vulnerability to extreme weather events. It is critical that the expansion of agro-industrial 
productive activities and the creation of jobs go hand in hand with sound management of Paraguay’s rich natural capital 
comprising, fertile soils, abundant water, and pastures and forest resources; in addition, the enhancement of its capacity 
to develop and implement a strategy for integrated management of climate change risks are all keys to securing the 
basis of long term growth and development for the generations to come.      
 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

5. The bulk of the rural poor and vulnerable population, a good part of which are indigenous peoples, rely on 
agriculture to make a living. In 2017, 76 percent of households in rural areas were engaged in family farming or small, 
informal agri-based activities, individually or in an organized way. If looking only at indigenous peoples, 71 percent of 
households rely on agriculture along with forestry, hunting and freshwater fishing. The impressive growth of capitalized 
agriculture has not translated into significant benefits for smallholders, who are left far behind in terms of per capita 
income and other socio-economic indicators, even when compared to rural households that do not rely on agriculture.  
Such subsistence and transition producers tend to combine agriculture with multiple sources of income such as off-farm 
labor, migration and remittances as a coping mechanism; but, on-farm production and associate income constitutes a 
key source of income which is critical for overall sustenance of these households. In addition, their capacity to mitigate 
against and adapt to climate risks is extremely limited. In 2011 agricultural households in rural areas were found to be 
more than twice as likely to report a negative shock than non-agricultural households. Exposure to climate or other 
shocks can push vulnerable households back to or further into poverty since the economic gains in years with good sales 
can be drawn down with just one season of severe drought .   
 
6. Global experience demonstrates that building resilience against natural disasters and climate change, 
integrating value addition opportunities and removal of barriers to accessing markets for agriculture creates 
economic opportunities for the rural poor and vulnerable population. Recent evidence in Paraguay confirms that 
vulnerable rural inhabitants can lift themselves out of poverty and begin to prosper when they receive assistance in 
accessing markets and technology. It is the case of about 25,000 households who have benefited from the Sustainable 
Rural Development Project (PRODERS, P088799 ). By selling their surpluses in open-air markets or through farm-gate 



 
The World Bank  
Productive Alliances Project (P168153) 

 
 

  
Oct 29, 2018 Page 5 of 12  

     

intermediaries, subsistence and transition producers have significantly enhanced their agricultural earnings and half of 
them were able to rise above the poverty threshold, according to the measurement of June 2018 in relation to the 
baseline.   
 
7. There is untapped potential to enhance outcomes through linkages with formal supply chains, to enable 
transition of subsistence and transition producers toward greater value addition. Paraguay’s food system has formal 
supply chains with larger potential, such as organic yerba mate for export, horticulture for supermarket, and nutrition-
rich grains and beans as inputs for processed foods. Empirical experience in Paraguay indicates, however, that multiple 
barriers prevent rural producers from becoming providers in more modern chains, especially due to the lack of critical 
assets, infrastructure, knowhow and/or organization. In this regard, women find it particularly difficult to access 
financial services and technology. Only 30 percent of the credits issued by the Enabling Agricultural Credit Office (in 
Spanish “Crédito Agrícola de Habilitación”) and 5 percent in the case of the Livestock Fund (in Spanish “Fondo 
Ganadero”) are assigned to women . It is almost universally challenging for smallholders to meet demand requirements, 
including supplying consistent quantities of quality goods that comply with sanitary and phytosanitary standards and are 
delivered on time.     
 
8. Fostering sustainable and inclusive value chain integration has become a priority for the current 
administration. The National Development Plan of Paraguay (2014-2030) seeks to shift the overarching orientation of 
the national economy towards a knowledge-based approach, with diversified and competitive sectors, and increased 
technology adoption. Creating opportunities for the most vulnerable population groups and reducing inequalities are 
essential elements of the Plan. Building on the same in 2016, Paraguay submitted its Intended Nationally Determined 
Contribution (INDC) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Paraguay’s INDC identifies 
agriculture, forestry, land use and land use change as strategic sectors for adaptation and mitigation actions. More 
recently, the administration of President Abdo, who took office in August 2018, has committed to take family farming to 
the next level. To do so, the Government is promoting technology adoption and long-lasting linkages with competitive 
markets, so that producers improve their income in the short and medium-term and acquire economic and climate 
resilience in the long term.   
 
9. The sectoral agenda is led by the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Production in partnerships with its 
decentralized institutions. The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Production (MAL) focuses on producers, for whom 
agriculture represents a critical source of income (see beneficiaries for a more specific classification). It is responsible for 
the sectorial policy and is at the helm of a set of decentralized sectoral institutions such as the Paraguayan Institute for 
Agricultural Technology (IPTA,: in Spanish “Instituto Paraguayo de Tecnología Agraria”), the National Service for Quality 
and Safety in Vegetables and Seeds (SENAVE: in Spanish “Servicio Nacional de Calidad y Sanidad Vegetal y de Semillas”), 
and  National Service for Animal Quality and Health (SENACSA, for “Servicio Nacional de Calidad y Salud Animal”), and 
the aforementioned Enabling Agricultural Credit Office. To fulfill its mandate, the MAL not only formulates the national 
policy, but also carries out projects at the grassroot level with finance of the International Fund for Agriculture and the 
Interamerican Bank for Development.   
 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 
 
10. The Concept Note has been drafted at the time of preparation of the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for 
the period FY19-23. By appraisal of the project, the CPF will have been approved by the World Bank Board of Directors. 
 



 
The World Bank  
Productive Alliances Project (P168153) 

 
 

  
Oct 29, 2018 Page 6 of 12  

     

11. The Strategic Country Diagnostic (SCD) completed in June 2018 flagged the following three structural challenges 
for Paraguay: (i) concentration of inputs, production, exports, income and political influence; (ii) informality of 
production, labor, land and trade; and (iii) inefficient provision of public services. To address them in the CPF, the SCD 
proposed four policy priority areas: (i) accountable institutions, the rule of law, and business environment; (ii) quality of 
public services; (iii) natural wealth management; and (iv) human capital. The proposed project is mainly aligned with 
policy areas (i) and (ii). 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
To enhance access to markets and adoption of climate risk management approaches by project beneficiaries in a 
sustainable manner. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 
 

Increase in the volume of sales of project beneficiaries, disaggregated by gender, youth, and Indigenous (“access to 
market indicator”); 
 
Percentage of project beneficiaries (producers, cooperatives and agro-enterprises) in operation 1 year after the 
completion of the investment subproject (“sustainable access to market indicator”);  
 
Number of beneficiaries adopting climate smart practices promoted by the project, disaggregated by, among others, 
gender, youth, and ethnicity (“access to climate risk management approaches indicator”). 
 
 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
12. The project will contribute to creating long-term economic opportunities for the rural poor and vulnerable 
population by applying a two-fold approach: i) intervene at the grass-roots level via capacity building and subprojects 
(components 1a and 2a/b) focused on improving access to markets and resilience to extreme weather events and 
climate change; and ii) improve critical institutions, systems, and infrastructure (component 1b and 2c). In the short and 
medium term, the project will put into operation an inclusive agribusiness model: productive alliances. Producers will 
enhance their income-generating capacity by becoming more engaged in business activities, while incorporating more 
climate resilient technologies and approaches. In the long term the project will spark the creation of both on-farm and 
off-farms jobs and strengthen resilience.    
 
13. The project will have national coverage. Because Paraguay is a diverse country, activities will be tailored to fit 
the diverse ecological and productive contexts. Prioritization criteria for specific activities will be determined.  
 
14. Project beneficiaries will include the following categories:  
- rural indigenous communities; afro-descendants. Participation by women and youth will also be prioritized 
- organized rural smallholder producers from any of the following categories used for family farming policies in 
Paraguay: subsistence, transitional or capitalized producers, 
- producer cooperatives, small- and medium-sized agro-entrepreneurs, and other partner institutions; 
- and selected public institutions.  
Based on the experience of comparable interventions in Paraguay and other countries and counting a household as a 



 
The World Bank  
Productive Alliances Project (P168153) 

 
 

  
Oct 29, 2018 Page 7 of 12  

     

single beneficiary once it receives any type of support, the project will benefit over 30,000 poor and vulnerable rural 
households, with the target figures for both women-headed households and young producers to be determined later. 
Beneficiaries of investment support will be selected on a competitive basis (see component 2) and using screening 
mechanisms that ensure that the benefits reach the poor and vulnerable groups. This operation will adopt a customized 
approach to targeting indigenous peoples and afro-descendants, drawing upon the experience of PRODERS. 
Beneficiaries of PRODERS will be eligible for this project, provided they meet the specific criteria for each type of 
support.  
 
15. Four critical changes will distinguish this project from PRODERS: (i) promoting activities that ultimately help the 
beneficiaries profit from business opportunities –this project will take up where PRODERS left off in terms of promoting 
market access ; (ii) including calls for proposals and co-financing schemes (with counterpart contributions mainly in cash) 
for subproject investments to strengthen ‘buy in’ and sustainability of investments; (iii) capitalizing on the capacity and 
engagement of a larger spectrum of partners (alliances at various levels); and (iv) integrating a risk management 
approach across the board in order to minimize the shocks of extreme climate events, while investing in resilience 
against climate change and enhance the sustainability of project outcomes.  
 
16. The project will address the gender gaps that are critical to attaining the PDO, namely (i) increasing women’s 
access to resources and technology; (ii) strengthening the earning-generating capacity of women; and (iii) fostering the 
participation of women in critical institutions.   
 
17. The project will mobilize private capital in multiple ways in line with the Maximizing-Finance-for-
Development Agenda. Besides the inclusion of counterpart co-financing in all types of subprojects, the project will 
promote access to credit for smallholder producers by providing technical assistance to beneficiaries and financial 
institutions. Credit to small agricultural businesses is often considered risky and poorly profitable for financial 
institutions. By linking productive alliances that have been successfully implemented to commercial banks that can 
continue financing their business plans, the project will contribute to reducing the risk exposure of private financial 
institutions. With this experience, conditions can be put in place to removing barriers to crowding in private sector 
finance for small rural entrepreneurs. 
 
Component 1: Capacity building (approximately US$ 20 million IBRD loan) 
 
18. This component will address the need to build both human capital of targeted communities and producer 
organizations (1a), and to improve critical factors (1b), in order to facilitate access to markets and integration with 
formal and lucrative value chains. It will fund workshops, courses, field days, study trips, and public events. In addition, 
the subcomponent will finance the provision of expert assistance, as needed, such as lawyers and the preparation and 
dissemination of printed and audiovisual education material. 
 
1a Strengthening human capital of targeted communities and strengthening producer organizations  
19. This subcomponent will help remove barriers that prevent potential beneficiaries, in particular indigenous 
peoples and Afro-descendants, from taking advantage of investment opportunities. Furthermore, it will strengthen 
organizations that have already made investments, so that they are more sustainable. 
 
20. Assistance will cover areas such as legal issues during the formalization of land titles in indigenous communities 
or pending formal registration of the organization, technical and operational know how around select value chains, as 
well as management capabilities such as financial literacy, with an emphasis on understanding barriers to credit access 
notably for women and women’s organizations; creating and administering revolving funds; and monitoring and 



 
The World Bank  
Productive Alliances Project (P168153) 

 
 

  
Oct 29, 2018 Page 8 of 12  

     

assessing results of investments.   
 
21. Moreover, under this subcomponent, the project will disseminate calls for proposals among potential 
beneficiaries and provide technical assistance to the organizations for preparing the detailed proposals for investments, 
as described in component 2.    
 
1b Strengthening critical institutions and systems  
 
22. This subcomponent will focus on strengthening the institutions and systems that are pivotal to promoting access 
to markets, including a risk management and sustainability perspective as well as a gender angle. By doing so, the 
project will contribute to creating a conducive environment for improved partnerships between organized producers 
and firms. 
 
23. Attention will be paid to improving the capabilities of the MAL to provide the sector with updated risk-related 
information and services that mitigate and/or transfer risk. This includes existing climate information services, forecast 
models, and weather insurance, which will cover both indemnity-based and parametric/index-based insurance. The 
ministerial Risk Management Unit will lead these activities.   
 
24. Furthermore, the MAL and its dependent institutions will improve their ability to support productive integration 
in strategic value chains; for instance, studies and technical assistance will be undertaken to identify key constraints as 
well as policy and systems reforms and financing requirements to enhance Paraguay’s capabilities in terms of 
strengthened traceability systems and food quality governance for select (prioritized) value chains will be undertaken.  
Actionable roadmaps for implementing the salient recommendations would be developed under the project.   
 
25. In addition, the component will strengthen the existing ministerial centers that serve to collect, store, and sell 
products for associated farmers (CECOPROA: its name in Spanish “Centros de Comercialización para Productores 
Asociados”), and replicate the model in at least two additional locations. In this regard, alternatives for crowding-in 
private financing for building and managing the centers will be analyzed. 
 
26. Finally, the subcomponent will provide support to private firms, with a focus on small- and medium-sized 
enterprises, to put Supplier Development Programs into operation. These efforts will be complemented by advisory 
services provided by the International Finance Corporation to its client firms in selected value chains. The project will 
also examine the possibility to work with select private commercial banks in understanding and where feasible, helping 
address barriers to formal financing by producers (especially, women, subsistence, small or even medium-sized entities).   
 
Component 2: Investments to foster market access (approximately US$ 70 million IBRD loan, US$ 20 million 
counterpart funding from communities, organizations, and municipalities) 
 
27. Component 2 will provide matching grants to beneficiaries (organizations and institutions) to carry out 
investment subprojects (productive partnerships, 2a)) complemented by two sets of investments in innovation 
subprojects and small infrastructure works, 2b and 2c.  
 
28. Investment support under component 2 will be mainly granted on a competitive basis following calls for 
proposals. Special focus will be paid to promoting access to matching grants for afro-descendants, women farmers and 
young people. Clear beneficiary profiles and categories, as well as the criteria and process for selection will be 
elaborated during preparation.  A key consideration will be households and individuals that benefit under component 1 



 
The World Bank  
Productive Alliances Project (P168153) 

 
 

  
Oct 29, 2018 Page 9 of 12  

     

in terms of capacity building and technical assistance will be able to apply for investments under component 2.  
Different levels of counterpart contribution will be established based on categories of beneficiaries. The experience in 
multiple alliance projects in the region shows that providing counterpart co-financing in cash can help generate buy-in 
and ownership and contribute to more sustainable outcomes.  This finding will be applied appropriately during project 
design.  
29. The project will stimulate the access to financial services that can provide funds for subproject implementation 
and/or continue supporting the alliances once the project ends. To narrow the gender gap regarding access to credit for 
women, the project will include tailored training for women and provide additional support for women-led businesses.  
Similar attention will also be paid to participating afro-descendants and youth.    
 
2a Productive partnerships 
 
30. Indigenous and afro-descendent communities and producer organizations will be supported in establishing 
partnerships with purchasers and preparing business plans that aim to meet the purchasers’ requirements in terms of 
product type, quantity, and quality. These business plans will determine the investments needed either on-farm or off-
farm as collective assets, as well as the technical or administrative assistance.  
 
31. Since the project aims for all subprojects to incorporate climate-smart features to enhance their resilience to 
natural disasters and climate change, beneficiaries will be encouraged to incorporate climate risk management 
practices, such as small-scale water harvesting and irrigation schemes, soil management or other improved on- and off-
farm practices into their business plans, and adopt technologies that, besides boosting yields, are climate-smart and 
environmentally sound.  
 
32. Purchasers will include the following domestic public and private and potentially international actors: public 
institutions, such as schools, the military and hospitals, and businesses, such as supermarkets or agri-processors, with a 
focus on formal supply chains in dynamic markets. 
 
33. The scheme will finance subprojects with agricultural and livestock products, forestry products, such as yerba 
mate, aquaculture, and rural and ecosystem-based services, including agritourism. It will also support partnerships for 
both primary and processed products. The subcomponent will promote the participation of women in the organizations 
and provide customized assistance to women-led alliances. Attention will also be paid to Afro-descendants and youth.  
 
2b Complementary innovation subprojects 
 
34. Indigenous communities and producer organizations will partner with public or private institutions to carry out 
investment subprojects that aim to pilot, disseminate and adopt innovative technologies, and also to move downstream 
along value chains by piloting new processing techniques, products/product development and agro-industry based 
services. These investments seek to stimulate the sector to go beyond traditional agricultural schemes and introduce 
new products, concepts and activities that can translate into better access to lucrative markets and higher economic 
benefits in the medium term. Groups of alliances supported under subcomponent 2a will be eligible to this type of 
support to expand the adoption of technologies such as improved genetic plant varieties at a more regional level.  
 
35. Technologies and practices refer, for instance, to innovative integrated landscape approaches for agricultural 
products, drought-tolerant and disease-resistant plant varieties, integrated agro-forestry or pastoral-forestry systems, 
information and communication technologies, and new (green) business models, all of them with either promising or 
demonstrated benefits. Incentives will be provided for subprojects led by women, afro-descendants and young 



 
The World Bank  
Productive Alliances Project (P168153) 

 
 

  
Oct 29, 2018 Page 10 of 12  

     

producers.  
 
2c Complementary small infrastructure subprojects 
 
36. Municipalities will partner with the MAL to carry out small infrastructure works that are critical to facilitating 
agro-logistics and access to markets for communities and organizations, such as basic market/fair structures and spaces 
and storage facilities. The project will support analytical work to examine the opportunity to establish more 
sophisticated public-private investments in needed infrastructure such as wholesale markets, cold chains and processing 
plants.  
 
Component 3: Project Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation (approximately US$ 10 million IBRD loan) 
 
37. This component will provide support to the MAL for project coordination and management; monitoring, results 
evaluation, and assessment of project activities; project fiduciary administration, internal controls, and audits; project 
environmental and social risk management following the new Environment and Social Framework; a citizen engagement 
mechanism and a grievance redress mechanism; and project-related studies. In addition, this component will finance the 
strengthening of cross-cutting areas in the MAL, such as financial management and results-based monitoring. It will fund 
consultants, goods and services need to perform the activities. 
 
    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

A baseline environmental and social risks and impacts assessment (ESA) will be conducted under ESS1 at a 
framework level to verify the necessary scope of addressing ESS2-8. ESS2-4 and 6 will require close attention, 
given several related and critical challenges that include e.g. securing sound labor conditions and considering 
potential use of child labor, efficient use of living natural resources and all materials, consideration adaptation 
to increased climate variability and change and minimizing GHG emissions, sustained provision of ecosystem 
services, prevention of further expansion of the agricultural frontier, contamination and/or overexploitation 
of water resources, and promotion of biodiversity-friendly productive systems. ESS7 will require careful 
consideration during project preparation and implementation since the prevalence of indigenous and afro-
descendant communities will be a substantial criterion for the selection of subprojects. Based on the lessons 
learned in PRODERS, the project will adopt a customized approach to targeting Indigenous Peoples (IP, see 
ESS7 for more details) and the approach will be broadened to afro-descendant communities. ESS9 is the only 
ESS that is not expected to have relevance for the project, yet the institutional arrangements for matching 
grants/revolving funds remain to be determined. Due implementation of ESS10 will be critical to promote 
broad and transparent participation of project-affected and other interested parties and to prevent elite 
capture. 

 



 
The World Bank  
Productive Alliances Project (P168153) 

 
 

  
Oct 29, 2018 Page 11 of 12  

     

 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

World Bank 

Maurizio Guadagni, Francisco Javier Obreque Arqueros 

Sr Agricultural Spec. 
 

 

Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Republic of Paraguay 

 

 

 
 

 

Implementing Agencies 
 

Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Production 

Paula Durruty 

General Director of Planning 

paula.durruty@mag.gov.py 
 
 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

Task Team Leader(s): Maurizio Guadagni, Francisco Javier Obreque Arqueros 
 

  Approved By 
APPROVALTBL 

Practice Manager/Manager:   

Country Director:   
    

Note To view the Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts, please refer to the Concept Stage ESRS Document. 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects


 
The World Bank  
Productive Alliances Project (P168153) 

 
 

  
Oct 29, 2018 Page 12 of 12  

     

 
 
 
 
 

















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 1 of 19  

     

 

 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 
 

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 11-May-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC20468 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 2 of 19  

     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Argentina P162316  Integrated 
Management of 
Agricultural Risk 
(P162316) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND 
CARIBBEAN 

Aug 22, 2017 Oct 03, 2017 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Argentine Republic, Ministry 
of Finance 

Ministry of Agroindustry  

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The objective of the project is to contribute to strengthen resilience of the agroindustrial sector, particularly among the 
most vulnerable producers. This objective will be achieved through reduction of producers' vulnerability and exposure 
to climatic and market risk. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million)      

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

Finance OLD 

Financing Source Amount  

Borrower   37.50  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development  150.00  

LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES    0.00  

Total Project Cost  187.50  

    
 
 

 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 3 of 19  

     

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
1. After taking office in December 2015, the new Argentine Government moved with significant speed to 
implement reforms. The Government has rapidly implemented various macroeconomic reforms and initiated a program 
of structural reforms. These include inter alia (a) the elimination of export taxes on major crops, beef, and most 
industrial manufacturing products and the reduction by 5 percent of export taxes on soy; (b) unification of the exchange 
rate, effectively ending most foreign exchange restrictions; (c) moving from a system of discretionary to automatically 
provided import licenses in line with World Trade Organization procedures; (d) resolution of the dispute with holdout 
creditors; and (e)  measures to enhance public transparency and accountability. In addition, the National Institute for 
Statistics launched a new inflation index and improved the overall quality of statistics. Electricity tariffs and transport 
fees were increased to reduce subsidies, while protecting low-income users with a social tariff. Broader efforts to reduce 
energy subsidies (which account for a large portion of fiscal deficit) are under way.  

2. Economic activity contracted in 2016, but growth is expected in 2017. Economic activity contracted 2.3 percent 
during 2016, taking a toll on labor markets, where up to 0.9 percent of formal private sector jobs were lost in the first 
semester

1
. However, GDP expanded in the second half of 2016 (0.6 percent), and employment in the formal private 

sector recovered to its previous peak level (October 2015). The economy is expected to continue to grow in 2017 (+2.7 
percent

2
) on the assumption that the positive impact of recent policy changes kicks in and the global economy recovers. 

Inflation in the city of Buenos Aires was 40 percent in 2016, mostly due to currency depreciation and the reduction of 
energy and transport subsidies. However, inflation is expected to decrease to 21 percent in 2017

3
, despite further 

increases in energy and transport tariffs. The central government primary deficit in 2016 was 4.6 percent of GDP, below 
the official target (4.8 percent). The target primary deficit for 2017 (4.2 percent), though higher than originally planned, 
will require further fiscal consolidation efforts. 

3. The Argentine Government has made important steps to address the key macroeconomic imbalances with the 
objective of creating an environment conducive to economic growth and employment creation.  Argentina offers 
many opportunities in a weak global environment, and there is a strong interest from foreign investors and firms. Going 
forward, Argentina aims to continue building a growth enabling policy framework to enhance credibility and support 
broad based growth and quality employment. In particular, the following policies will be important to permanently 
reduce inflation and put Argentina on a sustainable growth path: (a) increase public spending efficiency as well as its 
efficacy and reduce the fiscal deficit in line with government targets; (b) continue fostering the credibility of the Central 
Bank so that monetary policy can further anchor inflation expectations; (c) strengthen competitiveness and productivity 
through an improved business environment and investments in infrastructure and increasing competition in markets 
and improving the regulatory framework in sectors; (d) continue strengthening the credibility of official statistics; and (e) 
continue improving the provision of public goods (including transportation, health, and education) and reducing regional 
disparities. 

                                            
1
 Source: Ministerio de Trabajo, Empleo y Seguridad Social  

2
 Source: World Bank Group. 2017. Global Economic Prospects, January 2017 Weak Investment in Uncertain Times. Washington, DC: 

World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-1016-9. 
3
 Source: Relevamiento de Expectativas de Mercado (REM), Banco Central de la República Argentina, April 2017.  



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 4 of 19  

     

4. Because of its geographical characteristics, Argentina is exposed to a variety of natural hazards. According to 
the Third National Communication (2015) by the Government of Argentina to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (TNC, 2015)

4
, the projections of climate models during this century generally indicate 

that the extremes of high temperatures and extreme precipitation will continue to increase in most of the country, 
although the precise quantification of this change presents considerable levels of uncertainty.  For example, droughts 
and floods during the last decades have increased due to the influence of stronger El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO) 
events and due to climate change.

5
 The natural disaster loss per capita in Argentina is high and relates predominantly to 

hydro-meteorological hazards, which represent 58 percent of the total economic losses over the last 50 years.
6
 

According to Swiss-Re, Argentina is among the 10 emerging economies with the highest flood hazard exposure, with 
potential losses in excess of US$ 3 billion a year (0.5% of GDP).  Drought, hail, and frosts are other hazards that 
significantly affect the economic performance of the country. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
5. Argentina is one of the world’s leading food exporters, enjoying vast farmlands and favorable natural 
conditions. Despite these advantages, the country’s agricultural sector is at a point of inflection. Over much of the past 
decade, the sector enjoyed high global prices but was buffeted by public policies that narrowed profit margins and 
stifled investment. The new administration made a major shift in taxes and regulation towards supporting economic 
incentives for development and investment, but global commodity prices have weakened over the past two years and 
prospects over the medium term are uncertain (World Bank, 2016). Lower commodity prices and slower growth in 
China, the major commodities consumer, seem to be here to stay.  Argentina and other major agricultural exporters face 
a difficult transition to a new equilibrium, a “new normal.” 

6. Despite a boom in global commodity prices, from 2002 to 2013 investment in agriculture/agribusiness fell and 
the rate of total factor productivity growth slowed compared to its neighbors. The Agriculture Production Index of the 
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) for Paraguay, Brazil and Uruguay was between 20 percent and 
30 percent higher than that of Argentina in 2013. This trend was closely associated with domestic policies that imposed 
export tariffs, quotas and exchange rate controls. In December 2015 the new administration eliminated most of the 
tariffs and quotas, unleashing new potential. Simulations that only look at the potential benefits from the removal and 
lowering of agricultural export tariffs and controls suggest a significant gain in both production and employment. By 
2019 grain and oilseed production may increase to 137 million tons, cattle stocks to 56.8 million head, and employment 
by 500,000 new jobs. 

7. While the sector prognosis is positive, there remain a number of important challenges that will determine the 
quality of sector growth and sustainability going forward. The main challenge the sector faces is the low and volatile 
productivity growth with a yield gap reaching 20 percent in selected crops. Dilapidating infrastructure and inadequate 
transportation and logistics networks further hurt the sector competitiveness, and can account as much as 35 percent of 
the total cost of a ton in the case of soy. Environmental degradation contributes further to significant losses, estimated 
to be in the range of 1 to 8 percent of GDP

7
. Because of these rising costs and accumulating underinvestment, export 

                                            
4
 Its Executive summary is available at: http://ambiente.gob.ar/wp-content/uploads/3Com.-Resumen-Ejecutivo-de-la-Tercera-

Comunicacion-Nacional.pdf  
5
 Caprioli (2010): Extreme Hydrologic Events in North Area of Buenos Aires Province (Argentina)  

6
  ‘Staying afloat: Flood Risk in Argentina’, Swiss-Re, 2016, 

http://media.swissre.com/documents/Swiss_Re_Argentina_Flood_Risk_Publ_long.PDF.  
7
 Country Environmental Analysis: https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/25775/109527-ENGLISH-PUBLIC-

ARG-CEA-Country-Environmental-Analysis-English.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y  

http://ambiente.gob.ar/wp-content/uploads/3Com.-Resumen-Ejecutivo-de-la-Tercera-Comunicacion-Nacional.pdf
http://ambiente.gob.ar/wp-content/uploads/3Com.-Resumen-Ejecutivo-de-la-Tercera-Comunicacion-Nacional.pdf
http://media.swissre.com/documents/Swiss_Re_Argentina_Flood_Risk_Publ_long.PDF
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/25775/109527-ENGLISH-PUBLIC-ARG-CEA-Country-Environmental-Analysis-English.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/25775/109527-ENGLISH-PUBLIC-ARG-CEA-Country-Environmental-Analysis-English.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y


 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 5 of 19  

     

product diversification equivalents fell from 2.1 to 1.7 from 1995 to 2009. Going forward, a key role for public policy will 
be to enable a conducive business environment (both for investments and cost competitiveness) as the private sector 
shifts gears from extensive to intensive production systems, and promote diversification towards higher price and value 
markets. 

8. Furthermore, given that agriculture is one of Argentina’s core economic activities, the country appears to be 
quite vulnerable to risks, in particular to more intense heat and extreme precipitation events.  Given the geographic 
extension of Argentina, the country faces a large set of natural hazards that have adverse economic impacts on a regular 
basis.  The hazards that are most reported to cause systemic losses in the agriculture sector are floods, extreme 
precipitation, droughts, hail, frosts and volcanic eruptions.  These macro and sector-level constraints and the sector risks 
outlined above have led to the Agriculture Sector of Argentina to show a drop in Total Factor Productivity (TFP) in 
relation to neighboring countries in recent years, as well as a drop in the adoption of agriculture technologies (see 
graphs below). These risks will likely intensify with rising climate variability and change.  

  
 
9. Agriculture production losses in Argentina during the past 20 years due to extreme weather events are 
estimated to amount to US$12 billion (current value)

8
.  Extreme losses

9
 in agriculture production between 1993/94 and 

2014/2015 have been estimated at US$8.7 billion for soy, US$2 billion for maize, US$860 million for wheat and US$493 
for sunflower.  The worse years in terms of agriculture production losses in the past two decades have been 2008/9 and 
2011/12 due to an extreme drought in the central “key” agriculture region (zona núcleo) of the country, which reached 
losses of more than US$9 billion.  Unfortunately, farmers in Argentina, especially family farmers, do not have access to 
financial instruments that would allow them to cover themselves against such systemic events.  Agriculture insurance in 
Argentina is concentrated on covering hail, with very few insurance policies being sold to cover for rainfall risks (excess 
rainfall, drought, and floods). 

10. Flood is the hazard that has caused the largest losses to the Argentinean economy historically.  It is 
estimated

10
 that the accumulated losses between 1950 and 2015 from the 10 worst floods were US$8.77 billion 

throughout the entire economy.  Many of these events have been linked to El Niño (ENSO) events, such as the floods of 
1982/83, 1992, 1997/1998, and 2015.  In relation to the most vulnerable areas, the La Plata Basin is one of the most 
affected given its level of exposure.  It is estimated that 80 percent of the Argentinean population lives in this basin, and 
it concentrates the main industrial (including agroindustrial) investments of the country. 

11. Within the Argentinean economy, the agriculture sector is the most susceptible to losses due to flooding.  In 
2000, for example, approximately 1.85 million hectares (4.5% of total cultivated area) were flooded due to extreme 
rainfall.  Losses to the sector amounted to US$187 million.  In 2001, a similar area was affected, producing losses of up 

                                            
8
 Agriculture Risk Management Policy Note for Argentina, World Bank, 2016. 

9
 By extreme we refer to deviations in yields of more than one standard deviation. 

10
 EM-DAT, 2016. 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 6 of 19  

     

to 70 percent of pastureland, a 15 percent drop in milk production, and between 50 and 60 percent drop in maize and 
wheat production, respectively

11
. 

12. The second most important hazard in terms of agriculture losses has been extreme drought.  The events of 
2005, and 2007-2009 have been very damaging for the livestock sector.  In 2009 the National Meteorological Service 
(SMN) reported that 90 percent of the national territory was under some type of drought situation; with the most 
severe droughts being recorded in the North of La Pampa and South of Buenos Aires and Cordoba Provinces

12
.  Because 

of these events, the number of cattle dropped considerably from 58.7 million in 2007 to 49.9 million in 2012 (15 
percent)

13
. 

13. Price volatility has also increased for international agriculture commodities since 2006/2007.  This has had a 
negative effect on Argentinean farmers.  From the beginning of the cropping seasons for grains (October), local prices in 
Argentina have had a tendency to drop until harvest, which highlights the need for Argentinean farmers to hedge their 
positions before planting.  Although Argentina has one of the oldest agriculture commodity exchanges globally, with 
futures and options for several grains, family farmers do not have access to such financial instruments to allow them to 
hedge against drastic price movements. 

14. Public policies and programs in Argentina that look towards the management of agriculture risks are 
concentrated in responding to agriculture emergencies.  This is quite different from other countries in the Region and 
other developed economies, which have a wider set of instruments and tools to manage agriculture sector risks in a 
more integrated fashion.  In Argentina, the main public policies and programs for agriculture risk management are in the 
area of agriculture emergency response, agroclimatic information systems (including price), and animal and plant health.  
From the private sector side, the main agriculture risk management instruments are the development and marketing of 
climate smart technologies (improved seeds, fertilizers, software and machinery, etc.), animal and plant health products, 
storage facilities, and agriculture insurance and commodity price derivatives.  

 
Relationship to CPF 
 
15. The project is fully aligned with the FY2015-18 World Bank Group’s Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 
Argentina. The CPS identifies maintaining Argentina’s position as one of the world’s top food providers through adapting 
to climate change and addressing the needs of small farmers as one of the country’s development challenges for 
sustained poverty reduction and shared prosperity. Argentina’s high potential in agriculture is at risk due to the 
increasing number of severe climate events such as droughts and floods.  

16. The CPS focuses on reducing poverty and promoting shared prosperity.
14

 It is organized around nine results 
areas within three broad strategic pillars. The proposed project is aligned with Strategic Pillars I--“Sustaining 
Employment Creation in Farms and Firms”--and III--“Reducing Environmental Risks and Safeguarding Natural 
Resources”. Additionally,  the proposed project is also aligned with the recently widened focus to unlock long-term 
productivity growth and job creation under Pilar I, in response to the reorientation of policies by the new 
Administration.

15
   The project would contribute strongly to “Raising agricultural productivity of small- and medium-size 

farms in low income regions” (Result Area 3 of the CPS). It may also support outcomes included in two other CPS result 
areas: “Reducing exposure to extreme flooding in the Province of Buenos Aires” (Result Area 7), and “Improving natural 

                                            
11

 Occhiuzzi and Mercuri, 2011.   
12

 Sousa, 2009.   
13

 FAOSTAT. 
14

 Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for the Argentine Republic for the period FY15-FY18 (Report No. 81361-AR). 
15

 Performance Learning Review (PLR) of the Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for the Argentine Republic for the period FY15-FY18 
(Report No. 11546-AR). 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 7 of 19  

     

forest cover in the Chaco Eco Region” through the development of an agriculture and climate change information 
system that facilitates producers’ access to climate-related data.  

17. This project builds on previous work in Argentina and in the region on the improvement of the management 
of agriculture risks.  The Bank has provided support to Argentina in 2016 through the development of an Agriculture 
Risk Management Policy Note (P156197) and a technical assistance program for building the institutional capacity for 
managing agriculture risks and preparing for ENSO events (P159720).  This project also builds on the information 
systems and farm-level climate resilience technology adoption experiences of the ongoing Project for Increasing Climate 
Resilience & Enhancing Sustainable Land Management in the Southwest of the Buenos Aires Province (P125804) funded 
by the Adaptation Fund and executed through the Ministry of Environment, and the study on “Agricultura y ganadería. 
Impacto y vulnerabilidad al cambio climático” (2015)

16
 funded by the GEF Argentina Third National Communication 

UNFCCC (P116974) project.  The project will also work alongside ongoing and future IFC advisory services and 
investments financing green technologies for agribusinesses in Argentina through commercial Banks.  Furthermore, the 
Bank has provided support to the Ministry of Agroindustry in the past years, helping in the design of agriculture risk 
transfer instruments for the livestock sector in Buenos Aires Province and cotton producers in Chaco Province.  Finally, 
this project is based on the Bank’s approach towards an integrated management of agriculture risks, promoting 
resilience and sector competitiveness, focusing on the most vulnerable farmers

17
. 

18. The project would contribute to poverty reduction by ensuring the inclusion of the most vulnerable farm 
households in the risk management strategies and subsequent activities, as these households tend to be among the 
poorest in the country. Reduction of agricultural output volatility and improvements in emergency response times 
would also benefit firms and employees along the value chains benefitting from project interventions, mitigating income 
shocks and variations, which disproportionately affect the poorest sectors of society, and thus contributing to shared 
prosperity. 

19. Climate change co-benefits. By increasing the resilience of the sector, the project would contribute to climate 
change adaptation. While the focus of agriculture risk reduction strategies and plans to be supported by the project is on 
retrospective risk, they will also consider climate change impacts.  Project investments in infrastructure and technology 
adoption can be considered as “no regrets”, given that key future climate change hazards would likely manifest through 
increased frequency and intensity of current trends.

18
 

20. Nutrition co-benefits. The Project is expected to contribute to improvements in food security by its focus on: (i) 
improved information for planning and response to production and climate-related hazards in agriculture; (ii) mitigation 
of risks of vulnerable small farmers, who depend on their output for daily sustenance; (iii) mitigation of risks in high-
value sub-sectors, which provide permanent and temporary employment to significant numbers of people up and 
downstream agriculture value chains; and (iv) improved recovery of agricultural systems and thus reduction of volatility 
of food prices, which affect disproportionately the poor, nationally and globally. 

 
 

                                            
16

 Full document can be found at: http://ambiente.gob.ar/tercera-comunicacion-nacional/   
17

 See Agriculture Sector Risk Assessment Methodology: 
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/586561467994685817/Agricultural-sector-risk-assessment-methodological-guidance-
for-practitioners  
18

 World Bank, Argentina, Cambio climático proyectado y su impacto en la agricultura 2050-2100, Policy Note, 2016. 

http://ambiente.gob.ar/tercera-comunicacion-nacional/
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/586561467994685817/Agricultural-sector-risk-assessment-methodological-guidance-for-practitioners
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/586561467994685817/Agricultural-sector-risk-assessment-methodological-guidance-for-practitioners


 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 8 of 19  

     

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

 
 
The objective of the project is to contribute to strengthen resilience of the agroindustrial sector, particularly among 
the most vulnerable producers. This objective will be achieved through reduction of producers' vulnerability and 
exposure to climatic and market risk. 

 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
i. Adoption of technologies and/or instruments for increased resilience (measured by number, type and gender 

of farmers; and area that has adopted production/market resilient technologies/instruments). [CORE SD 
INDICATOR: Farmers adopting improved agricultural technology] 

ii. Number of farmers (and/or area cultivated) that are part of an improved agriculture emergency system, by 
type of farmer and segregated by gender. [ CORE SD INDICATOR: Farmers reached with agricultural assets or 
services] 

iii. Number of Provinces that have adopted an integrated agriculture risk management plan. 
iv. Number of farmers participating in international value chains, among beneficiaries, by type and gender.

19
 

 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
21. Beneficiaries. The project will have as direct beneficiaries the most vulnerable small and medium-sized 
agricultural producers and small and medium-sized agricultural enterprises, located in the provinces where activities are 
carried out. It would reach about 70,000 small and medium producers and a number (TBD) of small and medium 
agribusiness firms. Small and medium farms, in particular those outside the main cereal production zones, are among 
the most vulnerable and have the lowest capacity to recover from negative impacts caused by external factors like 
extreme weather or market shocks. Small and medium-sized farmers conform mostly family-based units. Agriculture 
plays a varied role in these households, mostly depending on size and location, along a continuum of situations. 
Agriculture in small farms in marginal areas may function as a safety-net, part of a set of multiple activities in their 
livelihood strategies (close to 70 percent of the family members also work outside the farm, in other farms or sectors

20
). 

Many medium farms are well-integrated into markets, deploying advanced agriculture techniques and using wage labor.  

22. Gender. Women occupy a variety of roles in this continuum, from farm management to farm workers and are 
slightly over-represented in the smallest farms’ workforce. There are important gaps related to gender equality in the 
agroindustrial sector, though data is scant. Migration from poor rural areas may disproportionally affect both single and 
married women. Nevertheless, some young women are changing this trend by deciding to stay in rural areas in order to 
develop opportunities for themselves. Project preparation will explore gender aspects of vulnerability in order to 
determine if there is a need for specific support to women’s livelihood strategies. 

                                            
19

 This indicator would be included if project design incorporates financing for export diversification, to reduce market risks and in 
line with Argentina’s policy to  become one of the world’s “supermarkets”. 
20

 Edith Scheikerman de Obschatko et al.,Los pequeños productores en la república Argentina, PROINDER-SAGPyA/IICA, 2007. Up to 
date information on small and medium-sized producers is scant. The latest agricultural census was carried out in 2002. Argentina 
does not include rural areas and small towns, about 30 percent of the total population, in its regular household survey e ither. 

Note to Task Teams: The PDO has been pre-populated from the datasheet for the first time for your convenience. 
Please keep it up to date whenever it is changed in the datasheet. 

 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 9 of 19  

     

23. Indirect beneficiaries. Contractors (firms and employees) who provide services to farmers and whose income 
often collapses when disaster strikes agriculture production; firms and their employees, up- and downstream the 
agriculture value chains, who depend on reliable supplies of agricultural products; provincial governments, which 
allocate scarce public funds to attending emergencies and whose revenues suffer when these occur in their jurisdictions. 
In addition, the project will strengthen the institutions responsible for generating and disseminating critical information 
for risk management and the offices responsible for managing responses to agricultural emergencies. 

24. Integrated framework for managing agriculture risks. The implementation of the framework implies a balance 
between existing public policies and programs, available public resources, and existing private sector technologies and 
instruments.  It also requires the development of a robust institutional structure to ensure policy and program 
integration and clear communications across various sector stakeholders.  Interinstitutional coordination to reduce 
response times after an event, improving targeting of risk management programs to the most vulnerable population and 
changing the risk management paradigm from an ex post to an ex ante system are key issues to be tackled by the 
proposed operation.  Thus, this project seeks to provide the public sector with the capacity and strategies for managing 
agriculture sector risks in an integrated fashion, increasing the resilience of the most vulnerable farmers while improving 
the effectiveness and efficiency of public spending.  

25. Components.  In order to contribute to implementing an integrated approach to risk management, the project is 
divided into three components that have been identified as the key areas of improvement within the existing public 
sector policies and programs in Argentina. Component 1 focuses on the provision of agroclimatic information (public 
service) for the management of agriculture risks, while components 2 and 3 focus on bringing integrated management of 
agriculture risks at the farm level, addressing different agriculture risk layers with different risk management strategies 
(risk mitigation, transfer and coping – see risk layering figure below). 

 

 
 
 

26. Component 1 - Strengthening agro-climatic information systems (approximate cost USD 15 million, of which 
80% from the Bank). Despite the fact that the GoA has made important progress in facilitating access of agro-climatic 
information and commodity prices for agriculture risk management purposes, there remain important limitations – 
technical and financial – that hinder sustained cooperation among government institutions, and the use of data by the 
private sector and the public. For instance and despite the existence of cooperation agreements among institutions that 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 10 of 19  

     

generate data, heterogeneity of IT infrastructure and information systems still impedes coordination and cooperation. 
These constraints make it difficult to carry out risk monitoring and risk analyses in a timely manner. 

27. Based on an approach that intends to leverage public funds with private assets and participation, the 
component would finance improvements in capacity and interoperability of agroclimatic and price information systems 
operated or disseminated by the Ministry of Agroindustry (MAI) and other selected public and private entities linked to 
the agriculture sector. An example of this is the work being done to standardize and disseminate the agroclimatic data 
collected by private networks of meteorological stations with the ones of the National Meteorological Service (SMN) and 
of the National Agriculture Technology Institute (INTA).  Another example is the ongoing development of an information 
system that collects and publishes real-time spot prices of basic grains (Operations Information Systems for Grains

21
), 

which is a joint effort between MAI and the Agriculture Commodity Exchanges of Argentina. It would also improve the 
institutional capacity of selected institutions to analyze georeferenced data. The component would finance goods, 
training, consultant services and operational costs for the development or enhancement of agro-ecological data and 
information management systems. The project would also allocate resources to promote private- and public-sector 
development and implementation of IT systems and software solutions that improve access to agro-industrial 
information and enhance the assessment of agricultural risks associated with climate variability, climate change, and 
market price fluctuations. The key expected results from this component are: (i) a well-functioning early-warning system 
for the main hazards that affect agricultural value chains

22
; and (ii) a reliable and easily accessible system for the 

provision of production, price and meteorological information to the public. 

28. Subcomponent 1.1. Development of Tools and Systems. The purpose of this subcomponent is to consolidate 
and integrate production, price and meteorological information generated by a variety of public and private institutions. 
It envisages financing for the following activities: 

a. diagnostic of sector ICT capacities and systems;  
b. diagnostic of existing capacity for generation, transmission, maintenance, quality assurance and security 

of information;  
c. design and implementation of the infrastructure for provision of agro-industrial agro-climatic data, 

including systems for downloading, analyzing, visualizing and consulting data and information;  
d. design of protocols, standards and operation and maintenance manuals for supported tools and 

systems;  
e. integration and strengthening of key price and meteorological networks and data;  
f. development of historical synthetic data series for agroclimatic variables for probabilistic analysis; and 
g. strengthening of provincial and regional spatial data infrastructure selected on the basis of information 

gaps. 

                                            
21

 The real time price information system can be accessed at: www.siogranos.com.ar.  This information system received technical 
assistance from the World Bank in 2015 for its development and it is a unified system for the purchase and sale of grains that make 
up the Physical Market ("disponible", "cash", "forwards" a fijar "," directas ", etc.) and that arises according to the estab lished in the 
CNV - SAGyP Joint Resolution Nº 208 and 628. This system has been developed by the Cereal Stocks exchanges of Bahía Blanca, 
Buenos Aires, Córdoba and Entre Ríos, and the Stock Exchanges of Chaco, Rosario and Santa Fe, the Mercado a Término de Buenos 
Aires SA (MATba) and the Mercado a Término de Rosario S.A. (ROFEX). The products on which the aforementioned operations are to 
be reported are: wheat, corn, sunflower, soybean, soybean oil, forage barley and sorghum. The aim of the joint action is to improve 
transparency in the physical grain market and, in particular, to promote the link between the quality and the price of the products 
traded. 
22

 An example is the linkage and coordination with the Information and Early Warning System (IEWS) established under our 
Argentina Adaptation Fund: Increasing Climate Resilience & Enhancing Sustainable Land Management in the Southwest of the 
Buenos Aires Province (P125804) and coordinated between National Agriculture Technology Institute (INTA) and the National 
Meteorological Service (SMN). 

http://www.siogranos.com.ar/


 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 11 of 19  

     

 
 
29. Subcomponent 1.2. Institutional Capacity Development. This subcomponent aims at building the capacity of 
selected national and provincial government institutions for the operation of the supported information systems.  It 
would also promote the development of software solutions by the private sector, based on the data generated by the 
improved systems. This subcomponent would finance the following activities: 

a. hardware, software and training required for effective operation of selected national, provincial and 
decentralized entities; 

b. promotion and dissemination of visualization, consultation, analysis and data download tools developed 
by MAI, under an open data approach for private sector developers and use by other institutions; 

c. training of government staff and potential software developers in data management and information for 
agricultural risk management; and 

d. technical assistance for the design of market price references, agro-meteorological indexes and event 
impact analysis. 

 
30. Component 2 – Agriculture risk mitigation investments (approximate cost USD 125 million, of which 80% from 
the Bank). The purpose of the component would be to improve the resilience of agricultural systems prioritized through 
regional-level (inter-provincial) agriculture value-chain risk strategies and provincial-level integrated agriculture sector 
risk-management plans. The component would finance: (i) Rural public Infrastructure works; (ii) Afforestation, 
reforestation and watershed management to protect water sources, reduce flood risks, and as a basis to encourage the 
adoption of good practices and climate smart technologies; and (iii) incentives for the adoption of climate-smart 
agriculture technology and risk management instruments at the farm-level.  These would be financed through two 
subcomponents: 

 
31. Subcomponent 2.1. Infrastructure and natural resources management. This subcomponent aims to reduce the 
impact of climate and production risks events at the sub-regional level, as prioritized by risk management instruments. It 
would finance on-lending to provinces for the execution of risk mitigation subprojects (combinations of works, goods, 
consulting and non-consulting services, and operational costs) for:  

a. water for agriculture, including activities destined to capture, collect, store, distribute and use of water for 
agricultural production, as well as improvement in the efficiency in use of water (construction, rehabilitation and 
improvement of irrigation, micro-irrigation, surface and subterranean storage); 

b. natural resources management, including watershed management, drainage, forestation, reforestation and 
protection and recovery of forest, soil and water resources; 

c. other activities (to be defined) that may be prioritized in the risk management plans and which have 
demonstrated impacts on risk reduction. 

 
32. Subcomponent 2.2. Technical assistance to vulnerable producers. The purpose of this subcomponent is to 
promote the farm-level adoption of validated technologies to improve resilience of agricultural production systems. It 
may be deployed in combination with activities financed through subcomponent 2.2., or as standalone programs, all 
within approved risk management plans. The subcomponent would finance training and technical assistance services to 
farmer and farmer groups to:  

a. facilitate the adoption of good practices and climate smart production and storage technologies;  
b. improve the efficiency and sustainable operation of existing or new infrastructure; and 
c. facilitate access and use of agriculture insurance and price hedging instruments, and improve knowledge and 

purchase of such financial risk transfer instruments. 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 12 of 19  

     

 
33. The subcomponent may also finance: (i) applied research, piloting and dissemination of promising but un-tested 
climate-smart technologies; (ii) research, piloting and dissemination for technological diversification (e.g. marine and 
aquaculture, agroforestry systems); and (iii) support for the implementation of certification and traceability systems (e.g. 
country-level value chains of global importance). 

34. The project would explore the provision of incentives through financial institutions (such as partial credit 
guarantees, credit lines, etc.) and/or matching grants for poor and vulnerable farmers whenever a public goods element 
is envisaged (effectiveness of regional works, food safety, human nutrition or food security, climate change adaptation 
or mitigation, demonstration effects, etc.), or to mitigate a market failure.  

35. The Project may also work on market risk with a long-term view, and at a high level, supporting a set of (inter-
ministerial) policies and interventions, as well as to their coordination, which aim to reduce Argentina’s heavy 
dependence on undiversified and basic commodity exports, and make Argentinian agriculture more competitive in the 
world stage. This is in line with the Government’s vision to make Argentina the “supermarket of the world”. To this end, 
the Project would support and scale up existing and new measures that aim to improve value-addition, and 
diversify/differentiate exports and markets in agriculture/agribusiness. It would finance, among others, technical 
assistance programs on marketing and standard development, and other private sector development initiatives, to 
accelerate productivity growth and global integration in a strategic set of agricultural value-chains. 

 
36. Component 3 – Agriculture Emergency Response Financing (approximate cost USD 37 million, of which 80% 
from Bank). This component aims to improve the operation of the current agricultural emergency system enacted by 
Law  26.509 (of 2009), in order to increase coverage for vulnerable producers.  This Agriculture Emergency Law (AEL) 
provides the main response mechanism that assists the agricultural sector against extreme events. Nevertheless, the 
National Emergency and Disaster Agricultural Fund, constituted through the AEL, lacks enough resources to implement 
risk preparedness, mitigation and response activities. The AEL does not provide a clear distinction of roles and 
responsibilities between federal and provincial governments in the aftermath of an extreme event, and all farmers are 
entitled to receive the same benefits, irrespective of their characteristics. Allocation of benefits is not governed by clear 
rules and the system lacks transparency.  Most AEL benefits are not able to be used by family farmers because they are 
linked to cancelation or delays in the repayment of formal bank loans, and since most family farmers to do not have 
access to formal credit, they are de facto excluded from this support, although they are the most affected by natural 
disasters. 

37. The component would work in two directions: (i) improving the efficiency, equity and transparency of the 
agriculture emergency system; and (ii) introducing risk mitigation and risk transfer instruments to improve the financial 
sustainability of the agriculture emergency systems, in particular in terms of climate-related events.   The project will 
also improve provincial institutional capacities for the management of agriculture emergencies, promoting the use of a 
more integrated risk financing structure. At the national level, it would support the design, implementation and 
purchase of risk financing instruments (credits, guarantees, insurance, derivatives, etc.) in a pari passu modality with 
selected provincial governments.  The component would finance the following activities: 

a. Technical assistance for MAI’s Agricultural Emergency Subsecretariat in order to strengthen the systems for 
decision making, benefit allocation, and registry and monitoring of beneficiaries; 

b. Development of aggregate (provincial or regional-level) agriculture risk financing instruments (parametric 
insurance, catastrophe bonds, contingent lines of credit, weather derivatives, etc.), as well as training and 
technical assistance for their validation and adoption; and  

c. Payment of premiums and related costs of agriculture risk financing instruments to be piloted under the 
framework of the system of agricultural emergency, on the basis of national and/or provincial demands. 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 13 of 19  

     

38. The component may also include support for the design of instruments for price risk transfer for agricultural 
commodities and risks that are covered by current private sector agents. It may also provide support to build capacities 
in the public and private sectors for agricultural risk valuation and analysis. 

 
39. Component 4-- Project coordination, monitoring and evaluation (approximate cost USD 10 million, of which 
80% from the Bank). Provision of support to MAI, through its Rural Change Unit (UCAR), for carrying out: (a) project 
coordination and management; (b) monitoring, results evaluation and impact assessment of project activities; (c) project 
fiduciary administration, internal controls and audits; (d) project environmental and social risk/safeguards management; 
(e) a citizen’s engagement mechanism; and (vii) project-related studies. 

 
 

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
Specific subprojects to be financed under component 2 to strengthen resilience of the agricultural sector will not be 

identified before the project appraisal, and therefore their specific locations and environmental and social conditions are 
not known at the moment. While the project is national in scope, the natural environments of the Argentine provinces 
are very varied, including high diversity of ecosystems ranging from forests to desert and the Andes Mountains. The 
respective social and productive contexts are also diverse, the producer groups varying from large producers to 
subsistence farmers. Due to the national scope of the project, the project addresses potential presence of Indigenous 
Peoples. 
 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The implementing agency will be the Ministry of Agroindustry (MAI), through the Rural Change Unit (Unidad para el 

Cambio Rural-UCAR). The project’s environmental and social risk and safeguards management will be responsibility of 
UCAR’s Environmental and Social Unit, and previous experience has allowed it to enhance its capacity to streamline 
safeguards implementation and monitoring. However, beyond UCAR with previous experience with Bank-financed 
agriculture development projects and its strong commitment and active involvement during implementation of said 
operations, the project’s decentralized implementation approach will involve a number of provinces with uneven 
institutional capacities and diverse regulations, including limited resources to implement the required safeguards 
procedures. Further, despite of UCAR’s wide experience, it has recently faced some challenges regarding implementation 
of OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, in particular when addressing existing gaps between national and provincial 
regulatory and institutional frameworks and the OP 4.12 requirements. In conclusion, there is room for safeguards 
related capacity building. UCAR’s and the responsible provincial agencies’ institutional capacity needs will be assessed in 
detail as the project preparation proceeds and the identified actions included in the project design. 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
Lilian Pedersen, Tuuli Johanna Bernardini, Claudio Luis Daniele, German Nicolas Freire 

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 
 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 14 of 19  

     

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project will implement an integrated framework 
for managing agriculture risks, including a diverse set 
of investments. It aims to have an overall highly 
positive socioeconomic and environmental impact, 
including improvements in watershed management, 
reforestation, and application of climatic information 
systems to facilitate agricultural production planning 
and decrease climate related income loss. OP/BP 4.01 
is triggered as the physical interventions/subprojects 
under component 2 could have negative 
environmental impacts in case not properly managed. 
However, the majority of project activities are 
expected to have low to moderate impacts that can be 
prevented or mitigated. In socioeconomic terms, 
positive impacts are expected in terms of 
improvement of existing public infrastructure e.g. on 
irrigation.  
 
Negative cumulative impacts are not expected as all 
activities will be implemented in areas already under 
agricultural production. Further, the project will 
promote good environmental practices as a means to 
improved management of agricultural risks and thus 
reduction of producers' vulnerability through exposure 
to climatic and market risks. The project will also 
finance activities to avoid or restore land degradation 
in adjacent watersheds. 
 
As the subprojects will only be defined during project 
implementation, the project requires an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) that UCAR will prepare, including a framework 
level Environmental and Social Management Plan 
(ESMP). The ESMF will guide identification and 
adoption of measures to mitigate environmental and 
social impacts and good practices to create 
environmental and social value added. The ESMF will 
be structured to prevent, minimize and mitigate 
impacts on forests, water resources, worker and 
community health and safety, as well as public 
infrastructure and services. The ESMF will reference 
the relevant sections of the World Bank Group General 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 15 of 19  

     

Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines e.g. 
on annual crop production, perennial crops and 
related water consumption and management. 
 
As part of the ESMF preparation, UCAR will prepare a 
Social Assessment (SA) that will focus on the analysis 
of the situation of small and medium, indigenous and 
female farmers; in general those that are primarily 
linked to regional economies and thus the most 
vulnerable against climate related risks and with the 
lowest capacity to recover from negative impacts 
caused by external factors like extreme weather or 
market shocks. The scope of the SA will include 
indigenous communities/farmers in order to assess 
whether there are specific challenges they face to 
recover from negative impacts. 
 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes 

The project will develop capacity of national and local 
institutions for effective environmental planning and 
management in relation to climatic risks and improved 
land use practices. Even though all the productive 
activities financed by the project will be implemented 
in areas already under agricultural production, OP/BP 
4.04 is triggered for precautionary purposes as 
watershed management and flood control 
investments financed by the project may require 
restoration activities e.g. on buffer or adjacent zones 
to protected areas. If such situation is identified at the 
subproject screening stage, the ESMF will require 
identification of support activities to strengthen the 
associated management instruments/practices. 
Triggering OP/BP 4.04 will secure the project is able to 
implement potential restoration activities related to 
any type of natural habitat. The ESMF will include a 
negative list that will exclude any investment that 
might impact negatively any type of natural habitat. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 Yes 

OP/BP 4.36 is triggered as project is expected to 
finance forestation, reforestation, and protection and 
recovery of forests, particularly as part of watershed 
management. Only investments with positive impacts 
on forests and/or people dependent on forests will be 
eligible. The project will not intervene in the forest 
value chain. As component 2 will promote 
diversification of agricultural production and finance 
climate-smart technologies (e.g. agroforestry systems 
and agro-silvo-pastoral models), the project is 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 16 of 19  

     

expected to contribute to reducing pressure on forests 
and favor their management and conservation efforts. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will finance subprojects in agricultural 
systems that may require use of agrochemicals. By 
project appraisal, a list of agriculture innovations to be 
promoted by the project will be prepared, and some 
of them will most probably include use of agro-
chemicals. Additional technologies might be 
incorporated later on, and support is also envisioned 
to agricultural technology research that may involve 
agrochemicals. In every case, the policy will be applied 
using a negative list on prohibited substances and 
promoting integrated pest management. 
 
The ESMF will guide related screening and preparation 
of an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) for 
each subproject that may require use of 
agrochemicals, including proper management of any 
chemical waste. 
 
A positive list will be prepared to identify relevant 
natural/organic and low toxic pesticides and 
herbicides. Related training and capacity building 
activities will be included in the ESMF. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes 

Project implementation is not expected to have any 
negative impact on identified physical cultural 
resources. However, the OP/BP 4.11 is triggered for 
precautionary purposes. The ESMF will provide 
guidance to address potential chance finds during 
implementation of construction activities and soil 
excavation. The Environmental and Social Unit of 
UCAR has proven experience and appropriate 
procedures in place to address chance finds, aligned 
with Argentina’s well-developed legislative framework 
on the subject. The ESMF will also include reference to 
further guidance in case any subproject would relate 
to landscapes with historical/cultural significance, yet 
that is not envisioned at least at the PCN stage. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

The project will trigger OP 4.10 due to its national 
scope. Indigenous peoples are present in Argentina 
(about 2.5 percent of the population), and the income 
of several indigenous communities is linked to 
agriculture. As part of the preparation of the social 
assessment, UCAR will prepare an Indigenous Peoples 
Planning Framework (IPPF) to ensure that: (i) 
indigenous peoples' groups are afforded opportunities 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 17 of 19  

     

to participate in planning of project activities that 
affects them; (ii) opportunities to provide such groups 
with culturally appropriate benefits are considered; 
and (iii) any subproject that could have a negative 
impact on indigenous peoples will not be eligible for 
project funding, or otherwise minimized and 
mitigated. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

The project will trigger OP 4.12 since it includes 
infrastructure works that may imply either physical or 
economic displacement of people and/or business in 
the project area (e.g. activities like irrigation, and flood 
risk reduction may imply involuntary resettlement). 
UCAR will prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework 
(RPF) that will guide the preparation of specific 
Resettlement Action Plans (RAP), as required. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

The Project will not finance building of any large dam. 
However, OP/BP 4.37 is triggered as it is possible that 
irrigation or water supply may rely on performance of 
an existing dam. The ESMF will guide, when needed, 
the applicable review and evaluation of the operation 
and maintenance procedures of the relevant existing 
dam and presentation of the related report. Said 
report will include findings and recommendations for 
any remedial work or safety measures that, if needed, 
will have to be undertaken before the start of 
operations on the relevant subproject.  
 
Similar procedures have been in use and proven 
satisfactory during the implementation of other Bank-
funded projects with UCAR (e.g.  Second Provincial 
Agricultural Development Project - P106684). UCAR 
has signed an agreement with ORSEP, the Argentine 
Dam Safety Regulatory Agency, which will ensure 
proper dam safety supervision when needed. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

TBD 

The project is not expected to finance activities that 
could adversely affect other riparians, particularly as 
most of them would be upstream. The project will not 
finance large dams, and potential irrigation projects 
are expected to relate with ongoing and/or minor 
schemes that (i) will not adversely change the quality 
or quantity of water flows to the other riparians; and 
(ii) will not be adversely affected by the other 
riparians' possible water use. Triggering and 
addressing of OP/BP 7.50 will be analyzed in further 
detail with UCAR and the World Bank legal specialists 
as the project preparation proceeds. 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 18 of 19  

     

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
OP 7.60 is not triggered as the Project will not finance 
activities in disputed areas as defined in the policy. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Jul 31, 2017 
 

Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
UCAR will prepare, consult and disclose the ESMF, SA, IPPF and RPF with support and respective approvals by the World 

Bank by the project appraisal that is currently scheduled for August 22, 2017. The ESMF will be prepared based on the 
ESMFs of UCAR's earlier projects with World Bank financing, including improvements and adjustments/additions in terms 
of related lessons learnt and the particular features of this new operation, particularly in terms of climate-smart practices. 
 
The criteria and methodology to be used to select project beneficiaries with focus on the most vulnerable producers, as 

well as the mechanisms to be used for project related consultations and grievances will be discussed with UCAR as the 
project preparation proceeds. 
 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

World Bank 

David Tuchschneider, Diego Arias Carballo 

Senior Rural Development Specialist 
 

 

Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Argentine Republic, Ministry of Finance 

 

 

 
 

 

Implementing Agencies 
 

Ministry of Agroindustry 

Alejandro Gennari 

Director of UCAR 

agennari@ucar.gob.ar 
 
 



 
The World Bank  
Integrated Management of Agricultural Risk (P162316) 

 
 

  
Apr 02, 2017 Page 19 of 19  

     

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

Task Team Leader(s): David Tuchschneider, Diego Arias Carballo 
 

  Approved By 
APPROVALTBL 

Practice Manager/Manager: Garry Charlier 30-Apr-2017 

Country Director: Renato Nardello 12-May-2017 
    

 
 

 
 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects

















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Responding to COVID-19: Modern and Resilient Agri-food Value Chains (P173480) 

 
 

  
Jun 01, 2020 Page 1 of 10  

     

 
 
 
      

 

Project Information Document (PID) 
 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 09-Jun-2020 | Report No: PIDA29373 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 

The World Bank  
Responding to COVID-19: Modern and Resilient Agri-food Value Chains (P173480) 

 

 

  
Jun 01, 2020 Page 2 of 10  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Guatemala P173480 Responding to COVID-19: 
Modern and Resilient 
Agri-food Value Chains 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

LATIN AMERICA AND CARIBBEAN 09-Jun-2020 20-Aug-2020 Agriculture and Food 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance 
Guatemala (MINFIN) 

Ministry of Economy 
Guatemala (MINECO) 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The PDO is to contribute to reducing food losses, increasing adoption of climate resilient technologies and providing 
emergency response to COVID-19 to beneficiaries in select value chains 

 
Components 

Component 1: Emergency Response to COVID-19 impacts on agro-industrial economic activities 
Component 2: Investments to Enhance MSMEs Efficiency and Resiliency 
Component 3: Institutional strengthening in support of Guatemala’s agri-food system 
Component 4. Monitoring, Evaluation and Project Management 
Component 5: Contingency Emergency Response (CERC) 

 
OPS_TABLE_FCC The processing of this project is applying the policy requirements exceptions for situations of urgent need of 
assistance or capacity constraints that are outlined in OP 10.00, paragraph 12.     
Yes 

 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 211.00 

Total Financing 211.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 150.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 



 

The World Bank  
Responding to COVID-19: Modern and Resilient Agri-food Value Chains (P173480) 

 

 

  
Jun 01, 2020 Page 3 of 10  

 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 150.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Counterpart Funding 50.00 

          Local Beneficiaries 50.00 

     Other Sources 11.00 

          International Fund for Agriculture Development 11.00 

    

Environmental and Social Risk Classification 

Substantial 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 



 

The World Bank  
Responding to COVID-19: Modern and Resilient Agri-food Value Chains (P173480) 

 

 

  
Jun 01, 2020 Page 4 of 10  

 

B. Introduction and Context 
Country Context 
 
1. Despite a stable macroeconomic framework, Guatemala struggles with low rates of economic growth and 
high poverty compared to its neighbors. Measured by per capita Gross Domestic Product (GDP), Guatemala is the fifth 
poorest economy of Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) and remains one of the region’s countries with the highest 
rates of social and economic exclusion. GDP growth averaged only 3.3 percent over 2015-2018, with real GDP per 
capita growth stagnating and falling behind its Central America peers over the same period. Guatemala’s ability to 
provide basic public services and respond to changing conditions and demands is hampered by low collection of taxes 
by the Central Government (tax revenues are close to 10 percent of GDP) and highly rigid expenditures, as well as 
significant gaps in knowledge and job skills. For example, around two-thirds of Guatemalan children at late primary age 
today do not possess basic literacy skills.  
 
2. Poverty, inequality, and rurality are high and persistent.  Guatemala has one of the highest poverty rates in 
LAC, and deep inequality persist across various dimensions. In 2014, an estimated 60 percent of the total population 
of 17 million was estimated to live in poverty, up from 55 percent in 2000. Almost 80 percent of Indigenous people  
live in poverty (2014), and 50 percent live in extreme poverty. Income inequality is high, and the Gini coefficient rating 
stood at 0.49 in 2014. Vulnerability is particularly high among the Indigenous peoples, with almost 80 percent living in 
poverty in 2014, and half in extreme poverty. In 2017, about 48 percent of the total population was estimated to live 
in rural areas, where poverty is significantly higher (76 percent) than in urban areas (42 percent). Assessing more recent 
changes in poverty and inequality is difficult, due to the scarce availability of socio-economic data (Guatemala has had 
the second-lowest number of household surveys available in the region (after Haiti), in the period since 2000). 
However, qualitative evidence, available data and recent developments, do not point to progress on these metrics.  
 
3. Guatemala is among the highest rates in the Gender Inequality Index and has the lowest rate of female labor 
force participation in Latin America and the Caribbean. Many indicators of women’s economic opportunities have not 
improved since 2000 and are worse than the average in LAC and similar countries. Only 4 out of 10 women are in the 
labor force, less than half the corresponding rate of men. Similarly, female youth unemployment is almost twice that 
of men. Women are at a disadvantage with respect to their male counterparts also in terms of technical and soft skills, 
as well as business opportunities and access to information, technology, and markets for inputs and outputs – all of 
which translate into lower income levels. In terms of Gender-Based Violence (GBV), Guatemala registers one of the 
highest rates of violent deaths among women in the world: 6.4 in 100,000 in 2018, almost 5 times the global rate. An 
estimated 628 women lost their lives to violence in 2018, almost two deaths per day. Lack of education, inclusion, and 
gender inequality are among the most relevant triggers of GBV.  

 
4. Guatemala has the sixth highest rate of chronic malnutrition in the world and the highest in LAC, with 
Indigenous and rural populations disproportionately affected. In 2019, Guatemala ranked 68th in food security out of 
113 countries, with only 40 percent of Guatemalan families enjoying food security. Some 77 percent of families have a 
poor or inadequate diet, characterized by high consumption of cereals (maize) and low consumption of foods of animal 
origin, fruits, and vegetables. Chronic child malnutrition (stunting) is very high according to the World Health 
Organization (WHO), affecting 47 percent of all Guatemalan children under five, 58 percent of Indigenous children, and 
66 percent of children in the lowest income quintile. On the opposite side of the spectrum, overweight and obesity are 
on the rise, affecting over 50 percent of the adult population. 

 
5. Guatemala is extremely affected by climate and weather events and its poorer populations are particularly 
vulnerable. Guatemala is the ninth most at risk country worldwide from climate change. By 2050, economic losses 



 

The World Bank  
Responding to COVID-19: Modern and Resilient Agri-food Value Chains (P173480) 

 

 

  
Jun 01, 2020 Page 5 of 10  

 

from drought, flooding, and other extreme weather events are projected to reduce GDP by between 1.3 percent and 
3.7 percent. On the other hand, Guatemala's contribution to global Green House Gas (GHG) emissions is low compared 
to other countries: in 2011 the country emitted 3.4 tCO2e/capita (half of the average per capita emissions of LAC).  
Agriculture is one of the strategic sectors for climate change mitigation and adaptation goals under Guatemala’s 
Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC). 

 
6. On March 11, 2020, the WHO declared the novel coronavirus (COVID-19) outbreak a pandemic. and the 
impacts on Guatemala are expected to be severe. The economic impacts of the disease outbreak are envisaged to 
lead to a significant decline in GDP in 2020, and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has revised the country’s 
economic growth projections for 2020 to negative 2 percent.  Impacts are starting to be felt mainly through reductions 
in exports and tourism, and through reduced remittances (12 percent of GDP in 2018). The COVID-19 outbreak will 
have significant effects on the external accounts, inflation, and government balances, with expected higher financing 
needs and public deficit. On March 18, 2020, in preparation for the spread of COVID-19 in Guatemala, the Government 
launched the “National Program for Emergency and Economic Recovery” to respond to the crisis. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

7. Agriculture plays a significant role in Guatemala’s economic performance and employment. Primary agriculture 
accounts for about 10 percent of the country’s GDP with a significant multiplier when accounting for the full backward 
and forward linkages in the agri-food system and employs around 30 percent of the population. In 2015, the broader 
food sector represented 45 percent of the country’s total merchandise exports. Secondary processing activities also 
create opportunities for job creation and diversification of local production. Market-linkage programs in the sub-sectors 
of vegetable and fruit preparation for exports have in some cases, proven particularly beneficial for small-scale 
organized producers. 
 
8. Limited market access and inefficient value addition/preservation capacity and lack of market information 
result in low productivity and variable sales and incomes, for Guatemala’s micro, small and medium agro-industrial 
enterprises and small producers.  Within the domestic markets, smaller producers and SME agribusinesses face a 
number of challenges. Limited market transparency, lack of investment in on-farm and post-harvest technologies and 
other logistical market-access barriers lead to an abundance of middlemen, who capture a large portion of the value 
of any transaction. In addition, the quality of infrastructure varies greatly across Guatemala, which exacerbates regional 
income inequality, particularly between urban and rural areas. This also has severe impacts on access to agricultural 
markets, including contributing to high food losses (on-farm and throughout the VC and affecting food quality and 
safety.  

 

9. In particular, the Guatemalan agri-food sector faces the challenge of substantial post-harvest food losses, due 
to insufficient investment in storage facilities, limited market information and low uptake of good post-harvest 
practices.  According to the United Nations Environment Programme, 52,000 tons of post-harvest food is lost or wasted 
annually in Guatemala. More than 35 percent of beans and maize are spoiled due to poor harvest management, pests 
and animals, salmonella and aflatoxins. In addition, lack of information about market location and prices leads to high 
levels of food loss at the farm level and additional upstream loss in the value chain. Food Loss and Waste (FLW) also 
significantly contributes to GHG emissions 

 

10. To build toward its anti-poverty and growth potential as part of the new Government’s “economic wall of 
opportunities,” the agri-food system must improve significantly its productive and post-harvest efficiency while 
mitigating the deleterious impacts of the recent COVID-19 pandemic. COVID-19 is expected to impact in 



 

The World Bank  
Responding to COVID-19: Modern and Resilient Agri-food Value Chains (P173480) 

 

 

  
Jun 01, 2020 Page 6 of 10  

 

unprecedented ways the productivity and food security of producers and consumers within Guatemala’s food systems, 
as well as agri-food exports. While the sector has clear potential for continued expansion and diversification in export 
and domestic markets, the urgent challenge related to COVID-19 threatens producers, agribusiness micro-, small- and 
medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), other supply chain actors, markets, and domestic and international demand. To 
improve access to markets and build resilience in the system, especially given the current dual health and economic 
emergencies, the proposed Project offers an opportunity to make investments that contribute to strengthening and 
improving efficiency in productive and post-harvest capacity, and to promoting food safety, food quality, 
competitiveness and broader resilience considerations. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The project development objective (PDO) is to contribute to reducing food losses, increasing adoption of climate resilient 
technologies and providing emergency response to COVID-19 to beneficiaries in select value chains 
 

Key Results 

 

Reducing Food Losses 
• Reduction of food losses in selected value chains (as a percentage of total production)   

• Reduction of products rejected due to food safety received by buyers in selected value chains (as a 
percentage share of baseline).   

Increasing adoption of climate 
resilient technologies  

• Beneficiaries adopting improved agricultural technologies promoted by the Project to enhance climate 
resiliency, disaggregated by gender and ethnicity (number)  

• Beneficiaries demonstrating an improvement in empowerment  disaggregated by gender (IFAD core 
indicator) (percentage)1 

Providing emergency response 
to the Covid-19 pandemic 

• MSMES supported under MINECO’s COVID-19 emergency response fund, disaggregated by gender - 
(number) 

• Number of PFIs that use the guarantee fund (number)  

 
 
D. Project Description  
 

11. The proposed Project will prioritize investments in select, strategic Value Chains (VCs) pre-identified by 
the Ministry of Economy (MINECO).  Project-supported beneficiaries will be eligible micro, small and medium 
agribusinesses and agro-industry, producers’ associations, and producers’ groups (hereinafter referred to as 
MSMEs).  

12. Component 1: Emergency Response to COVID-19 Impacts on Agro-industrial Economic Activities. This 
component will invest in two strategic priority areas (i) Emergency relief to MSMEs through a MINECO partial 
guarantee fund, and (ii) Skills development for greater employability through training and an on-line labor-

 
1 This is a survey-based index for measuring empowerment, agency, and inclusion of women in the agriculture sector. Developed jointly by the 
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), the Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative (OPHI), and thirteen partner projects 
in IFPRI’s GAAP2 portfolio, Pro-WEAI is composed of twelve indicators of women’s empowerment in agriculture: autonomy in income, self-
efficacy, attitudes about domestic violence, input in productive decisions, ownership of land and other assets, access to and decisions on credit, 
control over use of income, work balance, visiting important locations, group membership, membership in influential groups, and respect among 
household members. 



 

The World Bank  
Responding to COVID-19: Modern and Resilient Agri-food Value Chains (P173480) 

 

 

  
Jun 01, 2020 Page 7 of 10  

 

matching platform. 

13. Component 2: Investments to Enhance MSMEs Efficiency and Resiliency. This component will operate 
at a national level, focusing on subprojects in select, strategic VCs. Eligible beneficiary MSMEs will receive 
financial support based on approved business plans to improve the quality of their productive processes through 
investments in post-harvest practices, including activities such as storage, agro-logistics, aggregation, and 
transformation of harvested products along the selected VCs. The Project will provide grants and beneficiaries 
will be expected to provide contributions.  The grants will be provided by MINECO with both IFAD and World 
Bank resources.  

14. Component 3: Institutional strengthening in support of Guatemala’s agri-food system.  The objective of 
this component is to strengthen public sector institutions that are considered strategic in supporting the 
efficiency of the country’s agri-food system.  It is divided into two sub-components: (i) improving public 
infrastructure to enhance SPS standards, food safety, food quality and traceability and (ii) institutional 
strengthening of key public sector institutions, including MINECO, MAGA, and National Quality System and INE.  

15. Component 4. Monitoring, Evaluation and Project Management. This Component will finance the overall 
project management, monitoring, and implementation of Components 1 to 3.  

16. Component 5. Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC). The objective of this component is 
to support the Government’s emergency response to disasters. This will be activated upon request of the 
Borrower, upon the official declaration of a national emergency.  

.

.  
Legal Operational Policies 

            Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50             Yes  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60             No  

 

Summary of Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
. 

 
17. Whereas the environmental risk rating is assessed as moderate, the combined Environmental and Social risk 
rating is considered SUBSTANTIAL, particularly driven by contextual social factors and borrower’s capacity: (i) the 
inherent challenges of implementing projects with multiple and diverse Indigenous groups with their own governance 
structures, languages and socio-cultural characteristics dispersed nationally; (ii) potential implementation of 
subprojects in remote and difficult to access areas due to inadequate and limited infrastructure, particularly during 
the rainy season, as well as potential overlapping with high crime and violence areas, creating challenges for providing 
technical support and effective monitoring; (iii) use of a guarantee scheme that triggers participation of financial 
intermediaries with no previous experience working with the World Bank; and, (iv) no existing institutional capacity in 
MINECO to develop and monitor Environmental and Social (E&S) instruments and no previous experience with the 
new areas covered by the Environmental and Social Framework. 
 
18. Given that the exact scope and location of subprojects will be defined only during project implementation, 
based on demand and subject to the specific eligibility criteria, and because specific risks are unknown, the project has 
adopted a framework approach to environmental and social management. The framework approach and phased 



 

The World Bank  
Responding to COVID-19: Modern and Resilient Agri-food Value Chains (P173480) 

 

 

  
Jun 01, 2020 Page 8 of 10  

 

preparation of E&S instruments is also required to accommodate project preparation with condensed procedures 
under paragraph 12 of the Investment Project Financing policy in response to the Covid-19 pandemic. The E&S 
instruments will be developed in two phases. The Government of Guatemala (GoG) will develop, consult with key 
stakeholders, and disclose prior to appraisal a draft Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), including a project-level 
Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) and an Environmental and Social Commitment Plan (ESCP). Consultations for 
these instruments took place in the context of country-wide quarantine with strong mobility restrictions, following the 
recommendations set forth in the WB’s Technical Note, avoiding in-person gatherings, and using virtual interactive 
meetings, emails, online surveys, WhatsApp and traditional telephone calls, when stakeholders did not have access to 
online channels or were not used to them. The results of these consultations have been documented in the draft SEP 
and integrated into the design of the project and the SEP. 
 
19. The Borrower will also develop, consult with stakeholders and disclose within 30 days of effectiveness: an (i) 
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); (ii) Labor Management Procedures with a dedicated GRM 
for project workers; (iii) an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF); and, (vi) a final SEP, including a project-
level GRM. The ESCP reflects the GoG’s requirements to implement the above-mentioned instruments at the site-
specific level and to complete periodic reporting to the Bank on its compliance. During implementation, as business 
plans are approved, Environmental and Social screenings will be carried out for each subproject. Environmental and 
Social Management Plans (ESMPs) covering environmental, social, health and safety (ESHS) issues, as well as 
Indigenous Peoples Plans (IPPs), will also be developed when applicable. All required construction phase mitigation, 
management and monitoring measures identified in the ESMF will be reflected in bidding and contracting documents. 

 

20. The PIU will include dedicated environmental, social and gender specialists and will be responsible for 
complying with environmental and social commitments, supervising firms and contractors to ensure application of 
mitigation measures, monitoring implementation and reporting to the Bank and relevant national authorities. MINECO 
will submit semiannual implementation reports to the Bank, including a dedicated section on compliance with the 
environmental and social requirements set forth in the ESCP and specified in each of the E&S instruments developed 
for this Project. 

 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements  

21. The Project will be implemented by MINECO. MINECO is the entity in charge of formulating and executing 
consumer protection and competition promotion policies. Specifically, it formulates and executes policies for 
national and foreign investment, promotion of competitiveness, industrial and commercial development. In 
addition, by delegation of the President of the Republic, it is the entity in charge of carrying out the negotiations 
of bilateral and multilateral international trade agreements and treaties. It also proposes, in coordination with 
the other ministries and State agencies, the specifications and technical and quality standards of national 
production; and facilitates the competitive development of micro, MSMEs through the provision of financial 
services and business development. The Project will be headed by the Vice Ministry of Investment and 
Competition of MINECO and the National Program on Competitiveness (PRONACOM).  
 
22. As part of the support to the agriculture sector, MINECO will provide technical support and capacity 
building for the other key institution in the sector - the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Food (MAGA). 
Among its functions, MAGA is in charge of implementing the food and nutrition security policy, as well as 
promoting community organization through productive agricultural projects by means of extension services, 



 

The World Bank  
Responding to COVID-19: Modern and Resilient Agri-food Value Chains (P173480) 

 

 

  
Jun 01, 2020 Page 9 of 10  

 

training, and technical assistance. In addition, it is responsible for generating, processing and disseminating 
geographic, cartographic, food security and risk management information to prevent and mitigate the effects 
caused by natural disasters. MAGA will receive technical support and capacity building through project activities.  

 . 
   
CONTACT POINT 

 

  World Bank 
 

Katie Kennedy Freeman 
Senior Agriculture Economist  

 

Tomas Ricardo Rosada Villamar 
Senior Agriculture Economist 

  

 

  Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Ministry of Finance Guatemala (MINFIN) 

 

 

 
 

  Implementing Agencies 

 

Ministry of Economy Guatemala (MINECO) 

Lisardo Bolaños Fletes 

Deputy Minister of MINECO 

lisardo.bolanos@fulbrightmail.org 
 

 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects


 

The World Bank  
Responding to COVID-19: Modern and Resilient Agri-food Value Chains (P173480) 

 

 

  
Jun 01, 2020 Page 10 of 10  

 

APPROVAL 

 

Task Team Leader(s): 
Katie Kennedy Freeman 
Tomas Ricardo Rosada Villamar 

 

  Approved By 

Environmental and Social Standards 
Advisor: 

  

Practice Manager/Manager:   

Country Director: Andrea C. Guedes 09-Jun-2020 
 

    
 
 
 
 
 
 


















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Colombia Institutional Strengthening for Territorial Development DPF (P170728) 

 
 

  
 Page 1 of 5  

     

     
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Program Information Document 
(PID)  

 
Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated:  18-Jun-2019| Report No: PIDC27150 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 
The World Bank  
Colombia Institutional Strengthening for Territorial Development DPF (P170728) 

 
 

  
 Page 2 of 5  

     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Colombia P170728 Colombia Institutional 
Strengthening for Territorial 
Development DPF 
(P170728) 

 

Region Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) Financing Instrument 

LATIN AMERICA AND 
CARIBBEAN 

Jan 16, 2020 Governance Development Policy 
Financing 

Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Republic of Colombia National Planning Department 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The objective of this operation is to support policies to strengthen the institutional frameworks for coordination, 
planning and resource allocation, and capacity building that promote strategic investments at the regional level, as 
well as to foster efficient rural and urban land markets to leverage regional development. 

 
 Financing (in US$, Millions) 

FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 
SUMMARY 
 

Total Financing 400.00 
    
DETAILS-NewFin3 

Total World Bank Group Financing 400.00 

     World Bank Lending 400.00 
   

  
Decision 
The review did authorize the preparation to continue 

    
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
The World Bank  
Colombia Institutional Strengthening for Territorial Development DPF (P170728) 

 
 

  
 Page 3 of 5  

     

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 
Advancing inclusive, sustainable and productive territorial development is one of the salient objectives in Colombia’s new 
National Development Plan (NDP) for 2018-2022. Historically, gaps in the frameworks and institutions for territorial 
planning and subnational public management have contributed to important challenges to equitable regional 
development in Colombia, as reflected in poor service delivery indicators and inequality measures. Recognizing the 
importance of addressing these challenges, the Government’s 2014-2018 NDP outlined a program of reforms targeted 
at establishing the enabling environment and regulatory framework for integrated territorial development, actions that 
were supported by the First Programmatic Territorial Development Development Policy Financing (P158520). Important 
milestones - including approval of a new territorial planning policy, a comprehensive cadaster policy, and the 
strengthening of investment agreements between the national and subnational governments, among others - were 
achieved under this Program. Under the framework of the new 2018-2022 NDP, the Government is now advancing on 
the next generation of policies aimed at strengthening the institutional frameworks needed to further consolidate 
territorial development in Colombia.  
 
Relationship to CPF 
 
The proposed operation is well-aligned with Pillar 1 (Fostering Balanced Territorial Development) of the 2016-2021 CPF, 
which recognizes the important role of subnational governments in supporting territorial development.  
 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The objective of this operation is to support policies to strengthen the institutional frameworks for coordination, 
planning and resource allocation, and capacity building that promote strategic investments at the regional level, as 
well as to  foster efficient rural and urban land markets to leverage regional development.  

 
Key Results  

 
Key results are expected from improved coordination, planning and resource allocation that promote strategic 
investments at the regional level, more efficient rural and urban land markets such as increased coverage of cadastral 
information for improved multisectoral public management, and improved public management capacity at the 
subnational level.  
 

D. Concept Description 
The proposed operation aims to achieve its objective in supporting policy actions under three pillars. As the design further 
develops, these may be consolidated into two pillars.  
 
Pillar 1: Coordination, Planning and Resource Allocation that Promote Strategic Investments at the Regional Level -  
Despite recent advances in the implementation of Colombia’s frameworks for effective territorial development, 
challenges related to weak inter-institutional coordination at the territorial level and investment atomization continue.  
Thus, further efforts are needed to consolidate these reforms and address persistent regional inequalities in territorial 
development. As such, reforms under this pillar focus on strengthening the institutional framework for multi-level 
governance, enhancing coordination within and between regions, and incentivizing regional investments aimed at 
supporting strategic regional development needs. 



 
The World Bank  
Colombia Institutional Strengthening for Territorial Development DPF (P170728) 

 
 

  
 Page 4 of 5  

     

 
Pillar 2: Fostering Efficient Urban and Rural Land Markets - Rural and urban land markets in Colombia have operated 
inefficiently, in part due to the lack of reliable and current information about land parcel demarcation, land ownership, 
land prices and overall land economic potential. As a result, land disputes have multiplied exponentially, complicated by 
the country’s long civil conflict which impeded access to the entirety of the territory. The operation will support 
government policies to establish efficient land information systems and processes and more dynamic land management 
at the urban level. 
 
Pillar 3: Improving Public Management Capacity at the Subnational Level - The effectiveness of the Government’s 2018-
2022 NDP in achieving its regional development objectives will depend, to a great extent, on the capacity of subnational 
governments to effectively manage the underlying processes essential for operationalizing and implementing policy, as 
well as for the central government to effectively monitor the process and provide subnational entities with relevant 
incentives and support.  As such, the operation supports reforms that build on previous and existing efforts to strengthen 
institutional capacities in subnational governments.  
 

E. Poverty and Social Impacts and Environmental Aspects 
 
Poverty and Social Impacts 

The Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) will be organized around the pillars outlined in the DPF. In particular, the 
policies in Pillar 1 aimed at strengthening policies and institutions to enable integrated territorial development are 
expected to have positive effects on territorial management and planning at the subnational level, as well as on the 
enhancement of territorial development. The effects on welfare are likely to be mostly indirect and moderately positive 
overall, operating through a better provision of public services and local public goods. Actions under Pillar 2, supporting 
policies to improve the efficiency of rural and urban land markets are expected to have moderate positive effects in the 
long-run through tenure formalization, and the improvement of efficiency and performance of sub-national entities that 
could help to reduce socio-economic gaps. The impact on poverty and shared prosperity of policy actions under Pillar 3, 
aimed at supporting the strengthening of management capacity in the public sector at subnational level are expected to 
be positive; it will, however, depend on the way those savings will be allocated and the elasticity between local public 
investment and poverty. Further analysis and a more extensive literature review will take place as the team moves forward 
to determine the distributional impact of these prior actions. 
 
Environmental Impacts 
 

The policy actions supported by this operation will likely contribute to more adequate management of local resources and 
a better planning of territorial development, which, by way of integrating environmental preservation and conservation, 
can generate better contributions in information, institutional coordination and allocation of budgets for environmental 
management. To expand the coverage of cadastral information should contribute to increased tenure security and secure 
access of local communities to forest and natural resources and to strengthen local governments’ ability to generate 
resources, improve public service delivery, and potentially develop environmental enforcement capacity; those 
improvements can help to reduce illegal deforestation and degradation of rural landscapes, maintain vital ecosystems 
services, reduce greenhouse emissions, and improve agricultural productivity. Policies supporting strong environmental 
requirements for urban permits and urban land regulations could bring about climate change co-benefits in cities. The 
environmental analysis identified a potential risk for possible indirect negative environmental effects from some policies 
supported under the DPF, which are not considered to be significant, as long as government applies existing environmental 
legislation and best practices.  
 



 
The World Bank  
Colombia Institutional Strengthening for Territorial Development DPF (P170728) 

 
 

  
 Page 5 of 5  

     

 .    
CONTACT POINT 
 

World Bank 

Alberto Leyton, Alexandra Ortiz 

Lead Public Sector Specialist 
 

 

Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Republic of Colombia 

 

 

 
 

 

Implementing Agencies 
 

National Planning Department 

Monica Penuela 

Subdirectora de Credito 

mpenuela@dnp.gov.co 
 
 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

Task Team Leader(s): Alberto Leyton, Alexandra Ortiz 
 

Approved By 
APPROVALTBL 

Country Director: Ulrich Zachau 18-Jun-2019 
   
 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects

















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
UY - COVID-19 Response & Economic Recovery (P172796) 

 
 

  
 Page 1 of 8  

     

     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Program Information Document 
(PID)  

 
Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 15-May-2020 | Report No: PIDA29255 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 
The World Bank  
UY - COVID-19 Response & Economic Recovery (P172796) 

 
 

  
 Page 2 of 8  

     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Uruguay P172796 
UY - COVID-19 Response & 
Economic Recovery 
(P172796) 

 

Region Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) Financing Instrument 

LATIN AMERICA AND 
CARIBBEAN 

18-Jun-2020 
Environment, Natural 
Resources & the Blue 
Economy 

Development Policy 
Financing 

Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Oriental Republic of Uruguay Ministry of Economy and Finance 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The development objective of the proposed operation is to support the Government of Uruguay in (i) mitigating the 
economic and social impact of the COVID-19 outbreak and (ii) laying the foundations for a strong and resilient economic 
recovery.  
 

 
 Financing (in US$, Millions) FIN_SUMM_PUB_TBL 

SUMMARY 
 

Total Financing 400.00 
 

 
DETAILS-NewFin3 

Total World Bank Group Financing 400.00 

     World Bank Lending 400.00 
   

  
Decision 
The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate 

     
 
 
 
 



 
The World Bank  
UY - COVID-19 Response & Economic Recovery (P172796) 

 
 

  
 Page 3 of 8  

     

B. Introduction and Context  
 
Country Context  
 

1. The COVID-19 outbreak is expected to push Uruguay’s economy into a recession for the first time in two 
decades. Over the past years, real GDP growth had been on a downward trend, declining from 4.6 percent in 2013 to 0.2 
percent in 2019, the lowest level since 2002. Prior to the outbreak, it was expected that this trend would be reversed in 
2020 as result of the implementation of the new Government’s reform agenda as well as the prospect of large 
infrastructure investments associated with a paper mill project of historic proportions coming on stream. The economic 
fallout resulting from the COVID-19 outbreak has changed this scenario dramatically. Total exports contracted y-o-y by 
10.9 percent1 as early as February, due to a drastic drop in exports to China, Uruguay’s largest trading partner. The 
domestic lockdown mandated in March then triggered a sharp decline in economic activity, affecting both demand and 
supply. Real GDP growth projections are nearly 6 percentage lower than they were at the beginning of 2020; they are 
projected to register at -3.7 percent, from an originally projected growth of 2.0 percent.  

 
2. The economic fallout will result in a significant increase in poverty and will generate an enormous strain for 
many Uruguayan families, with children and youth being particularly vulnerable to the shock.  Although the Government 
swiftly adopted emergency measures to mitigate the impact on the most vulnerable, building on existing social safety nets 
and adding temporary measures to expand the protection to those that do not qualify to existing programs, notably 
informal workers, Bank staff estimate that poverty will increase from 8.8 percent in 2019 to 11.8 percent in 2020, 
annihilating the major progress witnessed over the past decade. This is due to the economic impact of the pandemic 
layered over the effects of the drop in agricultural productivity from the drought as well as contagion from both 
Argentina’s economic crisis and Brazil’s recession. The increase in the poverty incidence translates into 106,000 additional 
people falling into poverty, disproportionately affecting households with children. Afro-descendants (1 in every 5 people 
in the poorest decile) and informal workers (7 in every 10 workers in the poorest decile) are disproportionately exposed 
to the shock. People in the bottom 40 percentile of the income distribution face higher risks of unemployment and labor 
income losses and make up a disproportionally large share of the workforce in the sectors most affected by the crisis, such 
as retail and hospitality. The expected increase in poverty incidence and severity threatens to erode human capital with 
lasting negative effects, and to raise concerns about perpetuation of disadvantages and social exclusion which stands in 
contrast to Uruguay’s societal preference for equity and social cohesion.  
 
3. To spur a strong economic recovery, Uruguay will have to set the foundations for a robust growth trajectory, 
notably by strengthening policies and institutions to enhance resilience to different types of shocks. The unprecedented 
economic shock caused by the COVID-19 outbreak is hitting Uruguay at the time of multiple risks pressing on the economy. 
First, Uruguay is confronting an increasingly adverse regional economic scenario, notably the protracted economic crisis 
and high market volatility in Argentina. Second, Uruguay is faced with a growing exposure to climate variability that is 
putting at risks major sectors of its economy, particularly agriculture. The different risk dimensions - health, fiscal and 
environmental - are mutually reinforcing and have the potential to create a “perfect storm” for the Uruguayan economy. 
The COVID-19 outbreak highlights the need for a more comprehensive and integrated approach to risk management, at 
the core of which is restoring prudent fiscal policy making. In order to put the economy back on a strong recovery path, 
the new authorities will need to embark on their ambitious medium-term reform program once the crisis abates, with a 
focus on the following dimensions: (i) fiscal consolidation, (ii) development of the private sector and (ii) resilience to 
climate and weather-related shocks.  
 

 
1 Although exports began to recover in March (in line with the rebound in industrial activity in China), they still were 23 percent lower than in 
March 2019. 



 
The World Bank  
UY - COVID-19 Response & Economic Recovery (P172796) 

 
 

  
 Page 4 of 8  

     

Relationship to CPF 
 

4. The proposed operation is fully aligned with the 2016-20 Country Partnership Framework (CPF), and the 2018 
PLR, notably as it supports Uruguay in “building resilience to shocks.” The 2015 Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) had 
identified the need to “build resilience to face economic volatility and extreme weather events” as one of the three main 
challenges for Uruguay. Accordingly, the first of the CPF’s two Focus Areas is dedicated to “building resilience to shocks.” 
This operation responds to the immediate needs to cushioning the impact of the pandemic on the most vulnerable 
workers and firms (Pillar 1) and lays the ground for a strong recovery (Pillar 2), through enhanced resilience to future 
shocks. The SCD update, currently under preparation, deepens the analysis of the vulnerability of the Uruguayan economy 
to multiple, reinforcing shocks (i.e. fiscal/financial, sanitary and environmental) and identifies key institutional weaknesses 
in this regard.  
 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
5. The development objective of the proposed operation is to support the Government of Uruguay in (i) mitigating 
the economic and social impact of the COVID-19 outbreak and (ii) laying the foundations for a strong and resilient 
economic recovery.  
 
Key Results  

 
6. Following corporate guidance on new IBRD financing for countries with an income above the Graduation 
Discussion Income (GDI), this operation addresses critical institutional shortcomings. At the core of the operation are 
policy and institutional reforms that will lay the foundations for a strong and resilient economic recovery, notably through 
enhancing resilience to multiple shocks. It supports measures that aim at mitigating the economic shock caused by COVID-
19, helping weather the impact on public finances, and restoring a robust fiscal outlook in the medium term. The operation 
thereby also contributes to safeguarding access to external capital markets on reasonable terms, an additional key feature 
of corporate guidance on GDI countries. This is critical given that the COVID-19 crisis has rendered access to sovereign 
financing more challenging for emerging economies, including Uruguay. Uruguay is currently rated just above the 
investment grade2, with a negative outlook in recognition of its large fiscal consolidation needs in a time of economic 
downturn. In addition, through its objective of enhancing resilience of the economy against climate shocks, the operation 
supports the provision of regional and global public goods.   
 

D. Project Description   

7. The proposed DPL is a stand-alone operation aimed at mitigating the economic and social impact of the COVID-
19 outbreak and improving policies and institutions for a strong and resilient economic recovery. The policy matrix of 
the operation includes key priorities in the Government’s emergency response to the COVID-19 crisis and in the medium-
term reform program. The first pillar is focused on supporting efforts to cushion the expected strong social and economic 
impact of the crisis, with a focus on the most vulnerable households and firms that would otherwise by financially viable. 
The second pillar is reflective is reflective of the ambitious medium-term reform commitments of the Government to 
support a strong and resilient economic recovery through: (i) instituting a fiscal policy framework that safeguards fiscal 
and debt sustainability, (ii) improving business climate for private sector development, (iii) enhancing disaster and 
environmental risk management and, (iv) transforming agricultural production towards higher resilience to climate 
change and increased productivity.  

 
2 Uruguay’s sovereign credit rating, according to Fitch, is the lowest possible rating within the creditworthiness band, i.e., BBB- with a negative 
outlook. The other two major credit rating agencies place Uruguay at BBB. 



 
The World Bank  
UY - COVID-19 Response & Economic Recovery (P172796) 

 
 

  
 Page 5 of 8  

     

 
8. The proposed DPF will support important reforms along two pillars:  
 

• Pillar 1 of this operation aims at supporting a series of temporary countercyclical measures to protect the most 
vulnerable and avoid the destruction of productive assets in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic. These measures 
include: (i) the enactment of a series of countercyclical measures, including the creation of the COVID-19 Fund to 
swiftly respond to the sanitary crisis (PA#1), (ii) the strengthening of three important social assistance programs to 
(partially) offset temporary income losses of lower income groups (PA#2), (iii) the creation of a temporary 
unemployment insurance scheme to protect workers against effects of lay-offs or partial suspensions (PA#3), (iv) the 
strengthening of the institutional response to the expected rise of violence in the context of the COVID-19 quarantine 
(PA#4), and (v) the adoption of emergency measures to support access to finance for MSMEs (PA#5). In the 
presentation of these emergency measures, the Government emphasized their temporary and countercyclical nature 
and committed to rolling them back once the crisis will have passed.  

 

• Pillar 2 of this operation aims at laying the foundations for a strong and resilient economic recovery. The COVID-19 
outbreak brings to the fore how the deteriorating fiscal position over the past years has limited the scope of a 
countercyclical fiscal crisis response. The Government is committed to reversing the trend of rising fiscal deficits and 
debt levels by instituting a fiscal policy framework that safeguards fiscal and debt sustainability and allows for 
conducting countercyclical policies in times of economic downturns. This agenda is at the heart of the medium-term 
reform program, as reflected in the Urgent Reform Bill, and will be implemented in full once recovery sets in. The 
commitment to fiscal consolidation has already manifested itself by measures adopted soon after the Government 
started its mandate, such as the elimination of certain tax expenditures in VAT (as reflected under the PA#6). Pillar 2 
also reflects the Government’s commitment to continue advancing on structural reforms for private sector 
development and on institutional strengthening for better protection of the economy against climate-related shocks. 
Both agendas were initiated under the previous Government and have been endorsed by the current administration 
as critical foundations for a dynamic and sustainable recovery after the COVID-19 pandemic. The Government will 
pursue a broader reform effort aimed at improving Uruguay’s regulatory environment, such as by easing requirements 
and costs for firm registration (PA#7). Uruguay also needs to strengthen its capacity to shelter its economy against 
climate variability to avoid jeopardizing its recovery post-COVID. Addressing disaster and environmental risks is by 
nature a complex and multi-sectoral endeavor, transmitting through various channels to the entire economy, and 
requires differentiated yet coordinated interventions at various levels of government. In this sense, the operation 
supports the institutional strengthening of the emergency response system, with enhanced coordination (both 
horizontal and vertical) between public and private stakeholders (PA#8) as well as the transformation of the 
agriculture model that increases resilience to climate variability, while enhancing productivity (PA#9). 

 

E. Implementation  
 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements  

 
9. The Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) will be the main responsible agency for the monitoring, evaluation, 
and results framework and will coordinate actions across relevant ministries and agencies involved in the operation. 
The agencies responsible for the implementation of the prior actions supported by the operation include: (i) Pillar 1: 
Ministry of Social Development (MIDES), Ministry of Labor and Social Security (MLSS), Ministry of Public Health (MPH), 
National Institute for Women (InMujeres) and MEF; (ii) Pillar 2: MEF, SINAE and Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture and 
Fisheries (MGAP). The World Bank will be monitoring the implementation of the DPF program through regular supervision 



 
The World Bank  
UY - COVID-19 Response & Economic Recovery (P172796) 

 
 

  
 Page 6 of 8  

     

missions. The World Bank will maintain close dialogue with counterparts throughout preparation and collaborate with 
MEF for the monitoring of indicators.  
 

F. Poverty and Social Impacts, and Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects 
 
10. The policy measures supported by this DPF series are aimed at mitigating the short-term social and economic 
impact of the Covid-19 pandemic on the most vulnerable, while implementing structural reforms aiming at building 
enhanced resilience to multiple shocks (sanitary, fiscal and environmental). As such, the overall reform package 
supported is expected to contribute to mitigating the effects of the pandemic shock on the poor, both directly through 
strengthening the social safety net, but also by facilitating a faster and more sustainable recovery. By strengthening the 
social protection systems, the policy program under the first pillar is expected to mitigate the impact of the Covid-19 
shock on the most vulnerable by providing emergency relief as part of a time-bound countercyclical economic stimulus 
package. Policies supported under the second pillar of the operation are aimed at strengthening the foundations for a 
strong economic recovery with an emphasis placed on enhancing institutional capacities in reducing the country’s 
exposure to future shocks, which tend to affect disproportionally the most vulnerable groups of the society. 

 

Environmental, Forests, and Other Natural Resource Aspects 
 

11. The policies supported under Pillar 1 of this DPL are not likely to cause significant negative effects on the 
environment, forests, or other natural resources. The policies supported under the second pillar of this operation aim at 
strengthening the foundations for private sector development and are expected to increase overall economic activity. 
Spurring economic recovery after the COVID-19 pandemic does not imply a relaxation of environmental standards, given 
the strong environmental management framework in Uruguay. The adoption of a policy on emergency and disaster risk 
management and institutional strengthening of the National Emergency System-SINAE (PA#8) is expected to reduce 
adverse impact to the environment including degradation of natural resources and the human urban environment from 
exposure to disease and effects of infrastructure loss. The adoption of the national plan of adaptation to climate 
variability and climate change (PA#9) is expected to have significant positive environmental effects.  
 
12. Uruguay has a strong legislative and regulatory framework and relatively effective public-sector environmental 
agencies. The limited negative environmental effects that could result from the operation will be well managed and 
mitigated by the existing laws and regulations. Agencies such as the DINAMA and DINAGUA and DIGESA (under the 
Ministry of Health) provide oversight and regular monitoring of environmental indicators, especially pollution. 
Environmental impact assessment and licensing has been a requirement since 1994 (Ley 16,466) and is considered among 
the top ranked countries based on environmental performance.3 

 

G. Risks and Mitigation 
 

13. The overall risk to achieving the PDO is assessed as Moderate. Given the severe economic impact of the COVID-
19 outbreak around the globe, the macroeconomic risk is rated as Substantial: if the projected recovery path that foresees 
a return to positive growth rates at end-2020 does not materialize, the country may be stretched beyond its fiscal capacity 
to support the businesses and households affected by the crisis. The temporary COVID-19 response measures supported 
through this operation would help the economy withstand the shock, while the medium-term institutional and policy 
reforms also contained in the policy matrix will be critical for embarking as swiftly as possible on a sustained recovery 

 
3 Ranked #6 according to the 2018 Environmental Performance Index. See: Wendling, Z. A., Emerson, J. W., Esty, D. C., Levy, M. A., de Sherbinin, A., 
et al. (2018). 2018 Environmental Performance Index. New Haven, CT: Yale Center for Environmental Law & Policy. https://epi.yale.edu/ 



 
The World Bank  
UY - COVID-19 Response & Economic Recovery (P172796) 

 
 

  
 Page 7 of 8  

     

trajectory. The risks related to Sector Strategies and Policies are rated Substantial because the timing of this operation, 
(prepared shortly after the new Government took up its mandate, as well as the enormous amount of personal and 
financial resources needed to respond to the COVID-19 crisis) may affect the ability to implement effectively the measures 
contained in the policy matrix and meet the result targets. These risks are however mitigated by supporting through this 
operation the reforms falling under the Government’s priority areas, as set by the COVID-19 response package and policy 
package put forward in the Urgent Reform Bill. The risk categories for the Technical Design of the Program, Institutional 
Capacity for Implementation and Sustainability and Stakeholders are rated as Moderate. In terms of technical design and 
institutional capacity, Uruguay has a strong track record in terms of implementing programs, and a long trajectory of 
successful DPL programs with the Bank and similar programs with other IFIs. On risks related to Stakeholders, the DPL 
series supports further strengthening of the policies underpinning this social contract, notably those captured under Pillar 
1.  . 
    

CONTACT POINT 

 

World Bank 

Carole Megevand, Peter Siegenthaler 

Sector Leader 
 

 

Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Oriental Republic of Uruguay 

Mariella Maglia 

Director - Multilateral Organisms 

mariella.maglia@mef.gub.uy 
 

 

Implementing Agencies 
 

Ministry of Economy and Finance 

Mariella  Maglia 

Director - Multilateral Organisms 

mariella.maglia@mef.gub.uy 
 
 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects


 
The World Bank  
UY - COVID-19 Response & Economic Recovery (P172796) 

 
 

  
 Page 8 of 8  

     

APPROVAL 

Task Team Leader(s): Carole Megevand, Peter Siegenthaler 
 

  Approved By 
APPROVALTBL 

Country Director: Jordan Z. Schwartz 22-Apr-2020 
    
 



















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

PARAGUAY 

 

 

 

PROJECT TO IMPLEMENT THE  
CENSUS AND AGRICULTURAL SURVEYS SYSTEM 

(PR-L1147) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Gonzalo Muñoz (CSD/RND), 
Project Team Leader; Alvaro García Negro (RND/CPR), Project Team Co-leader; Héctor 
Valdés Conroy (CSD/RND); Fernando Glasman (VPC/FMP); Jorge Luis González 
(VPC/FMP); Jose Antonio Mejía Guerra (IFD/ICS); Alejandro Quijada (CSC/CPR); Rodolfo 
Tello (VPS/ESG); Rodolfo Graham (LEG/SGO); Jennifer Doherty (CSD/CCS); Carolina Vera 
(CSC/CPR); and Elizabeth Chávez (CSD/RND). 

 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors 
simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the 
document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus superseding 
and replacing the original version. 

 



 

CONTENTS 

PROJECT SUMMARY 
 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................. 1 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale ............................................ 1 
B. Objectives, components, and cost ................................................................ 7 
C. Key results indicators ................................................................................... 8 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ................................................................. 9 

A. Financing instruments .................................................................................. 9 
B. Environmental and social safeguard risks ................................................... 10 
C. Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 10 
D. Other project risks ...................................................................................... 10 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 11 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 11 
B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ....................................... 12 

 
 
 
 
 
 

APPENDIXES 

Proposed resolution 
 

  



 - ii - 
 
 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) – Summary 

Annex II Results Matrix 

Annex III Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED 

1. Multiyear execution plan and annual work plan (AWP) 

2. Monitoring and evaluation plan 

3. Environmental and social management report (ESMR) 

4. Procurement plan 

OPTIONAL 

1. Project economic analysis 

2. Institutional Capacity Assessment System (ICAS) 

3. Program Operating Regulations 

4. Census and surveys technical report 

5. Public consultation with data users and producers 

6. Public consultation with National Organization of Indigenous Peoples (ONPI) 

7. Bibliography 

8. Sociocultural analysis 

 
  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-43
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-34
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-29
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-43
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-30
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-35
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-42
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-33
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-32
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-31
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1261750315-13


 - iii - 
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS 

AWP Annual work plan 
CAA Consejo Asesor Agrario [Agricultural Advisory Council] 
CAN Censo Agrario Nacional [National Agricultural Census] 
DCEA Dirección de Censos y Estadísticas Agropecuarias [Office of 

Agricultural Censuses and Statistics] 
DGEEC Dirección General de Estadística, Encuestas, y Censos [Bureau of 

Statistics, Surveys, and Censuses] 
DGP Dirección General de Planificación [Bureau of Planning] 
DINCAP Dirección Nacional de Coordinación y Administración de Proyectos 

[National Office of Project Coordination and Administration] 
ESMR Environmental and social management report 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization 
ICAS Institutional Capacity Assessment System 
MAG Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock 
OC Ordinary Capital 
ONPI  Organización Nacional de los Pueblos Indígenas [National Organization 

of Indigenous Peoples] 
PDA Personal digital assistant 
PEU Program execution unit 
SCSP Sistema de Contrataciones del Sector Público [Public Sector 

Procurement System] 
SICP  Sistema de Información de Contrataciones Públicas  

[Public Procurement Information System] 
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
WAL  Weighted average life 
WCA World Programme for the Census of Agriculture 
 
 



 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

PARAGUAY 
PROJECT TO IMPLEMENT THE  

CENSUS AND AGRICULTURAL SURVEYS SYSTEM 
(PR-L1147) 

 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Republic of Paraguay 
Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Amortization period: 24 years 

Executing agency: Republic of Paraguay, acting through the  
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace period: 6 years(b) 

IDB Ordinary Capital (OC): 15 million 100% 

Interest rate: LIBOR-based 

Credit fee: (c) 

Inspection and supervision fee: (c) 

Total: 15 million 100% 

Weighted average life (WAL) 15.25 years(d) 

Currency of approval: 
U.S. dollars from the 
Ordinary Capital  

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description:  

To contribute to improving the availability and quality of agricultural information in the country, to support decision-making by public and 
private stakeholders. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan proceeds:  

(i) The program execution unit has been established on the terms agreed upon with the Bank; and (ii) the borrower has provided evidence, 
to the Bank’s satisfaction, that the program Operating Regulations have entered into force (see paragraph 3.4). 

Special contractual execution conditions: 

The project will be executed in accordance with the contractual provisions on environmental, social, health, and safety matters identified 
in the legal requirements section of the environmental and social management report (ESMR), including Annex B. 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(e) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(f) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

 
(a) Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization schedule, 

as well as currency and interest rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management considerations into account when reviewing such 
requests. 

(b) Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that they do not entail any 
extension of the original WAL of the loan or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract. 

(c) The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the Bank’s 
lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(d) The original WAL may be shorter, depending on the signature date of the loan contract. 
(e) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(f) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law). 

 
 

 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-42
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-29


 
 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale 

1.1 Agriculture is a key sector of the Paraguayan economy. In the period 2004-2016, it 
generated an annual average of 25% of GDP, and 30% of jobs. The sector has also 
grown at an average annual rate of 5.7% over that same period. Alongside this 
growth, agricultural exports have risen significantly over the last decade, 
representing 60% of the total value of exports in 2016.1  

1.2 This solid sector performance has occurred in the context of a dual productive 
structure. On the one hand, rapid growth can be observed in some areas, especially 

soybeans, which contributed 57% of agricultural GDP growth between 2004 and 
2016. Based on Paraguay’s last National Agricultural Census in 2008 (CAN 2008), 
the production of soybeans and livestock is concentrated on lands larger than 500 
hectares. By contrast, survey data show that the average annual farm income of 
family farms (under 50 hectares, accounting for 96% of at farms, according to 
CAN 2008) devoted to sesame, cassava, sugarcane, corn, and other crops, fell from 
US$3,121 in 1991 to just US$981 in 2013. (Willi, P., 1991; A-Fines and GIZ, 2014).2 
Recent studies indicate that, to maintain this solid aggregate sector performance 
and improve farming income for rural families living Paraguay, productivity needs to 
improve through actions to promote the use of better technologies among small-
scale farmers, greater diversification of production, and the introduction of 
production systems that help to better manage climate and other risks (Nin-Pratt, A. 
et al., 2016). 

1.3 These recommendations are the result of an analysis of existing official statistics. 
However, decision-makers need robust, up-to-date information that allows them to 
work more precisely when designing and/or implementing instruments for public 
policy and/or private investment. Furthermore, the impact of different interventions 
can only be measured and assessed effectively if appropriate statistics are available. 
For that reason, statistics are needed on land use, agricultural production factors, 
the predominant economic and social conditions faced by farmers, and other areas. 
Additionally, much of the income inequality seen in Latin America and the Caribbean 
can be attributed to factors such as race, place of birth, education level of parents, 
gender, and sexual orientation. Some case studies suggest that the benefits of 
having information are much greater than the costs of generating it. For example, 
Bruce Gardner reviewed the literature that quantifies the value of information on the 
agricultural market for private decision-makers, as well as for decision-makers in the 
public sector working on policy reforms relating to trade and investment in research 
and development in the U.S. (Gardner, 2004). The study confirms that the availability 
of this information has net benefits for decision-makers. 

1.4 Data requirements for the agricultural sector are extensive and include information 
on the structure and management of agricultural holdings, agricultural production 
and inputs, food consumption, household income and expenditure, gender equality, 
the work force, and agricultural prices. There is also a growing demand for basic 
agroenvironmental data on greenhouse gas and ammonia emissions, to improve 
national greenhouse gas inventories. All these data could come from agricultural 

                                                
1  Source: Central Bank of Paraguay. 
2  See optional electronic link 7 for a full bibliography. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-2
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-2
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36


 - 2 - 
 
 

 
censuses and sample surveys, population censuses and surveys, administrative 
records, and other sources.  

1.5 An agricultural census is a statistical operation focused on collecting, processing, 
and disseminating data on the structure of the agricultural sector of an entire country, 
or a significant part of one. The basic objectives of agricultural censuses according 
to the World Programme for the Census of Agriculture (WCA 2020) (FAO 2015) are: 
(i) to provide data on the structure of agriculture, especially for small administrative 
units, and to enable detailed cross-tabulations; (ii) to provide data to use as 
benchmarks for, and reconciliation of, current agricultural statistics; and (iii) to 
provide frames for agricultural sample surveys. 

1.6 In an integrated agricultural statistics system, an agricultural census provides: (i) an 
integrated set of data on food and agriculture, necessary for decision-making related 
to food, agriculture, and rural development; and (ii) sampling frames for the surveys, 
which are conducted more frequently to collect more detailed and timely data. It 
should also be based on the necessary quality standards and include the 
dissemination of the information, so as to meet the information demand of the public 
and private sectors. 

1.7 The “Global Strategy to Improve Agricultural and Rural Statistics” (World Bank, 
UNSD, FAO 2010) published after a consultation process that included national 
statistical institutes, agriculture ministries, recommendations from the United 
Nations Security Council, experts and academics, and online forums. In its 
recommendations, the strategy identifies and highlights limitations in the production 
of statistical data for the agricultural sector and suggests that the conceptual 
framework for agricultural and rural statistics needs be expanded, and that the scope 
and coverage of such statistics should be broadened to include, for example, 
aspects of rural populations and households, fisheries, forestry, and other 
dimensions. 

1.8 Some countries of the region, including Paraguay, therefore implemented technical 
cooperation operation ATN/OC-14750-RG, to develop a consensus-based shared 
conceptual and methodological framework for the IDB’s Regional Public Goods 
Initiative based on technical and practical criteria, to promote the production of 
agricultural and rural statistics sustainably over time. This regional public good, 
named “Development of Methodology for the Implementation of Agricultural 
Statistics Systems in Latin America and the Caribbean,” began with a diagnostic 
assessment3 of the capacity to produce and disseminate agricultural and rural 
statistics, looking at the legal framework, coordination within the national statistical 
system, financial and human resources, available infrastructure and equipment, and 
the type and quality of data. It also identified national needs, along with procedures 
for generating and/or compiling data and dissemination methods.  

                                                
3  This assessment was based on responses to a self-administered standard questionnaire sent to the 

countries. The questionnaire had 233 items grouped into 23 categories under four dimensions, which 
were used to prepare a baseline country profile. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36


 - 3 - 
 
 

 
1.9 The findings of the regional public good assessment put Paraguay4 in Group 2 out 

of four groups, with Group 1 being the “weakest countries,” and Group 4 being the 
“strongest countries.” Group 2, “intermediate to weak countries,” also includes 
El Salvador, Belize, the Dominican Republic, and St. Lucia. According to this 
diagnostic assessment, the main limiting factors for agricultural statistics in 
Paraguay are institutional weakness due to a scarcity of resources, both human 
(core training) and material (physical infrastructure), and weak methods and 
practices. Added to these are poor coordination within the national statistical system 
and unawareness of data quality5 (see details in Table 1). 

 
Table 1. Limiting Factors for Agricultural Statistics in Paraguay 

Dominant 
limitations 

• Transportation equipment for field activities 

• Sound methodology implemented for agricultural surveys 

• Development and updating of sampling frames 

Significant 
limitations 

• Number of professional staff for statistical activities in the main offices 

• Number of professional staff for statistical activities in the field 

• Technical skills of available statistical personnel 

• Up-to-date information technology hardware 

• Up-to-date information technology software 

• Lack of available funds for planned statistical field activities 

• Interagency coordination 

Relevant 
limitations 

• Number of support staff in the field for statistical activities 

• Office equipment (phone, Internet, office furniture) 

• Turnover of professional staff 

• Information sources exhausted 

 

1.10 Paraguay’s current regulatory framework puts responsibility for producing 
agricultural statistics on the Ministry of Agriculture,6 as is the case in other countries 
inside and outside the region such as France, Uruguay, India, and the U.S. The legal 
foundation for statistical activities is based on two main laws: Executive Order 11126 
of 1942, which reorganizes the Bureau of Statistics, Surveys, and Censuses 
(DGEEC) and gives it the authority for “technical direction of all statistical work;” and 
Law 81 of 1992, which designates the Office of Agricultural Censuses and Statistics 
(DCEA) as the executing agency responsible for preparing agricultural statistics and 
keeping them up to date by regularly conducting the CAN. Paraguay has also 
developed the National Strategy for Statistical Development, based on the principles 

                                                
4  On a scale of 0 to 100, Paraguay received 28 points, ahead of only Argentina (21) and Venezuela (14) in 

a group of 13 Latin American and Caribbean countries that averaged 45. The best score was obtained 
by Mexico (82), followed by Brazil (71). Among the items with the lowest score were: (i) coordination 
within the statistical system, strategic vision and planning, and trained human resources, with a score of 
0; (ii) data collection technologies, with 9; and (iii) awareness of quality, with 23. 

5  “Diagnóstico sobre las capacidades instaladas en los países de ALC para la producción y difusión de 
estadísticas agropecuarias rurales” [Diagnostic assessment of installed capacities in the LAC countries 
for the production and dissemination of rural agricultural statistics], Miguel Galmés, technical cooperation 
operation ATN/OC-14750-RG IDB. 

6  Law 81/92 of 22 December 1992 establishing the organizational and functional structure of the Ministry 
of Agricultural and Livestock (MAG). 



 - 4 - 
 
 

 
of the PARIS 21 initiative.7 Nevertheless, the statistical sector is not coordinated as 
a whole, nor is there one institution with the legal mandate to lead and coordinate 
the process of preparing statistics across sectors and institutions. 

1.11 Paraguay’s most recent agricultural census was performed in 2008 and was the fifth 
in the country’s history since 1944. A decade has passed since that census 
(CAN 2008), and the information from it no longer reflects the current conditions in 
the country. It lacks the data to assess quality (omission and nonresponse rates), 
nor is there data on information requests classified by type of user or how that 
information is used. Some users have questioned the reliability of the data, because 
of the way the field work was done, and the data processed. The data are also not 
broken down by thematic area: gender and indigenous peoples. Paraguay does not 
have a system of regular, reliable surveys to monitor and follow up on trends 
occurring after the previous intercensal period (1981-2008). Data need to be 
quantified on the expansion of the land area devoted to annual crops, deforestation, 
new operators and the development of technology-based business production 
models, news ways of organizing production, and other developments. 

1.12 The Office of Agricultural Censuses and Statistics (DCEA) is the unit of the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG) responsible for “preparing and updating 
agricultural statistics, for which it regularly conducts the National Agricultural 
Census.”8 A preliminary assessment of the current organizational and financial 
structure of the DCEA reveals weaknesses in: (i) technical human resources, in 
terms of both number and knowledge that is sufficiently up to date to work using 
advanced technologies and statistical methods (out of 39 DCEA employees, only 
15 have university degrees, and 50% of those have low levels of training or outdated 
knowledge of census procedures); (ii) equipment and materials (100% of computer 
hardware is obsolete, and the vehicle fleet has been reduced by 80% over the last 
five years); and (iii) strategic planning for data collection based on statistical 
methods. Annual DCEA estimates of agricultural output are derived from data 
provided by authorized data reporters, which is an imprecise and unreliable type of 
information. Consequently, strengthening the DCEA both technically and 
administratively would benefit the decision-making and policy formulation process of 
the MAG, and particularly its Bureau of Planning (DGP)9 responsible for planning, 
monitoring, coordination, and assessment, as well as other public and private 
entities.  

1.13 The assessments mentioned above clearly underscore the need to strengthen 
country systems for agricultural statistics. This means not only having more 
information available, but improving the timeliness and quality of that information in 
a cost-effective manner. Adopting modern information technologies is a key factor 
in meeting these objectives, as their benefits in quality and economic efficiency have 
been proven in other countries. An example is the use of personal digital assistants 
(PDAs) to conduct surveys and censuses, known as computer-assisted personal 
interviewing (CAPI), instead of pen-and-paper interviewing (PAPI). Reliability, 
accuracy, timeliness, accessibility, and consistency are all quality indicators for 

                                                
7  The Partnership in Statistics for Development in the Twenty-first Century (PARIS 21), established in 1999, 

promotes the better use and production of statistics throughout the developing world. 
8  Law 81/92, Article 8. 
9  A MAG unit: http://www.mag.gov.py/index.php/institucion/dependencias. 

http://www.mag.gov.py/index.php/institucion/dependencias.


 - 5 - 
 
 

 
censuses that show improvements with the use of these new technologies (Baker 
et al, 1995; Caeyers et al., 2011; Seligson and Moreno Morales, 2015; Benstead et 
al., 2017). 

1.14 The Bank’s experience. Since 2007, the Bank has approved a series of investment 
loans to help support censuses and strengthen statistical systems. These include: 
the Program to Support the Economic Census (loan 1918/BL-PR); Program to 
Develop the National Statistical System through the 2012 Population and Housing 
Census (loan 2542/BL-PR); Project to Improve the Agricultural Statistical 
Information System and the Agricultural Information Service for Rural Development 
in Peru (loan 3272/OC-PE); and the Sustainable Agricultural Development Program 
(loan 3798/BL-GY). Public good ATN/OC-14750-RG, Development of a 
Methodology for the Implementation of Agricultural Statistics Systems in Latin 
America and the Caribbean, is also now in execution.  

1.15 Based on these operations, as well as the recommendations of the FAO’s World 
Programme for the Census of Agriculture (WCA 2020) and IDB technical note 
“Experiencias en el diseño estadístico y realización de censos nacionales del sector 
agropecuario y rural” [Experiences in the statistical design and implementation of 
national censuses of the agricultural and rural sector] (document IDB-TN-366), 
Table 2 presents the main lessons learned and the how these have been 
incorporated into the design of the proposed operation. 

 
Table 2. Lesson Learned 

Recommendations Incorporation into program design 

1. The National Agricultural Census (CAN) 
must be considered part of an integrated 

national statistical system. 

The program includes the generation of integrated 
information (census and surveys) of the national 
agricultural statistics system, as input for the 
national statistical system. 

2. Pilot testing is necessary to prepare a 
high quality census questionnaire. 

The program calls for a pilot to review and adjust 
critical parameters, such as the duration of surveys 
and the data collection and analysis method. 

3. As a project activity, it is important to 
make respondents, producers, and users 
aware of the value of accurate statistical 
information and utilizing that information to 
improve the quality of public policy and 
decision-making. 

The program will finance a communication and 
dissemination plan to raise awareness in the target 
population prior to collecting information, along with 
widespread dissemination of findings through 

various sources. 

4. The extensive involvement of public 
and private sector users in designing the 
census questionnaire ensures that useful 

information is collected. 

To design the census questionnaire, the program 
calls for workshops with the participation of public 
and private sector users. 

5. Political commitment to the census at 
the highest level is important. 

The program includes joint activities with 
Agricultural Advisory Council (CAA) to ensure that 
it is a political priority. 

6. Include the gender perspective in the 
design of the questionnaires. 

The program supports the incorporation of 
questions that will generate information on gender 
and diversity in census and survey forms, following 
the guidelines of the FAO’s WCA 2020.  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-36


 - 6 - 
 
 

 
Recommendations Incorporation into program design 

7. Work with advanced technologies for 
data collection. 

The program incorporates the use of PDAs for 
personal interviews and a Web-based data 
transmission system to enhance data quality and 
reduce the time required for collection and 
analysis. It also includes the use of satellite 
imagery to make land-use and production 
estimates. The use of PDAs will also facilitate the 
implementation and quality control of the census. 

8. Institution-strengthening must be 
prioritized to ensure census continuity and 
the ongoing quality and dissemination of 
statistical information. 

The program includes investments to help 
strengthen the DCEA, so that data collection, 
analysis, and dissemination actions are 
sustainable. A cooperation agreement with the 
DGEEC is also planned. 

9. Synchronized administrative 
management is necessary when 
executing a mass data collection 
operation. 

The program calls for a company or international 
agency with experience in human resource 
management to be engaged for the selection and 
hiring of census takers. 

 

1.16 The country’s sector strategy. The project is linked primarily to the principal points 
and objectives of the National Development Plan 2030, as well as the MAG’s 
Agricultural Strategic Framework 2014-2018 and Institutional Strategic Plan 
2014-2018. In terms of the National Development Plan 2030 and its major areas of 
strategic focus—poverty reduction and social development, inclusive economic 
growth, and positioning Paraguay as a global player—the project will provide 
essential input to identify evidence-based actions to support farming families and 
rural populations. The program will also contribute to the MAG’s Agricultural 
Strategic Framework 2014-2018 by supporting public policy design and the adoption 
of sector development measures, as one of the objectives is to make information 
available for such purposes. The program also fits into the MAG’s Institutional 
Strategic Plan 2014-2018 by supporting the establishment of an agricultural 
information system that integrates information on climate, economics, and 
technology, as well as statistical synthesis and studies of current economic 
conditions and sector performance, to provide the different users with data for 
decision-making. 

1.17 The Bank’s country strategy. This operation is aligned with the Bank’s country 
strategy with Paraguay 2014-2018 (document GN-2769), since it contributes to the 
strategic objective to “Increase the supply of agricultural public goods and services.” 

1.18 Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008), specifically the crosscutting themes of: 
(i) institutional capacity and rule of law, as it seeks to strengthening the institutions 
that generate agricultural statistics; (ii) gender equality and diversity, as it generates 
differentiated information by thematic area: gender and indigenous peoples; and 
(iii) climate change and environmental sustainability, as it provides reliable 
information for building a national emissions inventory. The program is also aligned 
the Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6) under the 
indicator, “Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological 
and managerial tools to improve public service delivery,” through the outcome 
indicator “Improvement in institutional capacity to collect and process agricultural 
statistics” in the program’s Results Matrix. It is consistent with the Dimension of 



 - 7 - 
 
 

 
Success 1 of the Agriculture and Natural Resources Management Sector 
Framework Document (document GN-2709-5), which advocates that agriculture in 
the region achieve high levels of productivity and proposes the modernization of 
statistics systems as an activity under its second line of action. Lastly, it is consistent 
with the Sector Strategy on Institutions for Growth and Social Welfare (document 
GN-2587-2) through support for public sector management through integrated 
information systems. 

1.19 Approximately 6% of the resources of this operation will be invested in climate 
change adaptation activities, based on the joint methodology of the multilateral 
development banks for estimating climate finance. These resources contribute to 
the IDB Group’s goal to increase the financing of climate change-related projects to 
30% of total approvals by the end of 2020. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost 

1.20 The general objective of this project is to contribute to improving the availability and 
quality of agricultural information in the country, to support decision-making by public 
and private stakeholders. The program has the following components: 

1.21 Component 1: Design and implementation of the agricultural census 
(US$10.32 million). This component will finance the implementation of the 
agricultural census with emphasis on guaranteeing quality, proper thematic 
coverage, and the timely and wide dissemination of the information generated. As 
an innovation, this census will adopt the use of an electronic questionnaire and data 
capture using mobile devices in the field. The census will have a crosscutting gender 
approach, to get women more involved and increase their visibility in their role as 
both producers and workers. All relevant information will also be disaggregated by 
indigenous community and will address issues of environmental conservation. The 
agricultural census process to be financed will have the following stages: 
(i) pre-census: cartographic updates and georeferencing of farms, pre-census 
survey, and development of the data capture system; (ii) census: data collection pilot 
test and field operation; and (iii) post-census: data quality analysis, post-census 
survey, and dissemination of results. To promote the quality of data collection, this 
component also envisages: (i) validations and controls in the electronic form that 
assist census takers in their work; (ii) a pilot test in the field to validate the electronic 
forms; and (iii) dissemination actions to inform and motivate the respondent 
population. An information processing and analysis system will be developed that 
encompasses everything from database consolidation and quality control to the 
generation of the primary tabulations and making the information (including 
microdata) available to users online, in as much detail as permitted by laws and 
regulations on the confidentiality of the information. As an additional layer of quality 
control for the information generated, a post-census survey is planned to validate 
the accuracy of the census itself.  

1.22 Component 2: Institutional strengthening of the entities in the agricultural 
statistics system (US$3.67 million). This component will strengthen the capacity 
of the Office of Agricultural Censuses and Statistics (DCEA) to generate reliable and 
up-to-date agricultural statistics. The strengthening process includes: (i) developing 
IT tools to support the adoption of best practices for agricultural censuses; 
(ii) updating knowledge of census processes in the region by sending DCEA 
technical staff abroad and hiring experts to bring DCEA technical staff up to date on 

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807


 - 8 - 
 
 

 
practices used; (iii) renovating buildings; (iv) purchasing computer hardware; 
(v) purchasing vehicles to ensure that the DCEA can operate throughout rural areas; 
(vi) developing a model for the use of satellite imagery to produce agricultural 
statistics that can be validated with census information; (vii) conducting thematic 
studies with the census information; and (viii) conducting two surveys built on the 
census sampling frame to update relevant information on the sector. The topics of 
these surveys will depend on the studies and policy priorities, but may include 
agriculture, livestock, production costs, and family farming. Agricultural statistics are 
also expected to be incorporated into the national statistical system under an 
agreement with the DGEEC. 

C. Key results indicators 

1.23 The program Results Matrix has been agreed upon with the borrower (Annex II) and 
contains impact, outcome, and output indicators for the program, as well as its 
baselines and targets. In keeping with the program objective, the impact indicators 
also seek to capture the two dimensions of availability and quality of agricultural 
information. As a substitute for availability, the number of census information 
requests is used as an indicator. The indicator to evaluate the expected changes in 
the quality of information will be user ratings. At the outcome level, indicators are 
included for three different dimensions: (i) the quality of the census will be assessed 
by comparing the census results to the results of the post-census survey, omission 
rate, and nonresponse rate; (ii) the improvement in the timeliness and availability of 
agricultural information will be verified through a shorter time lag between the 
conclusion of field work and publication of the final results, as well as through a 
shorter time devoted to data collection in the field; and (iii) the improvement in 
agricultural statistical capacity will be assessed through the rating of installed 
capacities for the production and dissemination of agricultural and rural statistics.  

1.24 As an added benefit, strengthening the agricultural census makes the source of 
information used to build Paraguay’s national emissions inventory more reliable, 
enabling Paraguay to comply with current requirements under the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and transparency guidelines 
under the Paris Agreement.10 It also generates information on land use (pastures, 
forests, crops), livestock, etc., that can be used to assess resilience, design public 
policies on adaptation, and makes it possible to pose specific questions on mitigation 
and/or adaptation. The program will also benefit Paraguayan farmers and ranchers 
(currently estimated at 300,000), public and private institutions, and other links in the 
agrifood chain. 

1.25 The use of mobile devices for data capture and satellite imagery are technological 
innovations that will benefit the country’s statistical capacity in the context of the 
agreement signed with the DGEEC. The program will also receive advisory support 
from the National Secretariat for Information and Communication Technologies 
(SENATICs) on the technical specifications of computer hardware and connectivity. 
These interagency agreements, along with efforts to strengthen the MAG/DCEA, 
aim to make the generation of agricultural statistics sustainable. 

                                                
10  The Paris Agreement (2015) is part of the UNFCCC, which establishes measures to reduce greenhouse 

gas emissions through mitigation, adaptation, and resilience of ecosystems to the effects of global 
warming. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40491683
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Treaty
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Climate_change_mitigation
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Climate_change_adaptation
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ecological_resilience


 - 9 - 
 
 

 
1.26 Economic viability. The economic analysis of the program was based on the 

economic viability of the 2018 National Agricultural Census (CAN 2018), the costs 
of which represent nearly 80% of total program resources. The analysis of the 
economic viability of the census employed the least-cost methodology (a specific 
instance of cost-effectiveness analysis). This methodology is commonly used in 
interventions of this nature, when it is recognized that the benefits (statistical 
information, in this case) have a very high value, but one that is difficult to quantify. 

1.27 The anticipated costs of the agricultural census indicate that it will be cost-effective 
(See optional electronic link 1). The estimated total cost of CAN 2018 is 
US$11,627,262,11 including all aspects of the preparation, survey, processing, and 
dissemination phases. The estimated number of productive units to be enumerated 
will be around 300,000, yielding a cost per productive unit of US$39.12 This figure is 
higher than was budgeted for the agricultural censuses in Nicaragua (2011, US$23) 
and Honduras (2008, US$27), but lower than was budgeted in Brazil (2018, US$47) 
or the actual figure in Uruguay (2011, US$73). Factoring in the land area (which 
affects the cost of field work), the cost per square kilometer of CAN 2018 in 
Paraguay will be US$29, which is higher than in Uruguay (2011, US$18.5) and 
similar to Brazil (2018, US$29), but lower than in Nicaragua (2011, US$49) and 
Honduras (2008, US$71). The cost of the agricultural census will therefore be within 
the range of costs of other recent agricultural censuses performed in countries of the 
region. 

1.28 Another relevant comparison is the costs budgeted for the census using 
computer-assisted personal interviewing (CAPI) (US$11,627,262) versus the costs 
that would be expected using pen-and-paper interviewing (PAPI) (US$12,330,855). 
The use of PDAs instead of paper questionnaires will save approximately 
US$700,000. This figure does not reflect the fact that CAPI offers better quality 
control than PAPI, so the financial gains of adopting CAPI are even greater. 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 This project is designed as a specific investment loan under the Flexible Financing 
Facility (document FN-655-1) and the specific investment modality. Its total cost is 
US$15 million, to be financed totally by the Bank from the Ordinary Capital 
resources. 

                                                
11  This figure includes the amount of Component 1, plus an amount corresponding to equipment and 

management and evaluation costs for the project. 
12  All figures presented in the economic viability analysis are expressed in 2016 U.S. dollars. The sources 

of this data are the FAO, Uruguay’s Office of Agricultural Statistics (DIEA), and the DCEA (Paraguay). 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-30


 - 10 - 
 
 

 
Table 3. Program Cost and Financing (in US$000) 

WBS Components IDB % 

1 Component 1: Design and implementation of the 
agricultural census 

10,320 69% 

2 Component 2: Institutional strengthening of the entities 
in the agricultural statistics system 

3,670 24% 

3 Administration, audit, and evaluation 710 5% 

4 Contingencies 300 2% 

 Total: 15,000 100% 

 * These amounts include local taxes. 

2.2 The program disbursement period will be five years, running from the effective date 
of the loan contract. Disbursements will be made in the form of advances of funds 
(see paragraph 3.7). 

 
Table 4. Disbursement Schedule (in US$) 

 Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

Total 1,559,201 11,117,339 895,705 803,553 624,202 15,000,000 

% 10% 74% 6% 6% 4% 100% 

 

B. Environmental and social safeguard risks 

2.3 In accordance with the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy 
(Operational Policy OP-703), the Bank has analyzed the potential environmental and 
social risks of this operation and classified it as category “B,” with a moderate level 
of risk. No significant environmental or social risks have been identified in the 
sociocultural analysis prepared for this project. The identified environmental and 
social risks relate primarily to interactions between census takers and the indigenous 
population, risks faced by census takers when travelling to socially complex areas, 
and the risk that the census questionnaire may not be sensitive enough to the 
sociocultural complexity of indigenous peoples and gender issues in agriculture. The 
sociocultural analysis includes recommendations on these issues to promote the 
inclusion of vulnerable population groups like indigenous peoples and small family 
farmers, with a gender approach. 

2.4 In accordance with Operational Policy OP-703, Directive B.6, this project requires at 
least one public consultation. This requirement was met with two consultations 
conducted with key stakeholders: (i) one with public and private sector data users, 
and (ii) another with the National Organization of Indigenous Peoples (ONPI). 
Additional consultations with other social actors are also planned as part of the 
census preparation process, especially, once a draft census form is ready. More 
information on this matter is included in the annex, Environmental and social 
management report (ESMR). 

C. Fiduciary risks 

2.5 The fiduciary risk is low, so no special mitigation actions are planned. 

D. Other project risks 

2.6 The following was identified as high risk: a government changeover would affect 
priority or execution time. The planned mitigation measure is to rely on political 
consensus and the sectoral private sector, as well as the mandate contained in 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1261750315-13
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-32
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-31
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-29


 - 11 - 
 
 

 
Article 8 of Law 81 of 1992, and international commitments (the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development). The following were identified as medium risks: (i) public 
administration fails to keep pace with census operation needs; (ii) no decree issued 
to conduct the census; (iii) refusal to provide information to census takers; 
(iv) political decisions not to disseminate census results; and (v) loan contract fails 
to enter into effect in 2018. The following mitigation activities were identified and 
agreed upon, supported particularly by the Agricultural Advisory Council (CAA) for 
the census, made up of prominent individuals from the public and private sector, to 
back up policy-level actions at the key entities identified: (i) the CAA will take steps 
to comply with administrative time frames; (ii) work will be done directly with the 
Office of the President; (iii) an efficient communication campaign will be launched 
(local authorities and civil society); (iv) the CAA will take steps to raise awareness 
among public sector stakeholders, with IDB support; and (v) the MAG, CAA, and 
project team will work with Congress for it to take up this law for consideration. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower will be the Republic of Paraguay, and the executing agency will be the 
borrower, acting through the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG), which will 
be fully responsible for administration and supervision of the program. 

3.2 The program will be implemented under the direct supervision of the MAG, acting 
through the Office of Agricultural Censuses and Statistics (DCEA) and the National 
Office of Project Coordination and Administration (DINCAP). The DCEA, supported 
by a program execution unit (PEU) reporting directly to the DCEA director, will 
provide general coordination of program execution, programming, and monitoring, 
ensuring that the conditions and targets set in the loan contract are met, and serving 
as principal liaison between the IDB and the borrower during execution. DINCAP will 
perform administration and finance activities, as well as procurement and 
contracting, in coordination with the PEU. 

3.3 The key positions identified for the PEU for program execution are: (i) general 
coordinator; (ii) Component 1 coordinator; (iii) Component 2 coordinator; 
(iv) financial and administrative specialist; (v) procurement specialist; and 
(vi) planning and monitoring specialist. 

3.4 Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan 
proceeds: (i) the program execution unit has been established on the terms 
agreed upon with the Bank; and (ii) the borrower has provided evidence, to 
the Bank’s satisfaction, that the program Operating Regulations have entered 
into force. These conditions must be satisfied for implementation to begin. The 
program Operating Regulations establish the basic rules for the execution of the loan 
(e.g., field work, supervision, and regional coordination, information processing and 
analysis, and fiduciary considerations), as well as the responsibilities of PEU 
members.  

3.5 Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services. Procurements 
financed in whole or part with IDB funds will be conducted pursuant to the Policies 
for the Procurement of Works and Goods Financed by the Inter-American 
Development Bank (document GN-2349-9) and the Policies for the Selection and 



 - 12 - 
 
 

 
Contracting of Consultants Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank 
(document GN-2350-9). The procurement plan contains detailed information on the 
procurements to be implemented during execution, as well as the procedures 
followed by the Bank for their review. Numerous low- and medium-skilled operational 
staff will be hired (approximately 5,300 people) to collect CAN information in the 
field. To do so, an international competitive bidding process will be held to engage 
a firm with experience in human resources management, or an international agency 
with such experience will be contracted. No selection processes involving single-
source selection are planned, with the exception of fuel purchases, since this product 
can be obtained from only one source13 under the fuel provision agreement between 
Petróleos Paraguayos (PETROPAR) and the executing agency,14 and other cases 
where it is justified under policy documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9. 

3.6 The Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements (Annex III) establish the framework 
applicable to program execution for financial management and planning, as well as 
procurement supervision and execution. An intervention of this nature entails 
significant travel expenditures and an additional time commitment from employees 
of the MAG or other government agencies called upon to prepare and implement of 
the census, as well as process and disseminate the information generated. The 
estimated expenditure for these tasks is approximately US$1.3 million, broken down 
as follows: per diems (per MAG regulations) (33%), gas (21%), and additional 
compensation (45%). This last item must be justified by the Budget Act and in line 
with expense items 123, 125, and 137, depending on the different cases of 
employees that take on additional work.15 

3.7 Disbursements. The disbursement modality will be as established in the Financial 
Management Guidelines for IDB-financed Projects (document OP-273-6). 
Advances will be made preferably on a six-monthly basis, once justification has been 
provided for at least 80% of the advanced amount. Accountability forms and the 
financial planning spreadsheet must be submitted as documentation.  

3.8 Audits. The PEU will deliver the audited financial statements for the program on an 
annual basis during execution on the terms required by the Bank. The project will 
require the selection of a Plus-level independent auditing firm. The audited financial 
statements will be delivered within 120 days after the close of each fiscal year, and 
the closing final statement will be delivered within 120 days following the scheduled 
date for the last disbursement. 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.9 The project has a detailed monitoring and evaluation plan agreed upon with the 
MAG. The DCEA, acting through the PEU, will be responsible for generating and 
sharing the necessary information with the Bank to track the Results Matrix 
indicators. 

3.10 Monitoring. Throughout project execution, the PEU will prepare and deliver status 
reports to the Bank within 60 days after the end of each six-month period. These 

                                                
13  Document GN-2349-9, paragraph 3.6(c). 

14  Based on Article 316 of Decree 176 implementing Articles 128 and 129 of Law 5554/2016. 

15  The program does not call for counterpart support to be factored into the calculation. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-43
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40468605
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-34


 - 13 - 
 
 

 
reports will provide a detailed account of physical and financial execution of the 
project, as well as progress on all Results Matrix indicators. The reports will also 
provide a detailed account of issues encountered during project execution, and 
corrective measures taken, as well as explain any deviation from the project 
management instruments (multiyear execution plan, annual work plan (AWP), and 
procurement plan). No later than the last quarter of each year of project execution, 
the PEU will deliver the AWP for the following year, to the Bank’s satisfaction, as 
well as the maintenance plan for equipment purchased with the loan proceeds and 
the plan for meeting the environmental and social requirements established in the 
environmental and social management plan (ESMP). Bank staff will conduct regular 
inspection missions and meet with PEU personnel to discuss the progress of 
activities identified in the AWP, compliance with the Results Matrix indicators, the 
AWP for the following year, and the procurement plan for the next 12 months. 

3.11 In addition to overall monitoring of execution, the project will incorporate several 
different measures to oversee data gathering and ensure the quality of information 
in CAN 2018 and the agricultural surveys in the two subsequent years. Firstly, a 
cartographic update will be done, to minimize the likelihood of omissions or 
duplications during data collection. Secondly, the PDAs used to collect information 
will have a built-in, automatic verification program. This way, any inconsistency in 
responses, whether contradictions or mistakes on the part of the respondent or 
errors on the part of the census taker when entering the information into the PDA, 
will be detected and corrected immediately. Thirdly, CAN 2018 will have a Web-
based data transmission system for the immediate and simultaneous application of 
controls on progress and coverage in the field, and the data registered by census 
takers. 

3.12 As established in the monitoring and evaluation plan, the project will have a midterm 
and a final evaluation. The midterm evaluation will be conducted 90 days after the 
date on which 50% of the loan proceeds have been committed, or 50% of the 
execution period has elapsed, whichever occurs first. The objective of the midterm 
evaluation will be to review the progress of all activities, examine the causes of any 
potential deviation from the planned progress, and propose corrective measures. 
The final evaluation will be conducted 90 days after the date on which 95% of the 
loan proceeds have been disbursed. These reports will include: (i) financial 
execution by subcomponent and the source of financing; (ii) progress on outputs, 
outcomes, and impacts included in the Results Matrix; (iii) compliance with the 
ESMP; (iv) summary of financial statements, procurements, disbursements, and 
internal control; (v) review of implementation; and (vi) lessons learned. Both the 
midterm and final evaluation will be conducted by external consultants independent 
of the PEU. 

3.13 Impact assessment. The project will have a “before and after” evaluation of the 
impact indicators included in the Results Matrix, conducted as part of the final 
evaluation described above and the project completion report (PCR). 

3.14 Additionally, CAN 2018 will include a post-census survey to measure omission and 
nonresponse rates, as well as the accuracy of certain key variables included in the 
census. This will make it possible to get an exact final value for the outcome 
indicators included in the Results Matrix. Significantly, there is no known experience 
with post-census surveys in the case of agricultural censuses, so this will be the only 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-34


 - 14 - 
 
 

 
census in the region to conduct such a survey. For that reason, CAN 2018 will not 
only yield benefits for Paraguay, but serve as an international benchmark. 



Annex I - PR-L1147

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2769

     Country Program Results Matrix

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country strategy 

or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution

     3.1 Program Diagnosis

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic 

Analysis

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms

     5.2 Evaluation Plan

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries and/or 

public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality

Labor

Environment

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector entity 

prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps in 

the sector that were identified in the project document and/or in the evaluation plan

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Yes

-Gender Equality and Diversity

-Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability

-Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law

I. Corporate and Country Priorities

Yes

Increase the provision of agricultural public goods and services.

The intervention is not included in the 2017 Operational Program.

Low

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting and 

Reporting.

Procurement: Information System, Price Comparison.

The objective of the project is to contribute to improving the availability and quality of agricultural information in the country to support the decision-making of public and private agents. To 

achieve this objective, the project will implement two components: 1) Design and implementation of the Agricultural Census; and 2) Institutional strengthening of the entities in charge of 

the agricultural statistics system.

The documentation is well structured, with a good diagnosis of the problems and main weaknesses faced by the national agricultural statistics system, including institutional weaknesses, 

inadequate methods and statistical practices used, and lack of coordination in the national statistical system. Likewise, aspects of the previous agricultural census are identified that can 

be improved upon in terms of data quality, and the dissemination and use of these data.

The proposed solution is in line with the problems identified. The results matrix (RM) reflects the objectives of the program and shows a clear vertical logic. Higher-level indicators reflect 

benchmarks established in other censuses to measure data quality. The lower level indicators reflect the design of each component. The RM includes SMART indicators at the levels of 

impacts, results and outputs with their respective baseline values, targets, and means to collect information. Empirical evidence is provided on the utility and effectiveness of implementing 

surveys using the Computer Assisted Personal Interviewing (CAPI) method; however, the external validity of this evidence is not alluded to.

The economic analysis is based on a cost-effectiveness analysis. The cost per survey, and per square kilometer, is compared between this and other censuses in the region. The census 

cost is identified using the CAPI method and it is compared to the cost of the counterfactual if the PAPI (Pen-And-Paper Interviewing) method was used. The results indicate that the 

CAPI method will provide a census of better quality and at a lower cost. A sensitivity analysis is performed based on the main costs. The results indicate that the CAPI method will allow 

the country to save a significant amount of resources, which is in contrast if the census was done using the PAPI method.

The monitoring and evaluation plan proposes an evaluation using two methods: 1) reflexive evaluation; and 2) ex post cost-effectiveness assessment. The reflexive evaluation will use the 

results of the census and a post-census survey to measure the quality of the data in terms of omission and non-response rates. These results will provide important information, since 

there is no evidence from another agricultural census carried out in the region that undertakes a post-census survey to verify the quality of the data

The risks identified in the risk matrix seem reasonable. Risks include mitigation actions and compliance indicators.

Evaluable
9.3

3.0

3.6

2.7

1.2

6.9

2.3

4.7

10.0

4.0

2.4

1.2

1.2



Annex II 
Page 1 of 5 

 
 

RESULTS MATRIX 

Project objective: To contribute to improving the availability and quality of agricultural information in the country, to support decision-
making by public and private stakeholders. 

 

EXPECTED IMPACT 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline Base year Final target Means of verification Comments 

Impact: Improve the utilization and value of agricultural statistical information. 

Requests and 
downloads of 
information 
generated from 
the agricultural 
census 

Information 
requests and 
downloads 

110 2009 200 DCEA reports No systematic record of consultations is 
available for the 2008 agricultural 
census. There are records of 
information requests that serve as a 
basis to estimate the quantity. 

Quality rating of 
census data 
based on user 
perceptions 

Score (1-5) To be 
determined 

2017 BL * 1.25 Survey of public sector 
users of agricultural 
information 

Create a list of users of agricultural 
information. Determine consultation 
methodology and content of the rating 
form. 
Construct baseline with opinions on the 
2008 census. 
For the new census, consider one year 
after the census is published to allow for 
dissemination. 

 
  



Annex II 
Page 2 of 5 
 
 

EXPECTED OUTCOMES 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline Base Indicators Unit of measure Comments 

Outcome 1: Improvement in the quality of the country’s agricultural statistics 

Difference 
between the 
results of the 
post-census 
survey and the 
census 

% N/A N/A <5% Publication of the census and results 
of the post census survey 

For the main variables: land area, 
land use, and others to be 
determined when the census form 
is designed. 

Overall 
omission rate 

% N/A N/A <5% Agricultural census fact sheet Comparison between the 
agricultural census and the post-
census survey. 

Nonresponse 
rate 

% N/A N/A 1% Agricultural census fact sheet and 
database 

Comparison between the 
agricultural census and the post-
census survey. 

FAO Gender 
Index 

Index 0 2009 1 The FAO Gender Index is calculated 
using items 1001-1005 of the FAO 
publication “World Programme of the 
Census of Agriculture 2020,” dividing 
the number of responses that can be 
obtained based on census 
information by the total number of 
items (5) 

Gender monitoring. 

Indigenous 
population 
index 

Index 0 2009 1 The indigenous population index has 
a value of 1 if the main census 
variables can be stratified based on 
the producer’s ethnic origin, and 0 if 
the census data cannot be broken 
down by this criterion 

Ethnic monitoring. 



Annex II 
Page 3 of 5 

 
 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline Base Indicators Unit of measure Comments 

Outcome 2: Improvement in the timeliness and availability of agricultural information 

Time lag 
between the 
end of field 
work and 
publication of 
results 

Months 12 2009 6 Presentation of final results Construct baseline using the 2008 
census. 

Time taken for 
field work 

Months 9 2008 4 Agricultural census fact sheet DCEA report on 2008 census as 
baseline. 

Outcome 3: Improvement in institutional capacity for the collection and processing of agricultural statistics 

Rating of 
agricultural 
statistical 
capacity 

Score To be 
determined 

2017 To be 
determined 

Report with baseline and final scores Score applied using the FAO 
methodology (“Assessing Country 
Capacity to Produce Agricultural 
and Rural Statistics,” June 2014), 
surveyed by an external 
consultant, rather than self-rating. 
Use the score directly and not 
“Class.” 

 
  



Annex II 
Page 4 of 5 
 
 

OUTPUTS 

Outputs 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline 

Base 
year 

Year 
1 

Year 
2 

Year 
3 

Year 
4 

Year 
5 

Final 
target 

Means of verification Comments 

Component 1: Design and implementation of the agricultural census 

Cartographic 
update 

Cartographic 
maps of 
departments 

0 2017  17    17 Department maps, DCEA 
technical report, and GIS 
content. With technical support 
from the DGEEC. 

 

Census 
conducted 

Census 0 2017  1    1 Preliminary results published.  

Post-census 
evaluation 
survey 
conducted 

Survey 0 2017   1   1 Report on post-census survey 
results.  
Within six months following 
census field work. 

 

Results 
disseminated 

Publication N/A N/A   1   1 Dissemination includes 
publication of results with a 
methodological note and the 
primary tabulations, as well as 
Web-based microdata 
consultation system. 

 

Component 2: Institutional strengthening of the entities in the agricultural statistics system 

Agricultural 
surveys  

Surveys 0 2017    1 1 2 Publication of survey results 
within three years following the 
census. 

 

Technical staff 
trained in 
generating 
statistical 
information 

Number of 
technical 
staff 

0 2017  15    15 DCEA report identifying 
technical staff and areas in 
which they received training. 

 

Model 
developed for 
the use of 
satellite 
imagery  

Model 0 2017    1  1 DCEA report on the results 
achieved in using satellite 
imagery to generate agricultural 
statistics.  

 



Annex II 
Page 5 of 5 

 
 

Thematic 
studies 
performed with 
census 
information 

Number of 
studies 

0 2017    1 2 3 Documents with the results of 
the studies performed within 24 
months following publication of 
the census results. 

 

 



Annex III 
Page 1 of 6 

 
 

FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENT 

Country: Republic of Paraguay 

Project name: Project to Implement the Census and Agricultural Surveys 
System 

Project number: PR-L1147 

Executing agency Republic of Paraguay, acting through the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Livestock (MAG) 

Prepared by: Fernando Glasman, Bruno Candia, and Jorge Luis Gonzalez 
(Fiduciary Specialists) 

 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 The institutional evaluation for the project’s fiduciary management was based on: 
(i) the fiduciary context of the country; (ii) the findings of the fiduciary risk 
assessment and project risk management workshop; and (iii) the September 2017 
report on findings using the Institutional Capacity Assessment System (ICAS) on the 
National Office of Project Coordination and Administration (DINCAP). The fiduciary 
agreements applicable in project execution have been prepared as a result of this 
evaluation. 

II. FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE COUNTRY 

2.1 In general terms, the country systems for financial management have a medium 
level of development; nevertheless, these systems need to be supplemented for the 
execution of Bank-financed projects. Specific financial reports are prepared through 
auxiliary accounting systems. Financial control tools such as the Integrated Financial 
Administration System (SIAF), the Integrated Accounting Subsystem (SICO), and 
other subsystems allow the executing agency to manage payment transfers to 
vendors under acceptable conditions through the Central Bank of Paraguay. The 
integration of these tools will allow audited financial statements for a program or 
project to be prepared in the SIAF in the future; in the meantime, parallel systems 
are used. External control is currently performed through private audit firms. 

2.2 In terms of the country’s Public Sector Procurement System (SCSP), the Bank 
makes full use of the Public Procurement Information System (SICP), as well as the 
country subsystems electronic for reverse auction and competitive bidding, for the 
amounts and categories established in the agreement for the use of these 
subsystems signed between Paraguay and the Bank on 17 June 2014.  



Annex III 
Page 2 of 6 
 
 

III. FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY 

3.1 The executing agency will be the Republic of Paraguay, acting through the Ministry 
of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG), with the support of the Office of Agricultural 
Censuses and Statistics (DCEA) and DINCAP. The DCEA, supported by a program 
execution unit (PEU) reporting directly to the DCEA director, will provide general 
coordination of program execution, programming, and monitoring, ensuring that the 
conditions and targets set in the loan contract are met, and serving as principal 
liaison between the IDB and the borrower during execution. DINCAP will perform 
administration and finance activities, as well as procurement and contracting, in 
coordination with the PEU.  

3.2 Considering the MAG’s satisfactory fiduciary performance in the execution of prior 
operations (loans 1255/OC-PR and 1800/OC-PR), acting through DINCAP, no 
fiduciary risks are anticipated that could affect meeting the program objectives. 
Nonetheless, the institutional capacity assessment of the MAG was updated during 
the preparation phase of the operation in the following areas: planning and 
organization, capacity to execute the activities programmed and organized 
(administration of personnel, goods, and services, and financial management), and 
control. The consolidated result for the MEG capabilities evaluated using the ICAS 
exhibits a medium level of development, which is associated with medium risk. 

IV. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

4.1 Based on the evaluations of the MAG and our experience to date, the opportunities 
for improvement are concentrated in the strengthening of accounting and internal 
control. 

4.2 Procurement management. The fiduciary risk is low, so no special mitigation 
actions are envisaged.  

4.3 Financial management. The internal control unit lacks formal procedures for the 
monitoring of project-related activities. For that reason, the DCEA will prepare a 
procedures manual for the PEU that will be approved by MAG authorities. 

V. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE CONTRACT 

5.1 The following agreements and requirements should be included in the special 
provisions:  

a. A special bank account to be opened for the exclusive use of the program.  

b. The executing agency will deliver the audited annual and final financial 
statements for the project, with specific terms of reference acceptable to the 
Bank, within 120 days after the close of each fiscal year of the executing 
agency during the original disbursement period or its extensions. The final 
audit report will be delivered within 120 days after the close of the original 
disbursement period or its extensions. 



Annex III 
Page 3 of 6 

 
 

VI. FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR  
PROCUREMENT EXECUTION 

6.1 The applicable procurement policies for this loan are documents GN-2349-9 and 
GN-2350-9. The Bank’s Board of Executive Directors also approved the use of the 
electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding subsystems (document 
GN-2538-11) of the SCSP (Law 2051/03). The use of other country systems 
accepted subsequent to approval of the project will be implemented automatically, 
and so stated in the procurement plan. 

6.2 Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services. Contracts for 
works, goods, and nonconsulting services1 subject to international competitive 
bidding (ICB) will be executed using the standard bidding documents issued by the 
Bank. Bidding processes subject to national competitive bidding will be conducted 
using national bidding documents agreed upon with the Bank. The project sector 
specialist will be responsible for reviewing the technical specifications of 
procurements during the preparation of selection processes. No selection processes 
involving single-source selection are planned initially, with the exception of fuel 
purchases under the fuel provision agreement between Petróleos Paraguayos 
(PETROPAR) and the executing agency,2 and other cases where it is justified under 
policy documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9.  

6.3 Numerous low- and medium skilled operational staff will be hired (approximately 
5,300 people) to collect information in the field. To do so, an international competitive 
bidding process will be held to engage a firm with experience in human resources 
management, or an international agency with such experience will be contracted. 
The estimated budget to engage this firm is US$335,895, and the estimated 
personnel expenditure is US$7,028,731. 

6.4 Selection and contracting of consultants. Consulting service contracts generated 
under the project will be executed using the standard request for proposals issued 
or agreed upon with the Bank. The project sector specialist will be responsible for 
reviewing the terms of reference for the contracting consulting services.  

a. Selection of individual consultants. Pursuant to the procurement policies 
contained in document GN-2350-9. 

b. Training. A procurement workshop will be held. 

c. Use of country system. Pursuant to document GN-2538 of October 2013, the 
use of the SCSP electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding 
subsystems in Bank-financed operations will apply:  

(i) To all contracts for goods and nonconsulting services subject to the use 
of the electronic reverse auction procedure under the SCSP and 
involving amounts below the Bank’s established threshold for the 
shopping method for off-the-shelf goods (for reference, US$250,000)..  

(ii) To all contracts for works involving amounts below the Bank’s 
established threshold for use of the competitive bidding (shopping) 

                                                
1  Document GN-2349-9, paragraph 1.1: Nonconsulting services are treated as goods. 

2  Based on Article 316 of Decree 176 implementing Articles 128 and 129 of Law 5554/2016. 



Annex III 
Page 4 of 6 
 
 

method for complex works (for reference, US$250,000), and for 
contracts for goods and nonconsulting services up to the amount 
established by the Bank for use of the shopping method for complex 
goods and services (for reference, US$50,000) 

(iii) Contracts for amounts equal to or greater than the aforementioned 
amounts will be governed by Bank policies (document GN-2349-9). 

6.5 Section 1 of the Bank policies (document GN-2349-9) will continue to be applicable 
to all executed contracts, regardless of amount or procurement method. Any system 
or subsystem approved subsequently will be applicable to this operation. The 
operation’s procurement plan and its updates will indicate what contracts are to be 
executed through the approved country systems.3 

6.6 Recurring expenditures. An intervention of this nature entails significant travel 
expenditures and an additional time commitment from employees of the MAG or 
other government agencies called upon to prepare and implement of the census, as 
well as process and disseminate the information generated. The estimated 
expenditure for these tasks is approximately US$1.3 million, broken down as follows: 
per diems (per MAG regulations) (33%), gas (21%), and additional compensation 
(45%). This last item must be justified by the Budget Act and in line with expense 
items 123, 125, and 137, depending on the different cases of employees that take 
on additional work. 

6.7 Advance procurement/retroactive financing. None for this operation. 

6.8 Domestic preference. None for this operation. 

 
Table 1. Thresholds for ICB and International Shortlist (US$) 

Method ICB works 
ICB goods and 
nonconsulting 

services 

International shortlist 
in consulting services 

Threshold 3,000,000 250,000 200,000 

 

                                                
3  If the Bank approves another system or subsystem, it will be applicable to the operation, in accordance 

with the loan contract. 



Annex III 
Page 5 of 6 

 
 

Table 2. Main Procurements 

Activity Method 
Estimated 

date 
Estimated  

amount (US$) 

Goods    

Computer hardware and tablets ICB Year 1 1,382,014 

Procurement of vehicles ICB Year 1 617,500 

Procurement of fuel SSS Year 1 283,353 

Nonconsulting services    

Firm to contract and manage personnel for field work ICB Year 1 335,895 

Consulting firms    

Evaluation of data quality by sampling QCBS Year 2 315,857 

Field operation (7,500 surveys in two waves) QCBS Year 4 758,981 

* Link to procurement plan. 

 
Table 3. Amounts by Category 

Categories Total amounts (US$) 

Works 35,588 

Goods 2,578,683 

Nonconsulting services 1,339,537 

Consulting firms 1,280,965 

Individual consultants 1,349,647 

Total, procurement plan 6,584,420 

Note: Does not include the US$7,028,731 corresponding to the operational staff expense for collection of information in 
the field, described in paragraph 6.3, as it is not a procurement. 

 

6.9 Procurement supervision. All procurement processes governed by policy 
documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 will be subject to ex ante review by the Bank, 
considering the position of the Ministry of Finance on the matter. Supervision of all 
procurement processes governed by the SCSP electronic reverse auction and 
competitive bidding subsystems (document GN- 2538-11) will be conducted through 
the country’s system.4 

6.10 Special provisions. No special provisions are anticipated, beyond those specified 
in paragraph 5.1. 

6.11 Records and files. The agreed formats and procedures to be described in the 
project’s Fiduciary Manual of Functions and Procedures should be used for the 
preparation and filing of project reports. 

VII. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

7.1 Programming and budget. (a) The PEU, reporting to the DCEA and in coordination 
with DINCAP, will centralize the coordination of execution, supported by other 
departments and units of the MAG, as necessary; and (b) the MAG will be 
responsible for budget programming, administration, and execution, under the zero-
based budget system. 

                                                
4  Depending on the scope of use of the system, supervision may be supplemented by project audits. If so, it 

should be mentioned in this Annex. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1147/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-345112541-43


Annex III 
Page 6 of 6 
 
 

7.2 Accounting and information systems. The country uses the modified cash basis 
of accounting; however, cash basis accounting is used for the accountability process 
of IDB-financed projects.  

a. Information systems. The PEU will have access to the SIAF through 
DINCAP. The country systems do not issue the reports necessary for the Bank. 
These reports are prepared using different systems, which creates additional 
work for the PEU. 

b. Disbursements and cash flow. Program disbursements will be made through 
advances of funds, which must be corroborated through the monthly 
submission of a detailed financial plan for up to six months, and another for a 
longer period, which can be used to determine the program’s actual demand 
inferred from the multiyear execution plan, annual work plan, and procurement 
plan. The second and subsequent disbursements will be subject to the 
justification of 80% of the previous advance.  

c. Exchange rate. The exchange rate agreed upon with the executing agency for 
accountability will be decided by the borrower and executing agency during the 
loan negotiation process. 

d. Internal control and internal audit. The ICAS establishes an improvement 
plan for internal control. Additionally, the MAG internal audit unit does not 
include Bank-financed projects in its audit plan.  

e. External control and reports. The executing agency must deliver annual 
program audit reports prepared by an independent audit firm accepted by the 
Bank, on terms of reference previously approved by the Bank. The project's 
financial statements include a cash flow statement, statement of accrued 
investment income, the notes to these financial statements, and the statement 
from the project management team. The audit report will include evaluation of 
the internal control system. The project will require the selection of a Plus-level 
independent audit firm. External audits will be covered with loan proceeds, 
estimated at US$260,000 over the planned five years of execution of the loan. 

f. Financial supervision plan. Financial supervision may be adjusted based on 
project execution and internal audit reports. 

 
Table 4. Financial Supervision Plan 

Nature/Scope Frequency 

Ex post review of disbursements 1 per year 

Financial audit and delivery of financial statements Annual 

Review of disbursement requests and attached reports 2/3 per year 

Inspection visit/analysis of internal controls and 
control environment at the executing agency 

Annual 

 

7.3 Execution mechanism. As described in Section III.A. of the loan proposal. 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/17 
 
 
 

Paraguay. Loan ____/OC-PR to the Republic of Paraguay 
Project to Implement the Agricultural Survey 

and Census System 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized, 
in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be necessary 
with the Republic of Paraguay, as Borrower, for the purpose of granting it a financing to cooperate in 
the execution of the Project to Implement the Agricultural Survey and Census System. Such 
financing will be for an amount of up to US$15,000,000 from the Ordinary Capital resources of the 
Bank, and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual 
Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on ___ ____________ 2017) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/CSC/EZSHARE-746870777-1994 
Pipeline: PR-L1147 
 



















































PUBLIC  

SIMULTANEOUS  DISCLOSURE 

 

 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

HAITI 

 

 

ARTISANAL FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 

 

 

(HA-L1096) 
 

 

 

 

 

 

GRANT PROPOSAL 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Caroline Bidault (RND/CHA), Team Leader; 

Bruno Jacquet, Marie Bonnard (RND/CHA); Lina Salazar, Carmine Paolo De Salvo, Michele Lemay 

(INE/RND); Romina Emanuela Kirkagacli, Marise Etienne Salnave (FMP/CHA); Louis-François Chrétien 

(LEG/SGO); Régine Lafontant (CDH/CHA); and Lisa Restrepo (INE/RND). 

 

In accordance with the Access to Information Policy, this document is being released to the public and 

distributed to the Bank´s Board of Executive Directors simultaneously. This document has not been 

approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be 

made available to the public, thus superseding and replacing the original version. 



CONTENT 

 

PROJECT SUMMARY………………………………………………………………………..1 

I. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................... 2 

A. Background, Problem Addressed and Justification ........................................... 2 

B. Objective, Components and Cost ...................................................................... 9 

C. Key Results Indicators ..................................................................................... 11 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS .................................................................. 11 

A. Financing Instruments ..................................................................................... 11 

B. Economic Analysis .......................................................................................... 11 

C. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks .................................................... 12 

D. Fiduciary Risk ................................................................................................. 12 

E. Other Key Issues and Risks ............................................................................. 13 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................. 13 

A. Summary Implementation Arrangements........................................................ 13 

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results ........................................ 16 

 



- ii - 

Annexes 
Annex I Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) Summary  

Annex II Results Matrix  

Annex III Fiduciary Arrangements 

 

Electronic Links 

Required 

1. The Pluriannual Execution Plan (PEP) 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542908  

2. Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542996 

3. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542894 

4. Procurement Plan 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542989 

Optional  

1. Economic Analysis of the Program 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542897 

2. Detailed Budget per Output 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542908 

3. Diagnostic of the fishery sector in Haiti Southern regions 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39305157  

4. A snapshot view of the fishery associated with Fishing Aggregating Devices (FADs) in 
selected communes of the Southeast, South and Grande Anse Departments, Haiti 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39540185  

5. Micro-study of the Fishery Sector in the South and Grand Anse Departments of Haiti 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39541888  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542908
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542996
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542894
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542989
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542897
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542908
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39305157
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39540185
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39541888


ACRONYMS 

 

AECID 
Spanish Agency of International Cooperation for Development (Agence 

Espagnole de Coopération Internationale pour le Développement ) 

AOP Annual Operation Plan 

BAC Agricultural Communal Office (Bureau Agricole Communal) 

CITES 
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and 

Flora 

DDA 
Departmental Agricultural Directorate (Direction Départementale de 

l’Agriculture) 

EA Executing Agency 

ESMR Environmental and Social Management Report 

FD Fishery Directorate 

FY Fiscal Year  

GCI-9 Ninth General Increase in Resources of the IDB 

GDP Gross Domestic Product 

GoH Government of Haiti 

Ha Hectare 

IDB Inter-American Development Bank 

MDE Ministry of Environment (Ministère de l’Environnement)  

M&E Monitoring and Evaluation  

MARNDR Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development 

MT Metric Ton 

OM Operation Manual 

PDPM 
Marine Fisheries Development Program (Programme de Développement de la 

Pêche Maritime) 

PR Progress Report 

SC Steering Committee 

UE European Union 

UNEP United Nations Environment Programme 

UPMP Procurement Unit of the MARNDR (Unité de Passation des Marchés Publics) 

 

 
 



PROJECT SUMMARY 

HAITI 

ARTISANAL FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 

(HA-L1096) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Beneficiary: Republic of Haiti 

Executing Agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Natural 

Resources and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

Amortization period: N/A 

Original WAL: N/A 

Disbursement period: 60 months 

Grace period: N/A 

Source Amount (US$) 

Supervision and 

inspection fee: N/A 

IDB (Grant Facility) 15,000,000 Interest rate N/A 

Local 1,500,000 Credit fee: N/A 

Total 16,500,000 

Currency: US Dollars Parallel Financing 

(AECID)         2,700,000* 

Project at a Glance 

Project Objective: The general objective of the project is to improve the income of small fishers in 

three southern regions of Haiti (South, South-East and Grande Anse), through the sustainable 

development of artisanal fisheries. The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen the institutional 

management of the fisheries sector for resource sustainability, and improved sanitary and food safety 

conditions for marketing of seafood products; (ii) improve the quality of fish at landing sites, through 

improved public infrastructure; and (iii) increase artisanal fisheries productivity and reduce economic 

losses through the establishment of a rights-based fishery management scheme. In order to achieve 

these objectives, and consistent with the identified challenges, the project will finance three 

components: (i) institutional strengthening and information system; (ii) public infrastructure; and   

(iii) stakeholders’ capacity building.  

Special contractual conditions prior to first disbursement: (i) the hiring or assignation of a 

planning, monitoring and evaluation specialist within the Fishery Directorate; of an administrator, an 

accountant and an administrative assistant within the MARNDR’s BCP-ProGEBA unit; and of a 

procurement specialist to support the Procurement Unit of the MARNDR (¶3.2); (ii) the creation of 

the Program Steering Committee (¶3.4); and (iii) the approval of the Operation Manual by the 

Steering Committee (¶3.7).   

Special contractual condition prior to the use of resources for execution: the recruitment of 

approximately 26 people by the MARNDR Fishing Directorate to provide basic fishery services in the 

field for the regions of intervention will be a condition prior to execution of Component 3 (¶3.3).  

Special disbursement: To enable the Executing Agency to fulfill all the conditions prior to first 

disbursement, an initial disbursement for up to US$125,000 will be made to the extent the Beneficiary 

fulfills to the Bank’s satisfaction all the standard general conditions prior to disbursement set forth in 

grant agreements, except for: (i) the submission of the initial execution report; and  (ii) evidence of 

reliable financial information systems and internal control mechanisms (¶3.8 and ¶5.6 of Annex III). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None 

Project 

qualifies for: 

SEQ [ X ] PTI [ X ] Sector [ X ] Geographic  Headcount  

  * The program is also supported by approximately US$2.7 million (€2.5million) in parallel financing from 
AECID (Spanish Agency for International Cooperation for Development) which is not included as part of 

the program’s budget total and  is subject to AECID’s annual budget approval for 2016-2020.  



- 2 - 

 

I. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, Problem Addressed and Justification 

1.1 Agriculture including farming activity, livestock, fisheries and forestry, plays a 
dominant role in the Haitian economy, contributing 22.5% of Gross Domestic 

Product (GDP) (Fiscal Year [FY] 2012-13). The economy’s recovery since the 

2010 earthquake has been mainly attributed to accelerated output growth in the 

agricultural sector. This has translated into GDP growth of 4.3% in FY 2013, up 

from the 2.8% observed in 2012. While agriculture represents the principal form 

of livelihood for over one million families, contributing to about 50% of the total 

households’ income,
1
 rural poverty headcount remains the highest in the country 

with 75.2% (58.7% national level).
2
  

1.2 The Fisheries Act of 1978
3
 established the Fishery Directorate (FD) under the 

Ministry of Agriculture Natural Resources and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

as the responsible institution for the administration and enforcement of the 

sector’s legal and regulatory framework, including surveillance and monitoring of 

authorized fishing gear and compliance with fishing seasons for certain species.
4
  

1.3 Occurring along many parts of the country’s approximately 1,700 km coastline,
5
 

the fishery sector in Haiti is of high socio-economic relevance as it generates 

around 77,000 full-time jobs (52,000 direct jobs, and 25,000 indirect jobs),
6
 and 

2.5% of the GDP
7
 (FY 2010-11). Artisanal fishing remains the main type of 

marine fishery in Haiti. It is carried out in a total of 420 locations in 9 out of 10 

departments of the country. Fishing is a diversified and largely unrestricted 

artisanal activity, with the relative importance of main fishing practices varying 

considerably among localities.
8
 Practices can nonetheless be grouped into two 

different types: (i) collection of intertidal species such as shellfish, crabs, clams, 

oysters, mussels; including the use of fish traps; and (ii) coastal fishing performed 

using boats
9
 and fishing gear to catch demersal and pelagic fish. Fishers target a 

wide range of resources that are found mainly on the continental shelf (conch, 

lobster, reef and demersal fishes and small coastal pelagics).
10

  

                                                 
1
  General Agricultural Census 2008-2009 (www.agriculture.gouv.ht); www.brh.net; www.mefhaiti.gouv.ht. 

2
   World Bank (WB). 2014. Poverty and Inclusion in Haiti: Social Gains at a Timid Pace. Washington DC: 

The WB. Retrieved from: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/01/19871408/poverty-

inclusion-haiti-social-gains-timid-pace  
3 
 The Fisheries Act of 1978 was approved byPresidential decree.

 

4
  e.g. lobster 

5
  Second longest in the Caribbean region countries, after Cuba (Fishery Country Profile, FAO, 2005). 

6
  Ministère de l’Agriculture, des Ressources Naturelles et du Développement Rural (MARNDR), Etude de 

la filière pêche en Haïti et propositions de stratégie d’appui au secteur, IRAM-INESA, 2007. 
7
  FAO statistics and data management, http://faostat.fao.org, 2010. 

8
  Célestin 2004, Damais et al. 2007, Favrelière 2008. 

9
  The estimated fleet is 26,000 units of pirogues, canoes, sailing boats, and/or wooden motorboats. 

10
  Célestin 2004, Damais et al. 2007, Favrelière 2008. 

http://www.agriculture.gouv.ht/
http://www.brh.net/
http://www.mefhaiti.gouv.ht/
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/01/19871408/poverty-inclusion-haiti-social-gains-timid-pace
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/01/19871408/poverty-inclusion-haiti-social-gains-timid-pace
http://faostat.fao.org/


- 3 - 

 

1.4 Marketing of seafood is conducted by a network of intermediaries that ensure the 
supply of fresh products for local consumption and export. The stakeholders who 

market fish products include “merchants,” “merchants-saras” and agencies. The 

marketing process of fishery products is dominated by women.
11

 They sell 69% of 

the fish production fresh and 31% salted or dried. The latter is of lower value than 

the fresh fish and is the result of a lack of accessibility to refrigeration and ice. 

The merchants, who are often the spouses of the fishers buy and then sell 

lowvalue fish to the merchant-saras in local markets or to agencies. Merchants 

saras, estimated at approximately 7,000, come from the urban centers to coastal 

areas to buy (dried or fresh) and return to sell the production back in the cities. 

Finally, an estimated 1,000 agencies are located in the communes in coastal areas 

and exhibit the greatest purchasing and refrigeration capacity. This allows them to 

purchase the highest-valued products (conch, lobster) to resell to wholesalers, 

supermarkets and restaurants in the urban centers.
12

  

1.5 Despite the prevalence of fisheries, Haiti is a net importer of seafood products.
13

 

National production supplies only around 30% of total consumption. In 2011 the 

sector’s annual production in terms of landing equivalent was estimated at 17,000 

MT of fish, 600 MT of lobster, 200 MT of conch meat and 50 MT of shrimp.
14

 

Artisanal fisheries and trade are estimated to generate an annual sales figure 

higher than 240 million gourdes (US$6.3 million). In 2003, total value of export 

amounted to 349 MT (US$4.2 million),
15

 but had dropped significantly by 2011 to 

less than 50 MT and limited to informal and occasional exchanges mainly with 

the Dominican Republic.
16 

This drop in exports was mainly due to the suspension 

of exports to Europe. 

1.6 Sector challenges. Despite the critical importance of fishing as an economic 
activity for coastal communities, several challenges prevent the development and 

sustainability of the sector. The following challenges have been prioritized and 

selected based on prior experience in the sector and Government of Haiti (GoH) 

Marine Fisheries Development Program (PDPM) priorities.
17

 

1.7 Resource sustainability. Artisanal fishery’s contribution to socio-economic 
development depends in large part on the sustainability of the fishery resources, 

which represents the main challenge for the sector. As such, fisheries can be 

distinguished from other agricultural activities by the challenges posed by 

resource management. These include: (i) the diversity of the resource and means 

of production, particularly in the case of artisanal fisheries; (ii) the mobility of the 

                                                 
11

  Gachot, 2015. 100% of merchants and merchants-saras are women. 
12

  Célestin 2004, Damais et al. 2007, Favrelière 2008. 
13

  In 2010, Haiti imported more than US$ 20 million (34 MT) of seafood products and registered close to 

US$6 million of exports (Sources FaoStat, 2012). 
14

  FAOStat, 2012. 
15

  ftp://ftp.fao.org/FI/DOCUMENT/fcp/fr/FI_CP_HT.pdf  
16

  Report on « préparation d’un programme d’investissement public en faveur du secteur de la pêche » (2011) 
17

  Ministère de l’Agriculture, des Ressources Naturelles et du Développement Rural (MARNDR), Etude de 

la filière pêche en Haïti et propositions de stratégie d’appui au secteur, IRAM-INESA, 2007. 

ftp://ftp.fao.org/FI/DOCUMENT/fcp/fr/FI_CP_HT.pdf


- 4 - 

 

resource not confined within set boundaries; (iii) the difficulties of assessing the 

status of stocks and determining sustainable yields; and (iv) the absence of 

property rights. Although reliable fisheries statistics do not exist for Haiti, 

available evidence shows a catch reduction per fishing trip in coastal waters,
18

 

indicating that inshore stocks are either fully exploited or depleted, therefore 

threatening the sustainability of the sector. Ensuring the resource’s sustainability 

requires a strong government commitment to implement sustainable fishery 

management systems.
19

 However, the existing Haitian governance structure has 

not proven conducive to a sustainable exploitation of fisheries, as evidenced 

particularly by a lack of implementation of monitoring, control measures and 

regulations. This has led to unrestricted ‘open access to fishing grounds,’ and 

deterioration of critical breeding and nursery habitat for fish and shellfish.  

1.8 Sector governance. The existing fisheries regulations date from several decades 
and are significantly outdated in several aspects, including the sustainability and 

management of the natural resource. The FD is currently understaffed, comprised 

of only six civils servants. Moreover, the decentralization of the FD services at 

local levels remains weak with only eight agents (most of them supported by 

projects) in Departmental Directorates for Agriculture (DDA) (one agent per 

6,500 fishers). This prevents the provision of public services at local level such as 

extension services for the introduction of new sustainable techniques, and on-site 

data collection and implementation of a catch monitoring system. The FD’s 

technical capacities for applied research, sanitary control and resource 

management, need to be revamped to implement a more science-based approach 

to the sector’s management. In this context, the FD is in a weak position to 

exercise its leadership and coordination role (¶1.2). 

1.9 Availability of information for decision-making. The FD does not collect 
fisheries data nor does it compile fisheries statistics except for imports and 

exports. Basic information especially related to socio economic aspects, catches 

and marketing is essential for the adoption of improved policies for fisheries 

management. Previous efforts to implement a data collection system have not 

proven to be sustainable due to methodological and financial constraints to 

maintain a long term data collection system.
20

 

1.10 Lack of public infrastructure and services for artisanal fisheries, results in 
poor product quality, important post-harvest losses amounting to around 40%

21
 

(US$2.8 million), loss of market opportunities in urban centers and suspension of 

exports of seafood products to Europe. Harvesting, processing and marketing 

occur in marginal highly degraded areas that lack the basic infrastructure to ensure 

basic sanitary conditions and product quality. Out of the 18 communes (¶1.14) 

targeted by the program, only two have regular access to water and electricity, less 

than 10% have adequate landing sites for artisanal fishing boats and the majority 

                                                 
18

  IRAM, 2007. 
19

  Christy, 1997. 
20

  “Fisheries Investment Plan,” financed with the technical cooperation ATN/II-11593-HA. 
21

  Macias, 2014. 



- 5 - 

 

(80%) have public markets in poor conditions without running water or facilities for 

ice production or storage. Finally, 16% do not have public markets.  

1.11 Associations’ capacities. In 2002, the GoH sought to revitalize the fishery sector 
through the National Fishers’ Association. A large number of fishers’ professional 

associations were developed since then with more than 80 associations registered. 

These associations have weak organizational structures and, as a consequence, 

limited capacity to manage productive infrastructure and provide services and 

equipment in a financially sustainable manner. The social context further inhibits 

the development of the sector. Specifically Haitian fishing communities are 

characterized by a relatively young population; high rate of illiteracy.  

1.12 Access to basic technologies and equipment. The development of the fishery 
sector in Haiti requires improvements in post-harvest handling of the product 

through refrigeration and the adoption of technical innovations, some of which 

have an important cost in terms of investment. This combined with the presence 

of financial constraints prevents stakeholders to invest in the sector.
22

  

1.13 Areas of intervention. The program will target the three most productive 
departments (South East; South; and Grande Anse),

23
 that have been prioritized 

by the GoH and which together support a majority of the country’s fisheries 

localities along approximately 540 km of coastline. However, the institutional 

component of the program will benefit all the fishing communes in the country. 

As the South Department is also the intervention area of the tourism project 

financed by the IDB (3383/GR-HA), a fishing program in this department will 

develop the complementarity of the two operations in a context of sustainable 

development of coastal areas through improvement in the fishery/tourism value 

chain. In the South East Department the program will complement the Spanish 

Agency of International Cooperation for Development’s (AECID) funding with 

public infrastructure and thus consolidate this department as a model and catalyst 

for artisanal fisheries development in Haiti contributing to the dissemination of 

their experience in other regions of the south. 

1.14 The area of intervention was further refined based on the following criteria:  (i) at 
least one fishing association; (ii) fishery as a relevant socio-economic activity and 

potential for further increase in productivity; and (iii) the possibility of               

re-enforcing existing interventions financed by the AECID. Within the 

intervention area a total of 55 fisher's associations have been identified, with an 

estimate of 20,800 fishers.
24

 On average, fishing communities comprise 80 

members of which 63% are fishers, and 35% are merchants. These fishing 

communities are widely scattered, small and isolated with little access to basic 

services such as water, sanitation and electricity. In addition, in the area of 

                                                 
22

  IRAM, 2007 and Macias, 2014. 
23

  Supply chain analysis for fresh seafood in Haiti, Felix, 2012. 
24

  Macias, 2014. 

javascript:fOpenWindow('http://edwbip.iadb.org:80/cognos8/cgi-bin/cognos.cgi?b_action=cognosViewer&ui.action=run&ui.object=XSSSTART*2fcontent*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27BI*20Reports*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27OPS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS*20REPORTS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*20-*20Versiones*27*5d*2freport*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*27*5dXSSEND&ui.name=LMS1&run.outputFormat=&run.prompt=false&p_Active=1&p_UDR=UDR&p_OpNumber=3383/GR-HA&p_Date=2015-04-06',%20'_OPSDetail');


- 6 - 

 

intervention the number of fishing vessels is estimated at approximately 10,700.
25

 

The small boat size (under 20 feet long) and lack of engines make offshore deep 

water fishing difficult and so most fishing effort concentrates on shelf resources.  

1.15 Lessons learned. This program takes into account important lessons learned from 
the Bank and other donor-financed operations in Haiti (UE, UNEP, AECID), as 

well as empirical evidence from research undertaken in Haiti and abroad (Belize, 

Ecuador, Chile, Panama, Guadeloupe). Since 2007, the MARNDR is 

implementing, with the technical and financial support from AECID, a project 

focused on strengthening the capacity of fishery institutions and fishers 

organizations to provide adequate services to their members. The total AECID 

funding to present amounts to €3.5million. A recent external evaluation of the 

intervention has indicated positive results, especially with respect to the 

organizational capacity of fishing associations including financial sustainability, 

and provisions of services including maintenance of collective infrastructure.
26

 

Therefore the proposed program aims to follow a similar approach. Moreover, the 

design benefited from the close participation of national and international experts 

involved in AECID-MARNDR’s project. Main lessons are primarily drawn from 

Christy, F. T., 1997 The Development and Management of Marine Fisheries in 

Latin America and the Caribbean, Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011, Coastal fisheries of 

Latin America and the Caribbean and the Sector Framework Document on 

Agriculture and Natural Resources Management (SFD) are included in Table 1. 

1.16 Conception of the intervention. Based on the sector diagnostic, the challenges 
identified and the lessons learned, interventions have been identified to improve 

the sustainability of the resources by simultaneously increasing fishers’ 

productivity and income through the provision of improved public services in the 

sector. The literature
27

 suggests specific reasons that justify the public provision 

of fishery services from a market failure perspective: (i) coordination failures 

might foster depletion of resources reducing economic gains in the long run;     

(ii) liquidity constraints limit the availability of financial resources for fishers to 

access productive capital and adopt sustainable technologies; and (iii) risk 

aversion and information asymmetries limit adoption of more productive and 

sustainable technologies by fishers. To avoid overexploitation of the marine 

resources, the implementation of a long term sustainable fishery management 

system is required as a pilot in the southern regions. The effectiveness of the 

system will be evaluated by an impact evaluation (¶3.12). 

1.17 Regarding productivity and income generation, the program will address market 
failures as follows: (i)  accelerating the decentralization and sustainability of 

fishery services in close proximity to fishers, through the GoH’s commitment to 

improve the staffing in the field; (ii) improving fishers’ access to pelagic stocks 

using technological improvements while simultaneously piloting a rights-based 

                                                 
25

  Dugout woods, flat-bottomed boats, and wooden sailboats. Less than 5% of total fishing vessels is made up 

of fiberglass boats equipped with engines donated by non-governmental organizations and aid agencies. 
26

  Marine Fishery Strengthening Program in the Southeast department, mid-term review, Canaest, 2014. 
27

  Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011. Coastal fisheries of Latin America and the Caribbean. 



- 7 - 

 

fishery scheme; (iii)  promoting enhanced product quality through improved  

post-harvest handling facilities to be co-managed with strengthened fishers’ 

associations; and (iv)  strengthening the fisheries value chain through enhanced 

collaboration between FD and other initiatives of the Bank for private sector. 

Table 1. Lessons Learned 

Lessons learned
28

 Reflected in the program design 

Improved operational legal framework is 

needed for marine fisheries with clear 

competency to regulate and implement 

corrective measures harmonized with 

international standards, framework legislation 

and regulations. 

The modernization of the legal framework will be 

supported through short term technical assistance. 

(Component 1). 

Basic socio-economic information is required 

for the adoption of improved policies for 

fisheries management. 

The program includes the design and implementation of 

marine information system including a national fishers’ 

census, registries and sustainable data collection through 

the associations, including socio economic aspects 

(Component 1). 

Fostering public infrastructure of fish product 

processing and the cold chain will improve the 

quality of the product opening new local and 

international markets. 

The program supports the development of public 

infrastructure to improve fish product post-harvest quality 

and sanitary conditions (Component 2). 

Promotion of collective action schemes among 

fishers is key to their participation, and 

prevents individual actions that might threaten 

the sustainability of the fishing resource. 

The program includes activities aimed at strengthening 

the capacity of fishers associations to promote collective 

actions that ensure sustainability. This includes training 

in sustainable fishing activities as well as maintenance of 

public infrastructure (Component 2). 

Shift attitudes from development to sustainable 

fisheries management: The major opportunities 

of the future lie in improved fisheries 

management. 

The program supports the establishment of fisheries 

management regimes through: rights-based fishery 

management pilot. (Component 3); and implementation 

of the national marine information system and the 

development of a research program (Component 1). 

Given the importance of women contribution in 

the fishery sector, the undertaken activities 

must also be targeted to strengthen their 

participation and empowerment. 

The program includes improvement of public 

infrastructure with the primary goal to increase the value 

of fish sales per merchant (women). Also, part of the 

training and matching grants benefit female merchants 

(Component 3). 

1.18 Regarding resource sustainability, the program will address market failures by 
strengthening fisheries governance and management implementing an integrated 

information system and establishing a strong scientific-based approach. In the 

case of fisheries, empirical evidence shows that integrated fisheries management
29

 

not only contributes to resource sustainability by reducing pressure on stocks but 

also generates increased income, especially with the transition towards a      

rights- based fishery management (Belize,
30

 Ecuador, Chile
31

). The program will 

ensure the implementation of a pilot on sustainable fishery management system to 

avoid overexploitation of the marine resources based on successful interventions 

                                                 
28

  Sector Framework Document on Agriculture and Natural Resources (GN-2709) 
29

  combining research, monitoring and measures to manage the activity 
30

  http://www.tidebelize.org/ 
31

  Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011, Coastal fisheries of Latin America and the Caribbean 



- 8 - 

 

in similar circumstances in Belize and Panama.
32

 This pilot will include:                 

(i) definition of extraction rates compatible with stock replenishment rates; (ii) the 

implementation of a fishery information system including a national fishers’ 

census, as well as a strong monitoring and evaluation system; (iii) the 

implementation of a rights-based fishery management scheme for both offshore 

and coastal waters, combining managed access, quotas and no-take zones; and 

(iv) the promotion of more sustainable alternative fisheries techniques. The 

fisheries management measures will strengthen the benefits for stock recovery of 

the already created marine protected areas in the intervention zone through close 

collaboration with Ministry of Environment (MDE) and UNEP in the 

implementation of fisheries habitat conservation regulations with the cooperation 

of the fishers’ associations. 

1.19 Gender approach. The proposed operation will include a gender approach that 
promotes women’s participation and empowerment. Specifically, the program 

will finance public infrastructure, training
33

 and matching grants
34

 targeted 

towards female merchants. These activities aim to increase women’s income by 

increasing value of sales and reducing economic losses.  

1.20 Consistency with national priorities and donor coordination. The program 
will finance activities included in the National Fisheries Development Program 

(NFDP) and the Fisheries Investment Plan financed with the technical cooperation 

ATN/II-11593-HA, particularly: (i) strengthening the institutional and legal 

framework, through the establishment of a monitoring and control system, a data 

collection and analysis service including a national census of fishers and a fishers 

and vessels registry; (ii) socio-economic development of artisanal fishery through 

institutional and organizational strengthening of fishers associations, and 

introduction of improved fishing techniques and equipment; (iii) improving 

seafood marketing through development of basic public infrastructure destined to 

improve the processing of fish products and access to cold chain; and                 

(iv) increasing effectiveness of fisheries management through introduction of 

awareness campaigns introducing sustainable fisheries management practices. 

Program activities will be closely coordinated with AECID. 

1.21 Consistency with the Country Strategy, Sector Strategy and GCI-9. The 
program is aligned with the Bank’s Country Strategy with Haiti for 2011-2015 

(GN-2646), which sets agriculture (including fisheries) as a priority sector of 

intervention and with its private sector development pillar. The program is also 

included in the 2015 Operational Program Report (GN-2805). It contributes to 

three of the lending program priority targets outlined in the Report on the Ninth 

General Increase in Resources of the IDB (AB-2764) (GCI-9) and its Results 

Framework: (i) support to small and vulnerable countries; (ii) poverty reduction 

and equity enhancement, as beneficiaries will be low income fishers; and 

                                                 
32

  Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011, Coastal fisheries of Latin America and the Caribbean 
33

  Training on the following themes will directly target female merchants: hygiene and sanitary conditions, 

conservation techniques, infrastructure management  
34

  Specific equipment such as coolers and dryers have already been identified 



- 9 - 

 

(iii) support regional cooperation and integration, as the operation is consistent 

with both, the cross-country focus and national subsidiarity criteria.
35

 It will also 

contribute to the regional development goals of “trade openness,” as well as to the 

Bank´s outputs, “regional and subregional integration agreements and cooperation 

initiative supported” as defined in the Results Framework. The operation is 

consistent with the strategic priority to “Protect the environment, respond to 

climate change and enhance food security,” and will contribute to its Regional 

Development Goal “Annual growth rate of agricultural GDP.” The operation is 

consistent with the “Agriculture and Natural Resources Management Sector 

Framework Document” (GN-2709-1), as it will foster fisheries management 

regimes adapted to local conditions. Also, it is consistent with the Sector Strategy 

“Sustainable Infrastructure for Competitiveness and Inclusive Growth”          

(GN-2710-5), as the Program seeks to ensure financial sustainability of the 

investments by developing maintenance plans for each infrastructure to be built. 

The linkages with other projects from an economic perspective will be developed 

during program implementation in particular with 3383/GR-HA, Sustainable 

Coastal Tourism Program, with respect to improving food products for the 

tourism value chain and 3260/GR-HA, Modernization of Agricultural Health 

Public Services, regarding sanitary protection activities. Linkages with other Bank 

initiatives through the FD will be developed to enhance private investments. In 

particular it will support the participation of fishers’ associations in the Program 

to Support Productive Investment (2827/GR-HA). 

B. Objective, Components and Cost 

1.22 The objective of the program is to improve the income of fishers in three southern 
regions of Haiti (South, South-East and Grande Anse), through the sustainable 

development of artisanal fisheries. The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen 

the institutional management of the fisheries sector for resource sustainability, 

and improved sanitary and food safety conditions for marketing of seafood 

products; (ii) improve the quality of fish at landing sites, through improved public 

infrastructure; and (iii) increase artisanal fisheries productivity and reduce 

economic losses through the establishment of a rights-based fishery management 

scheme. To achieve this, the program will support a set of investments and actions 

organized in three components. The direct beneficiaries of the program are the 

20,800 fishers located in the intervention area. An additional 31,200 fishers 

located elsewhere in the country will benefit from institutional strengthening. 

                                                 
35

  According to the guidelines for GCI-9 regional cooperation and integration lending priority                   

(GN-2733/ GN-2650), this operation is consistent with the cross-country focus criteria, as this national 

program will support the institutional strengthening and infrastructure investments to promote 

internationalization of the artisanal fishery industry, as presented in the result matrix by the indicator; 33% 

increase in the number of annual health certificates for exports (OIE). The operation meets the national 

subsidiarity criteria as it will support unilaterally policy reforms that are related to a supra-national plan. 

Particularly, as stated in the result matrix, at least three international conventions on sustainable fishing 

will be adopted. Haiti´s Pelagic fisheries as tuna, are shared among countries in the Caribbean, therefore 

the sustainability improvements will have a positive impact at a regional level.  

javascript:fOpenWindow('http://edwbip.iadb.org:80/cognos8/cgi-bin/cognos.cgi?b_action=cognosViewer&ui.action=run&ui.object=XSSSTART*2fcontent*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27BI*20Reports*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27OPS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS*20REPORTS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*20-*20Versiones*27*5d*2freport*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*27*5dXSSEND&ui.name=LMS1&run.outputFormat=&run.prompt=false&p_Active=1&p_UDR=UDR&p_OpNumber=3383/GR-HA&p_Date=2015-04-07',%20'_OPSDetail');
javascript:fOpenWindow('http://edwbip.iadb.org:80/cognos8/cgi-bin/cognos.cgi?b_action=cognosViewer&ui.action=run&ui.object=XSSSTART*2fcontent*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27BI*20Reports*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27OPS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS*20REPORTS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*20-*20Versiones*27*5d*2freport*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*27*5dXSSEND&ui.name=LMS1&run.outputFormat=&run.prompt=false&p_Active=1&p_UDR=UDR&p_OpNumber=3260/GR-HA&p_Date=2015-04-07',%20'_OPSDetail');


- 10 - 

 

1.23 Component 1. Institutional strengthening and information system        
(US$7.7million). This component will benefit all fishing communes in the 

country (¶1.13). To accomplish these goals, the program will finance: (i) technical 

assistance to conduct a detailed organizational and institutional analysis of the 

FD, revise and formulate the legal framework of the sector, and formalize the 

status of artisanal fishers;
36

 (ii) development and implementation of a national 

integrated fishery information system including: design of the system, software 

development, a national fishery census, and a registry of fishers, boats, sellers and 

associations; (iii) strengthening of FD’s human resources capacities at 

decentralized levels; (iv) technical training of managers, technicians and FD staff; 

(v) study for seafood products new potential markets; (vi) national sensitization 

campaigns on the use of ice, food safety, consumption of seafood products, and 

information on endangered species; (vii) design and construction of FD office in 

Damien and decentralized buildings;
37

 (viii) design and preliminary 

implementation of a plan for control and surveillance of seafood pathologies as 

well as a plan for sanitary control of seafood products; (ix) study on operational 

fishery control system that supports the transition towards rights–based fishery 

management for both offshore and coastal fisheries through a combination of 

managed access, quotas, no-take zones and similar measures; and (x) stock 

evaluation of under exploited resources via experimental fisheries campaigns and 

implementation of a research program on new fishery techniques.
38

 

1.24 Component 2. Public infrastructure (US$2.6million). This component will 
finance the design, supervision and maintenance plan (¶3.6) of the following 

infrastructure: (i) basic fishery infrastructure (landing, cleaning sites and public 

markets including solid waste management, manual system of seawater pumping 

filtration, ice container); and (ii) other landing facilities to protect fishing vessels 

during storms and hurricanes. To ensure sustainability, the design of investments 

will take into account the vulnerability to natural disasters, climate change 

mitigation and adaptation measures.  

1.25 Component 3. Stakeholders’ capacity building (US$3.5million). This 
component comprises the delivery of technical assistance and productive 

technologies through the provision of matching grants. To strengthen the     

fishers’ and merchants’ associations, the program will finance: (i) training to 

fishers and merchants in organizational administration, infrastructure management 

to ensure their sustainability and skills development for new fishing techniques;
39

 

(ii) provision of improved productive equipment
40

 to fishers’ and             

                                                 
36

  Administrative recognition of what is a fisher, defining fishers’ eligibility to public support. 
37

    The size of the FD offices in Damien cannot host all FD staff. As no other space within the MARNDR is 

available the program proposes to either build or rehabilitate one on the campus.  
38

  As no stock assessment has ever been done in Haiti, a preliminary work was conducted during program 

preparation (Optional Link #6)  
39

  AECID project will directly carry out strengthening capacities of the associations in the South East region 

under the AECID parallel funding, as well as training of project staff in other Departments through 

technical assistance. 
40

  The research program will define new fishing techniques to be promoted by the project to the associations. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39540185


- 11 - 

 

merchants’ associations through matching grants; and (iii) implementation of a 

pilot on new fishing techniques and rights-based fishery management. 

Approximately 2,829 fishers and 1,661 merchants will benefit from the pilot. 

C. Key Results Indicators 

1.26 The program is expected to improve artisanal fishers’ income through the 
development of sustainable artisanal fisheries in Haiti. Table 2 summarizes the 

program’s key indicators, measurement periods and selection rationale. 

Table 2. Key indicators, measurement periods and selection rationale 

Key Indicators Period Selection rationale  

Impact Indicators 

Increase average total net revenues from fishing and 

fishing-related activities by household 
Y5 

Measures the impact on productivity and 

income of artisanal fishers 

% of fishers fishing exclusively on the shore  
Y5 

 

Measure the improvement on the 

environmental sustainability of artisanal fishing 
Establishment of at least one no-take zone in the 

coastal area associated with the scope of the project 

Selected Outcomes’ Indicators 

Component 1: Membership to international 

conventions on sustainable fishing 
Y5 

Measures the improvement on the management 

of the resource at the institutional level. 

Component 2: Value of weekly sales of fish per 

woman merchant 
Y5 

Measures the improvement on sanitary 

conditions and quality of the products sold. 

Component 3: Fishing basins with rights based 

fishery management  established 
Y5 

Measures the improvement on the management 

of the resource at the local level. 

Core Sector Indicator (CSI): Number of 

beneficiaries of improved management and 

sustainable use of natural and cultural capital 

Y5 
Measures the number of total beneficiairies in 

the associations. 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing Instruments 

2.1 The total program amount is US$16,500,000; financed by the IDB Grant Facility 
up to the amount of US$15,000,000 and by the national counterpart up to the 

amount of US$1,500,000. The program is also supported by approximately 

US$2.7million (€2.5million)
41

 in parallel financing from AECID. A memorandum 

of understanding is expected to be negotiated between MARNDR, AECID and 

IDB to ensure further collaboration and complementarity of both interventions. 

The disbursement period will be 60 months. Table 3 provides the cost summary 

by investment categories and components (detailed budget). The budget includes 

all costs associated with risks mitigation measures mentioned in ¶2.5. 

B. Economic Analysis 

2.2 A cost-benefit analysis was conducted to assess the economic viability of the 
program. The main economic benefits that were quantified in the cost-benefit 

analysis were: (i) the increase in gross operating margins of fishers; (ii) the 

increase in the value added generated by the merchants; and (iii) the benefits 

obtained from the restoration and sustainability of the stock fisheries. The annual 

                                                 
41

  Subject to AECID’s annual budget approval in Euros for 2016-2020. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/38107888/R


- 12 - 

 

overall costs of the program considered in the analysis include both investment 

costs and recurrent costs. The analysis envisions a program horizon of 15 years 

and a 12% discount rate. Goods and services considered in the analysis are 

evaluated using their economic prices. The program is considered economically 

viable as its estimated internal rate of return is 14.5%. The positive net present 

value associated with the program amounts to US$1.6 million. Although the 

economic analysis of the program is based on reasonably conservative 

assumptions, a broad sensitivity analysis confirmed the reliability of the results. 

Table 3. Estimated cost by component in US$ million 

Investment categories IDB Local Total AECID 

I. Components 

1. Institutional capacity strengthening 6.3 1.4 7.7 1.08 

2. Public Infrastructure 2.6 0.0 2.6 0.54 

3. Stakeholders’ capacity building 3.5 0.0 3.5 1.08 

II. Monitoring-Evaluation, Audit, Administration, Contingencies 

Monitoring, Evaluation, Audits 0.8 0.0 0.8 - 

Administration 1.4 0.1 1.5 - 

Contingencies 0.4 0.0 0.4 - 

Total 15.0 1.5 16.5 2.7 

C. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks  

2.3 Following the guidelines in the Bank’s Environment and Safeguards Compliance 
Policy (OP-703 and OP-765), this operation has been classified in Category “B.” 

A positive social impact is expected from increasing fishers income level’s (as a 

result of the program’s activities) and providing suitable fish processing facilities 

(Component 2), which will contribute to improve social conditions and decrease 

public health risks from poorly handled products. In terms of environmental 

impact, the expected strengthening and monitoring of the sector, including the 

fishers census and assessment of fishery resources (Component 1), will build a 

strong foundation to implement a state fishery control system. No resettlement 

and no adverse impacts on critical habitats are foreseen. Direct impacts will be 

related to the construction of infrastructure, for which associated mitigation 

measures will be incorporated in the bidding documents for the works. Potential 

indirect negative impact as overfishing or endangered species fishing will be 

mitigated by both the GoH increased capacity measures and fishers’ awareness 

measures, whose costs have been incorporated into the operation’s budget. An 

environmental and social analysis was conducted and the associated 

Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) will be included in the 

Operation Manual (OM). This information is incorporated in the ESMR. 

D. Fiduciary Risk  

2.4 The financial risk of the proposed program is evaluated as being medium due to 
the increase in volume and complexity of new projects being assigned to the 

fiduciary team of BCP-ProGEBA (HA-L1087, HA-L1050 and HA-L1096). To 

mitigate this risk, the Bank recommends the strengthening of BCP-ProGEBA’s 

accounting team with the hiring of an administrator, an accountant and an 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/39542894/R


- 13 - 

 

administrative assistant dedicated to the implementation of this program. In 

addition the OM of the program will include among other sections: (i) procedures 

for the approval and disbursement of funds; (ii) chart of accounts; and (iii) policy 

and procedures for the administration of inventory. The hiring of a support team 

agreed upon with the Bank and the approval of the program’s OM will be 

condition prior to first disbursement. In addition, during the first year of the 

program, Bank’s Fiduciary staff will conduct inspection visits on a semi-annual 

basis to review the execution of the financial plan, the preparation of financial 

reports and the review of program expenses and documentation. All costs 

associated with mitigation measures are included in the operation budget. 

2.5 The procurement risk is evaluated as medium. The MARNDR’s Procurement 
Unit (UPMP) is operational since early 2014 and has proved to possess a strong 

technical capacity in procurement and a reliable structure. However, the increased 

number of projects that are being handled by this unit may have an impact on the 

timing of procurement activities. As a mitigation measure, an additional 

procurement specialist will be hired to support the UPMP. During the program’s 

life, the Bank will conduct at least one procurement inspection visit per year. All 

associated costs are included in the operation budget. The ex-ante review method 

will apply to major procurement activities. Ex post review will be conducted over 

specific low risk activities as detailed under Annex III. 

E. Other Key Issues and Risks 

2.6 The main risk identified during a workshop conducted with the GoH is the 
increase of the fishing effort and infrastructure sustainability. Mitigation measures 

include among others: implementation of a pilot rights based fishery management 

system, development of a fishery control system, technical assistance and training 

of FD technical staff, creation of a Steering Committee (SC) and implementation 

of infrastructure maintenance plans (¶3.6). The general risk qualification of the 

program is medium. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN  

A. Summary Implementation Arrangements 

3.1 The beneficiary of the program will be the Republic of Haiti and the Executing 
Agency (EA) will be the MARNDR. The EA will be responsible for the overall 

administration of the program, including: planning and reporting for technical and 

fiduciary aspects; execution of procurement activities; the supervision of technical 

assistance firms; financial and accounting management, including the submission 

of disbursement requests; risks management; monitoring and evaluation; and 

complying with contractual conditions of grant agreement. 

3.2 The MARNDR will execute the aforementioned tasks through its FD. The 
program will be headed by a Coordinator of the program. Financial management 

aspects will be handled through the fiduciary team of the MARNDR’s            



- 14 - 

 

BCP-ProGEBA unit while the UPMP will execute all procurement activities. To 

support the Project Coordinator in its tasks, the hiring or assignation of a 

planning, monitoring and evaluation specialist within the FD; of an 

administrator, an accountant and an administrative assistant within the 

MARNDR’s BCP-ProGEBA unit; and of a procurement specialist to support 

the Procurement Unit of the MARNDR will be a special contractual 

condition prior to first disbursement. 

3.3 To date, the MARNDR decentralized human resources in the intervention regions 
are limited (two agents in the South-East, two in the South financed by AECID 

and UNEP) or none (Grande Anse). The program will support the MARNDR-FD 

in strengthening its capacity to provide decentralized services within the 

DDA/BAC by recruiting/absorbing
42

 a total of 26 people (eight managers and 18 

technicians) whose salary will be supported by Public Treasury through 

counterpart funds. Recruitment of these managers and technicians is required to 

provide basic fishery services in the field for the respective regions will be a 

special contractual condition prior to the use of resources for the execution of 

Component 3. These MARNDR’s fishery employees located in the DDA or BAC 

will directly work and collaborate with the fishers associations in strengthening 

their capacity implementing the AECID model with the technical assistance of                

AECID-MARNDR’s project staff. 

3.4 A Steering Committee (SC) will be created
43

 to ensure strategic general guidance 

as well as the approval of the OM, initial Multi-Year Execution Plan, Annual 

Operation Plans and semiannual Progress Reports. This committee will be led by 

the Minister of the MARNDR, or his representative, and composed of: (i) the 

MARNDR’s General Director; (ii) a representative of the National Agency for 

Protected Areas from the Ministry of Environment; (iii) one representative of 

national fishers’ federation,
44

 representing the three implementation departments 

of the country; and (iv) one representative of the fishery and aquaculture 

consultation group
45

 which includes the private sector. Representatives of the 

Bank and other Donors, including AECID and UNEP, will be invited as 

observers. The SC will meet at least two times per year. The creation of the SC 

will be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement. 

3.5 Procurement activities will be conducted as detailed in Annex III. The 
MARNDR’s UPMP will manage all procurement processes for goods and 

services. Specific contractual mechanisms will be identified to purchase 

equipment through matching grants, as foreseen under Component 3. All 

procurement activities will be performed in accordance with Bank rules and 

procedures, with no exceptions to the application of the Policies for the 

                                                 
42

  Including 10 staff already supported by the AECID financing. 
43

  By Ministerial Circular. 
44

  IDBDOCS-#39592336. 
45  The objective of the group for the sector is among other to Ensure effective participation of civil society 

sector strategic orientation; coordinate the mobilization and use of resources (human, material and 

financial); and ensure communication. Membership is open to any stakeholder in the sector. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/39592336/R


- 15 - 

 

Procurement of Goods and Works (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and 

Recruitment of Consulting Services (GN-2350-9). The program will also be 

subject to the special provisions for procurement activities in Haiti (GN-2654). 

3.6 Project financial management will be conducted as detailed in Annex III. 
Advance of funds methodology will be used for the disbursement of program 

funds and for an amount equivalent to three-month funding needs. No financial 

resources of the program will be transferred to participating associations and 

stakeholders, with the exception of a limited budget during the first four years of 

the program for the strengthening of the capacity of local actors including fishers 

and sellers through their association. It will be implemented by DDA via a 

technical assistance to be provided by an experienced operator to be financed 

under Component 3. National counterpart will be used to finance operational costs 

including the strengthening of the FD human resources personnel at decentralized 

levels and which will be processed through the MARNDR single treasury 

account. The program will subsidize the purchase of equipment through matching 

grants to associations based on eligible criteria defined in the OM including: (i) a 

functioning registered association with all fishers and merchants members 

registered; (ii) a business plan; (iii) commitment through an agreement to comply 

with a rights based fishery management plan (¶7.3 of Annex III). The program’s 

grant contribution will be a maximum of US$30,000 per association, and the 

matching amount per association will be a minimum of ten percent of the grant. 

The OM specifies the amounts to be granted to each association per type of 

investment, based on a technical and economic analysis for each investment. 

3.7 Operation Manual (OM). The OM will set out the procedures to be followed by 
the EA with regard to implementation, planning and reporting of activities, 

financial management, audits, procurement and contracting, risks management, 

and monitoring and evaluation. The OM will include: (i) financial and accounting 

procedures; (ii) chart of accounts; (iii) procurement procedures; (iv) matching 

grant eligibility criteria and procedures; (v) environmental and social management 

plan and procedures; and (vi) monitoring and evaluation plan. The SC’s approval 

of the OM will be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement. 

3.8 Special disbursement. To enable the EA to fulfill all the conditions prior to first 
disbursement an initial disbursement of up to US$125,000 will be made to the 

extent the Beneficiary fulfills, to the Bank’s satisfaction, all the standard general 

conditions prior to disbursement set forth in the grant agreement, except for: 

(i) the submission of the initial execution report; and (ii) evidence of reliable 

financial information systems and internal control mechanisms. 

3.9 Special audit and financial reporting requirements: (i) audit of program: external 
auditors eligible to the Bank will be hired by the FD to perform the audit of the 

program as follows: one annual financial audit of the program including the audit 

of internal control processes and the review of procurement processes to be 

submitted within 120 days following the end of each fiscal year and a final 

financial audit of the program to be submitted within 120 days after the date of 



- 16 - 

 

the last disbursement. For accounting and audit purposes, the Haitian fiscal year 

will be respected; and (ii) during the first year of execution, the program will also 

submit quarterly unaudited financial reports 45 days after the end of each quarter. 

For the following years, the frequency for the submission of unaudited reports 

will be based on risk evaluation updates determined during supervision missions. 

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results  

3.10 Planning and monitoring. During the grant disbursement period, the EA will 
submit annual operation plans

46
 (AOP) no later than 30 days before the end of the 

preceding calendar year; and semiannual progress reports (PR) no later than 30 

days after the end of the calendar semester. AOPs and PRs will be prepared 

following a template consistent with the Bank’s “Project Monitoring Report”. The 

AOPs will include targets indicators, a work plan for the calendar year, updated 

procurement and risk mitigation plans, a disbursement forecast, and a 

maintenance plan for infrastructures and equipment. The PRs will indicate the 

level of fulfillment of the output and outcome indicators planned in the AOPs; 

detail the execution of procurement, risk mitigation and maintenance activities; 

analyze problems encountered; and propose corrective measures. Within 60 days 

after the last disbursement date, the EA will prepare a final report, summarizing 

all the PRs prepared during the program life and will organize a closing workshop 

to present and discuss the Project Completion Report prepared by the Bank. 

3.11 Evaluation. The EA will submit to the Bank: (i) a midterm independent 
evaluation report no later than 36 months after the date of entry into force of the 

grant agreement or when 50% of the grants proceeds have been disbursed, 

whichever occurs first; and (ii) a final independent evaluation report, within 90 

days after the date on which 90% of the grant proceeds have been disbursed or 

after the Bank’s official request. The final evaluation report will mandatorily 

include the results of the program’s impact evaluation (see below). 

3.12 Impact evaluation. An impact evaluation plan was agreed upon with the GoH. 
The impact evaluation and monitoring plan presents the methodology, data 

collection plan, indicators to be measured, sample design and budget allocated to 

each activity. For Components 2 and 3, the evaluation methodology to be applied 

is a quasi-experimental approach of Double Difference combined with a 

Propensity Score Matching. To accomplish this, a data collection strategy will be 

implemented to administer two rounds of surveys to fishers and merchants in 

treatment and control groups. This analysis will allow us to measure the impact 

heterogeneity of the program with an emphasis on beneficiary women 

(merchants). The total number of surveys for both rounds is 3,230. For 

Component 1, a reflexive method will be used to compare indicators before and 

after the intervention. The total cost of the impact evaluation amounts to 

US$450,000. 

                                                 
46

  Sections of the AOPs related to Component 2 and 3 for the SE department will be prepared in coordination 

with AECID. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/39542996/R


                                                                                    Annex I - HA-L1096

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Strategic Development Objectives

     Lending Program

     Regional Development Goals

     Bank Output Contribution (as defined in Results Framework of IDB-9)

2. Country Strategy Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2646

     Country Program Results Matrix GN-2805

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country 

strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Evaluable Weight Maximum Score

8.6 10

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution 7.2 33.33% 10

     3.1 Program Diagnosis 1.8

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions 2.4

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality 3.0

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis 8.5 33.33% 10

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic 

Analysis
4.0

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits 1.5

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs 1.5

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions 0.0

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis 1.5

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 10.0 33.33% 10

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms 2.5

     5.2 Evaluation Plan 7.5

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries 

and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality Yes

Labor

Environment Yes

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector 

entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps 

in the sector that were identified in the project document and/or in the evaluation plan
Yes

The general objective of the project is to improve income of small fishers in three southern regions of Haiti (South, South-East and Grande Anse), through the sustainable development of artisanal fisheries. The 

project aims to: (i) strengthen the institutional management of the fisheries sector for resource sustainability, and improve sanitary and food safety conditions for marketing of seafood products; (ii) improve the 

quality of fish at landing sites, through improved public infrastructure; and (iii) increase artisanal fisheries productivity and reduce economic losses through the establishment of a rights-based fishery management 

scheme.  A diagnosis of the opportunities and challenges of developing sustainable artisanal fisheries in Haiti is provided, although some key empirical evidence related to resource sustainability is missing. Cognizant 

of this, the project emphasizes the gathering of socio-economic and resource information and in general the interventions and their sequencing respond to the needs identified.

The vertical logic of the project recognizes and embeds both the need to establish sustainable management practices and to enhance income generating opportunities for fishers and merchants. Indicators at all levels 

are SMART and baseline values, yearly targets, and the means for collecting the information is provided. 

The ex-ante economic analysis is in general adequate, although some assumptions are not fully justified. The monitoring and evaluation plan is complete and follows the DEM guidelines. Given the lack of rigorous 

evidence on the effectiveness of the type of interventions promoted by the project, the non-experimental approach proposed for the evaluation is particularly relevant, especially if similar project interventions are 

to be expanded to other parts of the country.

The program will finance public infrastructure, training and matching grants 

targeted towards female merchants (see components II and III). Also, the impact 

evaluation design will allow to measure the specific impact on women 

merchants. 

The project will improve environmental sustaibability of artisanal fishing. See 

paragraph 1.23 of the POD.

The impact evaluation will be conducted by implementing a quasi-experimental 

approach of Difference in Differences combined with Propensity Score 

Matching. This analysis will allow measuring the project effectiveness on 

improving income and environmental sustainability by increasing access to 

productive capital (boats, new fishing techniques, etc.), human capital 

(trainings)  and public infrastructure.  In addition, this evaluation will allow 

comparing the effectiveness of providing matching grants that partially finance 

the cost of productive capital versus providing grants that fully finance access to 

productive capital. Also, the impact evaluation design will allow measuring  the 

specific impact on women merchants. 

Medium

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

-Regional and sub-regional integration agreements and cooperation initiatives supported

-Farmers given access to improved agricultural services and investments

Aligned

Increase agriculture income in targeted areas

The intervention is included in the 2015 Operational Program.

-Trade openness (trade as percent of GDP)

-Annual growth rate of agricultural GDP (%)

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Aligned

-Lending to small and vulnerable countries

-Lending for poverty reduction and equity enhancement

-Lending to support regional cooperation and integration

I. Strategic Alignment



    ANNEX II - HA-L1096  

Page 1 of 5 

 

RESULTS FRAMEWORK 

Objective: The general objective is to increase revenues of artisanal fishermen in the three southern regions of Haiti through the development of sustainable artisanal 

fishing. The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen the institutional management of the fisheries sector for resource sustainability and improved sanitary and food 

safety conditionsfor marketing of seafood products; (ii) improve the quality of fish at landing sites through improved public infrastructure; and (iii) increase artisanal 

fisheries productivity and reduce economic losses through the establishment of a rights-based fishery management scheme. 

IMPACTS Baseline 2015 End of Project 

Target 

Comments 

IMPACT 1: Increase net revenues of artisanal 

fishers 

  Source and year of baseline: Preparatory surveys Gachot, 2015, will 

be confirmed by baseline surveys administered in Y1 

Means of verification:  Impact evaluation surveys, Associations 

monitoring system, Fisheries information system  
Indicator 1.1: Increase average total net revenues 

from fishing and fishing-related activities by 

household 

US$1,640  US$2,458  

IMPACT 2: Improve the environmental 

sustainability of artisanal fishing 

  Source and year of baseline: Preparatory surveys Gachot, 2015, will 

be confirmed by baseline surveys administered in Y1 

Means of verification:  Impact evaluation surveys. Shore=continental 

plateau. 
Indicator 2.1: % of fishers fishing exclusively on the 

shore out of total number of fishers 

75% 50%  

Indicator 2.2: Establishment of at least one no-take 

zone in the coastal area associated with the scope of 

the project 

0 1 

 

COMPONENT I: INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING AND FISHERIES INFORMATION SYSTEM 

OUTCOMES Baseline Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 End of 

Project 

Comments 

OUTCOMES 

OUTCOME 1: Strengthen 

the institutional management 

of the fisheries sector for 

resource management 

       Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015.International 

conventions  have to be ratified by the parliament. For the FAO 

agreement the verification will be done with documentation 

provided by the Ministry.  

Means of verification: At least 3 from the list below : 

  · The Internation Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic 

Tunas (ICCAT) is responsible for the conservation of tunas and 

other related species in the Atlantic Ocean and adjacent seas 

(1969) 

  · The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species 

of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES; 1973) 

  · UN Agreement relating to the Conservation and Management of    

Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks (1995) 

  · Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS; 1974) 

  · The Ramsar Convention (1971) 

  · Convention on Biological Diversity (1993) 

Indicator 1.1: Membership to 

international conventions on 

sustainable fishing (unit: 

number of conventions) 

 

0   1  2 3 



    ANNEX II - HA-L1096  

Page 2 of 5 

 

COMPONENT I: INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING AND FISHERIES INFORMATION SYSTEM 

OUTCOMES Baseline Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 End of 

Project 

Comments 

OUTCOMES 

· Convention on marine pollution (MARPOL; 1983) 

  · International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter, and Eliminate 

Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (INN)  

OUTCOME 2: Improve 

health conditions of fishing 

products 

        
Source and year of baseline: OIE fisheries report, 2008-2009  

Means of verification: OIE reports 

Indicator 2.1: Number of 

health certificates for exports 

given to firms (OIE) 

666   800   1000 

OUTPUTS 

Output 1: Revision and 

formulation of judicial 

instruments for the drafting of 

a framework law on fisheries 

0   1   1 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR , DPAQ 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

Output 2: FD offices built and 

equipped (unit: infrastructure) 

0   3   3 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Visual observation during IDB inspection 

visits. 

One office for Fisheries Directorate in Damiens and 2 buildings in 

Pestel and in Les Cayes 

Output 3: Study on 

operational implementation of 

a control and monitoring 

system of marine fisheries 

(unit : study) 

0  1    2 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Rapport semestriel du projet 

Control and monitoring system of marine fisheries, pilot towards a 

rights-based fisheries control system 

Output 4: Implementation 

plans for a system of 

monitoring, control and 

surveillance of diseases as well 

as for a health control system 

for fishing products drafted 

(OSAPISA) (unit: plan) 

0  2    2 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: (i) Biannual project reports;  

(ii) Implementation plan for a system of monitoring, control and 

surveillance of diseases; and (iii) Implementation plan for a health 

control system for fishing products  

Output 5: Additional FD staff 

at decentralized DDA (South, 

South East and Grande Anse) 

in place (unit: staff) 

0 26     26 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Proof of recruitment (contractual term 

prior to first disbursement) 

Additional DDA managers (8) and technicians (18) in departments 

of intervention (Sud, Grande Anse and Sud Est) 



    ANNEX II - HA-L1096  

Page 3 of 5 

 

COMPONENT I: INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING AND FISHERIES INFORMATION SYSTEM 

OUTCOMES Baseline Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 End of 

Project 

Comments 

OUTCOMES 

Output 6: Managers and 

technicians trained (unit: 

people trained) 

0 2 45   2 49 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

Staff trained in : masters ; short term training for DDA managers, 

DPAQ managers and technicians; training of aquatic pathology 

service. 

Output 7: Study on new 

potential markets prepared 

(unit: study) 

0 1   0  1 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports, Study 

Output 8: Outreach campaigns 

conducted (unit: campaign)  

0  2 1   3 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: (i) Biannual project reports; (ii) National 

outreach campaign on the use of ice and health norms;               

(iii) National outreach campaign promoting the consumption of 

fishing products; and (iv) National outreach campaign on 

endangered species. 

Output 9: Fisheries 

information system in place 

(unit: system in place) 

0  1    1 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

This system includes: software development ; data collection 

system 

Output 10: Census of 

fishermen conducted (unit: 

census) 

0 1     1 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports, census report, 

dataset 

The census of fishermen will take place nationally and will include 

data on equipment and boats. 

Output 11: Studies  on fishery 

resources and new fishing 

techniques completed (unit: 

study) 

0 3 1 1 1  6 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

3 fisheries resources evaluation campaigns (experimental fishing) 

Research on new fishing techniques including artifical reefs, FAD 

(including study of impacts) 
 

COMPONENT II: PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURES 

OUTCOMES Baseline Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 End of 

Project 

Comments 

OUTCOME 3: Increase 

quality of fish sold  

       Source and year of baseline: Preparatory surveys Gachot, 2015, 

will be confirmed by baseline surveys administered in Y1 

Means of verification: Impact evaluation surveys in the 

intervention area 
Indicator3.1: Value of weekly 

sales of fish per woman 

merchant 

US$54       US$74 



    ANNEX II - HA-L1096  

Page 4 of 5 

 

COMPONENT II: PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURES 

OUTCOMES Baseline Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 End of 

Project 

Comments 

OUTPUTS 

Output 12: Fish 

reception/unloading areas with 

water supply and wastewater 

disposal systems built (unit: 
infrastructure and equipment) 

0  1 1   2 Baseline year: 2015 

Means of verification: Visual observation during IDB inspection 

visits. Marigot and Anse d’Hainault 

Includes: 300m2 warehouse, 1 floating pontoon, 1 3000L tank, 2 

manual water pump systems, 1 insulated container. 

Output 13: Fish cleaning areas 

with water supply and 

wastewater disposal systems 

built (unit: infrastructures and 

equipment) 

0  10 7   17 Baseline year: 2015 

Means of verification: Visual observation during IDB inspection 

visits. One by commune of intervention except Jacmel 

Includes: 30m2 warehouse, 1 2000L tank and its setting up, 1 

manual water pump system, 1 20m3 insulated chamber. 

Output 14: Communal public 

markets built and equipped 

with water supply and 

wastewater disposal systems 

(unit: infrastructure and 

equipment) 

0 2  2   4 Baseline year: 2015 

Means of verification: Work acceptance report + visual 

observation during IDB inspection visits. 

Belle Anse (improvement of existing market), Bainet, Aquin, St 

Jean du Sud (local/regional distribution centers) 

Includes: 90m2 warehouse, 1 3000L tank and its setting up, 1 

manual water pump system. 

Output 15: Landing areas 

improved (unit: infrastructure 

and equipment) 

0  21 20 28  69 Baseline year: 2015 

Means of verification Visual observation during IDB inspection 

visits. Beaching trolleys; improvement of accesses on board and 

boat shelters. 

Output 16: Technical 

assistance to the MARNDR for 

the monitoring of the public 

infrastructure works (unit: 

technical assistance) 

0 1     1 Baseline year: 2015 

Means of verification Proof of recruitment (contractual term prior 

to first disbursement),  progress reports, supervision visit reports. 

 

 

COMPONENT III: STAKEHOLDERS’ CAPACITY BUILDING 

OUTCOMES 

OUTCOME 4: 

Establishment of rights based 

management systems  

       Source and year of baseline: Macias, 2014  

Means of verification: Fisheries information system and surveys  

Note: The targeted area is composed by five fishing basins defined 

as fishing geographic area with a homogeneity in terms of fisheries 

perspective (eg narrow continental shelf, sandy bottoms, 

techniques and material) that the fishers usually operate together. 

Indicator 4.1: Fishing basins 

with rights based fishery 

management  established (unit: 

number) 

0     2 2 



    ANNEX II - HA-L1096  

Page 5 of 5 

 

COMPONENT III: STAKEHOLDERS’ CAPACITY BUILDING 

OUTCOMES 

OUTCOME 5: Increase 

artisanal fishing productivity 

       Source and year of baseline: Preparatory surveys Gachot, 2015, 

will be confirmed by baseline surveys administered in Y1 

Means of verification: Fisheries information system and surveys 

(Total catches of pelagic fishes per boat / total number of fishing 

trips per month) / number of fishers per boat 

Indicator 5.1: Catches of 

pelagic fishes by trip and by 

fisher (unit: KG) 

0.373      1 

OUTCOME 6: Reduce 

economic losses 

       Source and year of baseline: Preparatory surveys Gachot, 2015, 

will be confirmed by baseline surveys administered in Y1 

Means of verification: Impact evaluation surveys in the 

intervention area 
Indicator 6.1: Percentage of 

total catches sold fresh (%) 

69%      78.3% 

OUTPUTS 

Output 17: Fishers 

associations trained (unit: 

association) 

0  40 15   55 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

100% of fishers are men 

Output 18: Merchants 

associations trained (unit: 

association) 

0  10  15  25  Source and year of baseline: Rapport Javier Macias, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

100% of the beneficiaries of the merchant training will be women 

Output 19: Fishers and 

Merchants associations having 

access to technologies through 

matching grant system (unit: 

association) 

0   20 20 15 55 Source and year of baseline: Rapport Javier Macias, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

Associations will be able to choose from a list of predefined 

technologies. 

Output 20: Pilot on new 

fishing techniques 

implemented in the targeted 

area and rights based 

management fishery system 

(unit=pilot) 

0     1 1 Source and year of baseline: the implementation of this pilot will 

be based on the studies conducted in component I.  

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

Output 20.1: Number of 

beneficiaries of improved 

management and sustainable 

use of natural and cultural 

capital 

0     4490 4490 Core Sector Indicator (CSI) 

Number of total beneficiairies in the associations. To be 

desagregated as follows: 

2829 fishers (men) and 1661 merchants (women) 

 



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 1 of 8 

 

 

FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTS 

 

COUNTRY:    Republic of Haiti 

PROJECT Nº :  HA-L1096 

NAME:  Artisanal Fisheries Development Program 

EXECUTING AGENCY:  The Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural 

Development (MARNDR) 

FIDUCIARY TEAM:  Marise E. Salnave and Romina Kirkagacli (FMP/CHA) 

 

I. Executive Summary 
 

1.1 The objective of the project is to improve income of small fishers in three southern 
regions of Haiti (South, South-East and Grand Anse) through the sustainable 

development of artisanal fisheries. The Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and 

Rural Development (MARNDR) will execute the project through its Fishery Directorate 

(FD). Financial management aspects will be handled through the fiduciary team of the 

MARNDR’s BCP-ProGEBA unit while the Central Procurement Unit of the Ministry 

(“Unité de Passation des Marchés Publics” - UPMP for its French acronym) will execute 

all procurement activities.  

 

1.2 The project amount is US$16,500,000 financed by the IDB Grant Facility up to the 
amount of US$15,000,000 and the national counterpart up to the amount of 

US$1,500,000. 

 

II. General Context of National Financial Management and Procurement Systems 
 

2.1 The most recent evaluation of the public financial management systems of the Republic   
of Haiti is contained in the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) 

assessment report conducted in 2011 and published in February 2012. Country financial 

management systems and external control mechanism, as evidenced by this latest 

diagnostic, would require further improvements to conform to levels consistent with 

fiduciary management of Bank’s funded projects. As a result, no country systems will be 

used for the financial management of the project.  

 

2.2 An evaluation of the National Procurement System was performed in 2013, applying the 
methodology established by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and 

Development (OECD/DAC). A certain number of recommendations were identified 

through an action plan for the modernization of the national procurement system; 

however, the implementation of this plan still needs to be initiated. Based on the current 

situation and the need to align the national system to international standards and best 

practices, the Bank’s procurement policies will govern procurement activities foreseen 

under this program. 

2.3 To mitigate these risks the Bank will continue in the foreseeable future to: (i) rely on 
special project execution units for the execution of all projects; and (ii) to implement 

special fiduciary arrangements for the implementation of its projects and to conduct close 



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 2 of 8 

 

 

operation supervision of project execution units. External control will be performed for 

all Bank operations by independent audit firms acceptable to the Bank in accordance with 

the Bank’s financial reporting and audit guide. 

 

III. Executing Agency´s Fiduciary Context  
 

3.1 The MARNDR will execute the project through its FD and will be responsible for the 
overall management of the project including the preparation of the PEP and POA, 

technical supervision of activities as well as the monitoring and evaluation of project 

results. Financial management aspects will be handled through the fiduciary team of 

MARNDR’s BCP-ProGEBA unit which has extensive experience in the financial 

management of Bank financed operations
1
 and will report to the Director of the FD. 

BCP-ProGEBA will be responsible for the overall administrative and financial 

management of project resources including budgeting, accounting and reporting on use of 

funds, payments and disbursement requests and the recruitment project auditors.  The 

implementation of this new project will result in an increase in workload which may have 

an impact on project execution.  

 

3.2 The UPMP, created through the Ministerial Decree “M-AIDG/(C-17)09-13:1659 (bis)” 
on September 17, 2013, has been in place and operational since early 2014. Based on 

findings of the technical assistance conducted by the Bank’s procurement team, this Unit 

has proved to possess a solid technical knowledge in the application of Bank’s 

procurement policies. The Coordinator of the Unit, a Senior Procurement Specialist who 

has worked in specific Bank projects in the past, has been handling all procurement 

activities of the Ministry with a high focus on the quality of the processes and an 

increased collaboration with the technical teams. The Unit is composed of several 

procurement specialists and has an organized system to treat purchase requests and 

conduct procurement processes and is now working on the establishment of an improved 

filing system. With an increased number of projects handled by this Unit, the 

management of the workload may have an impact on execution. 

 

IV. Fiduciary Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Actions  
 

4.1 The latest assessment of BCP-ProGEBA was updated in July 2014 and confirms 
improvement in its financial management risk rating from medium to low.                 

BCP-ProGEBA has updated its accounting system and its accounting manual to include 

mechanisms followed for the monitoring of budget, the safeguarding of financial 

information, and the management of fixed assets. Nonetheless, due to the increase in 

volume and complexity of new projects being assigned to the fiduciary team of         

BCP-ProGEBA (HA-L1050 and HA-L1096), the Bank considers financial management 

risk rating to be medium and to mitigate this risk recommends the strengthening of its 

accounting team with the hiring of an administrator, an accountant and an administrative 

assistant dedicated to the implementation of this new project. In addition the operation 

                                                 
1
  The unit has successfully executed operations HA0016, HA-L1021 in the Artibonite Valley and is currently 

implementing HA-L1087. 



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 3 of 8 

 

 

manual of the project will include among other sections: (i) procedures for the approval 

and disbursement of funds; (ii) chart of accounts; and (iii) policy and procedures for 

inventory administration. The hiring of the administrator, the accountant and the 

administrative assistant and the approval of the project’s operation manual will be 

condition prior to first disbursements. In addition, during the first year of the project, 

Bank’s Fiduciary staff will conduct inspection visits on a semi-annual basis to review the 

execution of financial plan, the preparation of financial reports and the review of project 

expenses and documentation. 

 

4.2 The fiduciary risk level for procurement under this project is defined as medium mainly 
due to the workload that is being handled by the UPMP through the procurement 

execution of several projects. The following specific risks and related mitigation 

measures have been identified: (i) clearance of all procurement processes is currently 

centralized with the coordinator of the Unit which can result in delays in procurement 

execution. Mitigation: A procurement specialist with the required qualifications will be 

hired in order to support the additional workload of the Unit; (ii) with a centralized 

structure, the high number of transactions may also negatively impact the execution 

timeframe. Mitigation: The Unit will work on consolidated procurement plans in order to 

improve its planning capacity and identify recurrent purchases so as to reduce 

transactional costs and achieve best value for money; (iii) the increased number of 

contracts handled by the Unit may impede the effectiveness of contract management. 

Mitigation: Identify a mechanism to ensure proper follow up on contract management 

matters; (iv) the technical staff has not executed Bank’s projects previously and is new to 

Bank’s procurement policies and procedures. Mitigation: As for all other projects, it is 

recommended that the technical staff is trained on procurement matters such as: 

preparation of Terms of Reference, establishment of selection criteria, evaluation of 

technical and financial offers and contract monitoring during execution; and (v) while a 

filing system has been put in place, the Unit does not have a dedicated space to stock 

archives and does not have a person dedicated to the management of files. Mitigation: 

Recruitment of a dedicated person for the management of archives. 

 

V. Aspects to be Considered in the Special Conditions of Contract 
 

1. Special conditions precedent to first disbursement: 
 

5.1 Special Accounts: FD will open two separate bank accounts (in US dollars and in local 
currency) for the management of grant resources. Local counterpart funds will be 

processed through the Compte Unique du Trésor (CUT- according to its French acronym) 

the MARNDR single treasury account which became operational in October 2014 for 

funds disbursed by the Government of Haiti. 

 

5.2 The preparation of an operation manual to include: (i) procedures for the approval and 
disbursement of funds; (ii) chart of accounts; and (iii) inventory, equipment and 

consumable stocks management and fuel consumption control procedures.  

 



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 4 of 8 

 

 

5.3 The Central Bank exchange rate at the day of transaction will be used at the reference 
rate. 

 

5.4 Procurement: A procurement specialist with the required qualifications will be hired in 
order to support the workload of the UPMP. 

 

5.5 Special audit and financial reporting requirements: (i) Audit of project: external 
auditors eligible to the Bank will be hired by the FD to perform the audit of the program 

as follows: one annual financial audit of the program including the audit the internal 

control processes and the review of procurement processes to be submitted within 120 

days following the end of each fiscal year and a final financial audit of the program to be 

submitted within 120 days after the date of the last disbursement.  For accounting and 

audit purposes, the Haitian fiscal year will be respected; and (ii) during the first year of 

execution, the project will also submit quarterly unaudited financial reports 45 days after 

the end of each quarter. For the following years, the frequency for the submission of 

unaudited reports will be based on risk evaluation updates determined during supervision 

missions. 

 

5.6 Special disbursement: An initial disbursement of up to US$125,000 will be made to the 
extent the beneficiary fulfills, to the Bank’s satisfaction, all the standard general 

conditions prior to disbursement set forth in grant agreements, except for (i) the 

submission of the initial execution report; and (ii) evidence of reliable financial 

information systems and internal control mechanism. US$125,000 will enable the 

executing agency to fulfill all the conditions prior to first disbursement and shall include: 

(i) the hiring of the administrator, the accountant and the administrative assistant to 

strengthen the fiduciary team of the BCP-ProGEBA; (ii) the hiring of a procurement 

specialist to support the Coordinator of the UPMP; (iii) the selection of a consultant 

responsible for elaborating the operation manual of the program; (iv) the hiring of a 

planning, monitoring and evaluation specialist to support the FD Coordinator; (v) the 

hiring of a consultant for the formatting of the BCP-ProGEBA accounting system to 

include the chart of accounts of this new operation and the financial reports to be 

submitted to the Bank including the training of new accounting personnel; and (vi) the 

purchase of office and Information Technology (IT) equipment. 

 

VI. Fiduciary Arrangements for Procurement Execution  
 

6.1 The procurement fiduciary arrangements establish the conditions applicable to all 
procurement execution activities in the project. 

 

1. Procurement Execution  
 

6.2 All project related procurement activities will be performed by the MARNDR 
Procurement Unit following the Bank’s Procurement Policies: Policies for the 

Procurement of Goods and Works financed by the Inter-American Development Bank 

(GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants financed by 



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 5 of 8 

 

 

the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2350-9) and the Special Procurement 

Provisions for Haiti (GN-2654). 

 

a. Procurement of works, goods and non-consulting services: The contracts for works, 
goods, and non-consulting services

2
 generated under the project and subject to 

International Competitive Bidding will be executed through the use of the Standard 

Bidding Documents (SBDs) issued by the Bank. The processes subject to National 

Competitive Bidding (NCB) will be executed through the use of National Bidding 

Documents agreed to by the Bank. The technical specifications review during the 

preparation of the selection process, is the responsibility of the project sector specialist. 

Some contracts for the purchase of equipment will be executed using matching grant 

mechanisms (the cost of the equipment will be borne by the project and partially through 

beneficiaries’ contributions). As such, specific contractual modalities will be identified in 

order to reflect this specific execution mechanism. A contract with a financial institution 

is foreseen to allow the purchase of this equipment by fishermen associations through a 

voucher system.  

b. Selection and contracting of consultants: The consulting services contracts generated 
under this project will be executed through the use of the Standard Request for Proposals 

(SRFPs) issued or agreed to by the Bank. The terms of reference review for the selection 

of consulting services is the responsibility of the project sector specialist. 

c. Selection of individual consultants: The selection will be made in accordance with 
Bank’s Procurement rules and procedures and will consist in evaluating the capacity of at 

least three candidates against set and agreed Terms of References.  

d. Direct contracting: No Direct Contracting is foreseen under this project for the time 
being. Should any direct contracting be required during the execution of the operation, a 

revised Procurement Plan will reflect this change and will be submitted to the Bank for 

non-objection. 

2. Thresholds (thousands US$) 
 

6.3 The thresholds established in the Special Procurement Provisions for Haiti (GN-2654), 
until these will be in place, will be applied to the procurement activities foreseen under 

this operation, as detailed in the following table: 

 
Table 1. Thresholds in force since January 1, 2012 (In thousands of US$) 

HAITI   

Works Goods Consulting Services 

International 

Competitive 

Bidding 

National Competitive 

bidding / Price 

Comparison 

International 

Competitive 

Bidding 

National Competitive 

bidding / Price 

Comparison 

Short list of national 

firms only 

>1.000 <1.000 >100 <100 <100 

 
 

                                                 
2
  Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2349-9) paragraph 1.1: The services 

different to consulting services have a similar process as procurement of goods. 



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 6 of 8 

 

 

3. Main Procurement Activities 

Table 2. Main Procurement Activities 

Activity Procureme

nt Method 

Estimated 

Date 

Estimated Amount 

thousands US$ 

Goods    

Purchase of  70 boats ICB Feb-2016 385,000 

Purchase of  80 engines ICB Feb-2016 320,000  

Purchase of 930  coolers for fish merchants ICB Feb-2016 210,000  

Works    

Construction of 23 fisheries infrastructures  
ICB Jan-2016 1,700,000  

Construction of  2 docks  (Marigot et Anse d'Hainault) ICB Jan-2016 510,000  

Services    

Contract with financial institution for the provision of vouchers to 

fishers’ associations 

NCB Jan-2016 60,000 

Preparation of a national census of fishermen ICB Jan-2016 400,000 

Firms    

Supervision of fisheries infrastructure works QCS Jan-2016 1,756,000  

Operators to strengthen fishermen’s associations QCS Mar-2016 1,200,000  

Communication campaign QCS Mar-2016 525,000  

Design and implementation of an  information system for 

fisheries 

QCS April-2016 450,000  

*To access the 18 month procurement plan, click here  

 

4. Procurement Supervision 
 

6.4 Based on the risks identified under Section II above, the major procurement activities 
foreseen under this operation will be subject to ex ante review by the Bank. Procurement 

activities using the shopping method for goods and for works falling below the threshold 

of US$200,000 and the recruitment of individual consultants selected under a competitive 

method will be subject to ex post review. The external audit firm recruited under this 

operation as per paragraph 4.2 will conduct the ex-post review on these contracts, on 

behalf of the Bank. 

 

5. Records and Files 
 

6.5 The executing agency will be required to keep files and track records of all procurement 
related activities financed by the Bank in their office in accordance with the Bank’s 

procurement rules and procedures and to the project’s operational rules in such a way that 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/39542989/R


ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 7 of 8 

 

 

it be available for supervision visit by the fiduciary team. It is also recommended that the 

executing agency develops electronic filing so as to ensure the efficiency of the system. It 

is important however to note that the national legislation in Haiti does not recognize 

electronic documents, hence this filing method should not replace paper files. 

 

VII. Financial Management 
 

A. Programming and Budget 
 

7.1 Programming and budget execution and monitoring at the project level will rely on the 
Bank’s project financial management formats and procedures. The FD will prepare 

annually, an operation plan (AOP) which includes a procurement plan and a            

twelve-month detailed financial plan. The financial plans will respect the budget lines 

defined in the grant agreement (investment categories). During the first year of execution, 

the program’s financial plans will be reviewed on a quarterly basis.  

 

B. Accounting and Information Systems 
 

7.2 BCP-ProGEBA’s financial management systems will be used for the financial 
management of the project. The system will be programmed to generate income and 

expense reports by investment categories and source of funds and to generate financial 

statements required by bank. 

 

C. Disbursements and Funds Flow  
 

7.3 Advance of funds methodology will be used for the disbursement of project funds for an 
amount equivalent to three-month funding needs.  The FD will open separate bank 

accounts for the management of grant resources. Disbursement Supervision will be 

expost. As specified in section 5.6 above, an initial disbursement of up to US$125,000 

will be made by the Bank grant to fulfill conditions prior to first disbursements. No 

financial resources of the program will be transferred to participating associations and 

stakeholders, with the exception of a limited budget during the first four years of the 

program for the strengthening of the capacity of local actors including fishermen and 

sellers through their association to be implemented by Departmental Agricultural 

Directorate (DDA) via a technical assistance to be provided by an experienced operator 

(one operator per department in the South and Grand’Anse) to be financed under 

Component III of the program. The local national counterpart will be used to finance 

operation costs including the strengthening of the FD human resources personnel at the 

decentralized level; managerial (eight) and technical (18) staff. GoH funding will be 

processed through the MARNDR single treasury account. The project will also subsidize 

the purchase of equipment through matching grants based on eligible criteria is to be 

defined in the operation manual. Funds will be used for the purchase of improve 

productive equipment. Each association will contribute to a certain percentage of the cost 

based on their financial capacity and further defined in the operation manual. Exchange 

rate valid at the day of transaction will be used to record all expenses made in local 

currency. The Central Bank exchange rate will be used at the reference rate.  



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 8 of 8 

 

 

 

D. Internal Control and Audit 
 

7.4 The internal auditor of MARNDR will fulfill the internal audit function. The internal 
control environment of the project will be strengthened with the preparation and 

implementation of the project operation manual referred to in section 4.2. 

 

E. External Control and Reporting 
 

7.5 Audits will be performed in accordance with Bank’s Guidelines for Financial Reports and 
External Audits as described in point 4.5. Financial audit cost will be financed by IDB 

grant and estimated at US$200,000. The program financial statements will correspond to 

the fiscal year. The audit firm will carry out audit on the basis of specific terms of 

reference to be agreed between the FD and the Bank. During the first year of execution, 

the project will also submit quarterly unaudited financial reports 45 days after the end of 

each quarter. The frequency for the submission of unaudited report, for subsequent years, 

will be based on risk evaluation updates determined during supervision missions. 

 

F. Financial Supervision Plan 
 

7.6 During the first year of execution, Fiduciary staff will review the execution of financial 
plan on a quarterly basis and on a semi-annual basis for the following years. Semi-annual 

inspection visit will be performed by financial management specialist, during the first 

year of execution however frequency of visit are subject to change based on findings 

raised during supervision missions. 

 

G. Execution Mechanism 
 

7.7 The FD will maintain proper financial management systems and will prepare AOPs (see 
7.1.) indicating cash flow needs for the execution of program’s activities. The        

twelve-month financial plan will serve as the basis for advance of funds disbursements. 

Disbursement of advances of funds will be for the equivalent of funding needs required 

for three months of program execution. Fund flows will be executed as stated in point 

7.3. 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

 

 

 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/15 

 

 

 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing ____/GR-HA to the Republic of Haiti 

Artisanal Fisheries Development Program 

 

 

 

The Board of Executive Directors 

 

RESOLVES: 

 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized, 

in the name and on behalf of the Bank, as Administrator of the IDB Grant Facility (hereinafter 

referred to as the “Account”), to enter into such contract or contracts as may be necessary with 

the Republic of Haiti, as Beneficiary, for the purpose of granting it a nonreimbursable financing 

to cooperate in the execution of the Artisanal Fisheries Development Program. Such 

nonreimbursable financing will be for an amount of up to US$15,000,000, which form part 

of the Account, and will be subject to the Terms and Financial Conditions and the Special 

Contractual Conditions in the Project Summary of the Grant Proposal. 

 

 

 

(Adopted on ___ ____________ 2015) 

 

 

 
LEG/SGO/HA/IDBDOCS#39566710 
HA-L1096 





















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

BOLIVIA 

 

 

 

AGRICULTURAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY PROGRAM II 

(BO-L1179) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Álvaro García Negro (RND/CPR) 
and Juan Manuel Murguía (RND/CBO), Project Team Co-leaders; César Falconi (CSD/RND); 
Viviana Alva-Hart (RND/CAR); Fernando Balcázar (RND/CCO); Carolina Escudero and 
Abel Cuba (FMP/CBO); Javier Jiménez (LEG/SGO); Gina Peñaranda (CAN/CBO); Alberto 
Villalba (VPS/ESG); and Yolanda Valle (CSD/RND). 

 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors 
simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the 
document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus superseding 
and replacing the original version. 

 



 

CONTENTS 

PROJECT SUMMARY 
 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................................ 1 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale ............................................ 1 
B. Objectives, components and cost ................................................................. 8 
C. Key results indicators ................................................................................. 10 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................... 11 

A. Financing instruments ................................................................................ 11 
B. Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 11 
C. Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 12 
D. Other project risks ...................................................................................... 12 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 13 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 13 
B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ....................................... 15 

 
 
 
 

  



 - ii - 
 
 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) – Summary  

Annex II Results Matrix  

Annex III Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements  

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED 

1. Multiyear execution plan 

2. Annual work plan 

3. Monitoring and evaluation plan 

4. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) 

5. Procurement plan 

OPTIONAL 

1. Economic analysis of the program 

2. Institutional capacity assessment  

3. Draft Operating Regulations for the program 

 
  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670736
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670729
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670734
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670747
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670738
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670749
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670745
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670743


 - iii - 
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS 

BSE Bovine spongiform encephalopathy 
CAO Cámara Agropecuaria del Oriente 
DALY Disability-adjusted life year 
EGDI E-Government Development Index 
FMD  Foot and mouth disease 
GDP Gross domestic product 
IBCE Instituto Boliviano de Comercio Exterior [Bolivian Foreign Trade 

Institute] 
ICAS Institutional Capacity Assessment System 
ICB International competitive bidding 
IICA Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture 
INE Instituto Nacional de Estadística [National Statistics Institute] 
IPPC International Plant Protection Convention 
IRR Internal rate of return 
NB-SABS Normas Básicas del Sistema de Administración de Bienes y Servicios 

[Basic Regulations of the Goods and Services Management System] 
NPV Net present value 
OIE World Organisation for Animal Health 
OVE Office of Evaluation and Oversight 
PVS OIE Tool for the Evaluation of Performance of Veterinary Services 
RASFF Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed 
SCF Single Currency Facility 
SENASAG Servicio Nacional de Sanidad Agropecuaria e Inocuidad Alimentaria 

[National Service for Agricultural Health and Food Safety] 
SIAP-BID Sistema de Administración de Proyectos del Banco [Administration 

System for Bank Projects] 
SICOES Sistema de Contrataciones Estatales [Public Procurement System] 
SIGEP Sistema Integrado de Gestión Pública [Integrated Public Management 

System] 
UDAPE Unidad de Análisis de Políticas Sociales y Económicas [Economic and 

Social Policy Analysis Unit] 
 
 



 

 
PROJECT SUMMARY 

BOLIVIA 

AGRICULTURAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY PROGRAM II 
(BO-L1179) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Plurinational State of Bolivia 
 OC FSO 

Amortization period: 30 years 40 years 

Executing agency: Servicio Nacional de Sanidad 

Agropecuaria e Inocuidad Alimentaria [National Service 
for Agricultural Health and Food Safety] (SENASAG) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace period: 6 years 40 years 

IDB (OC): 21,250,000 85 
Inspection and 
supervision fee: 

(a) N/A 

IDB (FSO): 3,750,000 15 
Interest rate: SCF – fixed(b) 0.25% 

Credit fee: (a) N/A 

Total: 25,000,000 100 
Currency of approval: US$ US$ 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description: The general objective of the program is to help increase productivity in the agriculture 

sector. The specific objectives are: (i) to reduce production losses from pests and diseases; (ii) to facilitate access to 
international markets; and (iii) to enhance service to users. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan: (i) the borrower will sign a subsidiary 

agreement with the executing agency establishing the following and other elements: (a) the mechanism for transferring the 
loan proceeds; and (b) the commitment of the executing agency to conduct program activities in accordance with the terms 
of the loan contract (paragraph 3.2); (ii) the executing agency: (a) will create the program execution unit in accordance with 
terms and conditions previously agreed upon with the Bank; and (b) will contract specialists, through a competitive process, 
in at least the following areas: general coordination, planning, financial management, procurement, and environmental and 
social management (paragraph 3.2); (iii) the program technical board will be created and its members appointed 
(paragraph 3.2); and (iv) the program Operating Regulations will be approved by the executing agency and will be in force, 
under terms previously agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.4). 

Special contractual conditions of execution: Prior to startup of the activities for the fruit fly control program in 

Component 3, agreements will be signed between SENASAG, the Municipio of El Torno, the Municipio of Luribay, and 
local producers’ associations (paragraph 3.3). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(c) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting topics:(d) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a) The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its 
review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(b)  The borrower will pay interest on outstanding balances on this portion of the Ordinary Capital loan at a LIBOR-based rate. The rate on 
the outstanding balance will be set whenever such balance reaches 25% of the approved net amount or US$3 million, whichever is 
greater. 

(c) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(d) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule 

of Law). 

 



 
 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale 

1.1 Overview of the agriculture sector. The agriculture sector is of crucial 
importance to the Bolivian economy. It accounts for more than 13% of the country’s 
GDP, contributes more than US$1.3 billion in exports (18% of the total), and 
employs 35% of the economically active population (INE, 2015). The sector’s GDP 
has been growing at an average annual rate of 4.16% (2002-2014), and its 
composition has undergone no substantive change over the last decade. Crop 
products represent 70% of agricultural GDP, livestock products account for 21%, 
and forestry, hunting, and fisheries products make up the remaining 9% (UDAPE, 
2015). The sector is fairly diversified, with the largest areas under cultivation 
corresponding to industrial crops (45%)—soybeans, sunflowers, sugarcane, and 
sesame—followed by nonindustrial crops such as grains (30%), fruits and 
vegetables (8%), and tubers (7%). The livestock sector is dominated by beef and 
milk production and by poultry farming. Agricultural exports have grown at an 
average annual rate of 13% over the past decade, with soybeans, Brazil nuts, 
quinoa, beans, and fruits as the main agricultural exports. The main destination 
markets are Latin America (47%), Europe (30%), and the United States (23%). 

1.2 Despite the recent growth and relative importance of the agriculture sector, an 
in-depth examination reveals low levels of productivity. According to a recent 
study, total factor productivity in Bolivia’s agriculture sector showed an annual 
growth rate of 1.4% over the period 2000-2012, below the average for the region 
(1.7%) and far short of Brazil (3.0%), Peru (2.6%), Chile (2.3%), and Paraguay 
(3.2%) (Nin-Pratt et al., 2015). Among the factors contributing to the poor 
performance of productivity in the sector (which include lack of market information, 
inadequate infrastructure, scarce access to financing, and low levels of innovation 
and technology transfer1), losses due to pests and diseases are especially 
significant. Estimates suggest that fruit growers in Bolivia lose approximately 
US$113 million per year2 due to the impact of the fruit fly, and it is estimated that 
the beef sector would lose around US$57 million3 in the event of another outbreak 
of foot and mouth disease (FMD). These estimates reflect a situation in which the 
intensity of spending on agricultural health4 in Bolivia (6.7% in 2009) is much lower 
than in Brazil (26.1%), Uruguay (22.9%), Chile (19.8%), and Argentina (37%) 
(Agrimonitor, 2015). 

1.3 Recent empirical evidence shows that progress in controlling pests and diseases 
is key to improving the country’s productivity. In this respect, a comparative 
evaluation of six agricultural health and food safety projects conducted by the 
Office of Evaluation and Supervision (OVE, 2015) indicates that campaigns for 
controlling and eradicating pests and diseases carried out by agricultural health 
agencies have been effective in boosting productivity. Noteworthy here is the case 
of farmers participating in the fruit fly control program in Peru (loans 1025/OC-PE, 

                                                
1 Kay, C. (2011); and Hameleers, Antezana, and Paz (2011). 
2  SENASAG – TESA PROMOSCA (2013). 
3  Due to source control costs and the closing of export markets, Mascitelli (2016). 
4  In this case, the intensity of spending on agricultural health refers to the proportion of supports for general 

services (or sector public goods) that go to agricultural health services. 

http://agrimonitor.iadb.org/es
https://publications.iadb.org/bitstream/handle/11319/7146/Evaluacion_comparativa_de_proyectos_de_sanidad_agropecuaria_e_inocuidad_alimentaria_Anexo_3.pdf?sequence=7


 - 2 - 
 
 
 

1647/OC-PE, and 2015/OC-PE), which increased fruit yields by 65%, and 
enhanced the value of production by 15% (Salazar et al., 2016). At the same time, 
Peru’s exports of fruits and vegetables rose at an average annual rate of 22.5% 
(1998-2014), outpacing other exports in the sector, for which the annual growth 
rate was 7.4% (SUNAT, Peru). The case of Uruguay also demonstrates the 
international trade benefits of animal disease control. Specifically, once the country 
was declared FMD-free without vaccination in 1996, the value of beef exports rose 
by more than 50%, generating additional annual earnings on the order of 
US$110 million from exports to the United States, while trade with Pacific Rim 
countries increased, and savings in vaccination costs came to US$8 million per 
year (Knight-Jones and Rushton, 2013; Otte et al., 2004). An important point to 
consider in connection with the foregoing empirical evidence is that the impacts 
have been felt by small and medium-sized farmers. 

1.4 To address the country’s phyto-zoosanitary and food safety risks, the National 
Service for Agricultural Health and Food Safety (SENASAG) was created by 
Law 2061 in 2000, with the mandate to protect health and the safety of food.5 In 
2016, Law 830/2016 ratified SENASAG as the competent national authority in this 
area. For technical and operational purposes, SENASAG has organized its 
functions into two broad areas: (i) agricultural health; and (ii) food safety, the 
challenges of which are described below. 

1.5 Agricultural health. In Bolivia, the fruit fly is one of the most destructive 
agricultural pests, damaging more than 260 crops and causing losses in the range 
of 20% to 60% of yields (SENASAG, Fruit Fly Control Program 2012). The area 
under cultivation in fruits and vegetables in the country exceeds 250,000 hectares, 
with citrus accounting for the greatest portion of that area (INE-CAN, 2013). The 
fruit fly reduces product yield, quality, and value; it increases production costs; and 
it diminishes opportunities for market access in light of phytosanitary restrictions in 
importing countries. To manage this pest, which has the potential to spread far and 
wide, a coordinated public-private effort is needed in which SENASAG plays a key 
role, defining intervention and inspection protocols, among other activities (IICA, 
2009). In order for importing countries to accept Bolivian fruits, fruit-fly-free zones 
must be established and maintained.6 Experience with control in one area can 
contribute to the design of a strategy for eradicating the pest in other areas, or in 
the entire country. Another threat to fruit production, especially citrus fruit, is 
Huanglongbing disease, which can devastate citrus orchards.7 This disease has 
not yet been detected in Bolivia, but the vector insect is known to be present. The 

                                                
5  The responsibilities of SENASAG include: (i) preservation of the health of agricultural and forestry 

resources; (ii) product certification for domestic consumption, imports and exports; (iii) accreditation of 
individuals and companies as service providers; (iv) control, prevention, and eradication of pests and 
diseases in animals and plants; (v) control and guarantee of food safety in the production and processing 
chains; and (vi) control of inputs used for agricultural, agroindustrial, and forestry production. 

6  An area free from fruit fly is one in which the fruit fly is not present, as demonstrated by scientific evidence, 
and in which, as appropriate, that status is being officially maintained (CIPF-NIMF 26 and NIMF 5). 

7  Huanglongbing is a bacterial disease that affects all commercial citrus species, as well as others. It is 
currently considered the most devastating citrus disease worldwide, given the damage it causes, the 
difficulty of diagnosing it, and the speed at which it spreads (Food and Agriculture Organization). The 
arrival of Huanglongbing in Brazil is estimated to have caused annual losses of 6% in the area under 
cultivation, cost increases of 10% to 20%, and an annual exit of 18% of small producers (1-4 hectares, 
2015-2016) (IICA, 2015, Evaluation of the Potential Impact of Huanglongbing in Argentina). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691814
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652374
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652374


 - 3 - 
 
 
 

presence of the vector combined with reports of the disease in neighboring 
countries makes it all the more urgent to take steps for its prevention and control. 

1.6 In zoosanitary aspects, Bolivia has been officially recognized by the World 
Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) as an FMD-free country since 2014. This has 
been the first step in opening dialogue between the country and potential meat 
export markets. Since that declaration, several countries have shown interest in 
Bolivian beef. The next challenge in terms of gaining access to potential markets 
is to identify the risk of diseases of the nervous system, primarily bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), for which Bolivia needs to run analyses that 
show a negligible risk of the disease in the country.8 Neighboring countries have 
already been recognized by the OIE as countries with a negligible BSE risk. Once 
these zoosanitary requirements have been met, potential buyers will give priority 
to those countries with the highest levels of food safety, particularly those with little 
or no presence of biological, physical, or chemical contaminants (including 
residues of pesticides and veterinary drugs) (Garzón, 2009). 

1.7 Another fast-growing sector that has been affected by health concerns is poultry 
farming, with production having increased over the last 10 years by 135% 
(www.udape.gob.bo). This sector is an important source of employment, 
generating some 60,000 direct jobs and 135,000 indirect jobs, owing primarily to 
its multiplier effect on the production of corn, sorghum, and soybeans. Among the 
diseases that cause losses in poultry production, the most important is Newcastle 
disease (the mortality rate from respiratory infections, of which this disease is a 
leading cause, is 9%). Declaring areas free from this disease would help open 
markets for poultry products.9 At this time, there is no evidence in Bolivia of avian 
flu, which could cause major losses in production and risks to human health (OIE, 
2007). Drawing on data from animal health services in 12 countries, Swayne 
(2011) found that the increase in the capacities of veterinary services, such as 
laboratory analysis, trained personnel, development of biological products, and the 
responsiveness of the surveillance system, are correlated with improvements in 
the control of avian flu. In this respect, Bolivia needs to conduct surveillance for 
the disease and demonstrate its absence with scientific evidence, so that it cannot 
be used as a sanitary barrier preventing access for the country’s poultry products 
to international markets. 

1.8 Food safety. The benefits of stronger and more effective food safety systems are 
increasingly important for meeting the growing demand for healthier, cleaner food. 
However, the country has little information on the level of contaminants in its food 
products. The government’s network of food safety laboratories—still without 
ISO 17025 accreditation—are limited in their diagnostic capacities to testing for 
biological contaminants (e.g. salmonella) and are unable to test for chemical 
contaminants (metals, pesticide residues, etc.). Data on the growth of pesticide 
imports, rejections of exports of agricultural products, and cases or outbreaks of 

                                                
8  BSE (known as mad cow disease) is a disease for which the OIE has established official recognition of the 

health status of countries and zones, based on a general risk analysis. The categories for BSE are: 
negligible risk, controlled risk, and undetermined risk. Bolivia is included in this last category.  

9  The Newcastle disease status of a country, zone or division can be determined on the basis of specific 
criteria established by the OIE. 

http://www.oie.int/en/animal-health-in-the-world/official-disease-status/fmd/list-of-fmd-free-members/
http://www.udape.gob.bo/
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652369
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652369


 - 4 - 
 
 
 

foodborne diseases10 highlight the problem. Between 2005 and 2013, pesticide 
imports grew 75% by volume (IBCE).11 With respect to the rejection of food 
products in foreign markets, the European market notified four rejections (RASFF, 
2016) during the period 2009-2013,12 while over that same period Peru reported 
no cases of rejection. The cases of foodborne disease recorded between 2010 
and 2015 totaled 35,850 (Ministry of Health of Bolivia, 2016). Meanwhile, the World 
Health Organization estimates a value of 315 disability-adjusted life years (DALY)13 
per 100,000 inhabitants caused by foodborne illnesses in Bolivia, higher than the 
estimate for most Latin American countries, which is 140 DALY, and for the United 
States and Canada, at 35 DALY. Thus, contaminant surveillance programs and 
awareness-raising for all links in the country’s supply chains are increasingly 
important for providing safer food to the Bolivian population and facilitating access 
to international markets. 

1.9 Beyond the technical and operational areas described above, SENASAG has a 
user services office covering all units. A survey conducted of users (producers, 
companies, exporters, and importers) of SENASAG services in 2016 revealed a 
satisfaction index of 6.13, measured on a scale of 0 to 10. The areas in which 
users reported dissatisfaction included transactions times, the number of 
requirements imposed, and the costs. In order to improve the delivery of services 
to users, SENASAG has embarked on a process to systematize its transactions, 
and at present four of the services in greatest demand can be done by users online. 
These efforts by SENASAG are part of a larger process to implement 
e-government that the country is pursuing in accordance with the General 
Telecommunications, Information Technologies, and Communications Act 
(164/2011). Meanwhile, indicators such as the United Nations e-Government 
Development Index (EGDI) show that the country has much room for improving 
the management of its public services. According to EGDI 2016, Bolivia ranks 
101st of 193 countries (behind most of the countries in the region), and the Doing 
Business report places it 137th of 198 countries worldwide, and 30th of 
32 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean (World Bank, 2015). 

1.10 For purposes of international comparison of agricultural health and food safety 
services, countries’ national services are subject to evaluations by the World 
Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) and the Inter-American Institute for 
Cooperation on Agriculture (IICA). In the case of Bolivia, those evaluations identified 
improvements in the delivery of services between 2008 and 2014 but recognized the 
need to strengthen them further. The evaluation of animal health and animal-source 

                                                
10  Date on foodborne diseases are merely indicative of the problem, as contamination may originate at 

different points in the chain, not only in production. These data represent a low estimate of the real situation 
in the country, as only about 10% of persons who suffer a bout of gastrointestinal illness will seek medical 
attention (Food and Agriculture Organization, 2002). 

11  The Action Network on Pesticides and their Alternatives in Latin America (www.RAP-AL.com) estimates 
annual use of agrochemicals in Bolivia at 9.03 kg per capita, higher than in Brazil (5.2 kg) and three times 
higher than in Costa Rica and Panama. 

12 Of total rejections in RASFF, 63% are due to the presence of aflatoxins in Brazil nuts, 21% to 
microbiological problems, and 16% to unsuitable organoleptic characteristics. The ratio of rejections per 
tons of exports for Bolivia is 1 rejection for every 4,907 tons, where for Peru the figure is 0 rejections for 
every 4,172 tons.  

13  A disability-adjusted life year (DALY) is equivalent to one year of healthy life lost. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652366
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652539
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652539
http://www.rap-al.com/


 - 5 - 
 
 
 

food safety services by the OIE14 showed improvements in 22 of the 
39 competencies assessed (the others were unchanged). The average value of the 
competency performance indicators for SENASAG in 2014 was 62%, below the 
averages achieved by Chile (2010, 82%), Uruguay (2014, 83%), and Colombia 
(2015, 70%).15 The plant health services evaluation conducted by IICA in 2014, using 
a similar methodology, found performance levels averaging 47%16 in the various 
competencies and identified the need for improvement in all areas of plant health 
services. Both evaluations recommend, among other steps, improving: (i) the 
surveillance, inspection, and control system; (ii) the control of agricultural inputs and 
medications; (iii) the capacity and management of laboratories for diagnostics and 
analysis of residues, with proper biosafety conditions; and (iv) improvement in the 
services offered to users. 

1.11 Bank’s strategy in the agriculture sector of Bolivia. The Bolivian government, 
with Bank support, is implementing efforts to boost productivity. This year, it has 
approved: (i) the National Irrigation Program with a Watershed Approach III 
(3699/BL-BO) for US$158.4 million, which will help to increase or improve areas 
under irrigation and will benefit more than 20,000 farmers directly; (ii) Direct 
Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives II (3536/BL-BO) for 
US$62 million, to help small-scale farmers adopt technologies that will boost 
agricultural yields, the value of output, and productive efficiency; and (iii) the Rural 
Land Regularization and Titling Program (3722/BL-BO) for US$60 million, which 
will support the regularization and titling of 24.5 million hectares and the 
registration of more than one million rural landholdings of small and medium-sized 
farmers. The proposed agricultural health and food safety program will supplement 
these operations with support targeted at general agricultural services designed to 
improve productivity levels in the sector. 

1.12 The proposed operation will help to consolidate Bank support in the area of health 
and safety, recognizing that SENASAG has been supported from its inception with 
funds from the Agricultural Services Program (1057/SF-BO), which called for 
investments to establish the institutional structure and set up the planning and 
administration systems, as well as services in the technical areas of food safety, 
animal health, and plant health. Achievements under that operation include: 
(i) central headquarters and nine district offices (one for each department) set up 
and open for service; (ii) coverage of 37% of the operating budget with own 
resources; (iii) Institutional Strategic Plan approved; (iv) website with information 
from the institution published; (v) national food safety unit created and providing 
services through a reliable management system (ISO-9000 certification); 
(vi) network of food safety laboratories established and running tests to identify 

                                                
14 The OIE Tool for the Evaluation of Performance of Veterinary Services (PVS) measures the effectiveness 

of veterinary services, identifies gaps and weaknesses, and provides recommendations for 
40 competencies in four groups: (i) human, technical, and financial resources; (ii) technical authority and 
capability; (iii) interaction with stakeholders; and (iv) access to markets. Each competency is rated on a 
scale from 1 to 5, with 5 being the highest score. The resulting values can be expressed as percentages. 
The tool used by IICA to evaluate plant health services, known as “Performance, Vision and Strategy,” is 
similar to the PVS tool developed by the OIE.  

15  http://www.oie.int/support-to-oie-members/pvs-evaluations/. 
16  This is lower than some other countries of the region, which have values above 50%, and far short of the 

ideal 100%. PVS country results are not publicly available. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652545
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652552
http://www.oie.int/support-to-oie-members/pvs-evaluations/


 - 6 - 
 
 
 

biological contaminants in foods; and (vii) two areas of the country (Chiquitanía in 
the department of Santa Cruz and the entire department of Oruro) have been 
declared FMD-free by the OIE. 

1.13 As well, in 2008 the Bank approved the Agricultural Health and Food Safety 
Program (2061/BL-BO) designed to strengthen systems for: (i) the administration 
of human, physical, and financial resources; (ii) cost recovery; (iii) integrated 
management of planning and monitoring; and (iv) information and management of 
services provided to users. In technical areas, the most pressing consideration 
was identified as the need to eradicate foot and mouth disease so the country 
could be declared FMD-free by the OIE. 

1.14 At the close of the operation, in 2014, SENASAG had achieved the following: (i) the 
system for the administration of human, physical, and financial resources had been 
implemented; (ii) own revenue from fees for services covered 90% of the total 
budget; (iii) the planning and monitoring system (Planea), part of the Institutional 
Strategic Plan, had been installed in the central and district offices; (iv) a user 
services management information system (Gran Paitití)17 was in operation with 
78 services systematized and 4 services available online through the institutional 
portal; and (v) the central office and district offices had been refurbished and 
improved. Lastly, the operation helped the country obtain an “FMD-free with 
vaccination” declaration by the OIE in 2014. 

1.15 Lessons learned. Between 2002 and 2014, the Bank approved 17 investment 
loans to strengthen agricultural health and food safety systems in the region, for a 
total amount of US$359 million, or approximately 10% of the total sector portfolio 
(OVE, 2015). As noted earlier, SENASAG has been supported since its creation, 
first with funds from the Agricultural Services Program (1057/SF-BO) and 
subsequently, in 2008, through the Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program 
(2061/BL-BO). The latter operation was selected as part of a sample of six projects 
(Argentina (1950/OC-AR, 2008-2015); Nicaragua (1500/SF-NI, 2003-2011); 
Peru (1647/OC-PE, 2005-2009, and 2045/OC-PE, 2008-2014); and Uruguay 
(2182/OC-UR)) that were analyzed by OVE for purposes of evaluating the 
interventions and identifying recommendations for the design of new operations. 
On the basis of the previous operations, as well as the conclusions and 
recommendations from the Comparative Project Evaluation of Agriculture Health 
and Food Safety, 2002-2014 (OVE), Table 1 below describes the main lessons 
learned and how these have been incorporated into the design of the proposed 
operation. 

 

                                                
17  Gran Paitití is an information technology system developed to manage each of the services that SENASAG 

provides nationwide. It administers information on animal health, plant health, food safety, as well as 
information from the administrative, planning and legal areas. The system is of national scope and is used 
in the departmental, local and frontier offices of SENASAG. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652556


 - 7 - 
 
 
 

Table 1. Recommendations incorporated into program design 

Recommendations Incorporation into program design 

Involve the private sector 
through joint work and the 
incorporation of new 
information and 
communication technologies. 

The program gives priority to incorporating a greater number of 
online services for users, in order to make their delivery more 
prompt and efficient.18 The phytosanitary and zoosanitary 
programs will be implemented in coordination with farmers. 

Make the laboratories 
sustainable. 

The laboratories operated by SENASAG are self-funded but do 
not have the necessary capacity to run public programs for pest 
and disease control. The program will provide financing to 
enhance the capacity of the laboratories, which will remain 
self-funded. 

Strengthen the food safety 
area. 

The program will strengthen the capacity of the laboratories for 
analyzing contaminants, surveillance plans, and training for 
farmers in good agricultural practices, thereby helping to 
improve food safety levels in Bolivia 

Evaluation and results in 
relation to direct beneficiaries 

The program includes a monitoring and evaluation component 
and an impact evaluation plan that will analyze the impacts of 
program activities on the direct beneficiaries. 

 

1.16 Program design. The design of the program addresses the need to protect Bolivia’s 
agricultural resources from health risks and provide the safety assurances sought 
by domestic consumers and foreign markets, especially high-value markets, as part 
of the government’s bid to position Bolivia as a reliable and safe supplier of quality 
food products. To this end, the program will continue the work of strengthening the 
country’s health services, which the Bank has supported (loans 1057/SF-BO and 
2061/BL-BO) since the creation of SENASAG. The design of the operation takes 
into account achievements to date, lessons learned, and the results of evaluations 
by the Bank and leading international agencies working in this area. Thus, the 
operation focuses on: (i) strengthening the technical capacity of SENASAG to act 
independently and objectively, basing its decisions on scientific principles; 
(ii) enhancing the analytical capacity in fully equipped, internationally accredited 
laboratories for the diagnosis of diseases and pests, control of agricultural inputs, 
and detection of contaminants in agricultural and food products; (iii) implementing 
disease and pest prevention and control programs that will help lay the groundwork 
for expanding those programs to other regions or for implementing innovative work 
solutions (coordination mechanisms with the private sector, accreditation of 
professionals, etc.) that will facilitate surveillance and control of other health 
threats; and (iv) improving the management and increasing the efficiency of 
service delivery to users throughout the country. 

1.17 Country strategy for the sector. The program is part of the Patriotic Agenda 2025 
and the Productive Economic Development Plan 2016-2020. The program will 
contribute primarily to Pillar 6, Productive Sovereignty with Diversification, which 
sets the objective for the agriculture sector of boosting productivity and enhancing 
market access for Bolivian products. The program will also contribute to Pillar 8, 
Food Sovereignty, with respect to the promotion of good agricultural practices and 

                                                
18  The program is helping to enforce the supreme decree on e-government in Bolivia (Supreme Decree 1874 

of 23 January 2014), as well as the 2016-2020 e-Government Plan. 



 - 8 - 
 
 
 

ecologically sound production. Lastly, the program is aligned with the Institutional 
Strategic Plan of SENASAG 2014-2018. 

1.18 Bank’s country strategy with Bolivia. The operation is consistent with the Bank’s 
country strategy with Bolivia 2016-2020 (document GN-2843), inasmuch as it will 
contribute to the objective of increasing productivity in the economy through the 
delivery of quality public goods and services. 

1.19 Strategic alignment with the Update to the Institutional Strategy 2010-2020 
and the Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019. The program is consistent 
with the Update to the Institutional Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and 
is aligned with the development challenges of productivity and innovation 
inasmuch as it will increase the agricultural productivity of small farmers and 
thereby contribute to the indicators in the Corporate Results Framework 
corresponding to the number of beneficiaries of improved management and 
sustainable use of natural capital and to the number of government agencies 
benefitted to improve public service delivery. The program is also aligned with the 
challenge of economic integration, inasmuch as it will support food safety 
mechanisms facilitating the participation of Bolivian producers in value chains 
integrated into international trade and will promote the alignment of trade 
integration instruments (Integration Annex). The program is aligned, as well, with 
the crosscutting area of institutional capacity, as it will strengthen the technological 
and management instruments for improving the delivery of SENASAG services, as 
reflected in the results indicators mentioned above. 

1.20 In addition, with respect to the Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019 (document 
GN-2727-6), the program is aligned with the regional context indicators of 
(7) intraregional trade in goods and (12) government effectiveness, as reflected in 
the program impact indicator in the results matrix (i) increased exports of agricultural 
products and the program outcome indicators (i) fewer sanitary barriers that restrict 
access to export markets for agricultural and agrifood products and (ii) improved 
service to users with incorporation of the virtual office and electronic signature. The 
program will further contribute to the Corporate Results Framework by aligning itself 
with the country development results indicator (5) corresponding to public agencies’ 
processing times of international trade of goods and services, as reflected in the 
outcome indicators mentioned above. 

1.21 The program is also consistent with the Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document (document GN-2709-5), which 
emphasizes the need to strengthen the provision of agricultural public goods, as well 
as with the Food Security Sector Framework Document (document GN-2825-3) in 
the dimension of access to safe and nutritious food, and also with the Integration 
and Trade Sector Framework Document (document GN-2715-6), which addresses 
the problem of logistics costs and the facilitation of international trade. 

B. Objectives, components and cost 

1.22 Objective. The general objective of the program is to help increase productivity in 
the agriculture sector. The specific objectives are: (i) to reduce production losses 
from pests and diseases; (ii) to facilitate access to international markets; and (iii) to 
enhance service to users. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691878


 - 9 - 
 
 
 

1.23 Components and cost. To achieve the program’s objective, investments will be 
made in four components, as described below. The total cost of the program will 
be US$25 million. 

1.24 Component 1. User services system (US$2.70 million). This component will 
improve the delivery of agricultural health and food safety services to users. To 
this end, it will provide financing for: (i) computer equipment and the development 
of applications to expand the capacity of the Gran Paitití information technology 
system, incorporating a greater number of online services and enabling digital 
signature; (ii) renovation of the building housing the Santa Cruz district 
headquarters19 (which serves roughly 50% of the country’s users), in order to 
incorporate new offices and refurbish public reception areas; and (iii) training for 
staff of SENASAG in public management and customer service. 

1.25 Component 2. Animal health system (US$7.80 million). This component will 
improve the zoosanitary status of the country by implementing national programs 
for disease prevention and control and strengthening laboratory capacity for the 
diagnosis of diseases and the control of veterinary inputs. It will provide financing 
for: (i) the program to maintain the country’s FMD-free status; (ii) the BSE 
prevention program; (iii) the program to control Newcastle disease in poultry, with 
a view to declaring two zones free of the disease, in the department of 
Cochabamba and the department of Santa Cruz, the country’s main poultry 
production areas; (iv) the national avian flu prevention program; and (v) the 
construction and equipping of a national laboratory for animal health diagnostics 
and control of veterinary inputs in the department of Santa Cruz.20 For the four 
zoosanitary programs, the component will finance epidemiological surveillance, 
emergency simulations, and training for technical staff.  

1.26 Component 3. Plant health system (US$8.10 million). This component will 
improve the country’s phytosanitary status through pest control programs and the 
creation of capacity for diagnosing agricultural diseases and pests and controlling 
agricultural inputs. It will provide financing for: (i) the pilot program for fruit fly 
control, so as to have two areas declared “low prevalence” zones, the municipio of 
El Torno (department of Santa Cruz) and the municipio of Luribay (department of 
La Paz). These two municipios have a total land area of 9,000 hectares, with 
2,500 farmers producing a large share of the country’s fruit supply; (ii) the 
prevention and control program for Huanglongbing disease that affects citrus 
crops; and (iii) construction and equipping of the national laboratory for diagnostics 
and control of agricultural inputs in the department of Santa Cruz. 

1.27 Component 4. Food safety system (US$5 million). This component will focus 
on training and awareness-raising for farmers and the general public with respect 
to greater food safety, and it will also determine the baselines for the presence of 
contaminants, as a way of facilitating surveillance decisions in line with scientific 
criteria. It will provide financing for: (i) training and certification in good agricultural 

                                                
19  The department of Santa Cruz accounts for the largest share (29%) of national GDP (INE, 2006) and 

produces 70% of the country’s food (CAO, 2014). SENASAG district headquarters in Santa Cruz serves 
approximately 50% of the country’s users. 

20  Before awarding contracts for the works in question, the executing agency will present to the Bank 
evidence that it has legal possession of the properties. This is a required condition for all works contracts, 
such as those mentioned in the following paragraphs. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691924


 - 10 - 
 
 
 

practices and ecological production for producers of priority farm products for local 
and export markets;21 (ii) renovation and equipping of the Cochabamba laboratory 
and construction and equipping of the main national laboratory, in the department 
of Santa Cruz, to expand its analytical capacity for identifying residues in 
agricultural and food products; and (iii) installation and operation of the 
surveillance system for chemical residues and contaminants in food, in accordance 
with Codex standards. 

C. Key results indicators 

1.28 The program has a results matrix (Annex II) agreed upon with SENASAG that 
presents impact, outcome, and output indicators with their respective baselines, 
targets and means of verification. The main expected outcomes are: (i) reduced 
losses in agricultural production caused by pests and diseases; (ii) fewer sanitary 
barriers that restrict access to export markets; (iii) improved zoosanitary and 
phytosanitary conditions in the country; and (iv) shorter processing times. The 
operation will generally benefit rural producers in the country (880,000 farms), the 
members of the main agrifood chains, and consumers of food products in the country 
(11.4 million) by lowering transaction costs and helping to preserve health and safety 
conditions while facilitating access to markets. The fruit fly pilot program is expected 
to benefit 2,300 producers, and 2,500 producers will receive training in best 
agricultural practices. 

1.29 Economic evaluation. The cost-benefit methodology was used to estimate the 
economic benefits to be generated among the target population of beneficiaries 
(see link). These benefits will be seen in the reduction of production losses caused 
by pests and diseases, better access to external markets (due to improved sanitary 
conditions), and improvements in terms of internal savings and time savings for 
users of services owing to modernization of the processing system (e.g. electronic 
signature).22 Based on the incremental economic effect and considering an impact 
horizon of 20 years, the planned investments yield a net present value (NPV) of 
US$21.1 million (at a discount rate of 12%) and an internal rate of return (IRR) of 
23.5%. Under these assumptions, the benefit/cost ratio is US$1.58 per unit 
invested. The indicators were subjected to a sensitivity analysis, which showed 
that even under pessimistic hypotheses concerning certain execution risks 
(a 20% increase in investment and recurrent costs combined with a 25% decrease 
in the rate of application of techniques, a 25% decrease in market access, and a 
25% decrease in users of the virtual office system), the program would still reach 
the breakeven point (NPV of 0 and IRR of 12%). 

                                                
21  This activity will provide training and certification for producers of priority products for the local and export 

markets, in accordance with the Economic and Social Development Plan 2016-2020. This includes the 
production of bananas, pineapples, quinoa, tomatoes, coffee, cocoa, chia, soybeans, sesame, wheat, 
potatoes, and corn. Beneficiary producers will be selected at random from each association. 

22  Benefits in the form of fewer export rejections and less foodborne disease in the population due to 
improvements in safety were also identified but were not included in the calculations because there was 
no attribution mechanism or precise baseline information available. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691924
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670749


 - 11 - 
 
 
 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 The total cost of the program is estimated at US$25 million, which the Bank will 
finance with a blend of US$21.25 million from the Ordinary Capital (OC) and 
US$3.75 million from the Fund for Special Operations (FSO). The distribution by 
source of financing is shown in Table 2. 

 

Table 2. Program cost and financing (US$ millions) 

Investment category IDB Total % 

I. Direct costs 23.60 23.60 94.4 

Component 1. User services system  2.70 2.70 10.8 

Component 2. Animal health system 7.80 7.80 31.2 

Component 3. Plant health system 8.10 8.10 32.4 

Component 4. Food safety system 5.00 5.00 20.0 

II.  Administration 0.80 0.80 3.20 

III.  Monitoring and evaluation 0.30 0.30 1.20 

IV.  External audits 0.30 0.30 1.20 

Total 25.00 25.00 100.00 

 

2.2 The program is structured as a specific investment operation, to be executed over 
five years, with the following disbursement schedule, in accordance with 
preliminary financial plan: 

 
Table 3. Program costs and financing (US$ millions) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

Total IDB 1.46 8.94 6.03 6.24 2.33 25.00 

% 5.9% 35.8% 24.1% 24.9% 9.3% 100% 

 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.3 In accordance with the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (OP-703), 
the program has been classified as a category “B” operation. During program 
preparation, an Environmental and Social Analysis found that the program will 
primarily have positive social and environmental impacts. The program will 
contribute to the following and other positive impacts: (i) more rational use of 
pesticides through implementation of integrated pest management and plant 
protection activities and training in good agricultural practices and ecological 
production; (ii) control of animal diseases that can affect human health; and (iii) a 
safer food supply. Potential adverse environmental impacts will be isolated and of 
limited scope. They will be linked to the construction and remodeling of 
infrastructure (4,000 square meters of new construction and refurbished space at 
two locations), the operation of laboratories (with a marginal increase in the use of 
toxic and biological substances as test reagents, samples of pesticides and 
veterinary products, and biological samples), and pest and disease control 
activities. To mitigate these adverse risks and impacts, an Environmental and 
Social Management Plan (ESMP) has been prepared that includes procedures for 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670747
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670747


 - 12 - 
 
 
 

handling toxic substances in the laboratories, steps for disposing of waste in 
accordance with national and international standards for the management, control, 
and disposal of biological and hazardous solid and liquid wastes, measures to 
ensure hygiene and safety in the workplace, and a monitoring plan that includes 
environmental indicators. The program also calls for activities to communicate with 
the general public and disclose information on the objectives and scope of the 
investments, through the publication and dissemination of information. The ESMP 
has been incorporated into the program Operating Regulations. 

C. Fiduciary risks 

2.4 Based on the results of the institutional assessment, SENASAG has the 
institutional capacity needed to properly carry out the responsibilities of the 
executing agency for the program. The results of the Institutional Capacity 
Assessment System (ICAS) exercise show strengths in organization, execution, 
and control capacities, and thus a weighted satisfactory development level and a 
low level of risk. Nevertheless, the risk analysis indicated the possibility of delays 
in procurement and contracting processes and hence the need to mitigate that risk 
by strengthening the institution’s team with fiduciary consultants in financial 
management and procurement, working exclusively on program implementation. 
This is due to the large number of financial and procurement transactions involved 
in the program, compared with the current levels of administrative and accounting 
activity at SENASAG. 

D. Other project risks 

2.5 The principal challenges facing SENASAG, as revealed by the risk analysis, lie in 
building and modernizing the laboratory infrastructure for animal health, plant 
health, and food safety, as well as in running and managing it. To mitigate those 
risks, the program includes specialized consulting assignments for infrastructure 
design, equipment and outfitting, and specialized technical training for laboratory 
personnel and for the technical areas responsible for running the laboratories. The 
investments financed by the program, both for infrastructure construction and for 
equipping SENASAG laboratories, entail a series of medium- and long-term 
institutional challenges involving the maintenance and sustainability of those 
assets. In this context, the project team analyzed a series of factors that will 
contribute directly to mitigating this risk. First, with enactment of the new 
Agricultural Health and Food Safety Act, there will be an estimated 22% annual 
increase in the current fee-based revenues of SENASAG, and this will contribute 
directly to the institution’s budgetary capacity, including the coverage of 
incremental operating costs associated with the operation and maintenance of 
those assets. Second, with respect to laboratory services, SENASAG will introduce 
fees directly associated with the costs of providing technical services, including the 
cost of maintenance and asset depreciation or replacement. Third, the program 
includes specific training activities for personnel, including aspects directly related 
to operation of the new infrastructure, equipment, and other assets. Lastly, 
SENASAG will be able to reinforce its human resources with respect to 
management of goods, services, and assets, thanks to the new legal and 
budgetary framework contained in the new law, as well as enhancing cost recovery 
management, among other aspects. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670745
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670745


 - 13 - 
 
 
 

2.6 Another risk is that SENASAG services will not meet the expectations generated 
by the program. To mitigate this risk, the program will implement a monitoring and 
evaluation plan covering the activities of the program execution unit as well as 
external evaluations, training, and instruction in institutional management by 
results. Risks have also been identified with respect to the contractual status of 
SENASAG staff, who now carry out their functions as temporary employees under 
short-term contracts. On this point, SENASAG has initiated a structural process 
with the Ministry of Rural Development and Lands and the Ministry of Economy 
and Public Finance for the gradual institutionalization of positions and their 
corresponding conversion to permanent positions financed from the General 
Treasury of the Nation. As well, with enactment of the new Agricultural Health and 
Food Safety Act and the anticipated growth in SENASAG’s own revenues, the 
institution will have greater financial capacity that will allow sound management of 
the conversion of staff contracts and thereby mitigate the risks associated with 
labor conditions. Lastly, risks have been identified in relation to the interest of 
potential beneficiaries and their participation in the program’s planned activities 
and services. To mitigate these risks, the program includes specific institutional 
strengthening measures designed to improve the quality of services provided by 
SENASAG and its capacity to respond to its clients, as well as training in good 
agricultural practices and other activities that will yield private benefits for 
producers. 

2.7 Finally, with respect to sustainability and scalability of the fruit fly project, this pilot 
project constitutes a learning phase in the framework of a national strategy for 
attacking the pest. Priority has been given to two zones (in the departments of 
Santa Cruz and La Paz), which have the largest concentration of farmers, a major 
share in the total production of the sector, the presence of producers’ organizations 
and associations, large markets in close proximity, and high incidences of the pest. 
The two zones together cover a total of 9,000 hectares (12% of the total area—
currently 75,000 hectares—planted in orchards that are susceptible to the fruit fly), 
and they have different geographic, ecological, and productive characteristics, 
which will provide detailed information, now lacking, in order to design a national 
program that will ultimately serve all areas of production in the country. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower will be the Plurinational State of Bolivia, and the executing agency 
will be the National Service for Agricultural Health and Food Safety (SENASAG). 
SENASAG was created by Law 2061 of 16 March 2000 as a deconcentrated 
agency of what is now the Ministry of Rural Development and Lands, with its own 
structure and legal, technical, and administrative capacity. It has nationwide 
responsibility for administering the agricultural health and food safety regime. It will 
handle coordination, planning and monitoring, technical and administrative 
management, procurements and contracting, and financial administration of the 
program. It will also implement the environmental and social safeguards for the 
program, contained in the ESMP. 

3.2 To implement the program, a program execution unit will be created; it will report 
directly to the national director of SENASAG, as the senior executive authority. 



 - 14 - 
 
 
 

Staffing of the program execution unit will consist of a general coordinator and 
personnel responsible for legal, planning, accounting and financial, procurement, 
and environmental matters. These personnel will work in direct coordination with 
the support and control areas of SENASAG with respect to fiduciary management 
and with the national head offices for plant health, animal health, and food safety, 
which will be responsible for technical management of activities in each of these 
areas. SENASAG will also establish a technical board for program coordination, 
comprising the national technical directors of SENASAG, and it will serve as a 
mechanism for ongoing monitoring and evaluation of program implementation. As 
special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the 
loan: (i) the borrower will sign a subsidiary agreement with the executing 
agency establishing the following and other elements: (a) the mechanism for 
transferring the loan proceeds; and (b) the commitment of the executing 
agency to conduct program activities in accordance with the terms of the 
loan contract; (ii) the executing agency: (a) will create the program execution 
unit in accordance with terms and conditions previously agreed upon with 
the Bank; and (b) will contract specialists, through a competitive process, in 
at least the following areas: general coordination, planning, financial 
management, procurement, and environmental and social management; and 
(iii) the program technical board will be created and its members appointed. 

3.3 During program preparation, plans were made for SENASAG to be able to sign 
agreements with autonomous territorial entities23 and producers’ associations. 
Those agreements will lay the basis for mutual cooperation among those involved 
and will spell out the activities covered by the agreements, the commitments of the 
parties, including mechanisms for cooperation between them, and other terms and 
conditions necessary for execution. Among other matters, the agreements will 
define: (i) the number of producers and land area to be covered or 
incorporated/used in the program technical activities; (ii) the times to be spent on 
specific areas and producers; (iii) the geographic location of farms and of 
agricultural activities; (iv) the inputs and the scope of technical assistance and 
training to be provided by the program; and (v) the dissemination of practices and 
results. As a special condition of execution, prior to startup of the activities for the 
fruit fly control program in Component 3, agreements will be signed between 
SENASAG, the Municipio of El Torno, the Municipio of Luribay, and local 
producers’ associations. 

3.4 Program Operating Regulations. Program execution will be governed by 
program Operating Regulations, which will establish guidelines and operating 
procedures relating to: (i) the execution structure of the program and the 
responsibilities of the program executing agency; (ii) the responsibilities of other 
entities involved in program implementation; (iii) the procedures for planning and 
programming the activities to be financed; (iv) the procedures and processes for 
technical management and financial and procurement administration; (v) the 
procedures for environmental and social management of the program; and 
(vi) operating instructions for monitoring and evaluation of the program’s impact. 
As a special contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement of the 
loan, the program Operating Regulations will be approved by the executing 

                                                
23  This encompasses departmental, municipal, regional, and rural indigenous autonomous governments. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670743


 - 15 - 
 
 
 

agency and will be in force, under terms previously agreed upon with the 
Bank.  

3.5 Procurement. Works, goods, and consulting services financed with program 
resources will be procured in accordance with the Bank policies established in 
documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 and with the provisions of the loan contract 
and the program’s fiduciary agreements and requirements (see Annex III), 
including the procurement plan for the first 18 months. The procurement plan 
includes the purchase of vehicles, operating and information processing 
equipment, furniture, individual consultants, consulting firms, and other items. It 
will be updated annually or when there are substantial changes, subject to the 
Bank’s approval. Procurement processes may be reviewed ex post, in accordance 
with the provisions of Annex III. 

3.6 Audits. During the loan disbursement period, within 120 days following the close 
of SENASAG’s fiscal year, audited annual financial statements for the program will 
be presented to the Bank. Audits will be conducted by a firm of independent 
auditors acceptable to the Bank. The scope and other aspects of the audit will be 
governed by the Financial Management Policy for IDB-financed Projects 
(document OP-273-6) and the Guide for the Preparation of Financial Statements 
and External Audits. 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.7 Monitoring. The program has a monitoring and evaluation plan. SENASAG will 
prepare and send the following reports to the Bank on a regular basis: (i) no later 
than 60 days after the end of each six-month period during program execution, a 
monitoring report, focused on achievement of the output indicators and progress 
towards outcomes, identification of problems encountered, and the corrective 
measures taken; and (ii) no later than the last quarter of each year during program 
execution, the multiyear execution plan, the program risk matrix, and the annual 
work plan for the following year. In addition, SENASAG will conduct two 
independent evaluations financed from the loan: (i) the midterm evaluation will be 
presented to the Bank no later than 90 days after 50% of the loan has been 
disbursed (or at the end of the third year of execution, whichever occurs first); and 
(ii) the final evaluation, no later than 90 days after 90% of the program resources 
have been disbursed. These reports will include an evaluation of the quality of data 
from the monitoring system, the degree of achievement of the outputs, outcomes 
and impacts established in the results matrix, as well as the level of compliance 
with the ESMP. 

3.8 Evaluation. The impact evaluation is designed primarily to measure the effects of 
the pilot program for fruit fly control, given its potential expansion at the national 
level. The estimates will be based on the method of differences in a panel of 
producers encouraged to participate randomly in a treatment group and a control 
group. For this purpose, two surveys are planned: a baseline survey (in two 
phases) and a final evaluation. The proposed sample covers two municipios 
located in the department of Santa Cruz: El Torno, one of the pilot areas of the 
intervention, and La Guardia, serving as a counterfactual (control) benchmark 
within the same geographical zone, where the agroecological characteristics, 
productive orientation, degree of organization among producers, and prevalence 
of the pest are very similar (70% correlation). The sample for the baseline study 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670734


 - 16 - 
 
 
 

comprises 386 farmers (with 248 in the treatment group and 138 in the control 
group), and a similar sample will be used for the final evaluation. The budget for 
data collection has been included in the program. The operation provides an 
opportunity to generate empirical evidence on the impact of pest management and 
control efforts on production, productivity, and incomes for individual farms and for 
the total area, as well as changes in land use, application of insecticides and/or 
fertilizers, incorporation of new technologies, and/or reorientation of crops. 



Annex I -BO-L1179 

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Strategic Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Regional Context Indicators

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Strategy Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2843

     Country Program Results Matrix

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country strategy or 

country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Evaluable Weight Maximum Score

8.7 10

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution 7.7 33.33% 10

     3.1 Program Diagnosis 1.8

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions 4.0

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality 1.9

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis 8.5 33.33% 10

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic 

Analysis
4.0

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits 1.5

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs 1.5

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions 0.0

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis 1.5

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 10.0 33.33% 10

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms 2.5

     5.2 Evaluation Plan 7.5

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries and/or 

public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality

Labor

Environment

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector entity 

prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps in 

the sector that were identified in the project document and/or in the evaluation plan
Yes

-Intraregional trade in goods (%)

-Government effectiveness (average LAC percentile) 

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Aligned

-Productivity and Innovation

-Economic Integration

-Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law

I. Strategic Alignment

-Public agencies' processing times of international trade of goods and services 

-Beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable use of natural capital (#)

-Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological and managerial tools to improve 

public service delivery (#)

Aligned

Improve the provision of quality public goods and services.

The intervention is not included in the 2016 Operational Program.

Low

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting and Reporting.

Procurement: Information System.

The objective of the program is to increase productivity of the agricultural sector by reducing production losses due to livestock and crop diseases, facilitating access to international markets, and improving the service to users 

of the national animal health system. The Program will implement four components: (i) Strengthening of user services; (ii) Strengthening of the animal health system; (iii) Strengthening of the plant health system; and (iv) 

Strengthening the food safety system. 

The documentation is well-structured, with a good diagnostic of the major challenges faced by the sector that contribute to low levels of productivity, including the significant losses of agricultural production due to animal and 

plant diseases, the difficulty of accessing key markets due to phytosanitary restrictions, scarce information about food safety due to limited diagnostic capabilities of national laboratories, as well as the inefficiency and low 

quality of service provision by the animal health system. The proposed solution is clearly related to the magnitude of the problems identified. While the results matrix (RM) reflects the objectives of the program, a clear vertical 

logic cannot be established due to an incomplete discussion of the current political restrictions on the exports of animal products which may inhibit market access even if domestic sanitary conditions are improved. The key 

outcome indicators have values that are the result of the ex-ante economic analysis; and lower-level indicators reflect the design of the four components. The RM includes SMART indicators at the levels of impact (except for 

one), outcomes (except for one) and outputs with their respective baseline values and targets and the means to gather information.  

The economic analysis (EA) is based on a Cost-Benefit Analysis that compares the expected benefits generated by the distinct program components (reduced production losses, improved market access, improved efficiency of 

the animal health system) with program costs (main investments and costs of operation, personnel, and maintenance). In general, the assumptions made are reasonable; however, the analysis fails to address the concerns of 

export restrictions that may considerably limit expected benefits of market access. The CBA estimates an IRR of 23.5%. A sensitivity analysis presents four alternate scenarios: (i) if costs increase to 20% above budget, the IRR 

is reduced to 17%; (ii) if adoption rates among farmers affected by the Fruit Fly and Newcastle disease drop to 70%, the IRR is 17.3%; (iii) if only 40% of all service procedures in the animal health system are improved, the 

IRR drops to 20.5%; and (iv) if only 40% of all market access improving measures are achieved, the IRR drops to 18.3%.

The monitoring and evaluation plan is well designed and the impact evaluation proposes a reasonable strategy for the evaluation of the pilot program for Fruit Fly eradication. The robust identification strategy proposes both a 

difference-in-difference approach (with propensity score matching) using an untreated municipality as a reasonable counterfactual, as well as randomized offering within the treated municipality to increase participation and 

adoption rates and identify the optimal design of the program. The evaluation also allows for the quantification of potentially important spillover effects. Given the scant literature on the effectiveness of plant health 

interventions, the impact evaluation will make an important contribution to the knowledge base of the sector, the country, and the Bank.

The risks identified in the risk matrix seem reasonable; eight are classified as Medium and five are classified as Low. It includes mitigating actions and compliance indicators.

The program will generate valuable information on the causal link between the 

control of the fruit fly and the increase of income of UPAS and agricultural yields.



Annex II 
Page 1 of 3 

 
 

RESULTS MATRIX 
(see detailed/complete results matrix) 

Objective: The general objective of the program is to help increase productivity in the agriculture sector. The specific objectives are: (i) to reduce 
production losses from pests and diseases; (ii) to facilitate access to international markets; and (iii) to enhance service to users. 

 

Impacts 
Baseline 

(2016) 
Target 
(2021) 

Means of verification Observations 

Impact: Increased exports of agricultural 
products  

  
  

Indicator: Annual export value of agricultural 
products (US$ millions) 

1,488  
(2015) 

1,963 
(2021) 

IBCA and INE data. 
Target: Projection of the average 
growth rate for 2010-2015 over the 
period 2016-2021. 

Impact: Increased economic value of livestock 
sector production 

Indicator: Gross value of annual production of 
the livestock sector (cattle, poultry, and swine) 
(US$ millions) 

    

Impact: Higher agricultural yields      

Indicator: Difference between average 
agricultural yields per hectare among 
beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries of the fruit 
fly pilot program (in kilograms per hectare). 

1,293  
(2015) 

1,815 
(2021) 

IBCA and INE data. 
Target: gross estimate based on 
2010-2015 trend and projection of 
sector benchmarks. 

Baseline by type of product     

Mandarins 8,174 9,809 Impact evaluation to be 
performed under the program. 

- The baseline value comes from 
departmental government and 
SENASAG studies. They will be 
revised in light of the baseline 
surveys. 

-  There is no information 
disaggregated between baseline 
data for the treatment and 
control groups. 

-  The target value comes from the 
technical estimates. 

Oranges 7,630 9,156 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40692440


Annex II  
Page 2 of 3 
 
 

 

Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program 
Outcomes 

Baseline 
(2016) 

Target 
(2021) 

Means of verification Comments 

Outcome 1: Reduced losses in agricultural 
production caused by pests and diseases. 

Indicator:  

Difference between losses in production caused by 
the fruit fly (measured as percentages of harvest) 
among beneficiaries (B) and non-beneficiaries (NB) 
in the pilot project. 




















NB

2017

NB

2022

B

2017

B

2022 %QP%QP%QP%QP  

30% 15% 

Baseline survey of 
producers. 

Annual reports of 
SENASAG based on the 
technical report monitoring 
program execution. 

Producer survey for 
evaluation of impact at the 
end of program. 

Production losses  
Baseline: 
30% (Santa Cruz) 
36% (La Paz) 

Target: 
15% (Santa Cruz) 
18% (La Paz) 

LB: SENASAG technical 
evaluation based on 
departmental data  

QP: production losses by volume. 

Outcome 2: Fewer sanitary barriers that restrict 
access to export markets for agricultural and 
agrifood products. 

Indicator:  

 New international agreements validating health 
status and safety of Bolivian agricultural products 
(quantity). 

0 20 

SENASAG based on IBCA 
and INE sector information 
and statistics. 
Evidence: international 
agreements signed by 
SENASAG. 

International agreements are 
instruments such as bilateral or 
multilateral agreements, 
protocols between countries, or 
similar instruments. They involve 
the opening of a new country for 
exportation of an agricultural 
product (e.g. chicken to Ecuador, 
citrus fruits to Brazil) 

Outcome 3: Improved zoosanitary conditions in the 
country  

  

SENASAG based on 
evaluations, resolutions, 
and OIE methodology. 

BSE: application presented to 
OIE. 

Indicator:  

 maintenance of Bolivia’s FMD-free status  
1 1 

 self-declaration of zones free of Newcastle 
disease 

0 2 

Outcome 4: Improved phytosanitary conditions in 
the country  

  
SENASAG based on 
technical studies of 
progress under the fruit fly 
pilot project. 

Based on IPPC international 
standards for phytosanitary 
measures. 

Indicator:  

 Declaration of zones of low prevalence of fruit fly 
pests 

0 2 



Annex II 
Page 3 of 3 

 
 

Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program 
Outcomes 

Baseline 
(2016) 

Target 
(2021) 

Means of verification Comments 

Outcome 5: Improved service to users with 
incorporation of the Virtual Office and Electronic 
Signature.  

  

Program execution unit 
report with details from 
administrative records, 
based on the Gran Paitití 
processing system and 
help desks. 

Average time includes user 
waiting time. 

It does not include the time 
needed to complete the forms. 

Indicator:  

 Average wait time for in-person service 
(submission of requirements and delivery of 
permit/certificate) in two selected services (food 
safety permit for importation, phytosanitary 
certificate for exportation) (minutes). 

36 0 

 Average processing time for approval of business 
registration (days)  

32 20 

 



Annex III 
Page 1 of 6 

 
 

FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS  

Country: Plurinational State of Bolivia 

Project: BO-L1179 Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program II 

Executing agency: National Service for Agricultural Health and Food Safety (SENASAG) 

Prepared by: Carolina Escudero and Abel Cuba (FMP/CBO) 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 This annex was prepared taking into account the results of the Institutional 
Capacity Assessment System (ICAS) review of SENASAG. 

1.2 Accounting activities, budgetary management, and cash management will be 
carried out using the Integrated Public Management System (SIGEP) and 
SENASAG’s institutional accounting system (VISUAL). For the financial reports 
required by the Bank, the SIAP-BID1 will be used. For tendering processes, the 
standard bidding documents of the Bank or those agreed upon with the Office of 
the Deputy Minister of Public Investment and External Finance (VIPFE) will be 
used and made available through the Public Procurement System (SICOES),2 
where calls for proposals and the results of national bidding processes will be 
published. 

1.3 At present, the Bolivian government and the Bank are preparing an agreement to 
adopt partial use of the Basic Regulations of the Goods and Services Management 
System (NB-SABS) in operations financed by the Bank in Bolivia. This program 
could apply that agreement once it is signed and in effect. 

II. FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY  

2.1 SENASAG was created on 16 March 2000 by Law 2061 as an operational 
structure of what is now the Ministry of Rural Development and Lands. It is 
responsible for administering the Agricultural Health and Food Safety System, in 
the framework of Article 9 of the Law on Organization of the Executive Branch. 
Supreme Decree 25729 of 7 April 2000 regulates the organization and powers of 
the SENASAG and also establishes its technical, administrative, and managerial 
independence, and its competencies, jurisdiction, and presence throughout Bolivia, 
in accordance with Law 1178 on Governmental Administration and Control, 3 
approved on 20 July 1990. 

                                                
1 Administration System for Bank Projects, developed by the Bank’s Country Office in Bolivia (CAN/CBO). 
2 Public Procurement System. A set of bidding documents agreed upon between the Bank and the VIPFE 

for use in processes below the threshold for international competitive bidding (ICB). 
3 This law governs the systems for administration and control of funds of the Plurinational State of Bolivia 

and their linkages with the national planning and public investment systems. 

http://www.sicoes.gob.bo/


Annex III  
Page 2 of 6 
 
 

2.2 For procurements, SENASAG applies the NB-SABS or the rules indicated in 
external financing agreements. 

2.3 Financial transactions are handled in the SIGEP and in SENASAG’s institutional 
system, which provides secure and reliable information on budget execution. This 
system produces financial information in the official currency, classified for 
accounting purposes by expenditure item. In addition, the entity has implemented 
the PLANEA system, which is the primary register for budgetary control and use of 
resources. The accounting records will be kept in accordance with the government 
accounting system. The financial reports required by the Bank will be prepared in 
SIAP-BID until the SIGEP accounting module for external resources enters into 
effect. 

2.4 Project contracting and payments will be conducted by SENASAG, through the 
execution unit, which will work exclusively on program execution and will be 
formally created within the organizational structure of that entity. 

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION MEASURES  

3.1 The ICAS review of SENASAG indicates an adequate degree of development and 
institutional capacity from the viewpoint of administrative definitions, regulations, 
etc. However, the analysis of risks associated with the program’s fiduciary 
management yields a medium risk classification. 

3.2 To mitigate the risk factors, three specific measures have been planned for 
program execution in order to strengthen fiduciary management: (i) the SENASAG 
team will be reinforced with professional personnel specialized in financial 
management and procurement management for program execution; 
(ii) administrative and internal control processes adapted to program needs for 
adequate financial and administrative management of procurements and 
contracting, including control mechanisms and targets for processing times, will be 
incorporated into the program Operating Regulations; (iii) SENASAG will adopt in 
full the national systems for integrated financial management currently used for 
planning, budgeting, accounting, and cash management functions, including the 
SIGEP, PLANEA, and VISUAL platforms, to ensure access to financial information 
in real time; and (iv) with respect to technical matters, staff capabilities will be 
strengthened in the areas of animal health, plant health, and food safety so as to 
ensure technical soundness in the preparation of technical specifications, terms of 
reference, and other basic inputs for procurement activities. 

IV. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF THE CONTRACT  

4.1 Operating Regulations. These will cover the execution mechanism, procedures, 
and information flows, as previously agreed between the executing agency and the 
Bank. 

4.2 Exchange rate agreed upon with the executing agency for financial 
reporting. The exchange rate used will be the rate in effect in the country on the 
effective date of the conversion of funds into local currency in the executing 
agency’s accounts. 

4.3 Financial statements and other audited reports. For the duration of the program 
disbursement period, audited financial statements for the program will be 



Annex III  
Page 3 of 6 

 

submitted to the Bank within 120 days after the end of each fiscal year of the 
executing agency. The statements will be duly audited by a firm of independent 
auditors acceptable to the Bank. The final report will be submitted to the Bank 
within 120 days following the date stipulated for the final disbursement. 

4.4 The terms of reference for the contracting of the firm of independent auditors will 
be subject to the Bank’s prior approval, and may include outputs stemming from 
the International Standards on Auditing relating to the financial audit of the 
program and other tasks. The scope will be governed by the Financial 
Management Policy for IDB-financed Projects (document OP-273-6) and the 
Guide for the Preparation of Financial Statements and External Audits. 

4.5 Procurement. Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the policies set 
forth in documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9, with partial use of the NB-SABS 
(paragraph 1.3). 

V. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION  

5.1 Procurement execution. Procurement processes for the program will be detailed 
in the procurement plan approved by the Bank and will be conducted within the 
framework of the policies set forth in documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 (with 
no exceptions anticipated), or through partial use of the NB-SABS. 

5.2 Procurement of works, goods and nonconsulting services. In the case of 
international competitive bidding (ICB), the current standard bidding documents 
issued by the Bank will be used. For other processes, the documents available in 
the SICOES will be used. Any changes to those documents will require the Bank’s 
no objection. 

5.3 Selection and contracting of consultants. Contracts for consulting services will 
be executed considering the following: 

(i) Selection of consulting firms. The Bank’s standard request for 
proposals will be used. For contracts in amounts of less than 
US$200,000, the documents available in SICOES will be used. Any 
changes to these documents will require the Bank’s no objection. 

(ii) Short list of consulting firms. This may be composed entirely of 
local firms for contracts where the value is less than the US$200,000 
threshold established for Bolivia. 

(iii) Selection of individual consultants. This will be based on 
qualifications for the assignment, comparing the CVs of at least three 
candidates, and as a rule no interviews will be held. When the 
assignments are linked to other specific advisory services, consulting 
firms will be used, except in circumstances (to be analyzed case-by-
case) where it is deemed appropriate to provide backup support to the 
individual consultant.  

5.4 Procurement planning. Program execution will adhere to the procurement plan 
administered by SENASAG and agreed upon in advance with the Bank. 
SENASAG will publish the procurement plan in the Procurement Plan Execution 
System (SEPA) and will update it annually or as needed.  



Annex III  
Page 4 of 6 
 
 

5.5 Advance procurement/retroactive financing. No advance procurement that 
would require retroactive recognition of financing is anticipated. 

5.6 National preference. The application of national preference will not be considered 
in procurement processes. 

5.7 Terms of reference and technical specifications. The Project Team Leader is 
responsible for reviewing the criteria for the selection of shortlists, terms of 
reference, and technical specifications, which will be agreed upon with the 
executing agency prior to execution of the processes. 

5.8 Table of threshold amounts. 

 
Table 1. Threshold amounts (US$000) 

Works Goods Consulting firms 

ICB NCB Shopping ICB NCB Shopping 
International 

publicity* 
National 

publicity** 

More than 
US$3,000 

Less than 
or equal to 
US$3,000 

Less than 
or equal to 
US$1,500 

More 
than 

US$200 

Less 
than or 
equal to 
US$200 

Less than 
or equal 

to US$50 

More than 
US$200 

Less than or 
equal to 
US$200 

* Shortlist with maximum of two firms of the same nationality. 
** Shortlist may be 100% national. 

5.9 Main procurement processes. These are detailed in Table 2. 

 

Table 2. Planning of main procurement item 

Description 
Selection 
method 

Estimate
d date 

Estimated 
amount 

(US$000) 

Consulting firms    

3 contracts with international firms to prepare designs for the works and conduct 
the program impact evaluation  

CQS/ 

QCBS 
TBD 359 

3 contracts with local firms to develop the data warehouse, supervise the works, 
and perform the external financial audit of the program  

CQS/ 
QCBS 

TBD 377 

Works    

Construction of the food quality control module, and upgrade of infrastructure 
according to ISO 17025 for LIDIVET facilities (2 contracts) 

Shopping TBD 904 

Refurbishment of installations and upgrade of infrastructure according to 
ISO 17025 for LIDIVECO facilities (2 contracts) 

Shopping TBD 215 

Construction and improvements of infrastructure for the district office; diagnostic 
rooms; and plant health and pest control diagnostic laboratory in Santa Cruz 
(3 contracts) 

Shopping TBD 3,228 

Installation of plant and animal health demonstration plots  Shopping TBD 104 

Installation of border control posts for entry and exit of fruit  Shopping TBD 42 

Goods    

Computer equipment (various purchases during execution) TBD TBD 2,101 

4x4 vehicles (various purchases during execution) TBD TBD 2,870 

Motorcycles (various purchases during execution) TBD TBD 1,231 

Other equipment (various purchases during execution) TBD TBD 1,128 

Laboratory equipment, materials, and inputs (various purchases during execution), TBD TBD 7,044 

Furnishings (various purchases during execution)  TBD TBD 154 



Annex III  
Page 5 of 6 

 

*Click here for the procurement plan for the first 18 months. 

 

5.10 Procurement supervision. Annual supervision visits will be conducted. If 
necessary, annual ex post review visits will be held. 

5.11 The thresholds for ex post review are shown in Tables 3 and 4 (direct contracting 
and unlisted procurements will be subject to ex ante review). The external audit 
firm will perform the ex post review. 

 
Table 3. Thresholds for ex post review of procurement (US$000) 

Works 
Goods and 

nonconsulting 
services 

Consulting firms 
Individual 

consultants 

Contracts for amounts 
less than or equal to 

US$1,500 

Contracts for amounts 
less than or equal to 

US$200 

Contracts for amounts 
less than or equal to 

US$50 

Those that are not 
considered key and 
are not part of the 

execution unit 

 

5.12 Operating or recurring expenses.4 These will be agreed upon with the Project 
Team Leader, recorded in the project budget, and included in the procurement 
plan. They will be contracted using the NB-SABS. The Bank may decline to 
finance these expenses if it finds that they have violated the basic principles of 
competition, efficiency, and economy. The external audit firm will be responsible 
for reviewing the supporting documentation for these expenses. 

5.13 Records and files. SENASAG will be responsible for establishing the supporting 
documentation, procedures and controls necessary to safeguard the 
documentation generated by the program. The Bank may, at any time, verify the 
standards for organization, control, and security of files. 

                                                
4 Operating or recurring expenses encompass leasing of premises, notifications, announcements, or 

communications made on radio, in the written press, or on television, translations, bank fees, office 
supplies, photocopies, postage, fuel, maintenance, short courses, and travel for line personnel. 

Description 
Selection 
method 

Estimate
d date 

Estimated 
amount 

(US$000) 

Individual consultants    

Program execution unit staff including coordination, planning, finance, 
procurement (2), legal, environmental and social management, and coordination 
with the Ministry of Rural Development and Lands, and administrative assistance 
in support of program execution  

NICQ TBD 766 

Technical team to develop the online web applications in the framework of “Gran 
Paitití” 

NICQ TBD 754 

13 international professionals to provide technical consulting services needed for 
the program  

IICQ TBD 305 

10 national professionals to carry out technical consulting services needed for 
the program  

NICQ TBD 133 

Nonconsulting services    

About 48 contracts for training services and awareness-raising workshops; 
equipment maintenance and calibration; validation of methods; site visits; etc. 

Shopping/ 
NCB 

TBD 2,947 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670738


Annex III  
Page 6 of 6 
 
 

VI. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

6.1 Programming and budget. SENASAG will handle both the formulation of the 
budget and any future changes, on the basis of the approved annual work plan, 
and will arrange to have the program recorded as an investment budget to be 
reported in the SIGEP. As an institutional tool, it has the PLANEA system for 
monitoring the institutional budget and the program.  

6.2 Accounting and information systems. Program transactions will be recorded in 
the SIGEP. The system integrates the different accounting stages in a single file 
and complies with the requirements for budgeting (budget execution), accounts 
(allocation of assets, liabilities, equity, and results), and cash management (cash 
transfer), on an accrual accounting basis. In addition, for purposes of program 
accounts, a chart of accounts will be prepared that will identify expenditures made 
at each step on a cash basis, harmonizing the program’s investment categories 
with the budgetary items and their respective accounts. In addition, the executing 
agency will use the SIAP-BID system on a temporary basis as a supplement for 
issuing the program financial reports, until the SIGEP accounting management 
module enters into effect. 

6.3 Disbursements and cash flow. Loan proceeds will be disbursed as advances of 
funds and direct payments, on the basis of the financial program, which will be 
periodically updated by SENASAG. The Bank will process a new advance of funds 
once at least 80% of previous fund advances has been accounted for. Loan 
proceeds will be deposited in a separate account in U.S. dollars and subsequently 
transferred to a different account in local currency, both within the CUT.5  

6.4 Internal control and internal audit. The financial management of the executing 
agency is subject to an annual reliability review by the Internal Audit Unit, and the 
program is expected to be included in this type of review. As a strategic activity 
within its mandate, the Bank will hold regular coordination meetings with the 
Internal Audit Unit to identify program monitoring needs. 

6.5 External control and reports. The SENASAG will contract a firm of independent 
auditors acceptable to the Bank on an annual basis, following Bank policies. This 
will be a multiyear contract (covering at least three fiscal years), in order to avoid 
transaction costs and ensure continuity in the work of the auditors, as well as to 
guarantee timely interventions that will allow for preliminary reviews at semiannual 
intervals. 

6.6 The terms of reference for contracting the firm of independent auditors will have 
the Bank’s no objection. 

6.7 Financial supervision plan. Activities may be adjusted on the basis of the 
program’s risk assessment conducted by the fiduciary team with the executing 
agency, and the external audit reports. Expenditures will be supervised on an 
ex post basis. However, at a minimum, the annual supervision plan will provide for 
a comprehensive visit (procurement and finances) by the Bank.  

                                                
5 Cuenta Única del Tesoro (CUT) [Single Treasury Account]. 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/__ 
 
 
 

Bolivia. Loan ____/BL-BO  to the Plurinational State of Bolivia 
Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program II 

 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Plurinational State of Bolivia, as Borrower, for the purpose of 
granting it a financing to cooperate in the execution of an agricultural health and food safety 
program II. Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$21,250,000 from the resources of 
the Single Currency Facility of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, corresponds to a parallel loan within 
the framework of the multilateral debt relief and concessional finance reform of the Bank, and 
will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of 
the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ _________ 201_) 
 
 
 
LEG/SGO/ CAN/IDBDOCS#40715591-16 
Pipeline No. BO-L1179 

 
 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/__ 
 
 
 

Bolivia. Loan ____/BL-BO  to the Plurinational State of Bolivia 
Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program II 

 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Plurinational State of Bolivia, as Borrower, for the purpose of 
granting it a financing to cooperate in the execution of an agricultural health and food safety 
program II. Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$3,750,000 from the resources of 
the Bank's Fund for Special Operations, corresponds to a parallel loan within the framework of 
the multilateral debt relief and concessional finance reform of the Bank, and will be subject to 
the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of the Project 
Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ ________ 201_ 
 
 
 
LEG/SGO/CAN/IDBDOCS#40714969-16 
BO-L1179 


	RES-final-version-con-cambios-vps_lp---resoluciones-legales-ingls---bo-l1179.pdf
	IDBDOCS-#40715591-v1-Proposed_Resolution_BL-OC
	IDBDOCS-#40714969-v1-Proposed_Resolution_BL-FOE





















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

BOLIVIA 

 

 

 

DIRECT SUPPORTS FOR THE CREATION OF  
RURAL AGRIFOOD INITIATIVES II 

(BO-L1096) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 

 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Lina Salazar (INE/RND) and 
Juan Manuel Murguía (RND/CBO), Project Team Co-leaders. Project team members: 
Fernando Balcazar (RND/CCO); Pedro Martel (INE/RND); L. Hernando Hintze (RND/CEC); 
Joseph Milewski (RND/CGU); Gina Peñaranda (CAN/CBO); Carolina Escudero and 
Abel Cuba (FMP/CBO); Mario González and Paul Winters (SPD/SDV); Catalina Mihotek 
(GDI/CBO); Javier Jiménez (LEG/SGO); Julián Aramburu and Elizabeth Chavez (INE/RND). 

 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive 
Directors simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board 
approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus 
superseding and replacing the original version. 

 



 

CONTENTS 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

 

I. BACKGROUND AND KEY ISSUES ............................................................................... 1 

A. Background, problems to be addressed, and conceptual design .................. 1 
B. Conceptual design ........................................................................................ 3 
C. Objectives, components, and costs .............................................................. 5 
D. Results Matrix and key indicators ................................................................. 7 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND RISKS ......................................................................... 8 

A. Financing instrument .................................................................................... 8 
B. Economic viability ......................................................................................... 9 
C. Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 10 
D. Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 10 
E. Other risks .................................................................................................. 11 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 11 

A. Implementation and management .............................................................. 11 
B. Monitoring and evaluation plan ................................................................... 12 

 
  

  



 - ii - 
 
 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) 

Annex II Results Matrix 

Annex III Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED 

1. Multiyear execution plan 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38725283 

2.  Work plan for the first 18 months of implementation (AWP) 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718579 

3. Monitoring plan 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38719418 

4. Impact evaluation plan 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38723707 

5. Procurement plan 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718556 

OPTIONAL 

1. Economic appraisal 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38703784 

2. Itemized budget 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718566 

3. Operating Regulations 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38724853 

4. Institutional capacity assessment (ICAS) 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38704081 

5. Initial technology menu – Subcomponent 1 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718555 

6. Analysis and design of Subcomponent 2 - Technical assistance 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38721944 

7. Baseline study 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38713551 

8. Environmental and social strategy 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38714002 

  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38725283
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718579
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38719418
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38723707
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718556
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38703784
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718566
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38724853
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38704081
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718555
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38721944
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38713551
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38714002


 - iii - 
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS 

CRIAR Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives (Project I) 
CUMAT Capacidad de Uso Mayor de la Tierra [Capacity for Greater Land-use] 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  
FSO Fund for Special Operations 
GCI-9 Ninth General Increase in the Resources of the Bank 
IFPRI International Food Policy Research Institute 
INIAF Instituto Nacional de Innovación Agropecuaria y Forestal [National 

Institute for Agricultural and Forestry Innovation] 
IPD-SA Institución Pública Desconcentrada Soberanía Alimentaria 

[Deconcentrated Public Institution for Food Sovereignty] 
IRR Internal rate of return 
LIBOR London Interbank Offered Rate 
MDRyT Ministry of Rural and Land Development 
NPV Net present value 
PCEU Program coordination and execution unit  
PCU Project coordinating unit 
SIGESEVA Sistema de Gestión, Seguimiento y Evaluación [Management, 

Monitoring, and Evaluation System] (CRIAR project information system) 
SIGMA Sistema Integrado de Gestión y Modernización Administrativa 

[Integrated System of Management and Administrative Modernization] 
VAM Vulnerability Analysis and Mapping (food insecurity) 

 



 

 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

BOLIVIA 
DIRECT SUPPORTS FOR THE CREATION OF  

RURAL AGRIFOOD INITIATIVES II 
(BO-L1096) 

 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

 Financing 
Ordinary Capital  

Fund for Special 
Operations  

Borrower: The Plurinational State of Bolivia Amortization period: 30 years 40 years 

Executing agency: Ministry of Rural and Land 
Development (MDRyT), through the Deconcentrated 
Public Institution for Food Sovereignty (IPD-SA) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 5 years 

Grace period: 6 years 40 years 

Source Amount % 
Interest rate: Single Currency Facility 

fixed* 
0.25% 

IDB (Ordinary Capital) US$49,600,000 80 Inspection and supervision fee: ** N/A 

IDB (Fund for Special 
Operations) 

US$12,400,000 20 Credit fee: ** N/A 

Total US$62,000,000 100 Currency: U.S. dollars from the 
Single Currency Facility 
of the Ordinary Capital 

U.S. dollars 

Project at a Glance 

Program objectives:  

The program’s general objective is to raise the income of Bolivia’s small-scale farmers by promoting productivity-enhancing 
technologies, thereby helping to reduce levels of vulnerability to food insecurity. Specifically, increased productivity will lessen 
vulnerability to food insecurity through increased output, which will result in higher income for participating producers through sales a nd 
in the form of food for their own consumption. The specific objective is to boost the adoption of technologies that increase agricultural 
yields, the value of production, and productive efficiency. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement: 

(i) evidence that a program coordination and execution unit with sufficient administrative, budgetary, procurement management, 
technical, operational, legal, and financial capacity has been set up under the IPD-SA, with staff assigned full-time to the program 
(paragraph 3.1); and (ii) entry into force of the program Operating Regulations, under the terms agreed upon in advance with the Bank 
(paragraph 3.2). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None. 

Program qualifies as:  SV [X]       PE [X]       CC [X]                CI [  ]  

* The borrower will pay interest on the outstanding balance of the Ordinary Capital portion of the loan, at a LIBOR-based rate. Each 
time the outstanding balance reaches 25% of the net amount approved or US$3 million, whichever is higher, the base rate will be 
set on that balance. 

**  The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its 
review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with the relevant policies. 

*** SV (Small and Vulnerable Countries), PE (Poverty Reduction and Equity Enhancement), CC (Climate Change, Sustainable 
Energy, and Environmental Sustainability), CI (Regional Cooperation and Integration). 

 



 

 

I. BACKGROUND AND KEY ISSUES 

A. Background, problems to be addressed, and conceptual design 

1.1 General context. Agriculture is one of Bolivia’s most important economic 
activities, accounting for about 13% of gross domestic product and employing 
approximately 30% of the total workforce (62% in rural areas). Its main 
agricultural products include soybeans, sorghum, corn, wheat, sugarcane, 
quinoa, and potatoes. Sector exports represent 16% of the total value of exports. 
The most important agricultural export products are soybeans (30%), nuts (27%), 
quinoa (15%), beans (8%), fruit (5%), coffee (4%), and corn (3%).

1
 Bolivia has 

37 million hectares of agricultural land, of which approximately 3.5 million are 
arable, representing 4% of its total area. The area of cultivated land has been 
expanding significantly, growing by more than 20% since 2005.

2
  

1.2 Despite this expansion and the agricultural sector’s high potential, Bolivia is one 
of the countries with the lowest productivity in the region. According to the Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), agricultural yields are 
approximately 43% of the South American average for the production of grains 
and tubers. Additionally, it was the only country in this region to experience 
negative growth in total productivity of the factors of production in the 2006-2011 
period (IFPRI, 2013).

3
 Low productivity weighs directly on the low income of the 

rural population and, consequently, on the country’s high levels of food 
insecurity. Bolivia is one of the region’s lowest-income countries, with 45% of its 
population under the poverty line—a number that swells to 61% in rural areas 
(INE, 2011). In terms of food security, Bolivia has the second-highest malnutrition 
rate in South America (21% of the population), and 89% of its municipios are 
categorized as having high or medium vulnerability to food insecurity.

4
 

1.3 Among the reasons for low sector productivity are a lack of market information, 
little investment in productive infrastructure, scant access to rural financing 
mechanisms, and insufficient levels of innovation and technology transfer.

5
 There 

is also a wide gap between the farming systems used in Bolivian agriculture. On 
the one hand are modern, commercial agriculture systems where production is 
typically intensive, mechanized, and export-oriented, with access to financing 
and cutting-edge technologies. These farms are located primarily in eastern 
Bolivia and produce mainly soybeans, rice, sugarcane, and beef. In subsistence 
agriculture, in contrast, small family farms are devoted mainly to producing food 
for their own consumption and have limited access to financing and productive 
technologies. These farms are found chiefly in the valleys and high plateau, and 

                                                 
1
  World Trade Organization (2013) and National Statistics Institute (INE, 2012). 

2
  World Bank and Ministry of Economy and Finance (2012). 

3
  International Food Policy Research Institute. Statistics Division of the FAO (2012): faostat.fao.org. 

4
  Food insecurity Vulnerability Analysis and Mapping (VAM) is a methodology developed by the United Nations 

World Food Programme to establish the degree of vulnerability of a given population and/or geographical 
area to food insecurity. It places municipios into three food security categories: (VAM=1: low; VAM=2: 
medium; VAM=3: high). 

5
  Plan del Sector Desarrollo Agricultural (2014-2018); Kay, C. (2011); and Hameleers, Antezana and Paz 

(2011).  

http://faostat.fao.org/
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752159
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751946
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752141
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752141


 - 2 - 
 
 

 
mainly grow traditional crops such as potatoes, corn, and grains. An estimated 
83% of rural households engage in subsistence farming.

6
 

1.4 With the Bank’s support, Bolivia has made considerable efforts to boost sector 
competitiveness by providing more public goods. Since the year 2000, loan 
operations have been executed in the areas of innovation and agricultural health 
(loans 1057/SF-BO and 2061/BL-BO), land regularization and management (loan 
1512/SF-BO), and irrigation (loans 964/SF-BO, 2057/BL-BO, and 3060/BL-BO). 
The proposed program complements these interventions in that it channels 
government spending to direct supports to promote the adoption of technologies 
to boost small producers’ agricultural productivity.  

1.5 The proposed program is based on the operation financed with loan 
2223/BL-BO, which is in its final stage of implementation. It was approved in 
2009 for US$25 million, of which the Bank financed US$20 million and the 
remaining US$5 million was financed with local counterpart resources. The 
objective of that operation is to help raise the income of small-scale farmers 
through two components: (i) direct supports for the adoption of agrifood 
technologies; and (ii) support for agrifood enterprises. To date, the operation has 
distributed 20,269 nonreimbursable vouchers to an equal number of small 
producers, to finance six types of agricultural technologies,

7
 exceeding the target 

by 49%. Of the target of having 80 productive enterprises in operation, to date 
there are 36. This is due to the difficulty of forming associations that meet the 
project eligibility criteria, which included having at least 30 beneficiary producers 
and being legally formalized. Some of the resources under Component 2 were 
therefore reallocated to Component 1. The original closing date for the operation 
was 24 May 2015. However, an extension was granted for fulfillment of the 
execution commitments until 24 December 2015. The operation has disbursed 
99% of the financing. 

1.6 The midterm evaluation for loan 2223/BL-BO conducted in 2013 highlighted the 
following strengths: (i) the types of technologies, which are well-suited to the 
production conditions of the target population, in addition to being low-cost and 
user friendly; (ii) the training of local technicians to resolve issues relating to 
using the technologies; (iii) the socialization of environmental practices among 
producers; (iv) the monitoring system; and (v) the rural technology fairs, which 
serve to bring together the demand for technology among small producers and 
the supply from private vendors. Areas needing improvement were: (i) the lag 
between technology delivery and technical assistance; (ii) the beneficiary 
registration systems; and (iii) the communications and socialization strategy. The 
evaluation also noted the limited progress on implementation of Component 2, 
identifying as execution difficulties producers’ liquidity constraints for financing a 
productive enterprise, a lack of incentives to form associations, and lack of 
knowledge as to how to formalize an organization (see Midterm evaluation). 

                                                 
6
  http://bolivia.um.dk/es/danida-es/programas-sectoriales/agricultura/. 

7
  These technologies include packages for crops (modern irrigation, traditional irrigation, dehydrators, mills, 

pulpers, weeders, shellers, electric fencing, greenhouses) and for livestock (poultry and beekeeping 
technologies and electric fences) in four departments. Irrigation equipment accounted for 60% of demand.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38703779
http://bolivia.um.dk/es/danida-es/programas-sectoriales/agricultura/


 - 3 - 
 
 

 
1.7 The evaluation to measure the impacts of loan 2223/BL-BO, based on a 

representative sample of 1,287 participating and control producers in five 
departments, showed the operation’s positive impacts. Utilizing a 
quasi-experimental instrumental variable methodology (see Impact evaluation),

8
 

the analysis showed that, in comparison to nonbeneficiaries, beneficiary 
producers saw increased in agricultural productivity (92%) and higher household 
income from agricultural activities (36%). The study also found evidence that the 
program reduced vulnerability to food insecurity (32%).  

B. Conceptual design 

1.8 The program’s intervention strategy centers on addressing the problems of low 
productivity and high vulnerability to food insecurity by targeting public agriculture 
expenditure to facilitating access to agricultural technologies and technical 
assistance. The literature on agricultural technology adoption suggests several 
reasons (market failures) to economically justify the public provision of 
technology transfer services. In the context of this operation, the following apply: 
(i) constraints on liquidity and access to credit; (ii) problems with information 
access and/or asymmetries; and (iii) aversion to risk. Liquidity constraints refer to 
credit market imperfections that limit the financial capacity of small producers to 
purchase and implement productivity-enhancing technologies.

9
 Lack of and/or 

asymmetrical information affects both producers and suppliers. Producers mainly 
lack knowledge as to the proper use of technologies and the existence of 
suppliers’ offerings. Suppliers lack knowledge about potential demand.

10
 These 

information asymmetries interact to preclude the existence of a marketplace. 
Lastly, risk aversion curbs technology adoption because of producers’ 
uncertainty regarding the returns associated with each technology.

11
 Amongst 

the program’s target population, only 7% of producers have access to credit and 
4% report having savings. In addition, 30% of producers mentioned problems 
with information on how to use technology and 13% gave lack of training as their 
main reasons for not doing so.

12
 

1.9 Empirical evidence shows that massive technology transfer interventions 
produce direct and indirect positive impacts. The direct impacts are those 
affecting beneficiaries who adopt technology, through improvements to 
productivity and income. The indirect impacts are those affecting nonparticipants: 
adoption by imitation, lower food prices, and/or job creation.

13
 Quasi-

experimental impact evaluations conducted by the Bank’s Office of Evaluation 
and Oversight for two technology adoption programs for small-scale farmers in 
the Dominican Republic (loan 1397/OC-DR) and Uruguay (loan 1299/OC-UR) 
yielded evidence of the positive impact of this type of intervention in the region. 

                                                 
8
  The impact evaluation was published as an IDB Working Paper for which there was a peer review process 

with external revisers. 
9
  Navajas and Tejerina (2007); Salazar and Winters (2012), and the CRIAR impact evaluation (2014).  

10
  Bentley, et al. (2011), Thiele and Barber (1998), and the CRIAR midterm evaluation (2013). 

11
  Feder et al. (1985), Abadí et al. (2005), and Monge, Hartwich and Halgin (2008).   

12
  CIES Internacional data (2014) for the impact evaluation of loan 2223/BL-BO (see Baseline study). 

13
  De Janvry, A. and E. Sadoulet (2002). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38724883
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38725172
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751714
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751970
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751892
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38724883
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752082
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751986
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38703779
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752134
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38752122
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751817
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38713551
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38751858


 - 4 - 
 
 

 
1.10 The proposed program incorporates the following recommendations from the 

midterm evaluation of loan 2223/BL-BO: (i) redefine the scope of supports to 
strengthen the delivery of technical assistance at the appropriate times and 
intervals; (ii) incorporate a gender approach with crosscutting actions to promote 
the participation of women; (iii) apply criteria of transparency and equal 
opportunity in the selection of beneficiaries; (iv) conduct a rigorous impact 
evaluation; (v) increase coverage; and (vi) concentrate supports under a single 
component for the distribution of vouchers to purchase technology. 

1.11 Lessons learned. The operation’s design incorporates lessons learned from 
loan 2223/BL-BO as well as from other Bank-financed operations involving 
supports for technology adoption (loans 2181/OC-ME, 2443/OC-DR, 2055/BL-NI, 
and 1299/OC-UR): (i) mechanisms should be incorporated to foster the 
development of a market of private technology suppliers; (ii) financial supports 
(vouchers) should be scaled to encourage the self-selection of small producers; 
(iii) since technical assistance plays a key role in technology adoption, these 
services should be offered at the right moment in the crop cycle, and at 
appropriate intervals; (iv) the technology menu selection criteria should be 
objective and based on technical, economic, social, and environmental 
principles; (v) the eligibility criteria for producers and the strategy for selecting 
them should foster transparency and equal opportunity; and (vi) program impacts 
should be measured using indicators that capture short-, medium-, and long-term 
impacts of the technology adoption process. 

1.12 Target population. As in loan 2223/BL-BO, the program beneficiaries are small 
producers from indigenous, native campesino communities whose income level 
is low primarily because of low agricultural productivity. The chief source of 
income for these producers is agriculture (67%).

14
 They work small plots of land, 

averaging two hectares, with more than 70% of the land devoted to the 
production of traditional crops with little commercial value.

15
 Of their total output, 

these producers consume 39% and sell 20%.
16

 Also, they are typically 
indigenous or native (71%), and have little formal schooling (four years on 
average) and limited access to credit or savings (7% report access to formal 
credit and 4% savings).

17
 

1.13 Gender approach. The proposed program includes a gender approach to 
promote the participation and empowerment of women through the following: 
(i) coordination of activities for obtaining an identity card; (ii) establishment of 
focal points for gender mainstreaming within institutions involved with the 
program; (iii) specific socialization activities to promote the linkage of 
associations for women producers; (iv) technical assistance that factors in the 

                                                 
14

  This percentage reflects food for the producers’ own consumption, which was valued at market prices to 
calculate the opportunity cost of selling.  

15
  In all, 44% have up to 1 hectare of cultivated land, 32% have 1 to 3 hectares, 13% have 3 to 5 hectares, and 

11% have 5 to 10 hectares. 
16

 The remainder goes to: 8% animal consumption, 5% seed, 2% processing, 16% gifts and bartering, and 10% 
losses. 

17
 Survey for the impact evaluation of loan 2223/BL-BO (see Baseline study). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38713551


 - 5 - 
 
 

 
situation of participating women in the local context; and (v) collection and 
monitoring of sex-disaggregated data and output indicators.  

1.14 National Development Plan and the Agriculture Sector Development Plan. 
The operation is consistent with the National Development Plan and the 
Agriculture Sector Development Plan 2010-2015 insofar as it contributes to the 
proposed goals of: (i) progressing toward food security and sovereignty; and 
(ii) increasing the contribution of agricultural and forestry production to people’s 
livelihoods and the country’s development. The program also dovetails with the 
proposed National Development Plan 2015-2020.  

1.15 Consistency with the Ninth General Increase in the Resources of the Bank 
(GCI-9) and the IDB country strategy with Bolivia. The proposed program is 
consistent with the following lending program priorities of the GCI-9 (document 
AB-2764): (i) support for small and vulnerable countries; (ii) poverty reduction 
and equity enhancement, since this operation’s main objective is to raise the 
agricultural income of small rural producers; and (iii) climate change and 
environmental sustainability initiatives, by creating incentives to adopt agricultural 
technologies that contribute to climate change adaptation. The program will help 
meet the regional GCI-9 targets relating to annual growth rate of agricultural GDP 
and number of farmers given access to improved agricultural services and 
investments. The program is also aligned with the Bank’s country strategy with 
Bolivia (2011-2015) (document GN-2631-1), in that it will contribute to the 
crosscutting objectives of climate change adaptation, by promoting technologies 
that will enhance the adaptive capacity of small producers, and of interculturality 
and participation of indigenous people, by including interventions that improve 
their living conditions. The program is consistent with the Sector Framework 
Document on Agriculture and Natural Resources Management (document 
GN-2709-1). 

C. Objectives, components, and costs 

1.16 Objectives. The program’s general objective is to raise the income of Bolivia’s 
small-scale farmers by promoting productivity-enhancing technologies, thereby 
helping to reduce levels of vulnerability to food insecurity. Specifically, increased 
productivity will lessen vulnerability to food insecurity through increased output, 
which will result in higher income for participating producers through sales and in 
the form of food for their own consumption. The specific objective is to boost the 
adoption of technologies that increase agricultural yields, the value of production, 
and productive efficiency. 

1.17 To achieve the proposed objectives, the program has a single component, 
“Direct supports for the adoption of agricultural technologies,” which will 
finance nonreimbursable financial supports (vouchers) to partially cover the cost 
of adopting a technology.

18
 The number of producers expected to benefit from 

the program is 45,500.
19

 The component is divided into two subcomponents: 

                                                 
18

  Technology adoption is understood to mean the purchase of technological equipment and technical 
assistance. Technical assistance is understood to mean the transfer of information, technology, and advisory 
services with the aim of improving agricultural activities (Law 144, 2011). 

19
 Including projections from loan 2223/BL-BO, a total of 66,500 producers will benefit. 



 - 6 - 
 
 

 
(i) nonreimbursable financial supports for the purchase of agricultural 
technologies; and (ii) technical assistance for agricultural processes with a focus 
on gender and association management. 

1.18 The program will initially target a subgroup of 70 municipios from a list of 
190 eligible municipios based on the following criteria: (i) vulnerability to food 
insecurity (VAM=2 or 3); (ii) predominantly agricultural land use as defined by the 
current “Capacity for Greater Land-use” (CUMAT)

20
 classification methodology; 

(iii) no participation in loan 2223/BL-BO; and (iv) municipios not located in 
protected areas. In addition, the program will directly include two

21
 municipios 

that had been selected as beneficiaries under loan 2223/BL-BO, but that did not 
participate owing to a lack of resources at program’s end. The additional 
70 municipios will be selected as follows: (i) 33 municipios will be included 
directly that have been prioritized by the Government of Bolivia because they 
have high poverty rates and meet the eligibility requirements; and 
(ii) 37 municipios from the remaining list of eligible municipios will be selected at 
random (see zoning). After the target of benefiting the 72 municipios has been 
met, if there are resources available, a new group of municipios will be selected 
at random from the universe of remaining eligible municipios. 

1.19 Subcomponent 1. Nonreimbursable financial supports for the purchase of 
agricultural technologies (US$46.78 million). This subcomponent will finance 
the delivery of nonreimbursable financial supports to partially cover the cost of 
purchasing an agricultural technology selected by the producer from a menu of 
eligible options, along with training in its use and maintenance. Producers who 
meet the following criteria will be eligible to receive these supports: (i) are small 
producers who subsist primarily on farming and/or raising livestock;

22
 (ii) have a 

valid identity card and are 18 years or older; (iii) were not beneficiaries of loan 
2223/BL-BO; (iv) do not have household members who were beneficiaries of 
loan 2223/BL-BO; (v) belong to the selected municipios and communities; (vi) are 
in the registry of potential beneficiaries;

23
 and (vii) are legally entitled to hold/use 

the land (by legal deed and/or according to custom and tradition). 

1.20 The initial technology menu has been determined based on the following criteria: 
(i) returns, meaning financial viability via impacts on productivity and/or reduction 
in losses; (ii) environmental sustainability, meaning that environmental impacts 
will be positive or neutral; (iii) appropriability, referring to a technology’s 
compatibility with external (agroecological and climate) and internal (gender and 
cultural) circumstances; (iv) neutrality, referring to the technology’s flexibility to be 
applied to a wide range of crops or livestock products; (v) availability, referring to 
the presence of sufficient supply; (vi) adaptability, which entails building capacity 

                                                 
20

 Based on the “Capacity for Greater Land-use” (CUMAT) classification methodology, the project will include 
municipios whose land is used mainly for: (i) extensive annual crops, (ii) intensive annual crops; or 
(iii) extensive perennial crops or extensive-grazing livestock. 

21
  The two municipios are Padcaya and San Lorenzo, both located in Tarija. 

22
  Small producers are those with small holdings as defined in agrarian legislation (the Régimen Agricultural 

Unificado [Unified Agricultural System]). 
23

  The execution unit will develop the registry of potential beneficiaries in each of the eligible communities. 
Producers will have a period of time to register and prove that they meet the requirements for participation, 
including by giving a sworn statement.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38789208
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38789115
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38725442


 - 7 - 
 
 

 
for climate change resilience; and (vii) verifiability, referring to the possibility of 
confirming in situ that the technology was adopted. The initial menu includes 
10 technologies grouped into three categories: agricultural production, 
post-harvest, and livestock production. This technology menu may be modified 
as mutually agreed with the Bank, in keeping with the selection criteria (see 
technology menu and Subcomponent 1). 

1.21 Subcomponent 2. Technical assistance for agricultural processes with a 
focus on gender and association management (US$10.85 million). This 
subcomponent will finance the delivery of nonreimbursable financial supports 
(vouchers) to partially cover the cost of technical assistance associated with the 
use of the technology purchased. The technical assistance will have two 
dimensions: (i) technical assistance to maximize productive potential, including 
crop diversification practices and use of inputs; and (ii) capacity-building to 
promote association management (see Subcomponent 2 study). It will also 
consider social and environmental sustainability and gender issues specific to the 
local context, including training exclusively for women, linking associations of 
women producers, and promoting women’s participation in the technical training 
teams. 

1.22 The technology supplier will provide training in use and maintenance at the time 
the technology is delivered to the field, as part of Subcomponent 1. Technical 
assistance with agricultural processes and association-related capacity-building 
will be outsourced to organizations or enterprises selected through a competitive 
process, with priority given to those on the list of technology clearinghouses 
certified by Bolivia’s National Institute for Agricultural and Forestry Innovation 
(INIAF). This mechanism will make it possible to build the capacity of local 
institutions and coordinate efforts with INIAF to create the institutional framework 
for an agricultural outreach system to ensure the operation’s sustainability.  

1.23 The financial support to be provided will consist of a fixed amount per producer of 
up to US$1,200 for technology adoption, including the purchase of equipment 
and technical assistance, with the beneficiary able to opt for a lesser amount, 
depending on the technology chosen. The US$1,200 figure includes financing for 
up to US$1,000 to procure technology and US$200 for technical assistance. Of 
the total voucher amount, 90% will be financed with program resources and 10% 
will be paid by the beneficiary. The voucher can be exchanged by the producer 
or any family member (first degree) listed in the registry of beneficiaries. Just one 
voucher will be given per family. The support amount may be revised as mutually 
agreed with the Bank (paragraph 2.5). The delivery and adequate use of 
technologies and the quality of the technical assistance will be supervised 
through a sample verification process done by an independent firm. 

D. Results Matrix and key indicators 

1.24 The program will use a Results Matrix (see Annex II) agreed upon with the 
Ministry of Rural and Land Development (MDRyT) showing the impact, outcome, 
and output indicators along with the respective baselines, targets, and means of 
verification. The program’s main outcomes will be a rise in agricultural 
productivity among small producers through increased technology adoption. In 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718555
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38721944
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/38703731/R


 - 8 - 
 
 

 
the long term, the program’s impact will be reflected in higher agricultural income 
for small producers and improved food security.  

 
Table 1: Main results matrix indicators 

Impact and outcome 
indicators 

Time of 
measurement 

Rationale for selection 

Annual household agricultural 
income (US$) Years 1 and 5 

Measures impact on quality of life 
for producers through income 
increases 

Food security index (FAO) 
Years 1 and 5 

Measures impact on vulnerability 
to food insecurity 

Average gross production 
margin per hectare (US$/ha) Years 1 and 5 

Measures the change in 
agricultural productivity resulting 
from technology adoption 

Share of beneficiary producers 
who used the promoted 
technologies during the 
previous two agricultural cycles 
(%) 

Years 1 and 5 
Measures the adoption and 
implementation of technologies 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND RISKS 

A. Financing instrument 

2.1 The total program cost is US$62 million, which the Bank will finance through a 
blended loan broken down as follows: US$49.6 million from the Single Currency 
Facility of the Ordinary Capital and US$12.4 million from the Fund for Special 
Operations. Table 2 shows the cost breakdown and sources of financing (see 
program execution plan). 

Table 2. Program cost and financing (US$ millions) 

Investment category IDB Total 
Approx

. % 

I. Component: Direct supports for the adoption of 
agricultural technologies 

57.63 57.63 93 

Subcomponent 1: Nonreimbursable financial 

supports for the purchase of agricultural technologies 
46.78 46.78 75 

Subcomponent 2: Technical assistance for 

agricultural processes with a focus on gender and 
association management 

10.85 10.85 18 

II. Program administration (implementation, 

monitoring, evaluation, audits. Includes strengthening 
of the Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation 
System (SIGESEVA)) 

4.37 4.37 7 

Total 62.00 62.00 100 

 

2.2 The program is structured as a specific investment operation to be executed over 
five years, according to the following disbursement schedule and the preliminary 
financial plan: 

 
  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38725283


 - 9 - 
 
 

 
Table 3. Disbursement schedule (US$ millions) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total % 

Total 
IDB 

2.19 11.82 15.92 18.76 13.31 62.00 100 

% 4 19 25 30 23 100  

 

B. Economic viability 

2.3 The ex ante economic appraisal of the program utilized a cost-benefit analysis 
methodology that began by analyzing each of the most important technologies on 
the initial menu in terms of demand. The costs used included investment in 
(technology asset, technical assistance, and private investment by the 
beneficiary) and operation, maintenance, and replacement of the technologies, 
as well as the costs of additional production and opportunity costs. The benefits 
included higher yields, diversification toward higher-value-added crops, and 
lower production losses. These were used to calculate the economic benefit of 
the technologies, which translates into an increase in gross margins for farms 
and in household income levels. The net incremental benefits of technology 
adoption were estimated using labor and input technical coefficients obtained in 
the field, as well as from the impact evaluation for loan 2223/BL-BO. Using 
efficiency prices, a technology adoption rate of 75%, a 12-year time horizon,

24
 

and a 12% discount rate, the appraisal found the program to be cost-effective, 
with a net present value (NPV) of US$25.8  million, an internal rate of return 
(IRR) of 28.3%, and a benefit-cost ratio of 1.35. Table 4 provides information 
broken down by technology. 

 

Table 4. Initial menu of eligible technology options  

Technologies Direct impact IRR 

Modern irrigation  Increases in productivity and efficiency of water use  
38%-
46%

25
 

Greenhouse Increases in productivity and efficiency of seed use 57% 

Fruit dehydrator Improvements to food security and value added to output  43% 

Storage silo and 
multipurpose mill  

Improvements to food security and value added to output 15%-17% 

Poultry coops  Increases in productivity and reproductive efficiency  19% 

2.4 An analysis of sensitivity to variations in the actual extent to which technologies 
are adopted by beneficiaries showed the program to be cost-effective starting at 
the cutoff point of 48% effective adoption. 

 
  

                                                 
24

  This time frame is equivalent to two useful life cycles of the technologies plus a two-year learning period.  
25

  The IRR of 31% is for the specific scenario of crop intensification (without diversification), while the IRR of 
34% is for the crop diversification scenario. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38703784


 - 10 - 
 
 

 
Table 5. Analysis of sensitivity to variations in extent of adoption  

Adoption rate 
NPV (US$ 
millions) 

IRR 

48% 0 12% 

60% 11.6 19.5% 

75%* 25.8 28.3% 

90% 40.1 36.9% 

* The 75% rate of effective adoption by beneficiaries 
was used in the base scenario. 

 

2.5 The maximum voucher amount per producer will be US$1,200. To be able to 
exchange a voucher of this maximum amount, producers will have to pay 
US$120, which represents 10% of their annual agricultural income (US$1,090). 
This amount was adjusted by 20% with respect to the amount under loan 
2223/BL-BO, because: (i) new technologies with slightly higher prices were 
included with the expansion of the program’s coverage; and (ii) the cost of the 
more intensive technical assistance is inherently higher—estimated at US$200 
per beneficiary. The midterm and impact evaluations of loan 2223/BL-BO found 
the amount to be appropriate to the financial and productive capacity of the target 
population.  

C. Environmental and social risks 

2.6 In accordance with the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (policy 
OP-703), this has been classified as a category “C” operation. The planned 
activities are not expected to adversely affect the environment or vulnerable 
communities. To the contrary, the program will boost the adoption of 
technologies with positive or neutral environmental impacts. What’s more, the 
anticipated social impacts are positive, as it gives priority to vulnerable 
communities and native cultures and will implement crosscutting activities to 
encourage the participation of women. This notwithstanding, an environmental 
and social management strategy was developed as part of the operation’s 
design, identifying steps to strengthen the  execution unit. 

D. Fiduciary risks 

2.7 The institutional capacity of the project coordinating unit (PCU) for loan 
2223/BL-BO was assessed during the design of the proposed operation using 
the Institutional Capacity Assessment System methodology in the following 
areas: (i) planning and organization, measuring the ability to carry out 
programming processes and to assign responsibilities for managing resources; 
(ii) execution, measuring the ability to achieve the programmed outcomes; and 
(iii) controls, measuring internal and external control capabilities. The 
assessment found the PCU’s institutional capacity development level to be 
“medium” for planning and organization, “satisfactory” for execution, and 
“medium” for controls. The assessment resulted in an overall score of 81%, 
equivalent to satisfactory development, with a low level of risk. The risk analysis, 
however, did identify the lack of clear definition of roles and responsibilities of the 
agencies involved in implementation as a risk.  

2.8 Based on these findings, an institution-strengthening plan was developed to 
ensure that the program coordination and execution unit (PCEU) for the 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38714002
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38714002


 - 11 - 
 
 

 
proposed operation will have the internal capabilities for effective execution. The 
principal actions include: (i) strengthening the SIGESEVA information system; 
(ii) preparing the annual work plan for the first year of execution, with physical 
and financial targets; (iii) preparing Operating Regulations that cover levels of 
authorization for different types of contracting and spell out the responsibilities of 
the various actors, avoiding duplication of efforts; (iv) designing an 
implementation mechanism that provides the PCEU with greater operational 
autonomy; and (v) bolstering staff knowledge of project management (Bank 
tools) in the PCEU and the MDRyT, as well as in the Internal Audit Unit. 

E. Other risks 

2.9 The program’s risks were identified during the design phase, along with the 
respective mitigation measures. The main risks are: (i) lack of identification of 
demand by technology suppliers; (ii) insufficient technical assistance, limiting the 
adoption of technologies; and (iii) program needs not met by SIGESEVA. The 
mitigation activities are: (i) implementation of a comprehensive communications 
and information plan to disseminate the program to all stakeholders; (ii) technical 
assistance strategy that provides training in the use of technology and support for 
agricultural processes and association management; and (iii) updating of 
SIGESEVA. All the activities have a budget line item. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Implementation and management  

3.1 The borrower will be the Plurinational State of Bolivia, and the executing agency 
will be the Ministry of Rural and Land Development (MDRyT), through the 
Deconcentrated Public Institution for Food Sovereignty (IPD-SA), which was 
legally established under the MDRyT via Supreme Decree 1858. The program 
coordination and execution unit (PCEU), which will run the program, will be 
attached to the IPD-SA. The PCEU will have Administrative Office status, 
assuming direct responsibility for implementation and devoting its time 
exclusively to program execution. The PCEU will carry out program planning, 
management, and monitoring, develop planning instruments, channel resources 
for execution, authorize and transfer voucher payments, and consolidate and 
submit to the Bank financial information and monitoring and evaluation reports, 
among other responsibilities set forth in the program Operating Regulations. So 
as not to slow the pace of execution, every effort will be made to keep on key 
personnel currently in the PCU

26
 for loan 2223/BO-BL for the PCEU. As a 

contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement, evidence must 
be furnished that a PCEU with sufficient administrative, budgetary, 
procurement management, technical, operational, legal, and financial 
capacity has been set up under the IPD-SA, with staff assigned full-time to 
the program. 

3.2 Operating Regulations. Program execution will be governed by the Operating 
Regulations, which will spell out the rules and procedures for activity 

                                                 
26

  Note that PCU refers to the project coordinating unit for loan 2223/BL-BO, while PCEU refers to the project 
coordination and execution unit for operation BO-L1096. 



 - 12 - 
 
 

 
programming, financial and accounting management, procurement, audits, 
monitoring, and evaluation of the program. It will also cover: (i) responsibilities of 
the entities under the MDRyT, IPD-SA, and PCEU; (ii) eligibility criteria for 
municipios, technologies, and beneficiaries; and (iii) implementation details for 
each subcomponent. As a contractual condition precedent to the first 
disbursement, the program Operating Regulations must enter into force, 
under the terms agreed upon in advance with the Bank. 

3.3 Procurement. The program involves only the procurement of goods and related 
services and the contracting of consulting services; it does not call for works. 
Goods will be procured and services contracted in accordance with the practices 
and procedures set out in Bank policies (documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9) 
and with the loan contract and the program’s Fiduciary Agreements and 
Requirements (see Annex III), which include a procurement plan for the first 
18 months. This plan will be updated yearly, or whenever substantial changes 
occur, subject to Bank approval. Procurements may be reviewed on an ex post 
basis, as described in Annex III.  

3.4 Retroactive expenditures. The Bank may retroactively recognize eligible 
expenditures of up to US$1 million, or 1.6% of the financing amount, incurred 
during the 18 months prior to the date of loan approval by the Bank’s Board of 
Executive Directors. The following will be considered eligible expenses: 
(i) preliminary studies for execution of the subcomponents; (ii) set-up and 
outfitting of the regional operating units; and (iii) hiring of key PCEU personnel as 
stipulated in Annex III.  

3.5 Audits. Each year, for the duration of the loan disbursement period, audited 
program financial statements will be submitted to the Bank within 120 days after 
the close of the PCEU’s fiscal year. These statements will be audited by an 
independent audit firm acceptable to the Bank. The scope and other related 
matters will be determined pursuant to the Financial Management Policy for 
IDB-financed Projects (policy OP-273-6) and the guidelines on financial 
statements and external audits.  

B. Monitoring and evaluation plan 

3.6 Monitoring. The program will use the Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation 
System (SIGESEVA), a computerized monitoring system whose design 
incorporates a database at the PCEU’s central office with a network connection 
to the regional offices. This system will make it possible to track technology 
request, delivery, implementation, verification, and payment processes under the 
program. It will also be used to enter the beneficiaries, technology suppliers, and 
technical assistance providers into the database. The respective payments will 
be made through the Integrated System of Management and Administrative 
Modernization (SIGMA). SIGESEVA will have the following modules: 
Subcomponent 1 (management and tracking of beneficiary producers), 
Subcomponent 2 (management and tracking of technical assistance providers), 
financial management, goods and services administration, and results 
management and monitoring. The system will generate reports for the various 
levels of oversight as well as for results monitoring and evaluation. It will be 
updated to capture detailed microeconomic information during creation of the 



 - 13 - 
 
 

 
registry and the registration of beneficiaries, as well as to link the physical targets 
set out in the Results Matrix with the advances of subcomponent funds.  

3.7 No later than 60 days after the end of every six-month period during program 
execution, the PCEU will, by way of this system, prepare and submit to the Bank 
semiannual progress reports indicating the level of fulfillment and progress (both 
physical and financial) of the program using the indicators set out in the Results 
Matrix and the activities in the annual work plan and procurement plan. The 
reports will explore any problems encountered and propose corrective measures 
to ensure successful program implementation. The reports relating to the second 
six-month period will also include the annual work plan for the following calendar 
year, along with a disbursement forecast, and an updated procurement plan (see 
monitoring plan).  

3.8 Evaluation. The PCEU will submit the following reports to the Bank: (i) a 
midterm evaluation within 90 days after commitment of 50% of the loan 
proceeds; and (ii) a final evaluation within 90 days after disbursement of 90% of 
the loan proceeds. These reports will include: (i) analysis of financial execution 
by subcomponent and source of financing; (ii) progress with respect to outputs, 
outcomes, and impacts; (iii) effectiveness in the application of the program 
Operating Regulations; (iv) the level of compliance with contractual clauses; (v) a 
summary of the results of the social/environmental audits; and (vi) a summary of 
the results of program audits of financial statements, procurement processes, 
disbursements, and internal controls. The final evaluation report will also include 
the results of the program’s impact measurement, in accordance with the agreed 
plan. All evaluations will be carried out independently and will be financed using 
the loan proceeds.  

3.9 Impact evaluation. This evaluation will identify the effects on agricultural income 
and food security in the households of beneficiary producers. It will also provide 
the tools to analyze the process of technology adoption in Bolivian agriculture 
(see evaluation plan). The evaluation will be financed with program resources. It 
is based on an experimental methodology for creating a counterfactual scenario 
wherein the producers will be randomly assigned to treatment and control 
groups. This program lends itself to an experimental evaluation because demand 
outstrips program resources, therefore requiring transparent, equitable 
beneficiary selection. Beneficiaries will be selected in two stages. In the first 
stage, 37 municipios from the list of eligible municipios will be selected at 
random. Of the beneficiary municipios, 50% will be communities whose main 
activity is agriculture. All producers within that group of selected communities 
who meet the stipulated eligibility criteria may benefit. This process will allow for 
two control groups (inside and outside the beneficiary municipios) to be 
constructed for the purpose of measuring the program’s direct impacts and 
spillovers. The remaining 35 beneficiary municipios who enter directly will be 
evaluated using a quasi-experimental instrumental variable methodology. The 
data needed for the evaluation will be generated by way of two surveys 
measuring the impacts in a representative sample of 1,980 producers 
(beneficiaries and control) per round. The survey of producers will include 
detailed information regarding their socioeconomic condition and agricultural 
activities. The design of this operation provides a unique opportunity to generate 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38719418
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38723707


 - 14 - 
 
 

 
empirical evidence that will contribute to understanding the effectiveness of 
agricultural technology transfer projects in the region.  

 



Annex I - BO-L1096

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Strategic Development Objectives

     Lending Program

     Regional Development Goals

     Bank Output Contribution (as defined in Results Framework of IDB-9)

2. Country Strategy Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2631-1

     Country Program Results Matrix GN-2805

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to 

country strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Highly Evaluable Weight Maximum Score

9.9 10

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution 9.6 33.33% 10

     3.1 Program Diagnosis 3.0

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions 3.6

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality 3.0

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis 10.0 33.33% 10

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General 

Economic Analysis
4.0

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits 1.5

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs 1.5

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions 1.5

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis 1.5

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 10.0 33.33% 10

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms 2.5

     5.2 Evaluation Plan 7.5

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended 

beneficiaries and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality Yes

Labor

Environment Yes

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public 

sector entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project
Yes

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close 

knowledge gaps in the sector that were identified in the project document and/or 

in the evaluation plan

Yes

Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting 

and Reporting.

The objective of the program is to increase the incomes of small Bolivian farmers, through the promotion of technologies that increase productivity, helping to reduce levels of 

vulnerability to food insecurity. For this, the program will finance the provision of nonrefundable subsidies to partially cover the costs of adopting a selected technology. It is expected 

that the number of beneficiaries of the program ascend to 45,500 producers. The program is a continuation of the 2223/BL-BO operation, currently in its final stages of execution.

Project documentation contains a solid and well-structured diagnosis on the low productivity of the agricultural sector and its contributing factors, including the lack of innovation and 

technology transfer, and presents some evidence that validates the effectiveness of the proposed intervention. The results matrix reflects the objectives and activities of the project 

and has a clear vertical logic. The key top-level indicators have values that are the result of the evaluation of CRIAR I and an ex-ante economic analysis. Lower-level indicators reflect 

the project design. SMART indicators at the level of impact, results and products, with their respective baseline and target values are provided and the means of collecting the 

information are noted.

The economic analysis presented is based on increases in the margins of agricultural production expected by technology. In general, assumptions seem reasonable, and are largely 

anchored in the evaluation findings of CRIAR I. The sensitivity analysis is differentiated by technology, thus avoiding that the relative high profitability of irrigation diversification 

camouflage sensitivity to relatively minor changes in the variables of interest of other less profitable technologies.

The Monitoring and Evaluation Plan proposes an identification strategy based on experimental methods, with random selection at the level of municipalities and beneficiary 

communities, allowing for the capture of spillover effects that in these types of interventions are often substantial, and therefore important to measure.

The risks identified in the risk matrix seem reasonable and include compliance indicators, as well as defining responsibility and dates for monitoring.

The project will track specific gender indicators and has 

cross-cutting activities to promote the participation of 

women.

The project promotes the adoption of technologies with 

positive or neutral environmental impacts.

BO-T1207 supported the design of the project.

The Impact Evaluation proposal will provide rigorous 

empirical evidence (experimental methodology) on the 

impact of technology transfer programs in the short, 

medium and long term.

Medium

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

C

-Farmers given access to improved agricultural services and investments

Aligned

Adaptation to climate change.

The intervention is included in the 2015 Operational 

Program.

-Annual growth rate of agricultural GDP (%)

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Aligned

-Lending to small and vulnerable countries

-Lending for poverty reduction and equity enhancement

-Lending to support climate change initiatives, renewable energy and environmental 

sustainability

I. Strategic Alignment



Annex II  
Page 1 of 3 

 

RESULTS MATRIX 

          

General objective 
The program’s general objective is to raise the income of Bolivia’s small-scale farmers by promoting productivity-enhancing 
technologies, thereby helping to reduce levels of vulnerability to food insecurity.  

Specific objective 
The specific objective is to boost the adoption of technologies that increase agricultural yields, the value of production, and 
productive efficiency. 

Impact 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline 

(2013) 
Target 
(2019) 

Observations 

Impact: Increase in family farming income of 

small-scale agricultural producers (male and 
female) 

 

   

Means of verification: Randomization ensures that the initial difference between 

the beneficiaries and the control group will be zero. The target value is drawn from 
the CRIAR baseline study, which analyzed impact on income of beneficiaries 
versus a control group. This study found an income differential between the two 
groups of US$133 (939 bolivianos), or about 12% of total income (US$1,090, 
National Institute of Statistics (2011)). This is a conservative scenario, since the 
study in question was conducted during the agricultural cycle immediately 
following the technology transfer. 
Observations: These figures will be verified with the baseline and monitoring 

surveys for the impact evaluation of CRIAR II. 

Indicator: Percentage difference in the 

increase in agricultural income among 
beneficiary versus control producers  

% 0 
 

12 
 

Impact: Improvement in level of food security 

among small-scale agricultural producers (male 
and female). 

  
  

Means of verification: The baseline value is zero because randomization 

ensures that the difference between the beneficiaries and the control group will be 
zero. The target value is drawn from the short-term impact evaluation of CRIAR, 
which found a change of 6% in the program’s first year.  
- These figures will be verified with the baseline and monitoring surveys for the 

impact evaluation of CRIAR II. 

Indicator: Difference in the percentage of 

beneficiary versus control producers who are 
not food insecure according to the Food and 
Agriculture Organization’s food security index. 

% 0 8 

  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38713551
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38724883


Annex II  
Page 2 of 3 
 

Outcomes 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline  

(2013) 
Target Observations 

Final outcome: Increase in agricultural 

productivity of small-scale producers (male and 
female) 

 

      Means of verification: 
- The baseline value is an average of the crops used for the economic appraisal, 

the calculations for which were based on data from the CRIAR impact evaluation, 
FAOSTAT, consultant reports, and the state-owned food production support 
enterprise EMAPA.  

- The target value is drawn from estimates in the economic appraisal. 
- These figures will be verified with the baseline and monitoring surveys for the 

impact evaluation of CRIAR II. 
  

Indicator 1: Value of agricultural production 

(median value per cultivated hectare) 

US$ per 
hectare 

840 2,686 

Indicator 2: Average gross production margin 

per hectare for agricultural activities (median 
U.S. dollars per cultivated hectare) 

US$ per 
hectare 

420 1,643 

Intermediate outcome 1: Increase in 

technology adoption by participating producers 
(male and female) 

      

Observations: The percentage reflects the number of farmers who use the 

purchased technology during the last two agricultural cycles under the program 
and is based on the data collected by CIES Internacional for the impact evaluation 
of CRIAR.  

 

Means of verification: The target value is drawn from the data collected for the 
impact evaluation of CRIAR and from existing literature.  

- These figures will be verified with the baseline and monitoring surveys for the 
impact evaluation of CRIAR II. 

Indicator: Difference in the percentage of 

beneficiary versus control producers who utilize 
the technologies promoted by the program 

% 0 75 

Intermediate outcome 2: Improved 

association-building among beneficiary 
producers (male and female) 

      
Means of verification: Charter of the producers’ association, signed by the 

community or by the Organización Económica Comunitaria [Community Economic 
Organization] (OECOM). Randomization ensures that the difference between the 
beneficiaries and the control group will be zero in the baseline.  

Indicator: Percentage of participating producers 

(male and female) who form new associations 

 

% 0 5 

  



Annex II  
Page 3 of 3 

 

Component: Direct supports for the adoption of agricultural technologies 

  Baseline Year 1 Year 2 Year 3  Year 4 Year 5 Target Observations 

Output 1: Technologies delivered to 
participating producers (male and female) 

  
            

 Means of verification: PCEU reports 

Milestone 1: Number of vouchers exchanged by 

beneficiary producers (male and female) 
 0 10,500  12,000  15,000  8,000   45,500  Voucher exchange will occur during the fairs, and 

occurs when the beneficiary pays the counterpart 
contribution.  
  

Milestone 2: Number of vouchers exchanged by 

female heads of household 
 0 1,500 2,500  3,500 4,000   11,500 

Milestone 3: Number of technologies installed 

on beneficiary producers’ plots (male 
 and female) 

0  8,000  11,500 12,500  11,000 2,500  45,500 Corresponds to the time of request by the supplier. 

Milestone 4: Number of participating producers 

(male and female) who have received training in 
technology maintenance and use 

0 8,000 11,500 12,500 11,000 2,500 45,500 
This training will be given directly by the technology 
provider. 

Indicator 1.1: Number of technologies for 

participating producers (male and female) paid 
for by the PCEU 

0 0 6,500 8,000 10,000 21,000 45,500 
Refers to the technologies for which the PCEU has paid 
suppliers as the final step in the process. This number 
includes the verified technologies. 

Output 2: Participating producers (male and 
female) having received technical assistance  

              Means of verification: PCEU reports 

Indicator: Number of beneficiary producers 

(male and female) who have received technical 
assistance with agricultural processes and 
association management during an agricultural 
cycle 

0 0 4,000 8,500  14,000  19,000  45,500   

  



Annex III  
Page 1 of 8 

 
 

FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS 
 

Country: The Plurinational State of Bolivia 

Project No./Name: BO-L1096 – Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural 
Agrifood Initiatives II  (CRIAR II) 

Executing agency: Ministry of Rural and Land Development 

Prepared by: Carolina Escudero (PRM) and Abel Cuba (FM) 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 This annex was prepared taking into account the results of the following in 
determining the level of fiduciary risk associated with the project: (i) the institutional 
capacity assessment of the project coordinating unit (PCU) for loan 2223/BO-BL; 
and (ii) the fiduciary supervision by financial management and procurement 
specialists at the Bank’s Country Office in Bolivia (FMP/CBO) during the execution 
of loan 2223/BO-BL.

1
 

1.2 Program execution will fall to a program coordination and execution unit (PCEU) 
attached to the new Deconcentrated Public Institution for Food Sovereignty 
(IPD-SA) under the Ministry of Rural and Land Development (MDRyT). 

1.3 Accounting records for the operation will be kept in the Integrated System of 
Management and Administrative Modernization (SIGMA).

2
 SIAP-BID

3
 will be used 

for financial reports required by the Bank. The IDB’s Standard Bidding Documents 
or other documents agreed with the Vice Ministry of Public Investment and 
External Financing and made available through SICOES

4
 will be used for 

execution of this operation; SICOES will also be used for the publication of specific 
procurement notices. 

1.4 Use of the Basic Standards of the Goods and Services Management System 
(NB-SABS) is acceptable to the Bank

5
 as relates to the National Production and 

Employment Support (ANPE) procurement modality for: (i) works contracts for 
amounts below the threshold established by the Bank for use of the shopping 
method (for reference: US$250,000); (ii) contracts for goods and nonconsulting 
services for amounts below the threshold established by the Bank for use of the 
shopping method (for reference: US$50,000); (iii) all individual consulting 
 

                                                 
1
   The PCU is the current project coordinating unit for loan 2223/BO-BL while the PCEU is the project 

coordination and execution unit for operation BO-L1096. 
2
   The Ministry of Economy and Finance has developed the Sistema de Gestión Pública [Public 

Management System] (SIGEP), which in the medium term will replace SIGMA. 
3
   Sistema de Administración de Proyectos–BID [IDB Project Administration System]. 

4
   A national procurement subsystem that has been approved for use in Bank operations. 

5
   See document GN-2538-11 for what the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors has approved as relates 

to acceptance of the partial use of the country procurement system in Bolivia. The agreement for the 
implementation and use of country systems in IDB-financed operations is currently being finalized, and 
will be applied once it enters into force. 



Annex III  
Page 2 of 8 
 
 

contracts;
6
 and (iv) use of the SICOES system

7
 as a mechanism for advertising 

requests for proposals and the results of national bidding processes and simplified 
procurement processes in Bolivia.  

II. THE EXECUTING AGENCY’S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT 

2.1 As a government agency, the MDRyT is governed by Law 1,178 of 20 July 1990 
for Government Administration and Control (SAFCO). This law regulates the 
administrative and control systems for government finances, and their relationship 
with country planning and public investment systems. 

2.2 The MDRyT uses SIGMA for all of its financial records.
8
 SIGMA offers secure and 

reliable access to budget execution information. It does not provide data in foreign 
currency, or on the basis of the investment categories established in the program 
costs table. The MEFP

9
 has, however, with Bank support, developed the 

Accounting Management Module, which allows reports to be issued based on the 
financing structures and the currency of loans from international development 
partners, meaning that these limitations should be overcome. Despite this, until 
such time as this module has been fully implemented, it has been agreed that the 
PCEU will use SIAP-BID

10
 as a supplementary accounting and reporting system for 

rendering accounts and financial reporting. As a state agency, the MDRyT is 
supervised by the Office of the Comptroller General and an internal audit unit. 

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

3.1 The institutional capacity assessment, together with the observations of the 
FMP/CBO team during execution of loan 2223/BL-BO, indicate an ADEQUATE 
level of institutional development and capacity, and a LOW level of fiduciary risk.  

3.2 Coordination. To ensure optimum overall coordination, the program Operating 
Regulations will include flow charts featuring independent and exclusive 
administrative and legal functions, as well as the coordination mechanism that will 
govern participants under the this program. It is recommended that the MDRyT 
maintain the structure established for the PCU, which, as executing agency for 
current loan 2223/BO-BL, has acquired the knowledge and experience needed to 
ensure compliance with the fiduciary agreements and requirements set out in this 
document. 

3.3 Procurement. Although the level of turnover among local authorities and 
administrative personnel (including high-, mid-, and low-level management 
procurement personnel) is generally high in the country, this has not been the case 
with the PCU.  To avoid adversely affecting the transfer and strengthening of 
procurement-related knowledge or the pace of execution, efforts should continue to 

                                                 
6
   Except in rare cases in which the Bank authorizes the use of the policy set forth in document 

GN-2350-9. 
7
   Sistema de Contrataciones Estatales [State Procurement System] www.sicoes.gob.bo  

8
  The Ministry of Economy and Finance has developed SIGEP, which in the medium term will replace 

SIGMA. 
9
   Ministry of Economy and Public Finance. 

10
  Sistema de Administración de Proyectos–BID [IDB Project Administration System], developed by 

Country Department Andean Group staff in the Bank’s Country Office in Bolivia (CAN/CBO). 

http://www.sicoes.gob.bo/


Annex III  
Page 3 of 8 

 
 

 

 

retain for the PCEU fiduciary staff (procurement and financial management 
specialists) who currently work in the PCU

11
 for loan 2223/BO-BL.  

3.4 Internal legal and administrative processes and procedures. It is highly 
recommended that the staff of the legal and administrative departments of the 
MDRyT and the IPD-SA continue to strengthen their knowledge of fiduciary 
management according to IDB guidelines, and that they participate in the early 
stages of procurement processes (preparation of bidding documents, draft or 
model contracts, etc.). Accordingly, the Bank will continue to provide training to 
agency staff (PCEU and other entities), supplemented by training offered by the 
Bank in the use program management tools (GRP, PM4R, MS Program). 

3.5 Public financial management. The PCEU will have access to SIGMA for the 
timely recording of payment requests and financial records. In addition, until such 
time as the SIGEP Accounting Management Module has entered into operation, 
SIAP-BID will be used as a supplementary system for recording program 
transactions. 

IV. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE CONTRACT 

4.1 Operating Regulations. Based on prior agreement between the Bank and the 
parties, the Operating Regulations will include details of execution arrangements, 
procedures, and information flows. 

4.2 Exchange rate agreed on with the executing agency for financial reporting. 
The exchange rate used will be the prevailing rate in the borrowing country on the 
effective date of the conversion of funds into local currency in the executing 
agency’s accounts. 

4.3 Financial statements and other audited reports. Each year, for the duration of 
the loan disbursement period, audited program financial statements will be 
submitted to the Bank within 120 days after the close of the executing agency’s 
fiscal year. These statements will be duly audited by an independent audit firm 
acceptable to the Bank. The final audit report will be submitted to the Bank within 
120 days following the date stipulated for last disbursement under the loan. 

4.4 The terms of reference for the contracting of the independent audit firm will be 
subject to the Bank’s prior approval, and may include outputs consistent with the 
International Standards on Auditing relating to the financial audit of the program 
and related audit tasks. 

V. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION 

5.1 Procurement execution. Procurement will be conducted consistent with what the 
Bank’s Board of Executive Directors has approved as relates to the acceptance of 
the partial use of the country procurement system of Bolivia (document 
GN-2538-11) once the agreement for the implementation and use of country 
systems in Bank-financed operations enters into force; and with the policies in 
documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 for everything not covered in document 
GN-2538-11 and the agreement for the implementation and use of country 
subsystems in Bank-financed operations. 

                                                 
11

  Note that the PCU is the current project coordinating unit for loan 2223/BO-BL while the PCEU is the 
coordination and execution unit for operation BO-L1096. 



Annex III  
Page 4 of 8 
 
 

5.2 Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services. Program-related 
contracts for works, goods, and nonconsulting services subject to international 
competitive bidding will be carried out using the Standard Bidding Documents 
issued by the Bank.  

5.3 Bidding processes subject to national competitive bidding (NCB) will be carried out 
using national bidding documents agreed on with the Bank (or satisfactory to the 
Bank) for amounts up to US$400,000, as such contracts can be fulfilled by local 
vendors and because it has been observed that contracts for amounts below 
US$400,000 have not generated interest among foreign bidders in recent years. 
Shopping will be applied in those cases indicated in the procurement plan, using 
the bidding documents agreed on with the Bank, or the ANPE procurement 
modality once the agreement for the implementation and use of country 
subsystems in Bank-financed operations has entered into force. Calls for bids may 
be published in the SICOES.   

5.4 This program does not envisage the contracting of works. If required, however, 
works valued at or below US$1 million will be contracted using the shopping 
method.  

5.5 Selection and contracting of consultants. Contracts for consulting services 
under the program will be listed in the initial procurement plan, and will be 
executed using either the Bank’s Standard Request for Proposals or one agreed 
with the Bank (or satisfactory to the Bank if no agreement has been reached). 

a. Selection of consulting firms. Consulting firms will be selected for the 
program using the Bank’s Standard Request for Proposals. 

b. Shortlist of consulting firms. For contracts valued below the thresholds 
established by the Bank for the country, the shortlist may comprise entirely 
(100%) Bolivian firms.

12
 For Bolivia this threshold is US$200,000. 

c. Selection of individual consultants. Individual consultants will be selected 
taking into account their qualifications for the assignment, based on a 
comparison of the qualifications of at least three candidates. As a rule, no 
interviews will take place. When the work necessitates the involvement of 
additional persons, to provide specific support and advisory services, 
consulting firms should normally be used. In circumstances where two or three 
persons would provide this support, the suitability of relying on individual 
consultants with complementary services will be analyzed on a case-by-case 
basis. The ANPE procurement modality may be used once the agreement for 
the implementation and use of country subsystems in Bank-financed 
operations has entered into force. Requests for proposals may be published in 
the SICOES. 

5.6 Procurement planning. The PCEU will publish the procurement plan in the 
Procurement Plan Execution System (SEPA) and will update it at least once a 
year, or as necessary to reflect the program’s actual progress and requirements for 
execution. 

5.7 Advance procurement/retroactive financing. The Bank may retroactively 
recognize eligible expenditures of up to US$1 million, or 1.6% of the financing 

                                                 
12

  Includes nonconsulting services. 



Annex III  
Page 5 of 8 

 
 

 

 

amount, provided that they meet requirements substantially similar to those set out 
in the loan contract. These expenditures must have been incurred during the 
18 months prior to the date of loan approval by the Bank. The following will be 
considered eligible expenses: (i) preliminary studies for execution of the 
subcomponents; (ii) set-up of the regional operating units; and (iii) hiring of key 
PCEU personnel as stipulated in the procurement plan.

13
   

5.8 Domestic preference. The application of domestic preference will not be 
considered in the procurement of goods envisaged for this operation. 

5.9 Terms of reference and technical specifications. The project team leader will 
review terms of reference and/or technical specifications. 

5.10 Table of threshold amounts (thousands of U.S. dollars). 

 

Works Goods and nonconsulting services Consulting services 

International 
competitive 

bidding 

National 
competitive 

bidding 
Shopping 

International 
competitive 

bidding 

National 
competitive 

bidding 
Shopping 

International 
advertising  

Shortlist 
100% 

national  

Greater than 
US$5,000 

Less than or 
equal to 

US$5,000 

Less than 
US$1,000 

Greater than 
US$400 

Less than or 
equal to 
US$400 

Less than 
or equal 

to 
US$200 

Greater than 
US$200 

Less 
than or 
equal to 
US$200 

 

5.11 Main procurements. The main procurements for this operation are detailed 
below:* 

*To access and review the procurement plan for the first 18 months, click: (here). 

5.12 Procurement supervision. The thresholds for post review are set based on the 
fiduciary capacity of the executing agency, the complexity of procurement, and/or 

                                                 
13

  Key personnel include: (i) national project coordinator; (ii) technical specialist I, PCEU; (iii) information 
technology expert; (iv) officer IV, planning, monitoring, and evaluation; (v) officer IV, legal affairs; 
(vi) officer III, agrifood technologies; (vii) officer III, voucher management; (viii) officer IV, SIGESEVA 
management and monitoring; (ix) officer IV, communications and training; (x) administrative specialist I, 
PCEU; and (xi) officer IV, goods and services (procurement specialist). 

Activity 
Bidding 
process 

Estimated 
date 

Estimated 
amount 

(US$000) 

Goods or nonconsulting services    

Engagement of several service providers/firms to 
verify that technical assistance was provided to 
beneficiaries (US$365,000 average contract) 

NCB Q3-2015 1,820 

Engagement of two service providers/firms to design 
and implement the program’s information campaign 

NCB Q1-2015 500 

Engagement of three service providers/firms to verify 
the installation of technology for program beneficiaries 

NCB Q2-2015 1,365 

Purchase of transport units Shopping Q2-2015 200 

Consulting services    

Engagement of several consulting firms (eight 
contracts on average) to provide technical assistance 
to program beneficiaries 

FBS Q2-2015 9,100 

Consultancy for the program impact evaluation QCBS 
Q4-2019  
Q2-2019 

500 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38718556


Annex III  
Page 6 of 8 
 
 

external factors that may affect the timeliness and manner of procurement 
execution. Given the current fiduciary management capabilities of the PCU (the 
PCEU for project BO-L1096) as relate to procurement, the program may be 
executed using ex post review for procurement processes worth up to 100% of the 
threshold for NCB, as set out in the table below. (Direct contracting and 
procurements not listed in the table will be subject to ex ante review). Based on the 
matrix of risks identified for the program, the level of fiduciary risk in relation to 
program procurement is LOW. Accordingly, annual procurement supervision visits 
and ex post review visits will be made with a view to updating the level of fiduciary 
risk and monitoring progress in procurement management under the program.  

 

Threshold for ex post review 

Works 
Goods and 

nonconsulting services 

Consulting services - 
Firms 

Shortlist may be 100% 
national 

Consulting 
services - 
Individual 

Contracts for amounts 
less than or equal to 
US$5,000,000 

Contracts for amounts less 
than or equal to 
US$400,000 

Contracts for amounts 
less than or equal to 
US$200,000 

No threshold 
amount 

5.13 Operating expenses. Operating expenses are recurring and maintenance 
expenses needed for program implementation. These will be agreed on with the 
project team leader and included in the procurement plan. Procurement relating to 
recurring expenses will be governed by the executing agency’s administrative 
procedures (generally the NB-SABS regulations), as referenced in the Operating 
Regulations. 

5.14 Direct contracting. Under this program, direct contracting may be used in the 
following cases: (i) key PCU personnel executing loan 2223/BO-BL (CRIAR); and 
(ii) contracts valued at less than US$500 individually, or US$5,000 when bundled, 
may be contracted directly in order to ensure efficient, timely execution. This must 
be approved by the project team leader, and the procurement plan must also be 
updated. 

5.15 Records and files. The PCEU for operation BO-L1096 will establish the 
supporting documentation, procedures, and controls necessary for project 
execution, and maintain them in accordance with the terms of the loan contract 
and local laws.  

VI. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

6.1 Programming and budget. The PCU for loan 2223/BO-BL, which is currently in 
operation, has an administrative department

14
 within which the project will be set 

up, thus allowing budget records to be kept with individual identification of the 
sources of financing and funds used in project execution. Inclusion in the budget as 
well as future budget modifications (requested via ministerial resolution) must go 
through the Bureau of Administrative Affairs (DGAA), based on the annual work 
plan and the project execution plan agreed with the Bank, thus ensuring that the 

                                                 
14

  Under SIGMA’s budgetary programming structure, an administrative department may include several 
projects with independent records and controls.  



Annex III  
Page 7 of 8 

 
 

 

 

funds required for each year of project execution will be available. Budget 
modifications also must be submitted to the Vice Ministry of Public Investment and 
External Financing, for approval via a ministerial resolution from the Ministry of 
Development Planning. 

6.2 Accounting and information systems. The PCEU for the proposed program 
(BO-L1096) will record project transactions in SIGMA. This system combines in a 
single registry the following accounting records: Budget (budget execution), Net 
worth (assets, liabilities, equity, and earnings), and Treasury (cash transfers), on 
an accrual basis. In addition, for project accounting purposes, a chart of accounts 
will be prepared to allow the identification of expenditures incurred by transaction 
on a cash basis, aligning the project’s investment categories with the respective 
budget line items and accounts. In addition, until such time as the SIGEP 
Accounting Management Module (currently SIGMA) is in operation, the PCEU will 
use the SIAP-BID system on a temporary basis for program accounting and as a 
supplementary accounting system for financial reporting.  

6.3 Disbursements and cash flow. The loan will be disbursed in the form of 
independent advances of funds to the PCEU. The frequency of advances will be 
determined as a function of the project’s financial programming, which will be 
updated periodically by the PCEU. The Bank may make a new advance of funds 
once at least 80% of previous fund advances have been accounted for. Loan 
proceeds will be deposited in an independent account in U.S. dollars, and 
subsequently transferred to another account in local currency, both under the 
CUT.

15
 The MDRyT, through the PCEU, will be responsible for the management of 

funds disbursed to it.  

6.4 Internal controls and audits. Financial management by the PCEU is subject to 
yearly reliability reviews by the Internal Audit Unit; the project is expected to be 
included in this type of review. As a strategic activity under its mandate, the Bank 
will organize annual workshops for the MDRyT Internal Audit Unit, with a view to 
strengthening its knowledge of project execution. These activities are coordinated 
with the Office of the Comptroller General (CGE). Additionally, the Bank has been 
supporting the CGE with a technical-cooperation operation that is seeking to 
strengthen the internal control system. With internal audit units as the main 
participants, it is equipping them with review tools and improving the application of 
their regulations. 

6.5 External controls and reporting. To meet the requirement of annual submittal of 
the project’s audited financial statements, the PCEU will need to hire an 
independent audit firm acceptable to the Bank, following Bank policies. A multiyear 
contract (spanning at least three fiscal periods) should be used so as to avoid 
transaction costs and give continuity to the auditors’ work, while also ensuring 
timely interventions that will enable preliminary reviews at semiannual cutoff points. 

6.6 Financial supervision plan. Supervision plans and timetables will be designed 
based on identified fiduciary risks. At a minimum, the following annual activities are 
envisaged: (i) a comprehensive visit (covering procurement and disbursements) by 
the external audit firm hired to review the project’s financial statements; (ii) a site 
visit to the areas targeted for investment under the loan; and (iii) a visit to verify 

                                                 
15

  CUT: Cuenta Única del Tesoro [General Treasury Account]. 



Annex III  
Page 8 of 8 
 
 

compliance with agreements based on the internal control recommendations 
issued by the project’s external auditor. 

6.7 Execution mechanism. Given that loan 2223/BO-BL is currently being executed 
by the PCU, no changes are anticipated in this area. The current structure, 
procedures, and arrangements will therefore be maintained for execution of the 
proposed operation, as will the PCU, along with its administrative, financial, and 
management autonomy. The PCEU for proposed project BO-L1096 will assume 
direct responsibility for implementation and will be devoted full-time to project 
execution. Its duties will include project planning, management, and monitoring, 
development of planning instruments, channeling of funds for execution, 
authorization and transfer of voucher payments, and consolidation and submittal to 
the Bank of financial information and monitoring and evaluation reports, among 
others set forth in the Operating Regulations. 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/15 
 
 
 

Bolivia. Loan ___/BL-BO to the Plurinational State of Bolivia 
Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives II 

 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Plurinational State of Bolivia, as Borrower, for the purpose of 
granting it a financing to cooperate in the execution of a direct supports for the creation of rural 
agrifood initiatives II program. Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$49,600,000 
from the resources of the Single Currency Facility of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, corresponds 
to a parallel loan within the framework of  the multilateral debt relief and concessional finance 
reform of the Bank, and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special 
Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on _________ 2015) 
 
 
 
BO-L1096 
LEG/SGO/BO-39765860 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/15 
 
 
 

Bolivia. Loan ____/BL-BO to the Plurinational State of Bolivia 
Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives II 

 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Plurinational State of Bolivia, as Borrower, for the purpose of 
granting it a financing to cooperate in the execution of a direct supports for the creation of rural 
agrifood initiatives II program. Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$12,400,000 
from the resources of the Bank's Fund for Special Operations, corresponds to a parallel loan 
within the framework of the multilateral debt relief and concessional finance reform of the Bank, 
and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual 
Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on _________ 2015) 
 
 
 
BO-L1096 
LEG/SGO/BO-39765884 

 
 





















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

URUGUAY 

RURAL PRODUCTIVE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM II 

(UR-L1147) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Ana Ríos (CSD/RND), Project 
Team Leader; Luis Hernando Hintze (RND/CUR), Project Team Co-leader; Gonzalo Muñoz 
and Maja Schling (CSD/RND), Alvaro García Negro (RND/CPR); Elizabeth Chávez and 
Rosario Frugone (CSD/RND); Jennifer Doherty-Bigara (CSD/CCS); Alberto Villalba 
(VPS/ESG); Rodolfo Graham (LEG/SGO); Federico Bachino and Adriana Torres (CSC/CUR); 
Abel Cuba and Emilie Chapuis (FMP/CUR); and Catherine Meola (SCL/GDI). 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors 
simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the 
document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus superseding 
and replacing the original version. 



 

CONTENTS 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................. 1 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale ............................................ 1 
B. Objectives, components, and cost ................................................................ 7 
C. Key results indicators ................................................................................... 9 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................... 10 

A. Financing instruments ................................................................................ 10 
B. Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 11 
C. Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 12 
D. Other project risks ...................................................................................... 12 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 13 

A. Summary of execution arrangements ......................................................... 13 
B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ....................................... 15 
C. Impact evaluation ....................................................................................... 15 

 
 
 

  



 - ii - 
 
 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) 

Annex II Results Matrix 

Annex III Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED 

1. Multiyear execution plan (PEP) and annual work plan (AWP) 

2. Monitoring and evaluation plan 

3. Environmental and social management report (ESMR) 

4. Procurement plan 

OPTIONAL 

1. Bibliography 

2. Diagnostic assessment for capacity building in technology generation and transfer, technical 
assistance, and rural extension 

3. Impact evaluation of the Rural Productive Development Program (RPDP) 

4. Beneficiaries of RPDP requests for proposals and the registry of family producers 

5. Survey of nonbeneficiary family producers in RPDP requests for proposals 

6. RPDP evaluation 

7. Climate change 

8. Technology evaluation 

9. Gender 

10. Program economic evaluation 

11. Rural Development Bureau - Organizational chart 

12. Draft program Operating Regulations 

 
  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-44
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-40
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-41
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-43
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-27
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-48
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-48
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-32
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-33
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-34
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-35
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-36
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-37
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-52
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-38
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-64
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-39


 - iii - 
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS 

ATDR Agente Territorial de Desarrollo Rural [Regional Rural Development 
Agent] 

DGDR Dirección General de Desarrollo Rural [Rural Development Bureau] 
ESMP Environmental and social management plan 
ESMR Environmental and social management report 
GHG Greenhouse gas 
ICAS Institutional Capacity Assessment System 
ICTs Information and communication technologies 
INIA Instituto National de Investigación Agropecuaria [National Agricultural 

Research Institute] 
IPNEs Institutos Públicos no Estatales [Nonstate Public Institutes] 
MGAP Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP) 
PMU Project Management Unit 
RPDP Rural Productive Development Program 
RTAE Rural Technical Assistance and Extension 
 
 



 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

URUGUAY 
RURAL PRODUCTIVE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM II 

(UR-L1147) 
 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Eastern Republic of Uruguay 
Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Amortization period: 24 years 

Executing agency: The borrower, through the Ministry of Livestock, 
Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP) 

Disbursement period: 6 years 

Grace period: 6.5 years(b) 

Interest rate: LIBOR-based 

Source Amount (US$) % Credit fee: (c) 

IDB (Ordinary Capital) 24,232,000 89 Inspection and supervision fee: (c) 

Local 2,889,000 11 Weighted average life: 15.25 years(d) 

Total 27,121,000 100 Approval currency: United States dollars 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description: To help improve the sustainability of small and medium-sized family-owned agricultural production units. 
The specific objectives are to increase the adoption of climate-smart technologies and to build capacities for technology generation and 
transfer, technical assistance, and rural extension. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first loan disbursement: Submission, to the Bank’s satisfaction, of evidence of the 
entry into force of the program Operating Regulations, including the environmental and social management plan (ESMP), in accordance 
with the terms previously agreed with the Bank (paragraph 3.1). 

For contractual conditions of a socioenvironmental nature, see Annex B of the environmental and social management report (ESMR). 

Special contractual conditions for execution: For the use of resources allocated to subcomponents (i), (iii), and (iv) of Component II, 
the signing and entry into force of Standard Framework Agreements between the MGAP (through the Rural Development Bureau 
(DGDR)), and the National Agricultural Research Institute (INIA) and Nonstate Public Institutes (IPNEs) (paragraph 3.2). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(e) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(f) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

 
(a) Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization schedule, 

as well as currency and interest rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management considerations into account when reviewing such 
requests. 

(b) Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that they do not entail any 
extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract. 

(c) The credit fee and the inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the Bank’s 
lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(d) The original weighted average life of the loan may be shorter, depending on the signature date of the loan contract. 

(e) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(f) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law). 

 
 

 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-39
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-41


 
 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale1 

1.1 The agriculture sector: importance, features, and challenges. The agricultural 
sector2 is of critical importance for Uruguay’s economy. In 2016, it accounted for 7% 
of GDP, or 12% of GDP when associated food industries are included (Ackermann 
et al., 2018). It represented 15% of employment and more than 75% of total exports, 
the main categories being beef, agricultural produce, dairy products, and forestry 
products (Uruguay XXI, 2016). Compared with other productive activities, the sector 
has the greatest multiplier effect on the economy (6.22, versus 5.47 for the 
manufacturing industry and 6.08 for services) and the greatest impact on 
employment (0.42, versus 0.33 for the services sector) (Terra et al., 2009). The 
sector received annual support equivalent to 0.58% of GDP over the 2014-2016 
period, of which 63% was for general services and 37% consisted of producer 
support (direct or price support) (Ackermann et al., 2018).3 

1.2 Between 1981 and 2012, total agricultural productivity in Uruguay grew at a higher 
average rate than in the region as a whole (1.5%, compared to 1.2%) (Nin-Pratt, 
Falconi, Ludena, & Martel, 2015). This growth has been uneven, however, with small 
and medium-sized family producers left behind (Instituto National de Investigación 
Agropecuaria [National Agricultural Research Institute] (INIA), 2016). Family 
systems account for more than 70% of farm enterprises and contribute around 25% 
of gross agricultural product. They are characterized by low levels of technology 
adoption and production efficiency, with high levels of variation from one year to the 
next (Albin, 2017); they are also focused primarily (60%) on livestock (Dirección 
General de Desarrollo Rural [Rural Development Bureau] (DGDR) and the Ministry 
of Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP), 2018c). Climate variability and 
change have a particular impact on small and medium-sized producers (MGAP, 
2017a), as it is reported that family-owned livestock farms tend to be located in areas 
of greater climate vulnerability (de Torres Álvarez et al., 2014). 

1.3 Against this backdrop, the sustainability of smaller-scale production units faces 
challenges across two main dimensions: 

1.4 Dimension 1 – Productive. The productivity of smaller-scale units could be 
enhanced by technical assistance and technology adoption. The results of the 2014 
dairy survey show that the level of productivity is, in general, directly related to farm 
size (Instituto Nacional de la Leche [National Dairy Institute] (INALE), 2017). Based 
on the same survey, Pérez-Quesada and García-Suárez (2016) report that 
productivity can be increased among smaller producers because their level of 
technical efficiency stands at 74%. This indicates that they can use available inputs 
and technologies more efficiently in order to increase production (by 26% on 
average). These authors also indicate that agronomic, veterinary, or accounting 
technical assistance is associated with higher production efficiency. Nonetheless, 
knowledge management difficulties and limited access to extension services are 
barriers that have a particularly marked impact on smaller-scale producers (INIA, 
2016). In 2011, only 46% of farms received technical assistance (Hegedus, 2013), 

                                                
1  See bibliographical references. 
2  Includes forestry and agroindustrial activities. 
3  Estimate based on the methodology of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-8
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-8
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-27


 - 2 - 
 
 
 

while it has been observed that technical assistance coverage increases in tandem 
with farm size (Arboleya, 2018). 

1.5 This production gap may also be narrowed through technology adoption, including 
improved management practices. In the case of cattle ranching, for example, 
producers that have not received technical assistance report average annual beef 
yields of 50-70 kg per hectare, versus 250 kg per hectare in specialized 
establishments (World Bank and the International Center for Tropical Agriculture, 
2015). A recent project demonstrated the potential for increasing beef productivity 
levels from 70 kg per hectare to 100 kg by using existing technologies and 
implementing practices based on the improved the use of available resources 
(Gómez Miller, 2017). In the case of family-owned dairy producers, a project aimed 
at improving production practices—coordinated by INALE in partnership with dairy 
cooperatives—indicates that 70% of beneficiaries either maintained or increased 
production over the 2013-2017 period, even under extreme climatic conditions 
(Arboleya, 2018). 

1.6 Despite the potential for increased productivity, there are significant barriers to the 
adoption of agricultural technologies. In Uruguay, this is influenced by farm size, 
access to information, technical and managerial capacities, costs, risk, and the 
availability of appropriate technologies (Gómez Miller, 2017; Saravia and Gómez, 
2013). Technology adoption is also directly linked to technical assistance and rural 
extension services (Saravia and Gómez, 2013), and technological change requires 
the identification, validation, and dissemination of technologies that are appropriate 
for family agriculture (Comisión Nacional de Fomento Rural [National Rural 
Development Commission], 2009). 

1.7 Social factors. Knowledge and adoption of technologies is influenced by social 
networks, which are an important source of information and learning that strengthen 
producers’ capabilities (Aramburu et al., 2014; Doss, 2006). Rural associations 
provide positive externalities and produce public and semi-public goods, in addition 
to serving as a tool for economic and social inclusion (Bijman et al., 2012). The 
experience in Latin America indicates that membership of such associations among 
rural extension users helps to overcome scale constraints, as it allows them to 
access the services offered by rural organizations (Escobar, 2012). Collective 
processes are therefore important for family agriculture, and support is needed to 
strengthen these organizations (de Torres Álvarez et al., 2014). 

1.8 In Uruguay, rural associations (cooperatives, rural development enterprises, and 
agricultural trade associations) have sought to meet the diverse needs of producers, 
with the existence of around 200 such organizations with the potential for 
implementing rural technical assistance and extension (RTAE) services (Arboleya, 
2018). In family agriculture, collective approaches have proven effective in 
supporting technological changes, reduced price variability, integration into value 
chains, lower transaction costs, and access to goods and services (Programa Fida 
Mercosur Claeh and Centro Cooperativista Uruguayo, 2014), as well as participation 
in programs to support technology adoption (DGDR/MGAP, 2018a). There is 
evidence of the effectiveness of collective strategies for supporting production: 
increased implementation of such strategies is correlated with economic and 
production improvements (66% increase in per capita farm earnings and 39% in 
liters per hectare) (García Ferreira et al., 2011). Collective approaches also help to 



 - 3 - 
 
 
 

ensure that producers continue to implement activities once an intervention has 
been completed (Universidad de la República, 2006). Nonetheless, collective 
activities aimed at facilitating access to technology face difficulties in terms of access 
to capital; minimum scales for achieving economic and organizational viability; 
visualization of the benefits from an activity (particularly where the impact is long 
term); and a scarcity of the skills necessary for collective work (INIA & DGDR, 2016). 
With respect to RTAE, the critical factors for improving these services include the 
training of technical staff, interagency coordination, and the availability of suitable 
technologies (Hegedus, 2013). 

1.9 At the same time, there are gender and age gaps in access to government rural 
development policies, technical assistance, access to land, assets, own revenues, 
independent work, and farm titles (DGDR, 2018). For example, women account 
for just one in four beneficiaries of policies to improve the productivity and income 
of family producers (compared to 44% of potential beneficiaries), while data from 
the 2011 Agricultural Census indicate that women producers receive less technical 
assistance (38% versus 43% for producers) (Mascheroni, 2016). Likewise, the 
advancing age of producers in the sector (MGAP, 2017b) is a barrier to increased 
productivity, as producer age is inversely correlated with the use of new 
technologies (INIA, 2016). 

1.10 Dimension 2 – Environmental. Climate change magnifies the aforementioned 
problems, as the country is vulnerable to extreme events. For example, preliminary 
estimates by the MGAP indicate that the immediate impact of the 2017-2018 drought 
caused agricultural sector losses equivalent to US$560 million. This amount rises 
by more than US$600 million if delayed impacts are taken into account, relating to a 
decline in the number of calves born and the consequent impact on future exports. 
The sector is also the main source of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (74% of the 
total in 2012). Within this, beef production accounts for more than 66% of emissions 
(Eastern Republic of Uruguay, 2017). This underscores the importance of 
implementing adaptation and mitigation measures. In fact, Uruguay’s production 
strategy is to rely on technological innovation and inclusion in value chains to double 
output by 2050 in a sustainable and inclusive manner, with greater climate resilience 
and lower rates of emissions (MGAP, 2017b). In addition, the objectives of the First 
Nationally Determined Contribution include reducing the rate of emissions from food 
production, while also indicating the priority given to adaptation in the agricultural 
sector (Eastern Republic of Uruguay, 2017). 

1.11 To achieve these proposals, climate-smart agricultural technologies warrant 
particular consideration, as these either maintain or enhance productivity while 
reducing emissions and/or contributing to climate resilience (World Bank and the 
International Center for Tropical Agriculture, 2015). Accordingly, the 2010 
“Agrointelligent Uruguay” policy has promoted the incorporation of climate-smart 
measures to enhance productivity in an environmentally sustainable manner 
(Ministry of Housing, Land Management, and the Environment, 2016). For example, 
implementation of the policy has facilitated a reduction in emissions rates for beef 
production through the use of feed management technologies and animal husbandry 
methods that help to boost productivity (Eastern Republic of Uruguay, 2017). In 
family-based livestock farming, specifically, estimates indicate that climate-smart 
practices (focused on adjustments in the number of animals per hectare, the use of 
rotational grazing systems, and herd optimization) can increase productivity by 25% 



 - 4 - 
 
 
 

and reduce emission rates by 30%, while simultaneously improving drought 
resilience (Ministry of Housing, Land Management, and the Environment, 2017). 
This reduction in GHG emissions through the implementation of climate-smart 
technologies tends to increase over time, reaching up to 40% in the third year in 
some cases (INIA, 2018). 

1.12 Previous experience. The Food and Agriculture Organization (2009) identifies the 
central elements of agricultural policy that agricultural institutions should focus their 
efforts on. These include government policies to protect and support weaker 
economic sectors; strengthening of the institutional framework for agriculture; and 
the provision of technology transfer and rural extension services. 

1.13 In this sphere, with respect to the implementation of differentiated policies for family 
agriculture in Uruguay, the following issues have been identified as important: 
(i) ensuring strong interagency coordination; (ii) creating synergies with other policy 
instruments (e.g., the promotion of collective endeavors and support for investments 
to enhance resilience); (iii) establishing a technical assistance network consisting of 
professionals committed to the programs and involved in them; (iv) working with 
producers that are nonbeneficiaries of public programs, as well as with those already 
served to incorporate more complex technologies or processes; and (v) leveraging 
the potential of rural organizations to facilitate the promotion and implementation of 
activities (Arboleya, 2018). The importance of addressing these factors is consistent 
with the findings of the Rural Productive Development Program (RPDP) (loan 
2595/OC-UR), whose impact evaluation showed a significant effect on beneficiaries’ 
productivity, with an increase of at least 10% in milk and beef yields per hectare 
(Aguirre et al., 2018). This study also reports that the impact is generally greater 
among those benefiting from MGAP support for the first time, and it indicates that 
the program has helped to strengthen beneficiary organizations, with an 
improvement in their collective processes. Nonetheless, data on program 
participation (DGDR/MGAP, 2018a) show that there is potential for improving the 
inclusion of women and young people as beneficiaries (44% of potential 
beneficiaries are women, yet only 25% benefited, while in the case of young people4 
4% of the total benefited, compared to a potential of 12%) (Beneficiaries of RPDP 
requests for proposals). 

1.14 An analysis carried out for Latin America (Food and Agriculture Organization and 
the IDB, 2016) indicates the need for government funding to ensure that the most 
vulnerable producers are able to access RTAE. It also reports that for these services 
to be effective, they should have a territorial approach, involve the participation of 
public and private stakeholders, provide continuous training for their human 
resources, and be linked to the research. Cumulative experience points to the 
following good practices: emphasizing the inclusion of smaller-scale producers that 
face greater hurdles to increased productivity; the participation of producers in 
determining their needs and prioritizing their problems; the provision of information 
and alternatives based on local agroecological and socioeconomic conditions; the 
simultaneous provision of public and private services at the regional level; and the 
incorporation of information and communication technologies (ICTs) to help reach 
producers and provide information and services to them (Escobar, 2012). ICTs can 
help foster the adoption of technologies to optimize production and increase farmer 

                                                
4  Individuals 15 to 29 years of age, according to the National Youth Institute. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-48
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-32
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-33
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-33


 - 5 - 
 
 
 

incomes (Jack & Tobias, 2017). Evidence from small-scale farmers in India indicates 
that cellphone-based technical assistance helped to increase yields (28% for cumin 
and 9% for cotton), with an estimated private return of US$10 for each dollar 
invested in the service (Cole & Fernando, 2016). 

1.15 Recent Bank experience. The RPDP, which was approved in 2011 with a final 
disbursement date of 31 December 2018, is executed by the MGAP through its Rural 
Development Bureau (DGDR). Its objective is to help improve the incomes of small- 
and medium-scale farmers, by increasing their productivity through the adoption of 
new technologies. To this end, the program focused on providing financing for: 
(i) production support for technology transfer; (ii) the promotion of research into 
adaptive technologies; and (iii) institutional strengthening of the DGDR. The 
operation’s intervention mechanism was based on requests for proposals for group 
management plans, and this serves as the foundation for this program. Its 
outcomes—some of which were measured in the aforementioned impact evaluation 
(paragraph 1.13)—include the following: (i) increases in average agricultural and 
livestock yields; (ii) the incorporation of new technologies validated under family 
agriculture condition; (iii) increases in the number of family producers belonging to 
rural organizations; and (iv) strategic territorial plans approved. 

1.16 Lessons learned. Lessons learned during execution of the RPDP, in particular, 
have been taken into account in the proposed program, together with experiences 
from similar operations (lons 1463/OC-UR, 2443/OC-DR, 1800/OC-PR, 2055/BL-NI, 
and 2223/BL-BO) and the Office of Evaluation and Oversight’s (OVE) Review of the 
Bank’s Support to Agriculture, 2002-2014. These lessons and way in which they 
have been incorporated into the program are presented in Table 1. 

 
Table 1. Lessons learned and their incorporation into program design 

Lessons learned Incorporation into program design 

In the RPDP5 

Coverage  

- Include incentives aimed at incorporating 
RPDP non-beneficiary producers. 

- The lack of information is an obstacle to 
producers’ participation in DGDR programs. 

- Lower proportion of women and young people 
among beneficiaries.  

- Creation and/or strengthening of synergies 
with rural organizations or public 
institutions. 

- Strengthening of program dissemination. 

- Requests for proposals targeting 
exclusively women and young people.  

Technical assistance  

- Assistance provided by individual technicians 
has posed limitations for: (i) the 
comprehensive, multidisciplinary 
consideration of technological options; 
(ii) reaching producers in remote or isolated 
areas; and (iii) high turnover.  

- Introduction of comprehensive technical 
assistance arrangements provided by 
multidisciplinary teams linked to rural 
organizations and/or public institutions. 

                                                
5  See Aguirre et al. (2018), DGDR/MGAP (2018) (Encuesta a Productores/as Familiares No Beneficiarios 

de Convocatorias de la DGDR), DGDR/MGAP (2018a) and Mendoza (2018) (Evaluación del PDPR). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-34
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-34
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-35


 - 6 - 
 
 
 

Lessons learned Incorporation into program design 

Monitoring and evaluation  

- Monitoring and evaluation require the 
availability and implementation of instruments 
for gathering and analyzing information. 

- The detailed prior design of the impact 
evaluation is essential for the robust analysis 
of program effectiveness. 

- A good practice yet to be implemented 
involves the categorization of technologies 
financed by the program, with a view to 
facilitating the monitoring and evaluation of 
expected outcomes and impacts.  

- Incorporation of instruments that facilitate 
dynamic monitoring and allow evaluation of 
the effectiveness of execution processes.  

- Design of the impact evaluation, and the 
identification and planning of the 
instruments to be used for information 
gathering.  

- Inclusion of typologies of technologies and 
technology packages.  

In similar operations 

Provision of technical assistance and 
technology linkage 

 

- The limited scale, high number, and scattered 
nature of smaller-scale producers lead to high 
costs in providing technical assistance and 
technology adoption on an individual basis. In 
addition, the development and/or adaptation 
of technologies for these producers is limited 
by a disconnect with researchers.  

- Promotion of the creation of groups of 
producers and linkages with rural 
organizations and public institutions to 
provide technical assistance more 
efficiently. 

- Activities that foster interaction between 
producers and technology 
researchers/developers. 

Sustainability of technology adoption  

- Projects frequently provide one-off 
improvements without altering the structural 
barriers experienced by beneficiaries; this 
reduces the sustainability of benefits over 
time. 

- Long-term sustainability is sought through 
the work with rural organizations, 
complementary multidisciplinary technical 
assistance offered by the private and public 
sectors, and technologies designed and 
adapted for the target population.  

 

1.17 Intervention strategy. The proposed program is based on the evidence presented 
above, and it seeks to continue improving the productive and environmental 
sustainability of small-scale agricultural units. To this end, it focuses on technology 
adoption, with particular attention devoted to market failures casued by: information 
asymmetries (paragraphs 1.4 and 1.6), human capital (paragraphs 1.7 and 1.9), and 
coordination (paragraphs 1.10 and 1.11). Using the RPDP as a foundation, the 
lessons learned and good practices identified through the experiences of the MGAP, 
the Bank, and the region were incorporated into the program’s design in order to 
amplify its reach and impact (paragraphs 1.10 to 1.14). These elements are 
summarized in Table 2. 

 



 - 7 - 
 
 
 

Table 2. Summary of key elements of program design 

Targeting 

- Emphasis on new beneficiaries. 

- Previous producers may benefit, but with more complex technologies. 

- Producers determine their needs and priorities, but solutions focus on climate-smart technologies 
(inputs and processes, including ICTs). 

- Special consideration for women and young people. 

Structure 

- Strengthening of interagency coordination and synergies. 

- A territorial approach with the participation of rural organizations and key institutions that 
contribute to promotion and implementation of the program. 

- Comprehensive technical assistance provided by multidisciplinary teams that are committed to 
the program and involved in it. 

- Public and private sector participation. 

 

1.18 Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and is expected to contribute to the 
Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6) through the 
development challenge of productivity and innovation, as it fosters increased 
productivity through the adoption of new technologies. It also contributes to the 
indicator of government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological 
and managerial tools to improve public service delivery. It is also aligned with the 
crosscutting themes of: (i) gender equity, with a special focus on women’s 
participation, thus contributing to the indicator of women beneficiaries of economic 
empowerment initiatives; and (ii) climate change and environmental sustainability, 
as it includes climate-smart technologies that contribute to resilient, low-carbon, 
sustainable development and thus supports farmers through access to improved 
agricultural services and investments (see Table 3 for specific indicators). It also 
contributes to the Sector Framework Documents on Agriculture and Natural 
Resources Management (document GN-2709-5), Food Security (document 
GN-2825-8); Climate Change (document GN-2835-5); and Innovation, Science, and 
Technology (document GN-2791-8). This is a result of its focus on the following 
dimensions of success, respectively: high levels of agricultural productivity and the 
management of climate impacts in the sector; reducing the vulnerability of food 
systems to climate change and natural disasters; progress in the countries on 
including climate considerations in the sectors; and investment in innovation, 
science, and technology. In addition, it supports the results matrix for the IDB 
Country Strategy with Uruguay 2016-2020 (document GN-2836), as it is linked to 
the strategic pillar of productivity and competitiveness through its support for 
innovation. It is also included in the Update of Annex III of the 2018 Operational 
Program Report for Uruguay (document GN-2915-2). 

1.19 It is estimated that 100% of the operation’s funds will be invested in climate change 
adaptation and mitigation activities, based on the multilateral development banks’ 
joint methodology for estimating climate finance (Climate Change). These funds 
contribute to the IDB Group’s target of increasing financing for climate-change 
related projects to 30% of all approved operations by the end of 2020. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost 

1.20 Objective. To help improve the sustainability of small and medium-sized family-
owned agricultural production units. The specific objectives are to increase the 

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/8505
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/8505
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-36


 - 8 - 
 
 
 

adoption of climate-smart technologies and to build capacities for technology 
generation and transfer, technical assistance, and rural extension. 

1.21 Climate-smart technologies help to strengthen climate resilience and/or reduce 
GHG emissions while also improving performance in terms of yield or return. Based 
on this criterion, priority will be given to those aligned with the actions identified in 
the First Nationally Determined Contribution. 

1.22 Component I. Improved productivity through technology adoption and 
alliance-building (IDB: US$17.94 million; local: US$380,000). This component 
focuses on financing the implementation of plans to improve productivity while 
taking climate considerations into account. It will provide direct support to 
producers who, as a group and in response to open and competitive requests for 
proposals organized by the MGAP, submit management plans that propose the 
use of climate-smart technologies to address their challenges. Groups of at least 
three producers (family, small, and medium-sized) will be eligible, the majority 
being family producers and not necessarily members of rural organizations. 
Support for the implementation of these plans will comprise financing for: 
(i) investments in technology, providing up to 50% of the total cost of materials, 
inputs, and specialized technical assistance for technology adoption (with a 
maximum value of US$8,000 per producer); and (ii) comprehensive technical 
assistance. The comprehensive technical assistance will consist of support and 
training in the areas of production, marketing/value added, and administration, 
provided by teams set up in either rural organizations or public institutions. 

1.23 Support will be differentiated, emphasizing the participation of beneficiaries who 
have not previously received support from the DGDR. In the case of beneficiaries 
who have already received DGDR assistance, the management plans will need to 
include more advanced technologies (as defined in the Technology evaluation). In 
no case will support be provided for practices that have already received 
cofinancing. New beneficiaries will also have the option of receiving greater 
comprehensive technical assistance as determined by the management plan and 
the technology selected (this support will be determined, in due time, in the 
documentation for the request for proposals). To encourage greater participation by 
women and young people, requests for proposals will be issued exclsuively for these 
groups, offering them up to 80% financing for technology adoption and alliance-
building processes. 

1.24 Component II. Capacity-building in technology generation and transfer, 
technical assistance, and rural extension (IDB: US$5.2 million; local: 
US$1.97 million). This componenent involves financing for activities aimed at 
generating and transferring technologies, as well as strengthening the delivery of 
rural technical assistance and extension (RTAE). To this end, strategic partnerships 
will be established with key rural organizations and/or nonstate public institutes 
(IPNEs) that have a local presence and work directly with producers. The component 
encompasses the following subcomponents: 

a. Generation and adaptation of climate-smart technology for family 
agriculture. This seeks to spark the development of new technologies or 
adjustments to existing ones through farm-based research and 
experimentation, based on strategic partnerships between producers’ 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-8
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-37


 - 9 - 
 
 
 

associations and public and/or private research entities. This will allow newly 
developed or adapted technologies to meet to the needs of producers. 

b. Strengthening of private sector RTAE capacities. This focuses on 
strengthening the ability of rural organizations to provide services to producers. 
It includes the creation of multidisciplinary teams to provide comprehensive 
technical assistance, training, as well as programs to disseminate and build 
awareness of the requests for proposals. 

c. Strengthening of public sector RTAE capacities. This is focused on 
improving capacities and coordination between the MGAP and IPNEs to 
support the delivery of RTAE to producers. 

d. Promotion and adoption of ICTs in family agriculture. This encompasses 
support for the use, dissemination, and development of ICTs for family 
agriculture through strategic partnerships with key entities. 

1.25 Monitoring and administrative costs (IDB: US$1.09 million; local: 
US$540,000). This includes the costs of administration, monitoring, audit, 
determination of baselines and final targets, and the midterm and final evaluations. 

C. Key results indicators 

1.26 A total of 3,100 producers are expected to benefit directly from the program, of 
which 50% have not previously benefited from DGDR support. Of this total number 
of beneficiaries, 32% are expected to be women (see Gender annex), with young 
people accounting for 11%. The expected impacts are increased productivity and 
reduced GHG emissions. The following intermediate outcomes are expected: 
(i) increased adoption and availability of climate-smart technologies; (ii) increased 
participation of new beneficiaries, women, and young people; and (iii) greater use 
of agricultural services, including technical assistance. Key indicators are 
presented in Table 3. 

 

Table 3. Main indicators in the results matrix 

Impact indicators 
Timing of 

measurement 
Rationale for selection 

Increase in partial land productivity (kg of 
meat/hectare, liters of milk/hectare) 

Impact 
evaluation 

Measures the contribution to the 
production dimension of sustainability 

Reduction in emissions per unit of output 
(kgs CO2 equivalent/kg of meat) 

Years 1 and 6 Measures the contribution to the 
environmental dimension of 
sustainability 

Increase in the rate of adoption of 
climate-smart technologies by 
beneficiaries  

Years 1 and 6 These measure the use of climate-
smart technologies, a proxy that 
indicates that producers have improved 
their climate resilience and reduced 
emissions  

Increase in the percentage of 
beneficiary producers that manage their 
lands with a safe carrying capacity 

Years 1 and 6 

Increase in the percentage of beneficiary 
family producers that continue to receive 
comprehensive technical assistance once 
the plan has been completed  

Years 1 and 6 Indicator of the intervention’s 
sustainability 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-52


 - 10 - 
 
 
 

Impact indicators 
Timing of 

measurement 
Rationale for selection 

Increase in the percentage of users of 
services provided by rural organizations.  

Years 1 and 6 The supply of services provided by rural 
organizations is a proxy that indicates 
whether producers are better able to 
buy inputs, sell their products, and/or 
purchase services on a group basis, 
thus favoring productivity levels 

Increase in new technologies validated 
for family production 

Years 1 and 6 Measures the availability of new 
technologies for family agriculture 

Increase in the rate of adoption of ICTs 
by family production units  

Years 1 and 6 Measures the effectiveness of training 
and other efforts to promote the use of 
ICTs by family producers 

Increase in the percentage of new 
beneficiaries 

Years 1 and 6 Indicates whether targeting and 
promotion efforts were effective in 
encouraging the participation of new 

beneficiaries 

Increase in the percentage of women 
beneficiaries  

Years 1 and 6 Indicates whether targeting and 
promotion efforts were effective in 
encouraging women’s participation 

Increase in the percentage of young 
beneficiaries  

Years 1 and 6 Indicates whether targeting and 
promotion efforts were effective in 
encouraging youth participation  

 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 Program cost and financing. Total program cost is US$27.12 million, of which 
US$24.23 million (89%) will be financed through a specific investment loan from the 
Bank’s Ordinary Capital. Table 4 presents the costs broken down by component. 

 

Table 4. Program cost and financing (US$ million) 

Investment component IDB 
Local 

counterpart 
Total % 

I.  Improved productivity through technology 
adoption and alliance-building 

17.94 0.38 18.32 68 

i. Individual plans 17.09 0.38 17.47 64 

ii. Plans, women and young people  0.85 0.00 0.85 3 

II. Capacity-building in technology generation 
and transfer, technical assistance, and 
rural extension 

5.20 1.97 7.17 26 

i. Generation and adaptation pf climate-
smart technologies 

0.42 0.13 0.55 2 

ii. Strengthening of private RTAE 4.26 0.96 5.22 19 

iii. Strengthening of public RTAE 0.19 0.79 0.98 4 

iv. Promotion and use of ICTs 0.33 0.09 0.42 2 

Administration and monitoring 1.09 0.54 1.63 6 

Total (US$) 24.23 2.89 27.12 100 

% 89.00 11.00 100.00  

 



 - 11 - 
 
 
 

2.2 The disbursement period will be six years, based on the expected annual budgetary 
space in the national budget, and also to allow the impacts in the producers’ 
management plans to materialize. See Table 5 for disbursement details. 

 
Table 5. Disbursement schedule (US$ million) 

Year 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Total 

Amount 4.0 5.9 4.9 4.4 3.5 1.5 24.2 

% 16.5 24.4 20.2 18.2 14.5 6.2 100 

 

2.3 Economic viability. Based on the experience and evaluation of the RPDP, the level 
of support for technology implementation is maintained at up to 50% of total costs, 
with a maximum of US$8,000 per producer. Analyses of the ex ante economic 
evaluation show that subsidies of 50% are sufficient to ensure that investments yield 
a return over that time period (Mendoza, 2018). In camparative terms, a similar 
World Bank program currently under way in Uruguay provides maximum support of 
80% of an investment of up to US$16,000 per producer. However, financing is 
limited to activities with substantial positive environmental externalities (reductions 
in pollution in tributaries and improvements in the efficiency of water usage). 

2.4 The program’s economic viability is based on the cost-benefit analyses carried out 
using a model of the support for climate-smart technology adoption by producers. 
Economic benefits were estimated by calculating the value of increased productivity 
in the targeted farms. Support to producers will be concentrated mainly in the 
segments of livestock farming for beef and wool (65%) and dairy (16%), which will 
be offered incentives for a wide variety of climate-smart technologies. For the 
program as a whole (including both administration, supervision, and monitoring 
costs and investments to strengthen the rural organizations supporting adoption by 
the producers), an internal rate of return of 15.4% was obtained, with a net present 
value of US$5.0 million (based on a 10-year time horizon and a discount rate of 
12%). In light of these results, the benefit/cost ratio is 1.11 for each unit invested. 
The results were subject to a sensitivity analysis indicating that even under more 
conservative assumptions (relating to the technology adoption process, higher 
costs, limitations in access to technical assistance once the intervention has been 
completed), program returns remain above 12%. The program also offers parallel 
benefits in terms of the reduction in GHG emissions, which are accounted for 
separately (Program economic evaluation). 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.5 This program has been classified as Category B operation in accordance with the 
Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (Operational Policy OP-703), as its 
potential direct and indirect impacts are reversible and temporary, of low magnitude, 
and localized in nature. Well-known measures are readily available to mitigate and 
compensate for them, and the implementation thereof is viable. It has also been 
determined that the level of natural disaster risk is low to moderate, taking into 
account the focus on climate-smart technologies. At the same time, highly positive 
effects are expected from the delivery of agricultural extension services, training, 
and climate-smart technology packages that will impact producers and the different 
beneficiaries throughout the entire production chain, as well as consumers across 
the country. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-38


 - 12 - 
 
 
 

2.6 An environmentaland social analysis was prepared for the program, and its 
corresponding environmental and social management plan (ESMP) sets out 
procedures, responsibilities, guidelines, and criteria for identifying, evaluating, 
avoiding, mitigating, and monitoring the environmental and social impacts of the 
specific actions financed. A significant consultation process was implemented during 
preparation of the operation, and there is no evidence of any environmental or social 
liabilities or compliance failures that could affect the future performance of this new 
initiative. 

2.7 The ESMP will be included as an annex to the program Operating Regulations, and 
both documents will establish environmental and social requirements to ensure that 
the project is executed in compliance with the Bank’s safeguards and the conditions 
included in Annex B of the environmental and social management report (ESMR). 

2.8 Environmental and social sustainability risks. Adverse climate conditions 
represent a medium risk to the program. In order to mitigate this, the program will 
focus on climate-smart technologies; requests for proposals that support the 
development and adaptation of climate-smart technologies; the development of 
ICTs that contribute to adaptation to climate change and variability; and the inclusion 
of climate risk management in training for associations, technical staff, and 
producers. 

C. Fiduciary risks 

2.9 Based on the MGAP’s prior experience in executing similar operations, no specific 
weaknesses have been identified in its institutional capacity. Neither the fiduciary 
activities included in the Procurement Plan nor the financial management activities 
are regarded as complex, thus confirming—together with the executing agency’s 
track record of performance and compliance—the low level of risk for this project 
(see Annex III). 

D. Other project risks 

2.10 Development risks. There is a medium level of risk associated with farm 
management plans lacking a comprehensive approach and difficulties in attracting 
new beneficiaries. To mitigate the former, the following activities are planned: 
training for each request for proposals, with specific training regarding the 
comprehensive approach; periodic monitoring and territorial coordination meetings; 
and preparation of a dissemination plan. In the case of the second risk, in addition 
to a dissemination plan, adjustments are planned to the requirements in the requests 
for proposals, as well as the signing of agreements with other public institutions. 

2.11 Macroeconomic risk. The new regional context poses a medium level of 
macroeconomic risk over the next few years for growth in Uruguay, trends in the 
dollar, and the resulting impact on inflation. Nonetheless, country risk remains low 
and stable (172 basis points in September 2018). At the same time, the increase in 
the dollar exchange rate may favor the competitiveness of the export-oriented 
agricultural sector. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-621703441-9
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-41


 - 13 - 
 
 
 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of execution arrangements 

3.1 The borrower will be responsible for program execution, through the Ministry of 
Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP). The MGAP, in turn, will act through 
the Rural Development Bureau (DGDR) with support from the Project Management 
Unit (PMU). The DGDR will be responsible for technical execution and the direction 
of the program, while the PMU will be responsible for fiduciary and administrative 
matters (see Organizational chart). The guidelines and procedures for program 
execution are set out in the program Operating Regulations. As a special 
contractual condition precedent to the first loan disbursement, evidence will 
be provided to the Bank’s satisfaction that that the program Operating 
Regulations (including the ESMP) have entered into force, in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed with the Bank. The aim of this is to establish the 
guidelines and procedures to be followed for successful program execution. 

3.2 Special contractual conditions for execution. Standard Framework Agreements 
are expected to be signed with the National Agricultural Research Institute (INIA) 
and other Nonstate Public Institutes (IPNEs) that are considered key to the execution 
of certain program activities. For the use of resources allocated to subcomponents 
(i), (iii), and (iv) of Component II, the signing and entry into force of Standard 
Framework Agreements between the MGAP (through the DGDR) and the INIA and 
IPNEs will be a special contractual condition for execution. The signing of these 
agreements is essential for implementation of the activities financed under each of 
the subcomponents. 

3.3 Execution arrangements are based on those used during implementation of the 
RPDP, with adjustments aimed at incorporating lessons learned. Details of the 
arrangements are provided in the draft program Operating Regulations, and Table 6 
provides a summary of their key features. 

 

Table 6. Key implementation features 

Technologies financed. These will be determined based on the producers’ needs, taking into 
account local conditions, technical viability, and contribution to climate change mitigation and/or 
adaptation. Multidisciplinary technical teams—the formation of which is supported under 
Component II—will prepare the management plans. 

Management plans. A management plan is considered implemented once at least 60% of the 
activities included in the approved plan have been fulfilled and an evaluation of technology adoption 
has been completed. 

Rural organizations. As part of execution, rural organizations interested in becoming Regional 
Rural Development Agents (ATDRs) will be convened and selected. The ATDRs are rural 
organizations authorized by the DGDR to provide support for the following activities: (i) raising 
awareness among producers; (ii) training for technical staff and producers; (iii) dissemination of the 
requests for proposals; (iv) provision of comprehensive technical assistance; (v) preparation of 
management plans; and (vi) monitoring of the implementation of approved plans. The program will 
finance institutional strengthening of the ATDRs, training of their human resources, and the services 
of promotion, extension, and technical assistance that they provide. 

Program dissemination. The requests for proposals will be widely publicized, using communication 
and awareness-building strategies by the DGDR and the ATDRs. 

 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-64
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-39


 - 14 - 
 
 
 

3.4 Procurement of goods, works, and consulting and nonconsulting services. 
Procurement financed in whole or in part with Bank resources will be conducted in 
accordance with the Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by 
the IDB (document GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and Contracting of 
Consultants Financed by the IDB (document GN-2350-9). The Procurement Plan 
contains details of the procurement processes that will be implemented during 
execution, as well as the procedures used by the Bank for their review. 

3.5 Direct contracting. Direct contracts totaling US$6,048,153 are envisaged, of which 
US$4,025,963 will be financed with Bank resources and the rest with local 
counterpart funds. The Bank-financed amount will be used to renew the contracts of 
consultants belonging to the RPDP team (US$3,885,736) and for fuel purchases 
(US$140,227). 

3.6 Single-source selection of consultants is permitted under sections 3.10(a) and 3.11 
of the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB 
(document GN-2350-9), which establish the principle of continuity of service where 
such continuity is more efficient than a new competition. In this case: (i) initial 
selection of the consultants was done on a competitive basis in 2012 and received 
the Bank’s prior no objection; (ii) the consultants whose contracts are to be renewed 
are subject to an annual performance evaluation; and (iii) in the event of 
unsatisfactory results, a consultant’s contract will not be renewed and alternative 
human resources will be sought through a competitive process. With regard to the 
direct purchase of fuel from the state-run Administración Nacional de Combustibles, 
Alcohol y Pórtland [National Fuel, Alcohol, and Cement Administration] (ANCAP), 
this is based, first, on the requirements of section 3.6(c) of the Policies for the 
Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the IDB (document GN-2349-9), 
which allow direct contracting in cases where a product may only be obtained from 
one source, and, second, on section 33.C.1 of the Texto Ordenado de Contabilidad 
y Administración Financiera [Consolidated Text on Accounting and Financial 
Administration] (TOCAF), which indicates that government bodies or departments 
may engage in direct contracting with each other. 

3.7 The fiduciary agreements and requirements (Annex III) establish the framework for 
financial management and planning, as well as the supervision and execution of 
procurement applicable to program execution. 

3.8 Disbursements. The primary disbursement modality will be advances of funds 
based on actual liquidity needs. These advances will preferably be made every six 
months, once reporting has been filed for at least 70% of the amount advanced. As 
documentary support, the accounting forms will need to be presented along with the 
financial planning spreadsheet. Documentation will be subject to ex post review. 

3.9 Audit. For the duration of program execution, the PMU will submit the program’s 
audited financial statements on an annual basis in accordance with Bank 
requirements. As agreed with the executing agency, audits will be performed by the 
Tribunal de Cuentas de la República [National Audit Office] (TCR). The audited 
annual financial statements will be submitted within 120 days after the end of each 
fiscal year or, in the case of the final statements, within 120 days following the date 
of final disbursement. 



 - 15 - 
 
 
 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.10 Throughout program execution, the DGDR, in coordination with the PMU, will 
prepare semiannual progress reports and submit them to the Bank within 60 days 
after the end of each six-month period. These reports will indicate the level of 
physical and financial progress toward the indicators and activities included in the 
results matrix, the annual work plan, and the procurement plan, analyzing any 
problems encountered and describing the corrective measures adopted to resolve 
them. The monitoring reports for the second half of each year will include the annual 
work plan for the following year, the updated procurement plan, the status and 
maintenance plan for the executed works, as well as the status of compliance with 
the environmental and social requirements established for the program in the ESMP. 

3.11 The DGDR, in coordination with the PMU, will also submit two evaluation reports: 
(i) midterm, within 90 days after the date on which 50% of resources have been 
committed, or after 50% of the execution period has elapsed, whichever occurs first; 
and (ii) final, within 90 days after the date on which 95% of resources have been 
disbursed. These reports, which will be prepared independently using loan 
resources, will include (i) financial execution by subcomponent and source of 
financing; (ii) progress toward attainment of the outputs, outcomes, and impacts 
contained in the results matrix; (iii) fulfillment of the ESMP; and (iv) a summary of 
the financial accounts, procurement, disbursements, and internal control. 

3.12 The monitoring and evaluation plan agreed with the MGAP and considered in the 
budget includes detailed information on indicators and means of verification; the 
critical path for activities and outputs; monitoring instruments; responsible parties; 
and the methodology and budget for implementation of the plan. 

C. Impact evaluation 

3.13 A quasi-experimental impact evaluation will be conducted that makes use of 
producers’ voluntary registration for the requests for proposals, implementing a 
random promotion to increase the participation rate in a randomly selected treatment 
group. This promotion will be used as an instrumental variable for evaluating the 
program’s impact on beneficiary productivity. A pilot test will be carried out at the 
end of 2018 with a view to selecting an effective promotion tool. Once this tool has 
been fine-tuned, the evaluation will be conducted for the meat and dairy segments 
at a minimum, given that these are representative of the majority of program 
beneficiaries. The source of information for this analysis will consist of surveys 
administered before and after the intervention (in 2019 and 2024), with a total 
sample of approximately 1,000 producers. 



Annex I - UR-L1147 

Page 1 of 1

Summary

1. IDB Development Objectives

Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Development Objectives

Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2836

Country Program Results Matrix GN-2915-2

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to 

country strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Evaluable

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution

3.1 Program Diagnosis

3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions

3.3 Results Matrix Quality

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis

4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA

4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs

4.3 Reasonable Assumptions

4.4 Sensitivity Analysis

4.5 Consistency with results matrix

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 

5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms

5.2 Evaluation Plan

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries 

and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public 

sector entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

1.0

9.1

3.0

3.6

2.5

9.0

3.0

3.0

Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting and 

Reporting, External Control.

Procurement: Information System.

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

2.0

9.3

2.5

6.8

0.0

Yes

Boosting productivity and competitiveness by promoting 

innovation

The intervention is included in the 2018 Operational 

Program.

The objective of the Program is to contribute to improving the sustainability of family, small and medium-sized agricultural production units. The specific objectives are the 
increase in the adoption of climate-smart technologies (CS), and the strengthening of capacities in the generation and transfer of technologies, technical assistance and rural 
extension. CS technologies are those that contribute to increasing climate resilience and/or reducing greenhouse gas emissions while improving performance in terms of 
production or profitability. The diagnosis provided is solid and substantiated in evidence, evaluation and lessons learned from the first Rural Productive Development Program.

The results matrix exhibits a clear vertical logic and is anchored in the two main dimensions that the program addresses to achieve the sustainability of production units of 
smaller scale: productive and environmental. The indicators of impact, result and product in general are SMART, with baselines and defined targets and with the means to verify 
compliance.

The economic analysis is based on the estimation of the benefits of increased productivity in the farms that benefit from the Program. The assumptions are reasonable and are 
based on the findings of previous evaluations, including of the first program. The results of the sensitivity analysis indicate that even under more conservative assumptions 
(linked to the rate of adoption of technologies, higher costs, limitations in access to technical assistance after the end of the intervention), the return of the program remains at 
levels above 12%

The Monitoring Plan complies with the requirements of the DEM. The evaluation proposal is to carry out a quasi-experimental impact assessment that takes advantage of the 
voluntary registration of producers to the calls made by the Program, implementing a random promotion to increase the participation rate in a group of randomly selected 
producers. This promotion will be used as an instrumental variable to evaluate the impact of the program on the productivity of the beneficiaries.

Medium

Yes

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Yes

-Productivity and Innovation

-Gender Equality and Diversity

-Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability

I. Corporate and Country Priorities

-Beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable use of natural capital (#)*

-Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives (#)*

-Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological and

managerial tools to improve public service delivery (#)*

-Farmers with improved access to agricultural services and investments  (#)*

-Beneficiaries of IDBG projects that contribute to at least one key dimension of food

security  (#)*



Annex II 
Page 1 of 8 

RESULTS MATRIX 

Project Objective: To help improve the sustainability of small and medium-sized family-owned agricultural production units. 

EXPECTED IMPACT 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline 

Baseline 
year 

Final target 
Means of 

verification 
Comments 

IMPACT 1 Improved sustainability of agricultural production by small and medium-sized family producers in Uruguay 

Partial productivity 
increased 

meat, kg/ha; 
milk, l/ha 

Meat: 
88 kg/ha 

Milk: 
3.632 l/ha 

2018 

Meat: 
96 kg/ha 

Milk: 
3.995 l/ha 

Impact 
evaluation 

Production plans that have lasted at least 36 months are 
considered to be beneficiaries. 

Current values are based on the RPDP I evaluation (conducted 
in 2018) and will be updated once the baseline from the impact 
evaluation is available (expected in 2019). 

A 10% increase in productivity is expected based on the results 
of the RPDP I evaluation. 

Beef, mutton, lamb and wool and milk segmented. 

Meat equivalent = beef + mutton and lamb + wool. 

Emissions per unit of 
output reduced 

Kg CO2-
eq/kg 

18.6 2018 11.1 

Initial survey: 
2019 

Final survey: 
2024 

INIA methodology (See annex to the Monitoring and 
Evaluation Plan). Values will be updated once the baseline 
from the impact evaluation is available. 



Annex II 
Page 2 of 8 
 
 

EXPECTED OUTCOMES 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline  

Baseline 
year 

Final 
target 

Means of 
verification 

Comments 

OUTCOME 1: Climate-smart improvements in agricultural production units  

Increased rate of climate-
smart technology adoption 
by beneficiaries* 

%  8.4 2017 64 Impact evaluation 

Those participating for at least 36 months are considered to be 
beneficiaries. 

Provisional baseline: Livestock Survey 2016/2017; the adoption 
rate is based on the question on innovation, item 8: 

“Management of the production process:“ ”Have you adopted 
(for the first time) livestock management practices aimed at 

introducing changes or improvements in the establishment?” 
This was restricted to producers of less than 150 Livestock Units 
(the average for the two lowest strata). Value will be updated 
once the baseline from the impact evaluation is available 
(expected in 2019). 

The target is based on the implementation of RPDP II plans. 

Increased percentage of 
producers who manage 
their lands with a safe 
carrying capacity 

% 28.5 2018 37.05 Impact evaluation 

Definition of safe carrying capacity (INIA/IPA) - see annex to the 
Monitoring and Evaluation Plan. Natural land systems are 
considered to exist where improved pastures are no more than 
5% of the total area. 

The current baseline value represents the probability of 
exceeding carrying capacity based on data from the Livestock 
Survey for producers using natural lands. 

Increase of 30% over the baseline. 

The baseline value will be updated once the baseline from the 
impact evaluation is available. 

 

  



Annex II 
Page 3 of 8 

 
 

Indicators 
Unit of 

Measure 
Baseline 

Baseline 
year 

Final 
target 

Means of 

verification 
Comments 

OUTCOME 2: Inclusion of new beneficiaries in MGAP (DGDR) interventions  

Increased percentage of new 
beneficiaries 

%  30 2017 50 Monitoring system 

New beneficiaries, in this context, are producers that have 
never participated in a DGDR program (including the first 
phase of the RPDP). 

The indicator shows the outcome of targeting actions on 
groups that do not typically have access to the incentives due 
to communication limitations. 

OUTCOME 3: Increase in the ongoing use of technical assistance from the RTAE system by family producers 

Increased number of 
beneficiary producers that 
continue to receive 
comprehensive technical 
assistance once the plan has 
been completed* 

Number of 
producers 

(% in 
parentheses) 

Meat:  
81 

(4%) 

Milk:  
323 

(16%) 

2016/2017 
livestock 

2014 dairy 

Meat:  
243 

(12%) 

Milk:  
972 

(48%) 

Rate for beneficiaries 

drawn from the 

monitoring system. 

Impact evaluation 

The baseline and final target are based on the 2,025 
producers whose management plans will be approved and 
implemented.  

The benchmark for the baseline is the current percentage for 
each group. The target is expected to be three times the 
number of producers to continue with technical assistance. 

This refers to technical assistance that is not provided by the 
DGDR, and which entails regular visits from technical staff 
(not one-off assistance). For livestock, agronomic technical 
assistance; for dairy, agronomic and veterinary technical 
assistance. 

OUTCOME 4: Strengthening the collective activities of rural organizations 

Increase in the percentage of 
users of services provided by 
rural organizations* 

% 29 2018 38 

Monitoring system: 

application form and 

closing form (at the 

end of the project) 

Includes: 

Technical assistance; 

Sale of inputs; 

Machinery or equipment services; 

Use of production services; 

Marketing of products. 

Increase of 30% over the baseline. 

The baseline is the percentage of nonbeneficiaries 
participating in one or more rural organizations. This indicative 
value will be adjusted based on information from the rural 
organizations' registration forms, which will include an 
information request regarding the number of users. 



Annex II 
Page 4 of 8 
 
 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline Year 

Final 
target 

Means of 

verification 
Baseline 

OUTCOME 5: Improved availability of technologies for small and medium-sized family producers 

Increase in new technologies 
validated for family production 

Number 0 2018 5 

Monitoring system 

Final report on each 

technology validated 

by the INIA 

Validation of a technology includes four categories of 
indicators: sociocultural, productive/economic, environmental, 
and reapplication. See annex to the Monitoring and 
Evaluation Plan. 

OUTCOME 6: Increased participation in DGDR interventions by rural women and young people  

Number of female 
beneficiaries increased 

Number of 
producers 

(% in 
parentheses) 

775 

(25%) 
2018 

992 

(32%) 
Monitoring system 

2018 study of 

beneficiaries 

Baseline source: Percentages are drawn from the RPDP I 
study of beneficiaries.  

Target source: Monitoring system. 

Target values are representative of the Uruguayan Registry of 
Family Producers. 

Estimates of absolute values are calculated from the 
respective percentages, based on 3,100 beneficiaries. 

Young beneficiaries are those aged between 15 and 
29 years, according to INJU. 

Number of young beneficiaries 
increased 

Number of 
producers 

(% in 
parentheses) 

124 

(4%) 
2018 

341 

(11%) 

OUTCOME 7: Increase in the use of information and communication technologies (ICTs) 

Increased rate of ICT adoption 
in family production* 

% 7 2018 11 

Monitoring system 

Specific baseline 

survey 2019 

(Registry of Family 

Producers) 

Final survey 2024 

(Registry of Family 

Producers) 

The target is for a 70% increase with respect to the baseline. 

The baseline value will be updated once the baseline from the 
impact evaluation is available. 

 
  



Annex II 
Page 5 of 8 

 
 

OUTPUTS 

Outputs 
Estimated 
cost (US$) 

Unit of 
measure 

Base-
line 

Base-
line 
year 

Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 
Final 
target 

Means of 
verification 

Comments 

Component I: Improved productivity through technology adoption and alliance-building 

Management plans 
implemented 

10,107,237 

Number of 
plans 

0 2019 0 0 600 750 450 225 2,025 
Monitoring 
system 

“Implemented” 
indicates that 60% of 
the activities included 
in the approved plans 
have been fulfilled and 
that the technology 
adoption evaluation 
has been conducted. 

Milestone 1: 
Management 
plans approved 

Number of 
plans 

0 2019 400 600 600 700 400 0 2,700 
Monitoring 
system 

Approved plans are 
those presented by 
eligible producers that 
have passed technical 
evaluation and for 
which the contract has 
been signed. 

Days of technical 
assistance provided 
to beneficiaries 

6,353,121 
Days of 
technical 

assistance 
0 2019 2,000 5,000 6,000 6,500 7,000 0 26,500 

Monitoring 
system 

8-hour day. 

Tools designed for 
promoting alliance-
building initiatives, 
with emphasis on 
integration into the 
chain  

106,955 Report 0 2019 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 

Promotion 
tools 
approved by 
DGDR 
management 

Supporting 
technical 
document 

 

Producers 
participating in new 
alliance-building 
initiatives  

898,421 
Number of 

beneficiaries 
0 2019 0 200 0 200 0 0 400 

Monitoring 
system 

Alliance-building 
initiatives to resolve 
limitations of scale: 
sales contracts for 
output, product 
differentiation. 



Annex II 
Page 6 of 8 
 
 

Outputs 
Estimated 
cost (US$) 

Unit of 
measure 

Base-
line 

Base-
line 
year 

Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 
Final 
target 

Means of 
verification 

Comments 

Number of women 
beneficiaries of 
specific plans 

424,000 
Number of 

women 
0 2019 0 100 0 100 0 0 200 

Monitoring 
system 

 

Number of youth 
beneficiaries of 
specific plans 

424,000 
Number of 

young people 
0 2019 100 0 100 0 0 0 200 

Monitoring 
system 

Youth beneficiaries 
are those between 15 
and 29 years old, 
according to INJU. 

Component II: Capacity-building in technology generation and transfer, technical assistance, and rural extension 

Projects supervised 
for validating 
technologies aimed 
at family producers 

560,603 Projects 0 2019 0 0 3 10 2 0 15 
Reports by 
project 

 

Number of rural 
organizations with a 

“comprehensive 
technical 

assistance” team 

4,270,304 
Rural 

organizations 
0 2019 20 10 10 0 0 0 40 

DGDR 
reports 

ATDR 

“Comprehensive” 
means that their 
function is to provide 
technical assistance 
to improve the 
productivity of 
medium-sized family 
producers. 

Specific 
agreements 
implemented with 
IPNEs to provide 
RTAE to 
beneficiaries 

819,508 
Number of 

agreements 
0 2019 2 1 1 0 0 0 4 

Agreements 
signed 

 

Proposal for 
evaluation system 
formulated 

25,000 Consultancy 0 2019 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 
Consultant 
report 

 



Annex II 
Page 7 of 8 

 
 

Outputs 
Estimated 
cost (US$) 

Unit of 
measure 

Base-
line 

Base-
line 
year 

Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 
Final 
target 

Means of 
verification 

Comments 

Monitoring tool for 
the RTAE system 
developed 

59,769 System 0 2019 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 
Confirmation 
that system 
is operating 

Conceptual definition, 
methodology defined, 
procedures 
established, and 
computer program 
developed. 

Private technical 
staff trained in 
providing 
comprehensive 
support to 
producers 

270,000 
Number of 

technical staff 
0 2019 100 50 25 25 0 0 200 

Training 
records 

Content: 

- Projects; 

- Technology; 

- Management; 

- Extension; 

- Communication; 

- Socioenvironmental 
area. 

* In coordination with 
the Acreditación de 
Saberes [Knowledge 
Accreditation] 
process. 

Public sector 
technical staff 
trained in strategy 
and methods for 
providing 
assistance and 
consolidation of 
rural extension 
processes 

72,600 
Number of 

technical staff 
0 2019 50 30 10 10 0 0 100 

Training 
records 

Content: 

- Projects; 

- Technology; 

- Management; 

- Extension; 

- Communication; 

- Socioenvironmental 
area. 

* In coordination with 
the Acreditación de 
Saberes [Knowledge 
Accreditation] 
process. 



Annex II 
Page 8 of 8 
 
 

Outputs 
Estimated 
cost (US$) 

Unit of 
measure 

Base-
line 

Base-
line 
year 

Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 
Final 
target 

Means of 
verification 

Comments 

Annual 
dissemination and 
awareness-building 
plans implemented 
and evaluated 

684,859 
Number of 

plans 
0 2019 1 1 1 1 1 1 6 

DGDR 
reports 

 

ICT projects 
developed for family 
production  

305,000 Projects 0 2019 0 0 5 5 5 0 15 
DGDR 
reports 

 

Tools implemented 
for supporting the 
use of ICTs in 
family agricultural 
production systems 
and RTAE services  

117,000 
Number of 

tools 
0 2019 2 1 1 2 1 2 9 

DGDR 
reports 

Guiding strategy, 
surveys (3), 
workshops, training, 
events to exchange 
experiences. 

 



Annex III 
Page 1 of 8 

FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Country: Uruguay 

Project: UR-L1147 - Rural Productive Development Program II 

Executing agencies: The Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP) 
through the Rural Development Bureau (DGDR) and its 
Project Management Unit (PMU) 

Fiduciary team: Abel Cuba and Emilie Chapuis (FMP/CUR) 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This operation is for US$27,121,000, of which US$24,232,000 will be financed by 
the Bank. The borrower is the Eastern Republic of Uruguay and the executing 
agency is the Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP) with the 
support of the Rural Development Bureau (DGDR) and its Project Management 
Unit. The MGAP’s execution of loans 1131/OC-UR (the Agricultural Services 
Program), 1643/OC-UR (Program to Support the Productivity and Development of 
New Livestock Products), and 2182/OC-UR (Program to Support Agricultural 
Public Management I) has been satisfactory. It is currently executing loan 
2595/OC-UR (Program to Support Agricultural Public Management II), for which 
fiduciary risk has been measured as low based on the Institutional Capacity 
Assessment System (ICAS) methodology.1 The Project Monitoring Report 
indicates a satisfactory level of execution. 

The objective of the new loan (UR-L1147) is to help improve the sustainability of 
small and medium-sized family-owned agricultural production units. The specific 
objectives are to increase the adoption of climate-smart technologies and 
strengthen alliance-building among participating producers. The expected impacts 
are an increase in income and productivity. The fiduciary activities—both financial 
execution arrangements and the procurement contracts included in the 
Procurement Plan attached to the Proposal for Operation Development for this 
operation—were identified based on the aforementioned objectives. The following 
sections describe the fiduciary mechanisms identified during the analysis mission. 
It should be noted that no exceptions to Bank policies are envisaged with respect 
to either financial management or procurement. Likewise, no retroactive financing 
or advance procurement is expected, consistent with the definitions in Section 1.9 
of document GN-2349-9 (Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works 
Financed by the IDB) and section 1.12 of document GN-2350-9 (Policies for the 
Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB). 

1 Program to Support Agricultural Public Management II, loan 3800/OC-UR, ICAS Analysis Report, May 2016. 



Annex III 
Page 2 of 8 
 
 

II. THE EXECUTING AGENCY’S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT 

 As mentioned above, the MGAP will be the executing agency for this operation 
through the DGDR and its Project Management Unit (PMU). Accounting, financial 
management, and procurement activities, together with support for the planning 
and monitoring of all operations involving external borrowing, are centralized in the 
PMU. Based on the information gathered during the analysis mission, the 
executing agency will have the same staff as for execution of the Program to 
Support Agricultural Public Management II. It was established that the executing 
agency has satisfactory experience in executing Bank-financed operations. 

 As reflected in the 2016 ICAS assessment mentioned in the previous section, “the 
MGAP’s key functions have been clearly defined in the areas of administration and 
financial accounting, and in management of the procurement cycle, on the basis 
of prior experience [...].” As further detailed in this Annex, the MGAP has executed 
several Bank-financed projects with a satisfactory level of performance, leading to 
the conclusion that its institutional capacity, as evaluated, is high. 

 In addition, the Ministry will be supported by its DGDR and PMU, as indicated in 
the matrix that describes the execution arrangements (comparing, in particular, the 
arrangements for loan 3800/OC-UR and the structure envisaged for the execution 
of UR-L1147). The aforementioned tool provides information including the 
following: 

a. With respect to the fulfillment of conditions in the area of procurement, 
technical aspects will be the responsibility of the DGDR while the UGP will be 
responsible for fiduciary requirements. 

b. The PMU will be responsible for: managing financial and audit reports; 
reporting on expenditure and requesting advance disbursements from the IDB; 
making payments to providers; preparing the procurement plan and the 
financial plan; and the accounting system. 

c. The DGDR will be responsible for: coordinating, implementing, and monitoring 
activities; planning, preparing, and organizing work plans; human resources; 
and filing documentation relating to program activities with the aim of providing 
information to the IDB and ensuring that supporting documentation is kept. 

 As indicated, execution arrangements are well established. Bearing in mind also 
the MGAP’s prior experience in executing similar operations, no specific 
weaknesses have been identified in the executing agency’s institutional capacity. 

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

3.1 Fiduciary risk is considered to be low. This finding is based on the institutional 
capacity assessment carried out under UR-L1135. It was agreed during the 
orientation mission for this new loan that since: (i) the exercise had been 
completed within a reasonable period; (ii) the fundamental structure of the 
executing agency remained identical; (iii) the indicators for measuring execution 
and the fulfillment of Bank requirements were satisfactory; and (iv) the new 
operation would use the same team of qualified staff with experience in executing 



Annex III 
Page 3 of 8 

 
 

Bank-financed operations, the May 2016 ICAS assessment identifying a low level 
of risk remained valid. 

3.2 In addition, neither the fiduciary activities included in the Procurement Plan nor the 
financial management activities are regarded as complex, thus confirming the low 
level of risk for this new operation due to the executing agency’s track record of 
performance and compliance. 

IV. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE CONTRACT 

 The following considerations will be included in the special provisions: 

a. The program Operating Regulations will be updated to identify the 
administrative and financial management arrangements for the component 
involving the distribution of support. The total value of support will be 
US$20,231,000, of which $19,631,000 will be financed with Bank loan 
proceeds and US$600,000 with local counterpart funds. 

b. Exchange rate: for financial reporting in U.S. dollars, the exchange rate used 
will be the one prevailing on the date of payment. 

c. Audited financial statements: During the project disbursement period, audited 
project financial statements will be submitted to the Bank within 120 days after 
the end of each of the MGAP’s fiscal years. The statements will be audited by 
the Tribunal de Cuentas de la República [National Audit Office] (TCR), or by 
an independent audit firm acceptable to the Bank based on terms of reference 
agreed with the Bank. The final audit report will be submitted to the Bank within 
120 days after the date stipulated for the final disbursement under the loan. 

V. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION 

 The Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements for Procurement establish the rules 
governing the execution of all procurement planned under the project. 

 Procurement execution 

 The Bank’s procurement policies—documents GN-2349-9 (Policies for the 
Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development 
Bank) and GN-2350-9 (Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants 
financed by the Inter-American Development Bank)—will apply to all planned 
procurement activities under this operation. These will be included in the 
Procurement Plan, which will cover an initial minimum period of 18 months with 
annual updates thereafter. Before initiating procurement, this procurement plan will 
be registered, approved, and published in the Procurement Plan Execution System 
(SEPA, www.iniciativasepa.org). Once registered, the plan will be updated 
annually, or whenever required by substantial changes to the original plan. 

 The relevance of each expenditure (i.e. terms of reference, technical 
specifications, and budget) is the responsibility of the project’s sector specialist 
and always requires a no objection before the procurement process may begin, 
based on the operational criteria of the Project Team Leader. 

http://www.iniciativasepa.org/


Annex III 
Page 4 of 8 
 
 

a. Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services: Project-
related contracts for works, goods, and nonconsulting services2 subject to 
international competitive bidding will be carried out using the standard bidding 
documents issued by the Bank. Contracts subject to national competitive 
bidding will be carried out using national bidding documents satisfactory to the 
Bank. The review of technical specifications for procurement during 
preparation of the selection processes is the responsibility of the project sector 
specialist. 

b. Selection and contracting of consultants: Contracts for consulting services 
under the project will be executed using either the Bank’s Standard Request 
for Proposals (in the case of all contracts above the applicable threshold for 
international shortlists) or one satisfactory to the Bank (in the case of bidding 
processes for amounts below the threshold applicable to international 
competitive bidding). The project sector specialist is responsible for reviewing 
the terms of reference for consulting service contracts. 

c. Direct contracting: As set out in the table below, direct contracting for a total 
amount of US$6,048,153 is envisaged, of which US$2,022,190 will be financed 
with local counterpart funds and US$4,025,963 with Bank resources. Direct 
contracts financed with local funds will not be subject to Bank review.  

Table 1. Direct contracts (US$) 

 IDB Local counterpart Total 

Consulting services, RPDP 
team 3,885,736  1,211,681  5,097,417  

Fuel 140,227   -  140,227  

Training  -  444,100  444,100  

Travel expenses  -  101,350  101,350  

Vehicle maintenance  -  109,686  109,686  

Postage  -  54,843  54,843  

Bank fees  -  10,530  10,530  

Audit, TCR  -  90,000  90,000  

Total 4,025,963  2,022,190  6,048,153  

 

(i) The contracts of the consultants belonging to the RPDP team are 
expected to be renewed under the operation. The team is made up of 
advisors, assistants, and the rural development field teams that are 
currently working under loan 2595/OC-UR. Consequently, and in 
accordance with sections 3.10(a) and 3.11 of the Policies for the 
Selection and Contracting of Consultants (document GN-2350-9) 
(which establish the principle of continuity of service where such 
continuity is more efficient than a new competition), the executing 
agency’s request has been deemed consistent with Bank policies 
based on the following factors: (i) initial selection of the consultants was 
done on a competitive basis in 2012 and received the Bank’s prior no 
objection; (ii) the consultants whose contracts are to be renewed are 

                                                
2  Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank 

(document GN-2349-9), paragraph 1.1: The treatment of nonconsulting services is similar to that of goods. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=774396


Annex III 
Page 5 of 8 

 
 

subject to an annual performance evaluation; and (iii) in the event of 
unsatisfactory results, a consultant’s contract will not be renewed and 
alternative human resources will be sought through a competitive 
process. The value of this activity is expected to total US$5,097,417 
over the six-year loan execution cycle, with US$3,885,736 financed 
from Bank loan proceeds and US$1,211,681 from local counterpart 
funds. This amount is considered reasonable given that: (i) the team 
comprises a total of 28 people; and (ii) their monthly salaries average 
US$2,462, which is within the reference scale for the Office of the 
President of the Republic. 

(ii) A budget of US$140,227 is also envisaged over the loan execution 
period for the direct purchase of fuel from the Administración Nacional 
de Combustibles, Alcohol y Pórtland [National Fuel, Alcohol, and 
Cement Administration] (ANCAP). The fuel will be used for transporting 
field teams in the project’s area of influence. This line is consistent with 
the requirements of section 3.6(c) of the Policies for the Procurement 
of Goods and Works Financed by the IDB (document GN-2349-9), 
which allow direct contracting in cases where a product may only be 
obtained from one source. ANCAP is an energy company that manages 
all of the country’s fuel supply plants and has a monopoly over fuel 
imports and exports in Uruguay. It also proposes fuel prices, which are 
then approved by the Executive Branch. Lastly, section 33.C.1 of the 
Texto Ordenado de Contabilidad y Administración Financiera 
[Consolidated Text on Accounting and Financial Administration] 
(TOCAF) indicates that government bodies or departments may 
engage in direct contracting with each other. As ANCAP is a state-run 
company, direct contracts with it are aligned with national requirements 
and the Bank’s policies. 

(iii) Training: The program includes training activities for a total of 
US$444,100. These will be financed using local counterpart funds, 
meaning that no interventions are expected in relation to procurement 
contracts using either the ex ante or ex post modalities. 

d. Selection of individual consultants: Selection of individual consultants is 
anticipated for a total amount of US$162,770, in accordance with the 
provisions of Section V of the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of 
Consultants Financed by the IDB, observing in particular the procedures 
envisaged for the competitive selection of these consultants. 

 

Table 2. Thresholds for international competitive bidding and shortlists with international 
participants (US$ thousands) 

Works Goods and services Consulting services 

International 
competitive 

bidding 

National 
bidding 

Shopping 
International 
competitive 

bidding 

National 
bidding 

Shopping 

International 
advertising 

for 
consultants  

Shortlist 

100% 

national 

≥3,000,000 
≤3,000,000 

≤100,000 ≥250,000 
≤250,000 

≤50,000 ≥200,000 ≤200,000 
≥250,000 ≥50,000 

 



Annex III 
Page 6 of 8 
 
 

 Main procurement processes 

 The procurement activities identified for this operation will be divided as set out in 
the following table: 

 
Table 3. Procurement activities 

Category Total, IDB 
Total, local 
counterpart 

Total US$ 

Goods 58,324 7,076 65,400 

Training -  444,100 444,100 

Consulting firms 204,918 135,082 340,000 

Individual consultants 3,992,282 1,267,905 5,260,187 

Nonconsulting services 205,115 24,885 230,000 

Total procurement 4,460,639 1,879,048 6,339,687 

*See Procurement Plan. 

 

 Procurement supervision 

 Given the experience and performance of the executing agency, procurement 
activities will be subject to ex post review, with the exception of those cases in 
which ex ante supervision is justified and explicitly specified in the Procurement 
Plan. The following table sets out the thresholds applicable to the foregoing:3 

 
Table 4. Thresholds for ex post review (US$) 

Works Goods Consulting services 

≥3,000,000 ≥250,000 ≥200,000 

 

 Ex post reviews will be conducted every 12 months in accordance with the project 
supervision plan. 

 Records and files 

 The agreed formats or procedures set out in the program Operating Regulations 
will be used for the preparation and filing of project reports. 

VI. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

 Programming and budget. For preparation of the Executive Branch’s (five-year) 
national budget, the agencies of the central government submit their proposals to 
the MEF before 31 July of the first year of the administration’s term in office. The 
MEF coordinates the budget preparation process with assistance from the 
Planning and Budget Office and the National Civil Service Office. It submits the 
national budget proposal to the Executive Branch, which approves it and forwards 
it to the Legislative Branch by 31 August of the same year. The Legislative Branch 
has 120 days to analyze, approve, and express its opinion on the amounts, and it 
may not make amendments that increase expenditure. Reallocations and any 
increases in the annual budget are prepared by the Executive Branch when it 
presents its annual accountability and budget execution statements. Within six 

                                                
3  Note: Ex post review thresholds are applied on the basis of the executing agency’s fiduciary execution 

capacity. They may be modified by the Bank as a result of changes in that capacity. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-43


Annex III 
Page 7 of 8 

 
 

months after the end of the fiscal year, the Executive Branch presents these 
reports to the Legislative Branch and may propose amendments for duly justified 
reasons. 

 The local counterpart contribution for this program is US$2.89 million. The 
executing agency will provide evidence to the Bank that local counterpart funds 
have been allocated for the first year of execution, both at the time of fulfillment of 
the conditions precedent and annually thereafter (by the end of February). 

 Accounting and information systems. Project accounts will be maintained in the 
project’s own system and in the country’s Integrated Financial Information System 
(SIIF). Budget credits approved for the program under the five-year budget law are 
allocated and executed using the SIIF; as a result, the procedures established by 
the General Accounting Office (CGN) will be followed when processing project-
related commitments and payments. 

 Project financial statements will be issued periodically on a modified cash basis. 
Project financial statements will be audited annually, and comprise the following: 
(i) statement of cash received and disbursements made; and (ii) statement of 
cumulative investment. 

 Disbursements and cash flow (in coordination with the use or nonuse of the 
national treasury system). Project funds will be managed through a National Single 
Account (CUN), to which end the National Treasury, at the request of the PMU, 
will open a special account at the Central Bank of Uruguay. This account will 
receive the funds disbursed by the Bank, but as it is a registered account (which 
cannot be used to make payments), a specific bank account will be opened for the 
program at the state-owned commercial bank (Banco de la República Oriental del 
Uruguay) for purposes of making the corresponding payments. 

 Disbursements will be made in the form of advances, based on actual liquidity 
needs and supported by adequate financial and disbursement projections. These 
advances will preferably be made every six months, once reporting has been filed 
for at least 70% of the amount advanced. As documentary support, the accounting 
forms will need to be presented along with the financial planning spreadsheet. 
Expenditures involving transfers to Rural Development Field Agents (ATDRs) will 
be documented in two stages: first, once the advances are made, and second, 
once the expense reports are received, supported by an accounting report that 
includes the exact amount used by each ATDR. 

 The eDisbursements system will be used to process disbursement requests. The 
exchange rate for the conversion of local currency payments into the currency 
used for the loan shall be the one prevailing on the date of payment. 

 Internal control and audit. The internal control system is based on the national 
system defined in the laws and regulations currently in force. As established in the 
Consolidated Text on Accounting and Financial Administration, the TCR will 
exercise preventive intervention in all expenditures related to program execution. 
The level of reliability for execution of this operation is high. 

 The MGAP will maintain the conditions established for the execution of loan 
2595/OC-UR, thus ensuring the continuity and participation of fiduciary staff 
assigned full-time to the program, although for this program they will constitute a 
unit within the PMU. This will strengthen the fiduciary function, as the PMU’s 



Annex III 
Page 8 of 8 
 
 

structure includes an Executive Management Department and an Administrative 
and Financial Department. In light of the formal structure specified by the Ministry, 
it is anticipated that the human resources and defined processes necessary to 
meet the Bank’s requirements will be available.  

 External control and reporting. The national external control system is executed 
by the TCR. The previous MGAP operation (2595/OC-UR) was audited by the 
TCR, and the corresponding annual reports were delivered in a timely manner and 
with unqualified audit opinions. For this program, the executing agency’s intention 
is for the TCR to continue providing these services. The TCR’s eligibility level is 
consistent with the type of entity and risk associated with the operation. 

 Annual financial audit reports and the respective evaluation of internal controls will 
be submitted for each fiscal year during the disbursement period by 30 April of the 
following year. The auditing standards issued by the International Organization of 
Supreme Audit Institutions will be considered. The cost of the audits will be agreed 
upon in the TCR Service Agreement Letter and will be financed with local 
counterpart funds. 

VII. FINANCIAL SUPERVISION PLAN 

 The initial financial supervision plan is based on the following: 

a. Participation in the launch workshop organized by the project team, with a brief 
presentation on project financial management considerations. 

b. Review of the financial conditions precedent (chart of accounts, agreement 
with the TCR, evidence of budgetary allocation of resources).  

c. Review of the annual work plan and initial financial plan prepared by the PMU 
as support for the first advance of funds (to be requested once the program’s 
eligibility has been established). 

d. If necessary, one financial visit will be carried out each year during program 
execution. The following issues will be covered: reconciliation of the account for 
advances and investments; implementation of external audit recommendations; 
quality and timeliness of accounting records; and maintenance of archives. 

 Execution mechanism. The MGAP will be accountable to the Bank for project 
execution, and it will maintain a direct relationship with the Bank. A description of 
the processes involving the use of the funds will be included in the program 
Operating Regulations; approval and entry into force of the Operating Regulations 
will be a condition precedent to the project’s first disbursement. 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-___/18 

Uruguay. Loan ____/OC-UR to the Eastern Republic of Uruguay 
Rural Productive Development Program II 

The Board of Executive Directors 

RESOLVES: 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Eastern Republic of Uruguay, as Borrower, for the purpose of 
granting it a financing aimed at cooperating in the execution of the Rural Productive 
Development Program II. Such financing will be in the amount of up to US$24,232,000 from the 
resources of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, and will be subject to the Financial Terms and 
Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan 
Proposal. 

(Adopted on ___ ____________ 2018) 

LEG/SGO/CSC/EZSHARE-1028536987-9657 
Pipeline No. UR-L1147 


	ur-l1147_summary_validation_dem_opc_spd.pdf
	Summary (I, II, III) 





















































 

PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

 
 
 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

HAITI 
 
 
 
 
 
 

AGRICULTURAL AND AGROFORESTRY TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION 
PROGRAM - PITAG 

 
 

(HA-L1107, HA-G1038) 
 
 
 

GRANT PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Carmine Paolo De Salvo 
(RND/CHA) and Bruno Jacquet (RND/CHA), Co-Team Leaders; Lina Salazar and Gonzalo Muñoz 
(CSD/RND); Sebastien Gachot and Geraud Albaret (RND/CHA); Regine Lafontant (CDH/CHA); 
Renaud Tahon (VPS/ESG); Nicola Magri (CTI/CHA); Romina Kirkagacli (VPC/FMP); Marise 
Salnave (VPC/FMP); Monica Centeno Lappas (LEG/SGO); Jennifer Doherty-Bigara (CSD/CCS); 
and Lisa Sofia Restrepo (CSD/RND). 

 
In accordance with the Access to Information Policy, this document is being released to the public and 
distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors simultaneously. This document has not been approved 
by the Board. Should the Board approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be made 

available to the public, thus superseding and replacing the original version

 
 



 

CONTENTS 
 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY ......................................................................................................... 1 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................................. 2 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, and Justification ...................................... 2 
B. Objective, Components and Cost ............................................................... 12 
C. Key Results Indicators ................................................................................ 13 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ................................................................ 15 

A. Financing Instruments................................................................................. 15 
B. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks ................................................ 16 
C. Fiduciary Risk ............................................................................................. 17 
D. Other Key Issues and Risks ........................................................................ 17 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 19 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements ................................................ 19 
B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results ...................................... 20 
C. Significant Design Activities Post Approval ................................................. 20 

 
 
 
 
  



- ii - 

 

 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) - Summary 

Annex II Results Framework 

Annex III Fiduciary Arrangements  

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED (REL) 

1. Pluriannual Execution Plan (PEP) and Annual Operational Plan (POA) 

2. Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 

3. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR)  

4. Procurement Plan  

OPTIONAL (OEL) 

1. Technical Documents for Component I 

2. Technical Documents for Component II 

3. Economic Analysis 

4. Draft Operational Manual 

5. Technical References  

6. Safeguard Policy Filter (SPF) and Safeguard Screening Form (SSF) 

  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-5
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-13
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-15
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-7
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-8
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-22


- iii - 

 

 

ABBREVIATIONS 

APAGRO Agroalimentary Productive Support Program 

CIRAD Centre de Coopération Internationale en Recherche Agronomique pour 
le Développement 

CRF Corporate Results Framework 

CRI Climate Risk Index 

CRIAR Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives 

IDB Inter-American Development Bank 

IFAD 

IICA 

International Fund for Agricultural Development 

Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture 

INDC Intended National Determined Contribution 

IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 

IRR Internal Rate of Return 

EA Executing Agency  

ESMP Environmental and Social Management Plan 

ESMR Environmental and Social Management Report 

ESS Environmental and Social Strategy 

FAMV Faculty of Agronomy and Veterinary Medicine 

FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 

FIES Food Insecurity Experience Scale 

FONRED Fonds national de recherche pour un développement durable 

GAFSP Global Agriculture and Food Security Program 

GDP Gross Domestic Product 

GHI Global Hunger Index 

GSSE General Services Support Estimate 

KBA Key Biodiversity Areas 

LAC Latin America and the Caribbean 

MARENA Natural Resources and Water Basins Management Program 

MARNDR Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development  

MOU Memorandum of Understanding 

NAIP National Agriculture Investment Plan 

PAES Environmental Program of El Salvador 

PATCA Technological Innovation Program 

PEU Project Execution Unit 

PITAG Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program 

PMDN Natural Disaster Mitigation Program 

POD Proposal for Operation Development 

POM Program Operating Manual 

PSE Producer Support Estimate  

PSG 

PTTA 

Project Specific Grant 

Technology Transfer to Small Farmers Program 

RESEPAG Agricultural Services Strengthening Program 

RGA General Agricultural Census 



- iv - 

 

 

ABBREVIATIONS 

SECAL Food Security Support Program 

SIGI Système Intégré de Gestion des Informations 

SME Small and Medium Enterprises 

SPF Safeguard Policy Filter 

SSF Safeguard Screening Form 

TSE Total Support Estimate 

UEP Studies and Planning Unit 

UNDP United Nations Development Program  

UPMP Unité de Passation des Marchés Publics 

USAID United States Agency for International Development  

WFP World Food Program 

 
 
 
 
  



 

PROJECT SUMMARY  

HAITI  

AGRICULTURAL AND AGROFORESTRY TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION PROGRAM - PITAG 

(HA-L1107, HA-G1038) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Beneficiary: Republic of Haiti Amortization Period: N/A 

Executing Agency (EA): Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources 
and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

Disbursement Period: 60 months 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace Period: N/A 

IDB (Grant Facility – HA-L1107):     55,000,000 
 

71.6 
Supervision and 
Inspection Fee: 

N/A 

Other/Co-financing (GAFSP – HA-G1038): 10,000,000 13 
Interest rate: N/A 

Credit Fee: N/A 
Other/Co-financing (IFAD)(a): 10,859,305 14.1 

Local: 1,000,000 1.3 

Currency of Approval: US Dollars  
Total: 76,859,305 100 

Project at a Glance 

Project Objective/Description: The general objectives of the program are to increase agricultural income and 
food security for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti. The specific objectives are to increase agricultural 
productivity and improve the use of natural capital through the adoption of sustainable technologies. 

Special Contractual Clauses prior to the first disbursement of the financing: (i) the approval by the Executing 
Agency and entry into effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms and conditions 
previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.1); (ii) see Annex III that includes a special disbursement; and (iii) see 
Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) (REL-3). 

Special Contractual Clauses of execution: see (i) ESMR (REL-3); and (ii) special execution requirements 
contained in Annex III. 

Exceptions to Bank Policies:  None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges(b): SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Cross-Cutting Themes(c): GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a) International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) contribution is, as of today, parallel (co-financing) but might be 
received by the Bank as a Project Specific Grant (PSG), subject to IFAD’s Board approval.  

(b) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(c) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity 

and Rule of Law). 

 
 
 
 
 
 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6


- 2 - 

 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, and Justification 

1.1 The agricultural sector and food security in Haiti. With a per capita annual 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of US$818 (2015) and 59% of the population living 
in poverty (World Bank, 2012),1 Haiti stands among the poorest countries in the 
world. The United Nations Development Program (UNDP) Human Development 
Index’s socio-economic indicators for 2014 placed Haiti 163rd out of 188 countries.2 
According to the World Bank Group,3 in rural areas, the poverty rate is even higher 
(75%), and more than 80% of Haitians who live in extreme poverty live in rural 
areas, where access to basic services remains very limited. In fact, it is estimated 
that only 10% of the rural population has access to electricity and less than 8% to 
drinkable water. 

1.2 Food insecurity is widespread in Haiti. The country is ranked 115th out of 
118 countries in the 2016 Global Hunger Index (GHI). Results of a recent World 
Food Program (WFP) analysis (2015) indicate that approximately 47% of the 
households are moderately or severely food insecure. In addition, households with 
children of less than five years of age are much more exposed to frequent food 
shortages.4 Therefore, one fifth of children less than five years old are chronically 
malnourished (DHS, 2012).5 

1.3 In this setting, the performance of the agricultural sector is strategic to help raise 
rural households’ incomes and improve their food security.  The sector contributes 
25% of GDP and 85% of employment in rural areas (UNDP, 2015). Haitian 
agriculture, though, presents very low levels of productivity, even when compared 
to other countries in the region (Table I-1 shows yields for the main crops grown in 
Haiti as a proxy for productivity), and per capita income in the Haitian agricultural 
sector has stagnated in recent years. Annual agricultural GDP per capita is 
currently estimated at US$400 per year. 

Table I-1. Yields for main Haitian crops compared to regional yields* 

Product Haiti's yields as % average yields in Central America and the Caribbean 

Cocoa 99% 

Mango 91% 

Sorghum 39% 

Avocado 47% 

Banana 25% 

* Countries considered for this comparison are Central American and Caribbean countries included 
in the FAOSTAT database, years 2010-2014.  

1.4 Agricultural productivity can be influenced by a wide range of factors such as land 
tenure status, human capital level, availability of agricultural inputs, access to 
finance, agricultural services provision (such as information, agricultural research 

                                                 
1  Please see OEL-5 for complete Technical References.  
2  UNDP Human Development Index. 
3  Haiti: Des opportunités pour tous-Diagnostic-Pays Systématique, May 2015. 
4  World Bank and ONPES, 2014. 
5  Haiti Demographic and Health Surveys. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 3 - 

 

and technology transfer, irrigation, agricultural health and food safety) and 
macroeconomic and trade policies. Some of the main factors that exacerbate low 
productivity include: 

a. Low level of investment and access to technologies. Most producers in 
Haiti are still using basic techniques predominantly for subsistence agriculture 
and lack of access to certified high-quality seeds, appropriate soil conservation 
techniques, inputs for production (i.e. pesticides and fertilizers)6 as well as 
basic tools and equipment. The General Agricultural Census (RGA) shows that 
only 7% of the farmers used mechanical equipment. Also, the baseline data 
collected for Technology Transfer to Small Farmers Program (PTTA) show that 
only 9% of the farmers had used improved seeds and only 22% have 
knowledge of certified seeds. The number of providers is limited in the country 
and their geographical locations do not allow to serve the vaste majority of 
smallholder farmers.7 In addition, a constrained access to factors of production 
(capital, land, labor, water availability)8 greatly limits the capability of farmers 
to increase productivity. This is explained in part by the significant financial 
constraints faced by farmers, due notably to the lack of agricultural credit, 
particularly in rural areas, where financial markets are thin or non-existent. 
Data collected for the evaluation of the agroforestry technology provided by 
PTTA in the North Department show that 28% of the farmers have a bank 
account and 19% have received a credit for agricultural purposes. Lack of 
information about existing technologies, farming techniques, access to 
markets, natural risks and climate change is also a contributing factor.  

b. Lack of financial and human resources to develop agricultural 
innovation. Agricultural research and extension has been virtually 
non-existent in Haiti for nearly three decades, (Cirad, 2015). Aggregate 
numbers show that over the last three decades technical efficiency in the 
Haitian agricultural sector has fallen drastically, at a -1.8% average yearly rate 
(Nin-Pratt, A. et al. 2015). Factors that contribute to explain these findings are 
the outdated institutional research framework, and the lack of technology 
transfer and extension systems. The lack of local expertise in applied and 
adaptive agricultural research as well as technology transfer is in turn partially 
explained by the very limited training and educational opportunities in these 
areas (some universities, such as FAMV, offer academic courses, but the 
quality of their curriculum remains low).9 The institution in charge of agricultural 
research is the Innovation Directorate of the MARNDR, which has 
71 employees distributed across the country, with only 6% of them having an 
education sufficient to conduct research activities. The 2009 RGA reports that 
43% of the farmers identified weak agricultural research and extension 
services as a constraint for the development of the sector. Moreover, only 
2.6% of farmers mentioned receiving some type of technical assistance. 

                                                 
6  In a study conducted by USAID in the North of Haiti in 2017, it is estimated that 28% of farmers use pesticide. 

Fertilizers is used by 4% of cacao producers, 13% of banana producers and 95% of rice producers. 
7     See Technical Document for Component II (Bellande, 2016). 
8  Only 13% of agricultural land has access to water, according to the 2009 General Agricultural Census. 
9   Cirad, 2015. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 4 - 

 

c. Climate risks. Haiti is one of the countries with the highest Climate Risk Index 
(CRI Germanwatch, 2016) and natural disaster risk index in the world 
(WB, 2005; UNDP, 2004), including climate hazards (Kreft et al., 2015). The 
climatic risks faced by farmers and their ability to cope with them also limit the 
long-term growth of the productivity of the agricultural sector in Haiti, especially 
in a context where watersheds are characterized by severe soil erosion risk 
and, on average, 50% of the upper watersheds is deforested.10 For instance, 
hurricane Matthew caused severe economic damages and estimated losses 
that amounted to US$1.9 billion. The damages and losses in perennial crops 
(coffee, cocoa, breadfruit, coconut, avocado, citrus and other fruit), which are 
extremely important for food security and rural income, were particularly high 
and represented US$433 million, further decreasing capital assets and 
sources of income for Haitian farmers. For the future, climate models predict 
temperatures to increase up to 0.8°C for the 2020s; and precipitation scenarios 
a drying trend in the mid-2020s with 3 to 4% less rainfall in the annual mean 
(IDB, 2016), translating into losses of 25% in average key crops such as 
banana, manioc and beans (UNDP, 2015). The limited access of farmers to 
agricultural technologies (¶1.4a) reduces their ability to cope with these natural 
and climate risks. 

1.5 The agricultural sector policy context. According to the Inter-American 
Development Bank (IDB) Agrimonitor database, total public support to the 
agricultural sector represented, on average, 5.3% of GDP in the period 2006-2012, 
but only 3.2% of the resources are allocated to finance public goods (the lowest 
level in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC), with funding to research basically 
inexistent), although, in LAC, such public spending has proven higher economic 
return rates than expenditures directed to the financing of private goods 
(Anriquez et al., 2016). 

1.6 Recent reforms. In recent years, the Government of Haiti, with the support of the 
IDB through Policy Grants 2731/GR-HA and 2945/GR-HA, has progressed in key 
areas of agricultural policy that would improve agricultural productivity and 
competitiveness in Haiti, as summarized below. 

a. Agricultural Research.  In 2013 the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources 
and Rural Development (MARNDR) and other agricultural research 
stakeholders, with the support of the IDB: (i) reviewed and analyzed the 
agricultural research programs and activities implemented in the last three 
decades; (ii) worked on the strategic issues on which research financing should 
focus; and (iii) reviewed different research financing instruments. This work 
resulted in the drafting of a new research institutional framework and a 
financing mechanism (Fonds National de Recherche pour un Développement 
Durable, FONRED), which is expected to be implemented in 2017. 

                                                 
10  Agricultural exploitation stressed the environment and have led to soil erosion and deforestation to be endemic 

problems in Haiti (McClintock, 2003). The great deforestation of the country began during the colonial period 
and was intensified in 1730 with coffee introduction, then other agricultural practices as monoculture and 
clean-cultivation caused rapid erosion and exhausted soil nutrients (Paskett and Philoctete, 1990). Most 
hillsides are eroded and a third of the land is severely degraded (White and Jickling, 1995). Also, gully erosion 
is chronic, which compromises soil fertility, infrastructure quality, and productivity (Wahab et al., 1986). 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 5 - 

 

b. Farmers’ access to technologies. A two-fold strategic approach was 
proposed to address the limited access of farmers to improved technologies: 
(i) create a legal and policy framework for a modern agricultural research 
system in the country (see above); and (ii) expand progressively the incipient 
market-friendly system of “smart subsidies” for promoting the adoption of 
agricultural technologies, reducing the supply-driven distribution of subsidized 
inputs and avoiding the crowding out of private suppliers. 

c. Institutional reform of the Ministry of Agriculture. In 2013, the MARDNR 
created a procurement unit (UPMP, Unité de Passation des Marchés Publics) 
to improve its capacity to absorb and administer financial resources. The 
Studies and Planning Unit (UEP) was staffed with high-level professionals, and 
launched the preparation of programmatic plans, with the objective of 
rationalizing budget preparation. 

1.7 In Haiti, the Bank is already financing investments for the provision of several 
agricultural public goods (agricultural health and food safety, land administration, 
fisheries management, rural infrastructure) through the following operations: 
Natural Disaster Mitigation Program II (3622/GR-HA), Artisanal Fisheries 
Development Program (3492/GR-HA), Modernization of Public Agricultural Health 
Services (3260/GR-HA) and Land Tenure Security Program in Rural Areas 
(2720/GR-HA). Investments in agricultural research and technology transfer 
complement the existing portfolio. 

1.8 Synergies with other initiatives. Several national and international institutions 
are partnering with the MARNDR on the provision of incentives to smallholder 
farmers and on applied agricultural research and training in Haiti: (i) the World 
Bank, USAID and the French Development Agency for the agricultural incentives 
program; and (ii) FAO, the Embassy of France in Haiti, USAID, IICA, the University 
of Quisqueya, the Faculty of Agronomy and Veterinary Medicine (FAMV), and 
NGOs for applied agricultural research and training. 

1.9 On the Bank side, the second phase of the Natural Disaster Mitigation Program 
(PMDN II - HA-L1097/HA-G1031), implemented by the MARNDR since 2016, 
offers possible synergies, notably related to watershed protection (combination of 
infrastructure provided by PMDN and sustainable farming practices promoted by 
PITAG), and to the strengthening of the FAMV curriculum. Other synergies (both 
on content and geographical areas) are envisaged with the Land Tenure Security 
Program in Rural Areas (2720/GR-HA), Water Management Program in the 
Artibonite Basin (3089/GR-HA), the Program to Establish a Partial Credit 
Guarantee Fund for Enterprise Development (2416/GR-HA), and MIF 
interventions in all suitable intervention areas. Collaboration with the last two 
programs will be particularly useful to facilitate the integration of farmers into the 
value chain and their access to broader markets. 

1.10 In order to maximize synergies, avoid duplication and adequately define the 
activities of PITAG, a coordination process was conducted with the various 
initiatives of the institutions listed above and will be continued during program 
execution through regular meetings and especially through the Agricultural 
Sectorial Group (a donor coordination mechanisms) that the Bank’s chairs in Haiti. 



- 6 - 

 

1.11 Lessons Learned. During the period 2011-2016, the MARNDR implemented the 
PTTA (2562/GR-HA), through funding provided by the Bank and the Global 
Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP), and the Natural Disaster 
Mitigation Program (PMDN – 2187/GR-HA). These programs covered a total area 
of 20,240 hectares across the South, North and Northeast departments. They 
benefitted a total of 43,956 small agricultural producers: 9,043 for PMDN and 
34,913 for PTTA 1. While PMDN focused on the promotion of agroforestry 
technological packages, PTTA promoted technological packages for irrigation, 
sisal, annual crops (rice, sweet potato, peanuts and vegetables), and agroforestry 
(coffee, cocoa, diversified crop systems). Qualitative and quantitative evaluations 
assessed that with an average adoption rate of 80%, and with average incentive 
values of US$595/farmer for PMDN and US$700/farmer for PTTA, agroforestry 
technological packages have generated positive results, since they contributed to 
the reforestation of about 13,082 hectares in the country, and led to significant 
increases in gross value added per plot ranging from 10% to 109%. The 
evaluations also found that results have been more limited for the annual crops 
(rice and vegetables), with no significant improvement of gross value added, since 
farmers did not modify their agricultural production practices. However, the 
subsidies contributed to reduce farmer decapitalization, as farmers used the 
vouchers to avoid selling cattle (an average effect of US$227) or contract informal 
and expensive credit to buy agricultural inputs (a 10% points difference between 
treatment and control groups).  

1.12 From a conceptual and operational standpoint, the proposed operation has been 
therefore designed on the basis of the lessons learned through PTTA and several 
other programs that implemented similar incentive mechanisms in Haiti: (i) the 
Agricultural Services Strengthening Program I and II (RESEPAG), financed by the 
World Bank and GAFSP; (ii) the Natural Disaster Mitigation Program II (PMDN 
II- 3622/GR-HA), financed by Bank; and (iii) the Food Security Support Program 
(SECAL), financed by the European Union and the French Development Agency. 
Other similar programs have been financed by the IDB in other countries, such as: 
(i) the Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives II (CRIAR) in 
Bolivia (3536/BL-BO); (ii) the Agroalimentary Productive Support Program 
(APAGRO) in Nicaragua (2055/BL-NI); and (iii) the Technological Innovation 
Program II (PATCA) in the Dominican Republic (2443/OC-DR). In addition to the 
lessons learned through the aforementioned operations, the design of the 
proposed operation takes into account: (i) the Review of the Bank's Support to 
Agriculture, 2002-2014, published (OVE, 2015); and (ii) the analysis of the 
performance of the incentive mechanism of the programs implemented in Haiti 
(IRAM, 2015). The main lessons learned and their inclusion in the design of the 
program are summarized in Table I-2.



- 7 - 

 

Table I-2. Incorporation of Lessons Learned in the Design of the Proposed Program  

Lesson Learned Source of the 
Lesson 

How the lesson shaped the 
design of the program 

(i) PTTA provided vouchers to rice and vegetable 
producers in order to purchase inputs such as labor, 
fertilizer, and pesticides. The results of the evaluation show 
that while the vouchers led to some adjustments in crop 
choices and input use, these changes did not translate into 
increased agricultural productivity or income. 

A randomized 
control trial impact 
evaluation of PTTA 
(rice and vegetable 
vouchers) (Gignoux 
et al., 2016). 

Agricultural and Agroforestry 
Technological Innovation 
Program (PITAG) shifts its focus 
from subsidies to inputs that are 
widely known and used by 
farmers (i.e. most rice-growers 
reported to have applied urea 
(88%), other chemical fertilizer 
(71%), and pesticide (79%) in the 
baseline survey), towards the 
promotion of more suitable 
technologies and agroforestry 
systems, which enhance soil 
conservation and generate 
positive environmental 
externalities.  

 

(ii) Agroforestry vouchers could be used for services such 
as pruning and grafting, or inputs such as seedlings and 
pesticides. The evaluation shows that, compared to the 
control group, beneficiary farmers increased the total 
number of plots planted and specifically the number of plots 
with annual crops. The project also had a positive impact 
on the use of labor and increased the expenditure in 
permanent seedlings. In addition, the program determined 
a 23% increase in farmers’ expected production, 38% in 
expected income and 78% in expected profits. 

An impact evaluation 
using a propensity 
score matching on 
agroforestry 
vouchers provided 
by PTTA 
(Fahsbender et al., 
2017) 

(iii) Include robust monitoring and evaluation arrangements 
in project design that will establish with certainty which 
elements of the program are effective. 

OVE, 2015 PITAG is built on the lessons 
learned through rigorous impact 
evaluations, and will measure its 
impacts through a rigorous 
monitoring and evaluation 
strategy. 

(iv) In designing projects, place as much emphasis on 
technical assistance as on the productive capital goods to 
be offered to beneficiaries. 

OVE, 2015 Technical assistance to farmers 
and technology providers has 
been strengthened in PITAG, 
through specific activities 
included in Component II. 

(v) The design of new technological packages must be 
directly related to the results of applied agricultural 
research, while considering the diversity of climates and 
social contexts in which they will be implemented. 

IRAM, 2015; PMDN I 
Mid-Term and Final 
Evaluations 

PITAG includes applied research 
component (Component I). 

(vi) The menu of technologies should be designed as to 
enhance agricultural productivity and contribute to climate 
change adaptation, without damaging the environment. 
Also, the promotion of technologies and practices should 
be avoided if certain conditions related to access to factors 
of production (especially water) are not fulfilled. 

IRAM, 2015; PMDN I 
Mid-Term and Final 
Evaluations 

PITAG makes a particular effort 
at identifying specific 
technologies that will facilitate 
climate change adaptation. 

(vii) It is necessary to develop synergies and 
complementarities among projects at local level (i.e., 
watershed protection through the combination of 
infrastructure, adoption of sustainable cropping practices 
and land tenure security; value chain development through 
support to agribusiness and Small and Medium Enterprises 
(SME) and adoption of sustainable cropping practices) to 
maximize impacts. 

PMDN I Mid-Term 
and Final 
Evaluations 

PITAG is designed in 
coordination with other 
complementary initiatives (see 
par. 2.7-2.9). 



- 8 - 

 

1.13 Justification for public intervention. From an economic perspective, several 
reasons justify public investment in agricultural research and training, as well as 
technology transfer services to farmers. Public investment in agricultural research 
and technology transfer schemes show high rates of social and economic returns 
(Alston et al., 2000). In addition, the proposed program will focus its support in 
promoting technologies (mainly agroforestry) that will generate positive 
environmental externalities. Moreover, with regards to technology transfer 
interventions, the literature also recognizes the existence of several market failures 
that hinder the process of agricultural technology adoption in developing countries, 
including: (i) lack of access to information and/or asymmetric information; (ii) input 
and output market inefficiencies (Feder, Just and Zilberman, 1985; Jack, 2013); 
(iii) liquidity constraints and insufficient access to credit; and (iv) risk aversion. 

1.14 The lack of information limits technology adoption not only because agricultural 
producers lack knowledge on the effective use of these technologies, but also 
because they lack information regarding location of private providers or costs of 
production. For instance, in the case of Nepal, Joshi and Pandey (2005) show that 
farmers’ perceptions regarding different rice varieties influence adoption decisions. 
Therefore, the authors conclude that it is important to disseminate information 
broadly using different methods to form accurate perceptions of the technologies 
to be promoted among farmers. Similarly, Conley and Udry (2004) demonstrate 
the importance of learning and information effects on the technological adoption in 
Ghana. Specifically, the authors show that pineapple producers changed their 
input use patterns only when they gained access to information regarding 
production yields from neighboring farmers. Finally, Bentley et. al (2011) measured 
the effect of farmers´ field schools where free information regarding plant health 
and agricultural practices is provided to farmers in Bolivia. The authors found that 
adoption rates are higher (about 82%) for producers who received the information, 
in comparison with the control group. 

1.15 As for the presence of thin markets for technology providers in rural regions, this 
is mainly caused by the small population density spread in remote and large areas 
without accessible roads and high transaction costs (IFAD, 2003). Therefore, it is 
not profitable for technology providers to be located in areas under these 
conditions without certainty of a demand for their technologies. On the other hand, 
it is difficult for farmers to reach technology providers as these are primarily located 
in urban or suburban areas. The presence of liquidity constraints and credit 
restrictions is one of the principal factors that limit smallholder farmers’ technology 
adoption, as mentioned in ¶1.4.  

1.16 Finally, the fourth obstacle that limits technology adoption is risk aversion. This 
factor limits technology adoption because producers prefer certainty regarding the 
future yields that will be obtained with new technologies before incurring the initial 
cost. Thus, producers tend to postpone technology investments until they can 
confirm the benefits associated with the adoption of such technologies through 
experience from other farmers (Feder, 1980). Several studies provide evidence on 
the negative impact of risk aversion on technology adoption such as Abadi 
Ghadim, Pannell y Burton (2005) and Besley and Case (1994), which in the case 
of Haiti could be further accentuated by climate uncertainty.  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 9 - 

 

1.17 The Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program (PITAG) aims 
to improve technology adoption by reducing the aforementioned market failures. 
Specifically, the provision of a matching grant that partially covers the cost of an 
agricultural technology aims to ease liquidity and credit constraints faced by 
smallholder farmers. Secondly, the provision of technical assistance to farmers 
aims to reduce the barriers related to risk aversion and information asymmetry. 
Lastly, the implementation of technology fairs aims to reduce the lack of 
information and eliminate problems related to shortage of supply and thin markets 
by bringing together demand (small farmers) and supply (technology private 
providers). Given the ability of the program to mitigate these three market failures, 
together with high social returns of agricultural research and technology transfer 
and the positive environmental externalities the program would produce, public 
intervention is justified. 

1.18 Evidence of the relevance of the selected thematic areas of intervention. 
Agricultural productivity can be influenced by a wide range of factors such as land 
tenure status, human capital level, availability of agricultural inputs, climate 
change, access to finance, the provision of agricultural services (such as 
information, agricultural innovation, irrigation, agricultural health and food safety) 
and macroeconomic and trade policies. A strategy to improve the agricultural 
sector’s performance requires a set of well-defined policies geared towards 
promoting efficient factor and product markets.  

1.19 The economic literature presents ample evidence of the linkage between 
agricultural services and agricultural productivity, which is a main driver of 
competitiveness. Research and technology transfer have been shown to be among 
the key determining factors of improvements in agricultural productivity over the 
past 50 years (Pardey et al., 2012). Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations (FAO, 2012) reports that research and technology transfers are 
priorities in order to meet the growing demand for food because of their high 
returns. Specific studies obtain rates of return ranging from 43% to 67% for 
investments in research and technology transfer (Alston et al, 2014; Jin and 
Huffman, 2015).  

1.20 In addition to the PTTA impact evaluations (mentioned above), other studies have 
analyzed the impact of similar programs in Latin America and the Caribbean. 
Gonzalez et. al. (2009) evaluate the impact of an agricultural technology transfer 
program, Technological Support in the Agricultural Sector, that aims to reduce the 
barriers that limit technology adoption among farmers in the Dominican Republic. 
The study presents evidence that the adoption of the promoted technologies 
increases productivity levels for beneficiary producers of rice and livestock. As for 
technologies that aim to increase agricultural productivity through the promotion of 
environmentally friendly technologies, there is evidence of their impact on income 
and productivity. Specifically, different studies of the Environmental Program of El 
Salvador (PAES), which promoted the adoption of conservation technologies and 
product diversification show that the project had positive effect on household 
income (Cocchi and Bravo-Ureta, 2007; Bravo-Ureta, 2006). Also, (Bravo-Ureta et 
al. (2010) analyze the impact of the Natural Resources and Water Basins 
Management Program (MARENA) in Honduras, which promoted agroforestry and 
soil conservation technologies with the goal to increase diversified farming and 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 10 - 

 

enhance soil, water and forest management. They find positive results of the 
project on the total value of agricultural production. 

1.21 The adoption of sustainable practices can increase the resilience of crop yields, 
which are expected to drop between 5-10% by 2060 because of temperature 
increase and shift in precipitation patterns,11 and improve watershed management 
and soil conservation. The promotion of resilient crops, through the adoption and 
multiplication of agroforestry, and the dissemination of climate change awareness 
has proven to increase system resilience and, therefore, enhance livelihoods. For 
example, use of cover crops in Brazil over maize increased its production by 
198-246% (Altieri, 2001), and intercropping can enhance soil fertility, reduce 
reliance on chemical fertilizers, and therefore reduce the carbon footprint of the 
agricultural sector (Conant, 2010). 

1.22 Finally, with regards to food security, (Salazar et. aAl., 2016) assesses the impact 
of the CRIAR program in Bolivia that aims to improve access to agricultural 
technologies through a voucher-based subsidy scheme. The results show that 
beneficiary households are 20–30% more likely to be food secure than the control 
group and 22% less likely to be concerned about lack of food. This increase was 
driven both by food availability and food access. The annual value of production 
per hectare increased by 92% and the value of production sold by 360%, and the 
results also show that participation in CRIAR increased net annual agricultural 
household income by 36% and per capita household income by 19%.  Also, an 
ongoing study of the PATCA II, that provides voucher-based subsidies to farmers 
to improve agricultural technology adoption, shows that beneficiary farmers 
increased food security by 27% (Salazar et. al., 2016). 

1.23 Consistency with national priorities. The proposed program is consistent with 
the 2010-2025 Agriculture Policy Document, the 2010-2016 and 
2016-2021 National Agriculture Investment Plan (NAIP), the 2011-2016 
Agricultural Extension Plan, and Haiti’s Intended National Determined Contribution 
(INDC, 2015). These documents envision to build-up and strengthen a modern 
agricultural sector based on the efficiency and effectiveness of family agriculture 
and agribusiness. 

1.24 Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy (UIS) 2010-2020 (AB-3008) and is strategically aligned with the 
development challenges of: (i) productivity and innovation, through the generation 
of sustainable agricultural technologies and improving access to those 
technologies, as reflected by the impact indicator “Annual household value of 
agricultural production.” The program is also aligned to the cross-cutting themes 
of: (i) climate change and environmental sustainability, through the generation and 
promotion of climate change adaptation and sustainable technologies, as reflected 
in the result indicators “Beneficiaries who adopted soil protection and restoration 

                                                 
11  According to a vulnerability study for the agricultural sector in Haiti’s National Adaptation Plan of Action (PANA), 

the temperature increase is estimated to vary between 1°C by 2030 and up to 1.7°C by 2060 and precipitation 
patterns are expected to decrease between 20% by 2030 and up to 35.8% by 2060, with a specific impact on 
irrigated crops. Corn projection scenarios foresee a decrease of 4% by 2030 and 7.7% by 2060; b) for rice 
decreases will attain 9% by 2030 and 15% by 2060 and potato will reach a 5% decrease by 2030 and 10% by 
2060. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 11 - 

 

technologies,” “Additional hectares of land applying agroforestry technologies,” 
and (ii) gender equality and diversity, through the reduction of gender inequalities 
and the promotion of women’s participation, as reflected in the result indicator 
“Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives.” The program 
contributes to the Corporate Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019 (GN-2727-6) 
through the indicators of: “beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable 
use of natural capital,” “women beneficiaries of economic empowerment 
initiatives,” “farmers with improved access to agricultural services and 
investments” and “beneficiaries of IDBG projects that contribute to at least one key 
dimension of food security. The program is aligned with the Bank’s Country 
Strategy with Haiti 2011-201512 (GN-2646), which sets agriculture as a priority 
sector of intervention. The program is also included in the 2017 Operational 
Program Report (GN-2884) and is aligned with the Country Strategic Objective 
“Protect the environment, respond to climate change and enhance food security”. 
The program is also consistent with the “Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document” (GN-2709-5) as it focuses on the 
provision of public agricultural goods and promotes access to technology, with the 
“Food Security Sector Framework” (GN-2825-3), as it will increase agricultural 
productivity and therefore contribute to food security, and the “Climate Change 
Sector Framework” (GN-2835-3) as the program enhances resiliency of vulnerable 
farmer communities through adaptation measures. According to the joint MDB 
approach on climate finance tracking, an estimated 64.56% of total IDB funding for 
this project result in climate change mitigation and adaptation activities. This 
contributes to the IDBG’s climate finance goal of 30% of combined IDB and IIC 
operational approvals by year’s end 2020.  

1.25 Gender mainstreaming. In the context of PTTA, a gender gap analysis was 
conducted. This study combined qualitative data from focus groups and 
quantitative data from the baseline survey. The main conclusions are the following: 
(i) women heads of household have less time to allocate to agricultural activities 
and therefore, have higher labor expenditures than men (310 Gdes vs. 280 Gdes); 
(ii) women heads of household have smaller plots and less access to land; 
(iii) women sell a lower proportion of their production and allocate more to home 
consumption compared to men (52% vs. 64% in the case of rice); (iv) more 
female-headed households face severe food insecurity (86% vs 71%); 
(v) female-head of households are less educated than men (55% never attended 
school vs. 30%); and (vi) female-headed households have lower annual income 
(US$176 vs. US$347) (Coelho, 2015). 

1.26 As a result of the gender gap assessment the following activities will be included 
as part of PITAG, with the objective of reducing gender inequalities and promoting 
women’s participation. First, PITAG will include an information campaign that 
targets women directly. Second, Component I will allocate financial resources to 
five applied research projects with the objective of developing new agricultural 
technologies that are directly targeted towards women’s needs or crops usually 
grown by women. Third, Component II will promote post-harvest technologies that 
are targeted towards agricultural activities usually conducted by women (i.e. mills 
and moisture meters). Fourth, the agroforestry packages will include crop varieties 
that aim to reduce food insecurity such as moringa and mirlinton, which are usually 

                                                 
12  Currently in effect until December 2017 (GN-2646-2). 

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807


- 12 - 

 

grown by female farmers. Fifth, the program will be monitored and evaluated using 
sex-disaggregated indicators. 

1.27 Climate change. The National Determined Contribution of Haiti defines a 
conditional target of 31% GHG emissions reduction, and includes key agricultural 
adaptation and mitigation actions such as development of crops resilient to climate 
change, sustainable practices and conservation of agricultural genetic resources, 
soils and water resources to attain its commitment. The program contributes to the 
NDC target through the development and promotion of sustainable and climate 
resilient technologies (mainly focusing on agroforestry packages), which will also 
contribute to the reforestation of the country and the reduction of net emissions.13 

B. Objective, Components and Cost 

1.28 The general objectives of the program are to increase agricultural income and food 
security for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti. The specific objectives 
are to increase agricultural productivity and improve the use of natural capital 
through the adoption of sustainable technologies. The channels through which 
increases in agricultural productivity are expected to increase food security are 
twofold. First, higher agricultural productivity will translate into higher agricultural 
yields, increasing food production for home-consumption. Second, higher 
agricultural productivity will increase agricultural income from increased production 
sales which, in turn, will improve household’s purchasing power for, amongst other 
goods, foodstuffs. To achieve its objectives, the program will be structured in two 
components. 

1.29 Component I. Applied research and training (US$14,600,000). The objective of 
this component is to generate and disseminate applied agricultural research and it 
will finance the following activities: (i) applied and adaptive agricultural research 
projects developed and implemented by national and/or international institutions. 
These research projects will create, improve and/or adapt sustainable agricultural 
technologies that will enhance the supply of technological options available to 
farmers. Eight main projects (total budget: US$9,318,000) were identified through 
a prioritization exercise based on an index that summarized economic, social, and 
environmental indicators as well as the yield gap vis-à-vis other countries in the 
region. All research projects will include climate considerations and foster 
adaptation and mitigation measures. Seven additional smaller projects will be 
demand-driven (total budget: US$3,080,000) and will be selected through a similar 
prioritization exercise; (ii) the strengthening of the higher education curriculum 
through activities conducted within the research projects (scholarships, among 
others), in order to improve applied and adaptive research and technology transfer 
capabilities in Haiti; and (iii) the institutional strengthening of the MARNDR 
Innovation Directorate (ID), through: (a) technical and scientific support; 
(b) materials and equipment; (c) strengthening of the technical and scientific profile 
of its professionals; and (d) an innovation information system. The component will 
be executed by the ID of the MARNDR. The selection of the various proposals will 
be conducted by a panel composed by Ministry staff and external experts (faculty 

                                                 
13  According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), agroforestry is a climate smart practice, 

as it has a mitigation potential of 1.1–2.2 Pg carbon over the next 50 years and also provides proven resiliency 
assets. 



- 13 - 

 

members from Haiti and abroad). The results of Component I will progressively 
provide inputs for the technology menu promoted by Component II, including 
climate considerations. A behavioral study will be also conducted to determine 
farmers’ willingness to pay for the new technologies (resulting from the adaptive 
research) to be introduced in the menu. The activities of the component are 
consistent with the recent reforms supported by the IDB as represents a first 
opportunity of application of the FONRED guidelines, whose development was 
supported by the IDB. 

1.30 Component II: Promotion of sustainable agricultural technologies 
(US$55,909,305). This component will finance the adoption of profitable, climate 
smart, and sustainable agricultural technologies that will improve farm profitability, 
generate positive environmental externalities, and facilitate the mitigation of and 
adaptation to climate change. The component will be implemented through the 
agricultural incentives mechanism implemented by the MARNDR. A preliminary 
technology menu has been selected through a prioritization exercise based on the 
relative importance of the different crops, their socio-economic relevance and their 
environmental sustainability. This menu will include: pre-harvest, harvest and 
post-harvest technologies, as well as sustainable soil recovery and conservation 
practices (i.e. agro-forestry systems, sustainable soil management techniques).14 
This menu will be updated each year, taking into consideration the results of 
Component I. To become beneficiaries of this component, interested farmers will 
participate in a series of fairs that will be organized to match demand and supply 
for the various technologies. The component will cover 90%15 of the costs of the 
technologies through a matching grant, and farmers will cover, in cash, the 
remaining 10%. The maximum amount of subsidy will depend on the specific 
technology chosen by farmers and will go up to US$2,000, with a weighted 
average of US$950. Given the damages experienced by farmers in the areas 
affected by hurricane Matthew (South and Grand’Anse Departments), the 
component will finance the total cost of the technologies in these regions. The 
demonstrated results of the selected technologies ensure the sustainability of the 
intervention (see Table I-2). The component will also finance: an information 
system for program implementation, technical assistance for farmers (specific 
assistance on how to choose and apply the technologies and general, strategic 
assistance on farm management and commercialization), and technical assistance 
for technology providers (mainly focused on quality control and environmental 
management). Technical operators will facilitate the implementation of the 
Program in the different intervention areas. 

1.31 Other project costs (US$6,350,000). Other activities to be financed include: 
(i) administration (e.g., consultants, travel, equipment, operational costs, audits); 
(ii) mid-term, final, and impact evaluations; and (iii) contingencies. 

C. Key Results Indicators 

1.32 The Results Framework (Annex II) has been agreed with the Government of Haiti 
and includes the program’s objectives, impacts, results and products, as well as 

                                                 
14  The initial list of technologies includes: motor-pompes, animal traction, cane mills, threshers, stocking 

equipment, different types of agroforestry packages, different types of forestry packages, forages. 
15  This percentage is meant to represent an average across technologies, and was determined on the basis of 

previous experiences, income data, and indicators collected during the evaluation of related programs. 



- 14 - 

 

their respective indicators. Table I-3 summarizes the program’s key impact 
indicators, measurement period and selection rationale. 

Table I-3. Key Indicators 

Impact/ Results indicator Measurement 
period 

Selection rationale 

(i) Percentage of male-headed 
households who are severely 
food insecure using the Food 
Insecurity Experience Scale 
(FIES) 

Y1 and Y5 This indicator measures the degree of food 
insecurity faced by the household, and it will 
be measured separately for male and 
female headed households, and compared 
with a control group. 

(ii) Annual value of agricultural 
production (US$/household) 

Y1 and Y5 This indicator is a proxy for agricultural 
productivity. 

(iii) Additional hectares of land 
applying agroforestry 
technologies 

Y1 and Y5 This indicator will measure the adoption of 
agroforestry technologies and monitor forest 
coverage, and will be measured separately 
for male and female farmers. 

1.33 Economic analysis. The program’s ex-ante economic analysis is based on a cost 
benefit methodology that examines the economic viability for each of the 
technologies selected as well as for the program as a whole. The costs considered 
include the investment (i.e., asset cost, technical assistance and private 
investment), operation, maintenance and reposition of the technologies as well as 
additional production costs and opportunity costs. The net benefits attributed to the 
adoption of the technologies were estimated using technical coefficients for labor 
and inputs obtained from the impact evaluation of agroforestry technologies 
provided with PTTA as well as from the technical report for Component II. The 
results of the analysis, using efficiency prices, an adoption rate of 75%, a 12-year 
horizon, and a discount rate of 12%, confirm that the program is economically 
viable with a net present value of US$28,000,000 and Internal Rate of Return (IRR) 
of 27%. Table I-4 shows the expected effects from each of the options offered in 

the technological menu with their respective IRR. 

Table I-4. Expected Effects and Internal Rates of Returns for the Technologies 

Technology Direct Effects IRR 

Agroforestry Increase productivity and improve soil quality 41.7% 

Irrigation Increase productivity and crop diversification 67.9% 

Animal traction Increase production 22.7% 

Post-Harvest equipment Increase income due to food processing 49.3% 

1.34 Beneficiaries. The program will have the following beneficiaries: (i) 3,000 direct 
beneficiaries of the agricultural applied research and training projects 
(Component I); and (ii) 65,048 farmers that will directly benefit from the matching 
grant mechanism promoting the adoption of technologies (Component II). It is 
expected that women would represent at least 40% of these beneficiaries. The 
departments targeted by the program are: North, North-East, Artibonite, South, 
and Grand’Anse. The first three departments have been selected because of the 
foreseen synergies with other complementary programs and the South and 
Grand’Anse were included to re-capitalize these departments after the damages 
caused by hurricane Matthew. Based on information obtained through PTTA, the 
expected beneficiaries will be farmers who, on average, have access to 



- 15 - 

 

1.4 hectares of land and plant 0.7 hectares; have low levels of income 
(US$248 annual household agricultural income and US$208 income from 
livestock); and low levels of schooling (53% are illiterate, 26% have incomplete 
primary school, 9% finished primary school and 2% have a high school degree). 
Given the program’s limited resources, the proposed targeting will help to: 
(i) ensure the coordination with other rural development programs financed by the 
Bank and other partners (see ¶2.6); and (ii) focus attention on farmers who are in 
most need of the proposed technological changes.

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing Instruments 

2.1 The total program amount is US$76,859,305. The Grant Facility will finance 
US$55,000,000, the GAFSP16 will finance US$10,000,000, and International Fund 
for Agricultural Development (IFAD)17 will finance the remaining US$10,859,305. 
The local counterpart will finance US$1,000,000 to cover recurrent costs. IFAD 
might elect, by the end of 2017, to contribute to the project through a Project 
Specific Grant (PSG) administered by the Bank, in place of a parallel cofinancing, 
for the budgeted amount. Such additional non-reimbursable funding will contribute 
to the project according to Table II-1. In this case, the Bank would establish a 
commitment from IFAD through an administrative agreement without the 
requirement of preparing or approving a separate project proposal. Under such 
administrative agreement, the resources provided by the donor will be 
administered by the Bank. The Bank will not charge an administrative fee for donor 
contributions to projects in Haiti.  The Board is therefore requested to authorize the 
President, or such representative as he shall designate, to enter into such 
agreements as may be necessary with IFAD and with the Republic of Haiti to 
receive, administer, and allocate to this operation the PSG resources aimed at 
supporting and executing the components of this operation. Table II-1 provides the 
cost summary by investment categories and components. The budget includes all 
costs associated with risks mitigation measures identified in the ESMP and the risk 
analysis.

                                                 
16  This co-financing is subject to the entry into effect of a specific agreement for the financing of this program to 

be signed between the IDB and GAFSP. 
17  This parallel financing is subject to IFAD´s approval. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6


- 16 - 

 

Table II-1. Costs and Sources of Financing (US$) 

Investment categories IDB GAFSP IFAD Local Total 

Components 

Component I. Applied 
research and training 14,600,000  

 

 14,600,000 

Component II. Promotion 
of sustainable 
agricultural technologies 35,050,000 10,000,000 

 
 

10,859,305  55,909,305 

Other project costs 

Administration 4,000,000  
 

1,000,000 5,000,000 

Audits 150,000  
 

 150,000 

Monitoring & Evaluation 700,000  
 

 700,000 

Contingencies 500,000  
 

 500,000 

TOTAL 55,000,000 10,000,000 
 

10,859,305 1,000,000 76,859,305 

• IFAD contribution is, as of today, parallel (co-financing) but might be received by the Bank as 
a PSG, subject to IFAD’s Board approval. 

 

2.2 The program is an investment grant operation and it is designed to be disbursed 
in 60 months. The disbursement calendar is presented in Table II-2 and is based 
on the Pluriannual Execution Plan (PEP) (see REL-1).  

 

Table II-2. Disbursement Projections (US$) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

IDB 3,123,865 4,150,926 14,565,837 16,471,691 16,687,681 55,000,000 

GAFSP 1,000,000 2,000,000 3,000,000 3,000,000 1,000,000 10,000,000 

IFAD 1,000,000 2,859,305 3,000,000 2,000,000 2,000,000 10,859,305 

Local 200,000 200,000 200,000 200,000 200,000 1,000,000 

TOTAL 5,323,865 9,210,231 20,765,837 21,671,691 19,887,681 76,859,305 

% 6.9 12.0 27.0 28.2 25.9 100 

A. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks 

2.3 According to OP-703, the program was classified as Category “B.” The expected 
negative impacts are considered to be low, and avoidable through adequate 
mitigation measures. During project preparation, an Environmental Assessment 
and an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) were prepared and 
consulted.18 Key project impacts and risks include: (i) water resource exploitation 
by the introduction of water pumps for irrigation purposes. This risk will present a 
negligible negative impact, based on an ex-ante hydrological assessment of the 
accumulated pumping capacity of the small number of water pumps (450 over all 

                                                 
18  The preliminary draft of the Environmental Assessment (and ESMP) was posted on the Ministry of Agriculture’s 

website (http://agriculture.gouv.ht/view/01/) on January 13, 2017 for public view, as well as on the IDB website 
on January 17, 2017. An updated version, integrating the results of the first consultations, was posted on 
February 16, 2017, prior to QRR. No further update was needed after last consultation events in 
September 2017. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3
http://agriculture.gouv.ht/view/01/
http://www.iadb.org/en/projects/project-description-title,1303.html?id=HA-L1107
http://www.iadb.org/en/projects/project-description-title,1303.html?id=HA-L1107


- 17 - 

 

intervention zones) to be financed throughout the life of the program. Moreover, a 
Water Resource Assessment will be completed prior to project execution to allow 
for a better understanding of the present state of water resources in the proposed 
intervention zones. The use of these water pumps will also be monitored; 
(ii) possible conflicts generated by program activities regarding agricultural use of 
land in protected areas/Key Biodiversity Areas (KBA).19 To mitigate this risk, the 
program will only take place in areas where management plans exist and are in 
effect, and will be implemented in accordance with the respective protected area 
management plan, including abiding by existing sustainable development zoning 
regulations; (iii) possible promotion of the use of invasive species. To address this 
concern, during the first year of the program’s implementation, a study on invasive 
and non-invasive species will be completed to identify alternatives. If no alternative 
is found, a management plan relating to the use of the invasive species will be 
prepared and implemented. The beneficiary shall comply with the environmental, 
social, health and safety and labor requirements set forth in the Environmental and 
Social Management Report (ESMR); and (iv) emissions associated with energy 
forests. To address this risk, for the first years of the PITAG project, energy forest 
packages will not be offered. Rather, during this time more research will be 
completed to determine the emissions (particularly of carbon dioxide and black 
carbon) that may be released due to energy forests. This research will examine 
the relationship between carbon emissions and sequestration, and the possible 
contribution to climate change, as well as potential human health impacts from 
burning biomass (in the form of charcoal or fuelwood). 

B. Fiduciary Risk 

2.4 An update of PTTA/RESEPAG institutional assessment related to its financial 
management and internal control processes was completed in January 2017. 
Based on its results, the Bank considers PTTA/RESEPAG overall risk rating to be 
medium due to following weaknesses: (i) financial reports are prepared manually, 
which increases the possibility of errors in financial reporting as SYSCOMPTE 
does not automatically generate financial reports; (ii) limitations identified in the 
Système Intégré de Gestion des Informations (SIGI), system used for the 
management of subsidies to farmers; and (iii) absence of a code of ethics. To 
mitigate those risks the EA: (i) has launched an evaluation of the functionality and 
the design of the SIGI information system which will advise on the best option to 
choose for the implementation of PITAG; (ii) will need to set up SYSCOMPTE 
parameters to allow the automatic generation of financial reports and the 
monitoring and execution of budget; and (iii) includes a code of ethics and 
professional conduct in the POM. The fiduciary risk related to procurement delays 
is classified as medium and its mitigation measures include: (i) anticipation and 
good planning for complex procurement processes; (ii) strengthening of the UPMP; 
and (iii) support to the MARNDR to simplify the procedures for contract approval 
and signature. 

C. Other Key Issues and Risks 

2.5 The design of the program used the methodology “Program Risk Analysis for 
Sovereign Guaranteed Loans.” A risk identification and management workshop 

                                                 
19  Sites contributing significantly to the global persistence of biodiversity.  



- 18 - 

 

was conducted during program preparation, to identify program risks and 
mitigation measures. All main counterparts (IDB, MARNDR, private sector, 
development partners) have been consulted as part of the definition of the risk 
matrix and its mitigation measures. The high risk identified is the insufficient quality 
and quantity of technology providers. Several mitigation measures were identified 
for this risk, namely: (i) strengthened selection process of potential providers, 
including quality and quantity control; (ii) trainings; (iii) updated quality standards 
for technologies; (iv) possibility to exclude providers who do not follow the rules; 
and (v) technology transfer to providers through Component I. The development 
risk related to the cash constraints of suppliers is medium, and its mitigation 
measures include: (i) strengthened selection process of potential providers, 
including quality and quantity control; (ii) promotion of link with microfinance 
institutions, including programs financed by IDB and Ministry of Commerce; and 
(iii) good planning of the campaigns in terms of areas and quantities of subsidies. 
The development risk linked to the lack of local financial counterpart is medium 
and its mitigation measure is the preliminary planning and communication with the 
Ministry of Finance. Extreme climatic events have been identified as a medium 
development risk and the related mitigation measures are: (i) promotion of 
technologies that are resilient to climate change; (ii) research on climate resilience; 
and (iii) good planning of the campaigns in terms of areas and seasons. The 
complexity of the subsidy management process is a medium development risk and 
its mitigations measures include: (i) updated operational procedure, based on 
PTTA experience; and (ii) improvement of information system (SIGI). The limited 
number of actors that can execute quality research in the country is a medium 
development risk, whose mitigation measures are: (i) promotion of consortia with 
national and international research centers; and (ii) efforts to give maximum 
visibility to calls for proposals. The limited transfer of research outputs to producers 
is a medium development risk and its mitigation measures include: 
(i) strengthening of coordination between the two Components, the Innovation 
Directory of the MARNDR; (ii) inclusion of dissemination activities in Component I; 
and (iii) monitoring of research activities in the country. The difficulty to access 
intervention areas has been identified as a medium governance risk, whose 
mitigation measure is the timely preparation of providers and the selection of 
providers that will have access to difficult areas. Finally, a medium sustainability 
risk was identified: value added by the technological packages absorbed by 
household consumption expenses. Its mitigation measures include: (i) promotion 
of synergies with microfinance initiatives; and (ii) introduction of the matching grant 
mechanism. 

2.6 The Government of Haiti and the MARNDR expressed high interest in this program 
and are committed to the sustainability of the activities supported by the Program 
beyond its execution period, since the program is aligned with the Road Map of 
the current administration, the 2010-2025 Agriculture Policy Document, the 
2010-2016 and 2016-2021 National Agriculture Investment Plan (NAIP), the 
2011-2016 Agricultural Extension Plan, and Haiti’s Intended National Determined 
Contribution (INDC, 2015). 



- 19 - 

 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements 

3.1 The beneficiary of the program will be the Republic of Haiti, and the EA will be the 
MARNDR, which has been in charge of the execution of most Bank-financed 
operations in the sector, and currently manages an active portfolio totaling 
approximately US$140 million. The EA will manage the program through: (i) the 
technical and administrative team of PTTA/RESEPAG executing unit (PEU); and 
(ii) the UPMP, which have demonstrated their capacity to execute similar programs 
in the past. The EA will be responsible for the overall administration of the program, 
including: planning and reporting technical and fiduciary aspects; execution of 
procurement activities; supervision of firms and service providers; financial and 
accounting management; risk management; monitoring and evaluation; 
supervision and execution of the environmental and social management plan. The 
Innovation Directorate will be responsible for the planning and technical 
supervision of Component I. The approval by the Executing Agency and entry 
into effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms 
and conditions previously agreed with the Bank constitutes a Special 
Contractual Clause prior to the first disbursement of the financing, justified 
by the need to have designated personnel for the execution of the program and 
clear procedures that will guide its implementation. 

3.2 Program Operating Manual (POM). The POM, which establishes standards and 
procedures for the MARNDR with regard to programming activities, procurement 
audits, and monitoring and evaluation, among others, will govern program 
execution. The POM will include, among others, the following: (i) a detailed 
description of the implementation agreement of each component; (ii) roles and 
responsibilities of the agencies involved in the implementation of the program; 
(iii) criteria and procedures to select and contract goods and services; (iv) criteria 
and procedures for management and financial control of the program; 
(v) monitoring and evaluation arrangements; (vi) specific environmental and social 
measures of the program, as described in the ESMR (annexed to the POM); 
(vii) presentation of evidence that the MARNDR has selected a program 
coordinator and a financial officer according to the terms and conditions previously 
agreed with the Bank; and (viii) a provision according to which a technical 
verification of the use of agricultural subsidy funds by the beneficiary will be 
performed on a quarterly basis by an individual consultant who will be hired 
according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank. A 
preliminary manual of procedures was prepared during program preparation.  

3.3 The following are some salient elements that will be included in the POM regarding 
the execution of Component II. The main selection criteria for beneficiaries are the 
following: (i) to be registered in the MARNDR farmers’ registry; (ii) to be domiciled 
in the area of intervention; (iii) to work on an area equal to or greater than 0.25 Ha; 
(iv) not having received a previous MARNDR technology subsidy; and (v) to meet 
the specific criteria for the desired technical package. The selected farmers will 
pay their contribution to a financial institution and technology providers will provide 
the technology to the farmers. The program will pay the remaining part of the cost 
of the technology to technology providers once it has been verified that they have 



- 20 - 

 

delivered the technology to the farmers. All the transactions and validation will be 
tracked by an updated version of the SIGI. 

3.4 Procurement. All program-related procurement activities will be performed 
following Bank’s Procurement Policies: Policies for the Procurement of Goods and 
Works financed by the Bank (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and 
Contracting of Consultants financed by the Bank (GN-2350-9) as applicable.  

3.5 Financial and Auditing reports. The program will submit to the Bank the following 
documents: (i) semi-annual financial reports of the program included in the 
semi-annual progress report; (ii) annual financial statements of the program, 
audited by an independent auditor are to be submitted to the Bank within 120 days 
at the end of each fiscal year, beginning with the fiscal year in which the first 
expenditures are incurred; and (iii) a final financial audit report of the program is to 
be submitted by the MARNDR within 120 days after the date of the last 
disbursement.  

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results 

3.6 It will be the PEU´s responsibility to put in place a monitoring system to collect data 
related to all the indicators in the Results Framework. This system will be 
instrumental for the PEU to be able to submit to the Bank semi-annual progress 
reports that will describe, among others: (i) the physical progress of the program 
(i.e., in terms of output indicators); (ii) the progress made in terms of outcomes and 
impacts, as stipulated in the Results Framework; and (iii) the status of applicable 
environmental and social mitigation measures. 

3.7 An impact evaluation will be conducted to measure the program’s impact and 
results. Specifically, the impact evaluation will be a combination of experimental 
and quasi-experimental techniques. Component I will be evaluated using a before 
and after calculation. On the other hand, Component II will use a randomization 
methodology to analyze the impact of the adoption of those technologies that will 
experience a demand higher than project’s capacity to supply it (i.e., irrigation), 
and combine it with a quasi-experimental approach of difference-in-difference for 
technologies such as agroforestry and post-harvest. For this purpose, a sample of 
2,000 farmers (1,000 beneficiaries and 1,000 control, representative by gender) 
will be surveyed for baseline and a follow-up surveys. The data collection will be 
representative of female-headed households and separate analysis will be 
performed in order to measure impact by gender. The total budget for the impact 
evaluation amounts to US$550,000 that will be covered with resources from this 
grant. Details on the monitoring and evaluation activities are provided in the 
Monitoring and Evaluation Plan prepared for the program. 

C.  Significant Design Activities Post Approval  

3.8 There will be no significant design activities post approval.  

 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-5


Annex I - HA-L1107/HA-G1038

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2646

     Country Program Results Matrix GN-2884

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country 

strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution

     3.1 Program Diagnosis

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic 

Analysis

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms

     5.2 Evaluation Plan

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries and/or 

public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality

Labor

Environment

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector entity 

prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps in 

the sector that were identified in the project document and/or in the evaluation plan
Yes

1.5

9.6

2.5

7.1

8.5

4.0

0.0

1.5

1.5

Evaluable
10.0

3.0

4.0

3.0

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

The objective of the program is to lower the levels of poverty and food insecurity in rural areas of Haiti by improving access to adequate and climate resilient agricultural 

technologies and increasing agricultural productivity among smallholder farmers. To increase adoption of such technologies, the program proposes the provision of agricultural 

incentives and technical assistance, as well as the development of applied and adaptive agricultural research projects, along with a strengthening of the high education 

curriculum and institutional capacities to conduct and apply research. 

The documentation is well-structured. The diagnostic is based on empirical evidence of the major challenges faced by the country with regards to the vulnerability of Haiti’s 

agricultural sector and outlines various market, environmental, and institutional factors contributing to the current levels of low productivity. The proposed solution is then 

linked to the problems identified. The results matrix (RM) reflects the objectives of the program and establishes a clear vertical logic, including impact indicators that can capture 

the program’s overall effect on income and food security. The RM includes SMART indicators at the impact (except one), outcome and output level, with their respective baseline 

values and targets and the means to gather information.  

The economic analysis includes a Cost-Benefit Analysis that considers the intervention’s benefit on the income of targeted smallholder farmers as measured in terms of gross 

value added. In general, the benefits are based on a good understanding of the theory of change, and the economic costs include all resource costs as well as costs from a social 

perspective. However, the quantification of benefits under Component I and II does not clearly separate between the distinct beneficiaries, which may lead to issues of double 

counting. Overall assumptions appear reasonable and appropriate; a sensitivity analysis contemplates key parameters and various break-even points.

The monitoring and evaluation plan presents all outputs and associated costs. The evaluation plan proposes a before-after comparison for Component I (no attribution), as well 

as a randomized control trial with an instrumental variable approach and a difference-and-difference method with matching for Component II. The plan provides sufficient detail 

on methodological and logistical considerations, though the power calculations should have been conducted separately for male and female beneficiaries given the focus on 

heterogeneous impact by gender.

The risk matrix identifies eleven risks; three are classified as Low, seven as Medium, and one as High. All of them seem reasonable and include appropriate mitigating actions 

and compliance indicators.

There is an impact evaluation plan that aims to measure the effect of 

the program on the adoption of agricultural technologies.

Medium

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

-Beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable use of natural capital (#)*

-Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives (#)*

-Farmers with improved access to agricultural services and investments  (#)*

-Beneficiaries of IDBG projects that contribute to at least one key dimension of food security  (#)*

Yes

Protect the environment, respond to climate change, and enhance food 

security.

The intervention is included in the 2017 Operational Program.

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Yes

-Productivity and Innovation

-Gender Equality and Diversity

-Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability

I. Corporate and Country Priorities



Annex II – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 1 of 6 

RESULTS MATRIX 

Project Objective: To increase food security and agricultural income for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti.  

Specific Objective: Increase agricultural productivity and improve the use of natural capital through the adoption of sustainable technologies. 

 

EXPECTED IMPACTS 

Indicators Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

IMPACT 1: Improve Food Security 

Indicator 1.1: Percentage of male-
headed households who are 
severely food insecure using the 
Food Security Scale (ELCSA)  

% 71 2013 35 2022 

 

Agricultural Household 
Surveys for baseline 
and follow-up. 

The baseline number will be 
updated through surveys to be 
conducted prior to program 
implementation. The baseline 
values correspond to baseline 
values of PTTA. Target numbers are 
based on the CRIAR impact 
evaluation conducted in Bolivia and 
apply to program beneficiaries. 

Indicator 1.2: Percentage of 
female-headed households who are 
severely food insecure using the 
Food Security Scale (ELCSA) 

% 86 2013 50 2022 

 

Agricultural Household 
Surveys for baseline 
and follow-up. 

The baseline number will be 
updated through surveys to be 
conducted prior to program 
implementation. The baseline 
values correspond to baseline 
values of PTTA. Target numbers are 
based on the CRIAR impact 
evaluation conducted in Bolivia and 
apply to program beneficiaries. 

 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

Indicator 1.3: Beneficiaries of 
IDBG projects that contribute to at 
least one key dimension of food 
security 

# 0 2017 65,048 2022  

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

This number corresponds to the 
total number of program 
beneficiaries. IDB finances 39,679 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 13,010, and 
IFAD 12,359. 

IMPACT 2: Increase Agricultural Income 

Indicator 2.1:  Annual agricultural 
income  

USD/ 
household 

170 2015 268 2022 

 The baseline number will be 

updated through surveys to be 

conducted prior to program 



Annex II – HA-L1107 
Page 2 of 6 

 

Indicators Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

• Annual agricultural income for 
female-headed agricultural 
households 

USD/ 
household 

68 2015 107 2022 

Agricultural Household 

Surveys for baseline 

and follow-up.  

implementation. The baseline and 

target values are obtained from the 

impact evaluation of the PTTA. The 

income increase corresponds to 

58%. Targets apply to program 

beneficiaries. 

This includes only income from crop 

related agricultural activities 

(livestock is not included) 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

•  Annual agricultural income for 
male-headed agricultural 
households 

USD/ 
household 

197 2015 311 2022 

Indicator 2.2: Annual agricultural 
profits 
 

USD/ 
household 

98 2015 160 2022 

 

Agricultural Household 

Surveys for baseline 

and follow-up. 

The baseline number will be 

updated through surveys to be 

conducted prior to program 

implementation. The baseline and 

target values are obtained from the 

impact evaluation of the PTTA. The 

profit increase corresponds to 

63%.Targets apply to program 

beneficiaries. 

Profits correspond to the agricultural 

revenues minus the cost of variable 

inputs and transportation for crop 

activities. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

• Annual agricultural profits of 
female-headed agricultural 
households 
 

USD/ 
household 

30 2015 49 2022 

• Annual agricultural profits of 
male-headed agricultural 
households 

USD/ 
household 

116 2015 189 2022 

IMPACT 3: Increase Agricultural Productivity 

Indicator 3.1: Annual value of 
agricultural production 

USD/ 

Household
/year 

347 2015 478 2022 

Agricultural Household 
Surveys for baseline 
and follow-up. 

This corresponds to an increase of 
38% in the value of production. This 
target corresponds to the results 
obtained in the impact evaluation of 
PTTA. Targets apply to program 
beneficiaries. 

 



Annex II – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 3 of 6 

 

EXPECTED RESULTS 

Results Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

 RESULT 1: Improve use of Natural Capital  

Indicator 1.1: Beneficiaries of 
improved management and 
sustainable use of natural 
capital. 

# 0 2017 61,224 2022  

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

This number corresponds to 
beneficiaries from agroforestry 
technologies. IDB finances 37,347 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 12,245, and 
IFAD 11,632. 

Indicator 1.2: Beneficiaries 
who adopted soil protection and 
restoration technologies 

# 0 2017 
45,918 

2022 

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

This number corresponds to 
beneficiaries from agroforestry 
technologies multiplied by an 
adoption rate of 75% (adoption rate 
observed in similar projects in the 
region). IDB finances 28,011 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 9,183, and 
IFAD 8,724. 

Indicator 1.3:  Additional 
hectares of land applying 
agroforestry technologies 

Has 0 2017 27,900 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target corresponds to 
estimates made for the economic 
analysis. IDB finances 17,019 
hectares, GAFSP 5,580, and IFAD 
5,301. 

RESULT 2: Improve Agricultural Innovation Services 

Indicator 2.1: Research and 
development expenditure as 
percentage of Agricultural GDP 

% 0.12 2017 0.3 2022 

Ministry’s executed 
budget. 

Baseline is taken from IDB 
Agrimonitor estimations for the 
average of the period 2008-2012.  

This indicator will be measured 
before and after the implementation 
(reflexive methodology). The target 
is based on calculations that 
include the value of the investment 
in research made by this and other 
related programs of the Ministry. 

Indicator 2.2: New 
technologies developed or 

# 0 2017 8 2022 
Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

These new technologies 
correspond solely to those 



Annex II – HA-L1107 
Page 4 of 6 

 

Results Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

adapted by new applied 
research projects 

developed by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 

Indicator 2.3: Male farmers 

who adopt the technologies 

developed by new applied 

research projects. 

# 0 2017 1,800 2022 

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

These new technologies 
correspond solely to those 
developed by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 

Indicator 2.4: Female farmers 

who adopt the technologies 

developed by new applied 

research projects. 

# 0 2017 1,200 2022 

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

These new technologies 
correspond solely to those 
developed by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

RESULT 3: Increase Adoption of Agricultural Technologies 

Indicator 3.1: Percentage of 
beneficiary producers who 
adopt agricultural technologies. 

% 0 2017 75% 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target represents the 
percentage of adopters observed in 
similar projects in the region 
including the PATCA in Dominican 
Republic and CRIAR in Bolivia. 

 

Indicator 3.2: Percentage of 

beneficiary women who adopt 

agricultural technologies 
% 0 2017 75% 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target represents the 
percentage of adopters observed in 
similar projects in the region. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

Indicator 3.3. Farmers who 

adopt agricultural technologies # 0 2017 48,786 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target represents the 
percentage of adopters observed in 
similar projects in the region. IDB 
finances 29,760 farmers, GAFSP 
9,757, and IFAD 9,269. 



Annex II – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 5 of 6 

Results Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

Indicator 3.4. Women 

beneficiaries of economic 

empowerment initiatives 
# 0 2017 26,019 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up.  

Project Report. 

This includes the total number of 
women to benefit from the program 
(40% of total beneficiaries from 
component I and II). IDB finances 
15,872 beneficiaries, GAFSP 
5,204, and IFAD 4,943. “Pro 
Gender Flag” 

 

PRODUCTS 

Products  Unit  
Base 
line 

Year 
1 

Year 
2 

Year 
3 

Year 
4 

Year 
5 

Final 
Goal 

Means of 
verification 

Observations 

Component I: Applied research and training 

1.1. Applied agricultural research 
projects implemented for the 
development/adaptation or 
improvement of new agricultural 
technologies  

# 
0 0 2 2 6 5 15 

Project 
progress 
report. 

The initial research projects 
will include: rice, banana, 
tubers, horticulture products, 
legumes, and agroforestry. 

MS. 1.1.1. Applied agricultural 
research projects implemented for 
the development/adaptation or 
improvement of agricultural 
technologies that specifically target 
female farmers 

# 
0 0 0 0 0 3 3 

Project 
progress 
report. 

Research projects on 
horticulture, tubers, and 
legumes  

“Pro Gender Flag” 

MS. 1.1.2. Applied agricultural 
research projects implemented for 
the development/adaptation or 
improvement of agricultural 
technologies that specifically target 
climate change adaptation or 
mitigation 

# 
0 0 0 0 0 3 3 

Project 
progress 
report. 

Three research projects on 
agroforestry. 

1.2. Scholarships to support the 
implementation of new innovation 
projects delivered to research 
fellows  

# 
0 0 2 3 3 2 10 

Project 
progress 
report. 

Research fellows include 
students, scientists and 
academics from Haiti that 
work in the new lines of 
agricultural research 
developed by the project.  



Annex II – HA-L1107 
Page 6 of 6 

 

Products  Unit  
Base 
line 

Year 
1 

Year 
2 

Year 
3 

Year 
4 

Year 
5 

Final 
Goal 

Means of 
verification 

Observations 

1.3. Directorate of Innovation 
strengthened  

# 
0 0 0 0 1 1 1 

Project 
progress report  

Strengthening of the 
Innovation Directorate 
includes provision of 
equipment and contracting a 
supervisor for the research 
program. Also, the 
implementation of the 
innovation information 
system. 

MS. 1.3.1. Innovation information 
system implemented 

# 
0 0 0 1 1 1 1 

Project 
Progress 
Report  

This corresponds to a system 
to monitor the research 
initiatives in the country. This 
system will be implemented 
by the MARDR. 

Component II: Promotion of sustainable agricultural technologies 

2.1. Beneficiary farmers who 

received technological packages # 

 

0 

       

3,252  

       

6,505  

     

19,514  

     

19,514  

     

16,262  

     

65,047  

Project 
progress 
report. 

IDB finances 39,679 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 13,010, 
and IFAD 12,359. 

MS. 2.1.1. Female farmers who 

received technological packages  # 
0 1,301 2,602 7,806 7,806 6,504 26,019 

Project 
progress 
report. 

This corresponds to 40% of 
total beneficiaries. IDB 
finances 15,872 beneficiaries, 
GAFSP 5,204, and IFAD 
4,943. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

MS. 2.1.2. Beneficiary farmers who 

received technological packages 

for climate change adaptation and 

mitigation. 

# 
0 

  

3,061  

  

6,122  

  

18,367  

  

18,367  

  

15,306  

  

61,223  

Project 
progress 
report. 

This number corresponds to 
beneficiaries receiving 
agroforestry technologies. 
IDB finances 37,347 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 12,245, 
and IFAD 11,632. 

2.2. Beneficiary farmers who 

received technical assistance # 

 

0 1,650 3,300 9,900 9,900 8,250 33,000 

Project 
progress 
report. 

IDB finances 24,750 
beneficiaries, and IFAD 
8,250. 

 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 1 of 6 

 

FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTS 
 

COUNTRY:    Republic of Haiti 

PROGRAM Nº:    HA-L1107/HA-G1038  

NAME:  Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program - 
PITAG 

EXECUTING AGENCY (EA): The Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural 
Development (MARNDR)  

FIDUCIARY TEAM:   Marise E. Salnave and Romina Kirkagacli (FMP/CHA) 

 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 The general objectives of the program are to increase agricultural income and food 
security for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti. The specific objectives are to 
increase agricultural productivity and improve the use of natural capital through the 
adoption of sustainable technologies. The EA will be the MARNDR, which will implement 
all program components through: (i) its Executing Unit named “PTTA/RESEPAG,” which 
will ensure program technical and financial management; and (ii) the procurement unit of 
the MARNDR named “UPMP,” which will perform procurement activities. The program is 
composed of two components: Component I - Applied research and training and 
Component II – Promotion of sustainable agricultural technologies. The total program 
amount is estimated at US$76,859,305; financed by the IDB Grant Facility for up to the 
amount of US$55,000,000; the GAFSP will co-finance up to the amount of 
US$10,000,000; the IFAD will finance the remaining US$10,859,305. The national 
counterpart will finance US$1,000,000 to cover recurrent costs linked to Component I and 
administrative expenses. 
 

1.2 The latest evaluation of the public financial management systems of the Republic of Haiti 
is contained in the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment 
report conducted in 2011 and published in February 2012. The Government of Haiti has 
shown continued commitment in improving the country system and has adopted in May 
2014 Public Financial Management reform strategy including an action plan 2014-2016 to 
consolidate basic public financial management functions focus on: (a) continuing the 
implementation of a Single Treasury Account (STA) with the support of IMF; (b) reaffirming 
the role of public accountants in the monitoring of expenses in all line ministries, and 
(c) improving the monitoring of public debt. Despite these measures, the    
country financial management systems and external control mechanism would require 
further improvements prior to conform to levels consistent with their utilization for the 
fiduciary management of Bank’s funded programs. As a result, no country systems will be 
used for the financial management of program. An evaluation of the National Procurement 
System was performed in 2013, applying the methodology established by the Organization 
for Economic Co-operation and Development. A certain number of recommendations were 
identified through an action plan for the modernization of the national procurement system. 
Based on the current situation and the need to align the national system to international 
standards and best practices, the Bank’s procurement policies will govern procurement 
activities foreseen under this program. Therefore, to mitigate these risks the Bank will 
continue in the foreseeable future to: (i) rely on special program executing units for the 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 2 of 6 

 

execution of all programs while at the same strengthening institutional capacities; and 
(ii) to implement special fiduciary arrangements for program implementation and to 
conduct close supervision of program executing units. External control will be performed 
for all Bank operations by independent audit firms acceptable to the Bank in accordance 
with the Bank’s financial reporting and audit guide. 

II. EXECUTING AGENCY´S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT AND COLLABORATION WITH OTHER ENTITIES 

2.1 The EA will be responsible for the overall program execution and administration, including: 
planning and reporting technical and fiduciary aspects; execution of procurement activities; 
supervision of firms and service providers; financial and accounting management; risk 
management; monitoring and evaluation; supervision and execution of the environmental 
and social management plan. The MARNDR will execute the aforementioned tasks 
through: (i) its Executing Unit named “PTTA/RESEPAG,” which will ensure the financial 
management of the program; and (ii) the procurement unit of the MARNDR named 
“UPMP”, which will perform the procurement activities of the program. The PEU has 
gained experience in the execution of Bank financed operations over the past five years, 
during the execution of the Technology Transfer Program for Small Farmers Program 
(HA-L1059, 2562-GR-HA, PTTA I). The program coordinator will report to MARNDR’s 
General Director. The EA will be responsible for the fiduciary aspects of the program and 
overall administration including financial reporting.  
 

2.2 The UPMP, which is the procurement unit of MARNDR, was created through a Ministerial 
Decree “M-AIDG/(C-17)09-13:1659 (bis)” of September 17, 2013, has been in place and 
operational since early 2014. Based on findings of the technical assistance conducted by 
the Bank’s Procurement team, this unit has proved to possess a solid technical knowledge 
in the application of the Bank’s procurement policies. As of now, 12 procurement 
specialists are working in the unit. The UPMP can count on an organized system to treat 
purchase requests and conduct procurement processes, and is developing an improved 
filing system.  

 
2.3 A Steering Committee (SC) will be created after program start-up workshop to ensure 

strategic overall guidance and coordination among the different institutions involved in 
program implementation. The SC will meet at least once a year in order to discuss 
strategic issues, as well as to approve the multi-year execution plan, annual operation 
plans and progress reports. This committee will be chaired by MARNDR’s General 
Director.  

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

3.1 An update of PTTA/RESEPAG institutional assessment related to its financial 
management and internal control processes was completed in January 2017. Based on 
the results, the Bank considers PTTA/RESEPAG overall risk rating to be medium due to 
following weaknesses: (i) financial reports are prepared manually which increases the 
possibility of errors in financial reporting as SYSCOMPTE does not automatically generate 
financial reports; (ii) Limitations identified in SIGI information system used for the 
management of subsidies to farmers; and (iii) absence of a code of ethics. To mitigate 
those risks the EA: (i) has launched an evaluation of the functionality and the design of the 
SIGI information system which will advise on the best option to choose for the 
implementation of new program; (ii) will need to set up parameters SYSCOMPTE to allow 
the automatic generation of financial reports and the monitoring and execution of budget; 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 3 of 6 

 

and (iii) include a code of ethics and professional conduct in the POM. The fiduciary risk 
related to procurement delays is classified as medium and its mitigation measures 
include: (i) anticipation and good planning for complex procurement processes; 
(ii) strengthening of the UPMP; and (iii) support to the MARNDR to simplify the 
procedures for contract approval and signature. 
 

3.2 Based on the most recent capacity evaluation of the UPMP conducted by the Bank, the 
risk level in terms of procurement is considered as medium. However, the following risks 
and mitigation measures have been identified: (i) a heavy workload is being handled by 
UPMP with the execution of several parallel programs financed by the IDB and other 
donors. Mitigation: hiring a new procurement specialist or designating a specific 
procurement specialist already working with the Unit to support the additional workload; 
(ii) a lengthy contract approval process at the level of the Ministry, which impacts the 
program timeframe. Mitigation: the EA will submit an annex to the POM describing the 
procedure and timeframe applicable to the MARNDR’s internal and external approval 
process for procurement contracts; (iii) with a centralized structure, the important 
number of transactions may also negatively impact on the execution timeframe. 
Mitigation: the Unit will work on consolidated procurement plans for the Ministry in order 
to improve its planning capacity and identify recurring purchases so as to reduce 
transactional costs and achieve best value for money; and (iv) contract archives are well 
organized but not yet available in electronic version. Mitigation: the program will support 
some of UPMP’s operational costs which will also be used to support the development of 
an electronic filing system. 

IV. ASPECTS TO BE CONSIDERED IN THE SPECIAL CONTRACTUAL CONDITIONS OF THE GRANT 

4.1 Prior to first disbursement of the financing. Special Accounts and authorized 
signatures: PTTA/RESEPAG will open four separate bank accounts at the Haitian 
Central Bank (two accounts for each financing source (IDB and GAFSP), one in US 
Dollars and one in Gourdes)..      

4.2 Adoption of program operation manual1. PTTA/RESEPAG shall update to the 
satisfaction of the Bank, their operations manual (OM) which shall set out the procedures 
to be followed by the EA with regard to planning and reporting of activities, financial 
management, audits, procurement and contracting, risk management, and monitoring and 
evaluation. The OM shall include, among others: (i) the role of each participant and 
collaborating institution for the implementation of the program; (ii) a code of ethics section; 
(iii) an annex describing the procedure and timeframe applicable to the MARNDR’s 
internal and external approval process for procurement contracts; (iv) the framework of 
Environmental and Social Management Plans; (v) the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan, 
procedures for the safeguard of financial information; and (vi) a chart of accounts. 

4.3 Audit special requirements: PTTA/RESEPAG will be responsible for the recruitment of 
external auditors eligible to the Bank to perform the financial audit of the program as 
follows: (i) annual financial audit of the program to be submitted within 120 days after the 
closure of each fiscal year for each executing unit; and (ii) a final financial audit of the 
program to be submitted within 120 days after the date of the last disbursement.  Audit 
may include audit of procurement processes under ex-post modality (this specific activity 
will be confirmed in the Terms of reference of the audit firm). For the audit of financial 

                                                 
1  The adoption of a program operating manual is considered critical and essential for insuring the efficient and effective 

execution of the program. 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 4 of 6 

 

statements, the Haitian fiscal year will be used. For Component II, a technical verification 
of the use of funds by the beneficiaries will be performed on a quarterly basis by an 
individual consultant based on terms of reference approved by the Bank.  

4.4 Special disbursement. To enable the EA to fulfill all the conditions prior to first 
disbursement, an initial disbursement of up to US$150,000 will be made to the extent the 
beneficiary fulfills, to the Bank’s satisfaction, all the standard general conditions prior to 
disbursement set forth in the grant agreement.  Funds will be used to finance the 
contracting of technical and fiduciary personnel, update the POM, prepare program’s 
chart of accounts and update program accounting and information systems (see ¶3.1). 

V. FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION 

5.1 The procurement fiduciary arrangements establish the conditions applicable to all 
procurement execution activities in the program. 

A. Procurement Execution  

5.2 All program related procurement activities will be performed by the MARNDR 
Procurement Unit (UPMP) and will be governed by the Bank’s Procurement Policies: 
Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works financed by the Inter-American 
Development Bank (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and Contracting of 
Consultants financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2350-9).  

a. Procurement of Works, Goods and Non-Consulting Services: The contracts for 
Works, Goods, and Non-Consulting Services2 generated under the program and 
subject to International Competitive Bidding will be executed through the use of the 
Standard Bidding Documents (SBDs) issued by the Bank. The processes subject to 
National Competitive Bidding (NCB) will be executed through the use of National 
Bidding Documents agreed to by the Bank.  

b. Selection and Contracting of Consultants: The consulting services contracts 
generated under this program will be executed through the use of the Standard 
Request for Proposals (SRFPs) issued or agreed to by the Bank. Research entities, 
Firms or Universities will be selected to develop research programs using Selection 
Based on Quality as procurement method. Approximately eight contracts will be 
signed for a total amount of US$13,000,000.  

B. Recurring Expenses 

5.3 Certain recurring expenses will be procured using program funds. These procurement 
activities will be carried out in accordance with the administrative procedures of the EA 
with the prior approval of the Bank who will assess and approve the use of these 
procedures.  

 

 

 

 

 

                                                 
2  Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2349-9) 

paragraph 1.1: The services different to consulting services have a similar process as procurement of Goods. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=774392


Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 5 of 6 

 

 

 

C. Main Procurement Activities 

Table V-1. Procurement Activities 

 
Activity 

Procurement 
Method 

Estimated 
Date 

Estimated 
Amount 
000’US$ 

FIRMS    

Development and implementation of research programs  

SBQ First two 
contracts to 
be signed in 
2018  

1,500,000 per 
contract  

Development of an information system to monitor and manage 
the research programs and the provision of agricultural subsidies  

SBQC December 
2017 

500,000 

Technical assistance and management of the agricultural 
subsidies scheme  

SBQC December 
2017 

5,000,000 

Technical assistance and training of service providers 
SBQC February 

2018 
600,000 

 INDIVIDUALS    

Supervisor of research program 
 
QIC 

 
March 2018 

500,000 for the 
entire duration of 

the program 

*To access the 18-month procurement plan, click here 

D. Procurement Supervision 

5.4 Based on the risks identified under Section II above, the major procurement activities 
foreseen under this operation will be subject to ex ante review by the Bank. Procurement 
activities using the shopping method for goods, works, non-consulting services and the 
recruitment of individual consultants selected under a competitive method might be 
subject to ex post review, as confirmed in the Procurement plan.  

E. Records and Files 

5.5 The EA will be required to keep files and track records of all procurement activities 
financed by the Bank in such a way that it be available for supervision visit by the 
fiduciary team. As confirmed by recent inspection visits, the UPMP is provided with an 
organized archiving system, despite space limitations which will be addressed with the 
creation of an electronic filing system with support from the Bank. Until the national 
legislation in Haiti will not recognize electronic documents, electronic archiving should 
not replace paper files. 

VI. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

A. Programming and Budget 

6.1 PTTA/RESEPAG will provide an annual operation plan (AOP), procurement plan and a 
12-month detailed financial plan. The financial plans and will respect the budget lines 
defined in the grant agreement (investment categories).   

B. Accounting and Information Systems 

6.2 SYSCOP will be used for program financial management. Detailed annual budget 
including activities to be financed will be included in system to facilitate the comparison 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3


Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 6 of 6 

 

of Actual vs Budget forecast at the end of each month and the production of financial 
reports by source of funds.  

C. Disbursements and Funds Flows  

6.3 Program financial management will be guided by OP-273-6. PTTA/RESEPAG will 
prepare annual planning of program cash flows to be revised every four months.  
Financial plans will be based on activities derived from the Annual Operation Plan and 
Procurement Plan and payment terms agreed with suppliers. Advance of funds 
methodology will be used for the disbursement of program funds. For each new 
advance, PTTA/RESEPAG will need to justify 80% of cumulated advance received. 
Disbursement Supervision will be ex-post. Local national counterpart will be used to 
finance recurring costs related to activities financed under Component I. Exchange rate 
on the date of conversion of the currency in which the disbursement is made will be used 
to record all expenses made in local currency; the Central Bank of Haiti exchange rate 
published for that date will be used at the reference rate. Payment of subsidies will be 
made via a financial institution which will be hired through a competitive bidding process. 
Payments by the financial institution will be subject to the farmer meeting set technical 
requirements to be validated by the Departmental Directorate of Agriculture (DDA) and 
the payment of a small contribution. The DDA will inform the EA that all technical 
requirements have been met following which the EA will send payment authorization to 
the financial institution. Amount to be disbursed will be subject to terms defined in 
matching grant agreement. 

D. Internal Control and Audit 

6.4 The internal control environment of the program will be strengthened with: (i) the 
updating and implementation of an operation plan; (ii) the updating of the current 
accounting system to include a module for budget preparation and monitoring and the 
automatic preparation of financial report; and (iii) the use of an information system for the 
management of subsidies to the farmers. 

E. External Control and Reporting 

6.5 Audits of financial statements will be performed in accordance with Bank’s Guidelines for 
Financial Reports and External Audits (OP-273-6) as described in Section IV of the 
Guidelines. Financial audit cost will be financed by IDB grant and estimated at 
US$150,000, including the audit of procurement aspects.    

F. Financial Supervision Plan  

6.6 During the first year of execution, fiduciary personnel of the Bank will perform inspection 
visits to review the execution of financial plan every four months and on a semi-annual 
basis for the following years, however the frequency of visits is subject to change based 
on findings from supervision missions.  

G. Execution Mechanism 

6.7 PTTA/RESEPAG will maintain proper financial management systems and will prepare 
an AOP and Procurement Plan and a twelve-month financial plan indicating cash flow 
needs. Disbursement of advances of funds will be for the equivalent of funding needs 
required for four months of program execution. Fund flows will be executed as stated in 
point 6.3 (Disbursement and Fund Flows) above.  

 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/17 
 
 
 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing ____/GR-HA to the Republic of Haiti 
Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological 

Innovation Program - PITAG 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

 That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, as Administrator of the IDB Grant Facility 
(hereinafter referred to as the “Account”), to enter into such contract or contracts as may be 
necessary with the Republic of Haiti, as Beneficiary, for the purpose of granting it a 
nonreimbursable financing to cooperate in the execution of the Agricultural and Agroforestry 
Technological Innovation Program - PITAG. Such nonreimbursable financing will be for an 
amount of up to US$55,000,000, which form part of the Account, and will be subject to the 
Terms and Financial Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions in the Project Summary 
of the Grant Proposal. 

 

 
 

(Adopted on __ ______________ 2017) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/HA/EZSHARE-1537888330-1429 
HA-L1107 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/17 
 
 
 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing GRT/__-_____-HA to the Republic of Haiti 
Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological 

Innovation Program - PITAG 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

 1. That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, as Administrator of the Global Agriculture 
and Food Security Program (GAFSP) Trust Fund (hereinafter referred to as the “Trust Fund”), to 
enter into such agreement or agreements as may be necessary with the Republic of Haiti, as 
Beneficiary, for the purpose of granting it a nonreimbursable financing to cooperate in the 
execution of the Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program - PITAG. Such 
nonreimbursable financing will be for an amount of up to US$10,000,000, which form part of the 
Trust Fund, and will be subject to the Terms and Financial Conditions and the Special 
Contractual Conditions in the Project Summary of the Grant Proposal. 

 

 2. That the authorization granted in paragraph 1 above shall be effective only once 
the Bank has entered into the specific contribution agreements. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ ______________ 2017) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/HA/EZSHARE-1537888330-1430 
HA-L1107 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/17 
 
 
 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing GRT/__-_____-HA to the Republic of Haiti 
Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological 

Innovation Program - PITAG 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

1. That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such agreements as may be 
necessary, and to take such additional measures as may be pertinent, to receive, administer 
and approve the use of nonreimbursable financing resources chargeable to the resources 
provided by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) described in Document 
PR-____, up to the amount of US$10,859,305 for the co-financing of any component to this 
nonreimbursable financing. 
 

2. That the authorization granted in paragraph 1 above shall be effective only once 
the Bank has entered into the specific contribution agreements. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ ______________ 2017) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/HA/EZSHARE-1537888330-1427 
HA-L1107 





















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

PARAGUAY 

 

 

 

PROJECT TO IMPROVE AND EXPAND ANIMAL HEALTH SERVICES IN 
PARAGUAY  

(PR-L1148) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Alvaro García Negro 
(RND/CPR) Project Team Leader; Gonzalo Muñoz (CSD/RND) Project Team Co-leader; 
Viviana Alva Hart (RND/CAR); Héctor Valdés Conroy (CSD/RND); Ana Rios Galvez 
(CSD/RND); Fernando Glasman (VPC/FMP); Jorge Luis González (VPC/FMP); Milagros 
Aime (VPS/ESG); Carolina Vera (CSC/CPR); Rodolfo Graham (LEG/SGO); Jennifer Doherty 
Bigara (CSD/CCS); and Yolanda Valle (CSD/RND). 

 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors 
simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the 
document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus superseding 
and replacing the original version. 

 



 

CONTENTS 

PROJECT SUMMARY 
 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................. 1 

A. Background, problem, and rationale ............................................................. 1 
B. Objectives, components, and cost ................................................................ 8 
C. Key results indicators ................................................................................. 10 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................... 11 

A. Financing instruments ................................................................................ 11 
B. Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 11 
C. Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 12 
D. Other project risks ...................................................................................... 12 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 12 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 12 
B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ....................................... 14 

 
 
 
 
 
 

APPENDIXES 

Proposed resolution 
 

  



 - ii - 
 
 

ANNEXES 

PRINTED ANNEXES 

Annex I Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) 

Annex II Results matrix 

Annex III Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED  

1. Multiyear Execution Plan and annual work plan (AWP) 

2. Monitoring and Evaluation Plan 

3. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) 

4. Procurement Plan  

OPTIONAL  

1. Bibliography 

2. Economic analysis of the project 

3. Institutional Capacity Assessment System (ICAS)  

4. Program Operating Regulations  

5. Contribution to actions against climate change 

6. SENACSA user survey and demand study 

7. Animal health diagnostic study for SENACSA  

8. Environmental and Social Analysis and Environmental and Social Management Plan 

9. Public consultation report  

 
  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-22
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-23
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-25
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-22
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-24
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-18
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-20
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-19
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-17
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/15%20LifeCycle%20Milestones/Draft%20Area/POD%20-%20Enlace%20opcional%20-%20Estudio%20de%20Demanda%20SENACSA%20-%20PR-L1148.pdf
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/15%20LifeCycle%20Milestones/Draft%20Area/POD%20-%20Enlace%20opcional%20-%20Diagn%C3%B3stico%20Sanidad%20Animal%20SENACSA%20-%20PR-L1148.docx?d=w26f4b22bde8240db8f607175c8775d30
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1327205104-7
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1327205104-8


 - iii - 
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS 

BCP Central Bank of Paraguay 
CSF Classical Swine Fever 
CVP Permanent Veterinary Committee of the Southern Cone 
DIGEAF Bureau of Administration and Finance 
ESMP Environmental and Social Management Plan 
FMD Foot-and-Mouth Disease 
GDP Gross domestic product 
GEF Global Environmental Facility 
ICAS Institutional Capacity Assessment System 
IICA Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture 
IRR Internal rate of return 
LIBOR London Interbank Offered Rate 
NPV Net present value 
OIE World Organisation for Animal Health 
OVE Office of Evaluation and Oversight 
PEU Program Execution Unit 
PMU Project Management Unit 
PPP Public-Private Partnership 
PVS Performance of Veterinary Services 
QCBS Quality- and Cost-Based Selection 
SCSP Public Sector Procurement System 
SEAM Ministry of the Environment 
SENACSA National Service for Animal Health and Quality 
SENASICA National Service for Agri-Food Health, Safety, and Quality 
SIAF Integrated Financial Management System  
SIGOR Regional Office Computerized Management System 
SISA Animal Health System 
UNDP United Nations Development Program 
 
 



 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY  
PARAGUAY 

PROJECT TO IMPROVE AND EXPAND ANIMAL HEALTH SERVICES IN PARAGUAY  
(PR-L1148) 

Financial terms and conditions 

Borrower: National Service for Animal Health and 
Quality (SENACSA) 

Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Guarantor: Republic of Paraguay Amortization period: 24 years  

Executing agency: The borrower, through the Project 
Management Unit and with the support of the Bureau of 
Administration and Finance  

Disbursement period: 5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace period:  5.5 years(b) 

IDB Ordinary Capital: 15,000,000 100 

Interest rate: LIBOR-based 

Credit fee: (c) 

Inspection and supervision fee: (c) 

Total: 15,000,000 100 

Weighted average life: 14.75 years 

Approval currency: United States dollars 
from the Ordinary 
Capital 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description: The program’s general objective is to help improve the productivity of the livestock sector. 
The specific objectives are to: (i) improve the effectiveness of animal health services with a risk management approach; 
and (ii) expand the coverage of veterinary services, including for smaller species. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first loan disbursement: (i) the Program Execution Unit will have been 
formed according to the terms agreed upon with the Bank; and (ii) the borrower will have presented, to the Bank’s 
satisfaction, evidence that the program Operating Regulations have entered into force (paragraph 3.4). 

Special contractual conditions for execution: The project will be executed in accordance with the contractual provisions 
on environmental, social, health, and safety issues set forth in the legal requirements section of the Environmental and 
Social Management Report, including Annex B.  

Exceptions to Bank policies: SENACSA will be the borrower and the executing agency. The guarantee by the Republic 
of Paraguay will be limited to SENACSA’s financial obligations in the context of the loan (including repayment of principal, 
payment of interest, and other lending charges) and will not cover performance obligations or local counterpart 
contributions. Accordingly, the Board of Executive Directors is being asked to approve a partial waiver of the Bank’s 
policy on Guarantees required from the borrower (document GP-104-2) (paragraph 3.1). 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(d) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(e) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a) Under the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the 
amortization schedule, as well as currency and interest-rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk 
management considerations into account when reviewing these requests. 

(b) Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted 
provided that they do not entail any extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date 
as documented in the loan contract.  

(c) The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors 
as part of its review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(d) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(e) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional 

Capacity and Rule of Law). 
 

 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-25
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-25


 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING1 

A. Background, problem, and rationale  

1.1 Paraguay closed 2017 with real GDP growth of 4.3%, up from 4.1% in 2016. 
Inflation, meanwhile, reached 4.5%, higher than the target of 4% set by the Central 
Bank of Paraguay (BCP) for 2017, while the central government’s budget deficit was 
1.5% of GDP, similar to the previous year. In the short and medium terms, the 
country’s GDP is expected to grow by around 3.5% to 4.0%, and its fiscal position 
should get stronger in line with the provisions of the Fiscal Responsibility Law. 

1.2 In this context, the agricultural sector is key to the Paraguayan economy, due to its 
contribution to GDP (an annual average of 25% in the 2004-2016 period) as well as 
to its share of the country’s jobs (annual average of 30% during the same period). 
Furthermore, from 2004 to 2016, the sector grew at an average annual rate of 5.7%. 
On par with this growth, the sector’s exports have significantly increased over the 
past decade; in 2016, they accounted for 60% of the total value of exports (BCP, 
2017). The livestock subsector accounts for approximately 5.5% of national GDP, 
with around 13 million head of cattle, 1.3 million pigs, and 500,000 sheep, among 
other species (National Service for Animal Health and Quality, SENACSA, 2016). 
Exports of animal products and byproducts totaled an annual average of 
US$1.424 billion in the three-year period 2014-2016 and account for 16% of all 
exports (SENACSA, 2017).2  

1.3 The importance of sheep, pig, and poultry products in the domestic market should 
also be highlighted. The majority of these products come from small family farms 
(IICA, Paraguay Observatory, 2016). According to the 2008 National Agricultural 
Census, there are 289,000 productive farms managing 31 million hectares of land, 
of which 66% are dedicated to livestock activity. Of these, 92% have less than 
50 hectares and are considered family farms.  

1.4 In the past few years, Paraguayan beef production has increased significantly due 
to growth in the cattle herd and slaughter.3 However, there are still significant 
productivity gaps compared to other countries in the region. For example, in 
Paraguay, the bovine calving rate4 is approximately 46%, lower than in the other 
MERCOSUR countries, which have an average rate of 61% (SIGOR SENACSA, 
2017). The national annual average cattle offtake rate5 is 15%, while in the other 
countries in the region it averages 24%. Likewise, while Paraguay produces 28 kg 
of meat per hectare per year, Brazil produces 49 kg, Argentina 34 kg, and Uruguay 
40 kg.6 With regard to productivity rates for small livestock, in Paraguay the lambing 

                                                
1  The references presented in the document are available at optional electronic link 1. 
2  Paraguay ranks sixth in the world among meat exporters.  
3  SIGOR: in the last decade the cattle herd grew 40% (from 10 million to 14 million heads) and the slaughter 

doubled (from 1.1 million to 2 million head of cattle).  
4  The calving rate refers to the percentage of weaned calves.  
5  The offtake rate is the percentage of cattle slaughtered divided by the population monitored by the official 

veterinary services; it is from 2016. 
6 EA Digital 2014 http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-

sinoineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-24
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/


  - 2 - 

rate is 40%; in Uruguay, it is 90%.7 Increasing productivity through technical change 
is complex, above all when taking into account the limited return on certain new 
technologies compared to the extensive production in areas with a relative 
abundance of land. However, expanding the agricultural frontier also has negative 
effects, namely, increasing deforestation.8 The main challenges for improving 
productivity include the availability of improved adapted pastureland; improving the 
genetic quality of the herd to increase efficiency in converting pasture to meat or 
milk; the appropriate management of pastures and livestock; improving reproductive 
efficiency and animal health. Furthermore, productivity is affected by the sector’s 
vulnerability to climate change, and the livestock sector is the country’s principal 
source of greenhouse gas emissions.9  

1.5 The importance of livestock health. International empirical evidence shows that 
animal health has significant positive effects on livestock productivity, access to 
international markets, and consumer health, due to fewer cases of zoonotic 
diseases.10 Globally, there is ever more concern over the sustained increase in 
detections of new and re-emerging infectious agents. This is accompanied by 
significant social and economic impacts on public and animal health in the affected 
regions. The growing risks of transmission of animal diseases and exchange of 
pests associated with trade liberalization, the movement of persons, and climate 
change, has led to greater epidemiological risks (Globalization and Infectious 
Diseases, 2004).  

1.6 The countries in the region, immersed in this risky scenario, are increasingly 
vulnerable, since they have the world’s largest population of animals intended for 
commercial use (Naranjo, 2017). This new global risk scenario led the member 
states of the World Trade Organization to sign an Agreement on the Application of 
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (WTO, 1995), whereby they commit to 
assessing and managing the risk to ensure sanitary and phytosanitary protection.11 
Accordingly, government veterinary services must design their sanitary strategies 
using a risk management approach that includes the pillars of identifying and 
reducing risks, as well as responding to sanitary emergencies.  

1.7 Pursuant to the Plan of Action 2011-2020 of the Hemispheric Program for the 
Eradication of Foot-and-Mouth Disease,12 the region of South America will move 
toward eradicating foot-and-mouth disease (FMD), which would mean an end to 
vaccination in the near future. This would lead to significant economic benefits by 
making it possible for Paraguay to access markets with more stringent health 
requirements and higher prices, but it would also increase the vulnerability of the 

                                                
7  Efecto de características maternas y del cordero sobre peso vivo al nacimiento, señalada, destete  

supervivencia neonatal [Effect of maternal and lamb characteristics on live weight at birth, marking weight, 
weaning weight, and neonatal survival] (Grasso, 2013).  

8  From 2001 to 2013 pastureland in Latin America was increased by 96.9 million hectares, mostly through 
deforestation in regions like Colombia, central Brazil, western Paraguay, northern Guatemala, and eastern 
Nicaragua (Graesser et al., 2015). 

9  Taking into account emissions from converting forest to cropland (Third National Communication from 
Paraguay to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (SEAM/UNDP/GEF, 2017)).  

10  IDB. Agriculture and Natural Resources Management Sector Framework Document (document 
GN-2709-5).  

11  World Trade Organization. https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/spsagr_e.htm. 
12  Pan American Health Organization/Pan American Foot-and-Mouth Disease Center (PAHO/PANAFTOSA, 

2010). 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/15%20LifeCycle%20Milestones/Draft%20Area/POD%20-%20Enlace%20opcional%20-%20Diagn%C3%B3stico%20Sanidad%20Animal%20SENACSA%20-%20PR-L1148.docx?d=w26f4b22bde8240db8f607175c8775d30
https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/spsagr_e.htm


  - 3 - 

country’s livestock population, which would be left without vaccine protection and 
exposed to potential reintroductions of the disease. This represents a strategic shift 
towards a risk management perspective in the design of health services, entailing 
major structural and organizational-operational adaptations.  

1.8 The animal products market, principally in the pork and poultry production sector, is 
also rapidly evolving towards new requirements related to the comprehensive safety 
of the production chain, including specifications on biosecurity management, 
real-time monitoring of hygienic-sanitary conditions, and farm-to-fork traceability, 
etc. Keeping more than one livestock species is another risk-reduction strategy for 
farmers, as it provides them with a broader range of options for adapting to the 
unpredictability of the weather than if they keep only one species (Reijntjes et al., 
1992). 

1.9 Ties between animal health and climate change. Evidence exists that 
interventions in animal health represent an important strategy for adapting to13 and 
mitigating14 climate change, which impacts animal health through its direct and 
indirect effects on the host-pathogen system environment. In fact, climate variability 
and extreme climate events are important factors in predicting the occurrence of 
diseases in animals.15 The direct effects are more pronounced in vector-transmitted 
diseases and/or diseases affected by weather conditions such as temperature and 
humidity.16 In turn, the indirect effects are derived from changes in biodiversity and 
land use, as well as from animals’ efforts to adapt to the new environment.17 
Managing health risks (which involves preventive veterinary medicine, monitoring, 
detection, and early response) is thus key to addressing the impacts of climate 
change on animal health.18 Therefore, in many countries, measures aimed at and 
support for effective animal health services may be the most important and 
necessary adaptation strategies,19 since efficient veterinary services are vital to 
addressing the impacts of climate change on animal health.20 It is also necessary to 
support animal health services in all countries so as to control and appropriately 
manage transboundary diseases and the food safety problems that may be 
exacerbated by climate change and the intensification thereof associated with 
climate variability.21 

1.10 Health risk management approach. The challenges involved in implementing new 
trade agreements that have stricter health requirements, as well as in addressing 
climate change scenarios, call for a new approach in health services based on 
identifying risks, assessing their potential effects, preventive action programs, and 
timely, effective communication. This entails creating risk management platforms 

                                                
13  Climate Change Impacts and Risks for Animal Health in Asia (S. Forman et al., 2008).  
14  Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions through Better Animal Health (A. Stoot et al., 2010).  
15  Climate-smart livestock production. FAO 2017. https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/spsagr_e.htm.  
16  Impact of Climate Change on Livestock Health: A Review (N. Abdela and K. Jilo, 2016).  
17  Climate-smart livestock production. FAO 2017.  
18  Climate Change and Animal Health (J. Lubroth, 2012). 
19  Managing Animal Diseases Risk in Australia: The Impact of Climate Change (P. Van den Bossche and 

J.A.W. Coetzer, 2008). 
20  Climate Change Impacts and Risks for Animal Health in Asia (S. Forman et al., 2008). 
21  Managing Animal Diseases Risk in Australia: The Impact of Climate Change (P.F. Black et al., 2008). 

https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/spsagr_e.htm


  - 4 - 

that use modern information technologies (OIE, 2004 and 2011).22 Therefore, new 
approaches to health certification and management are needed, with public-private 
participation and integration; collaborative monitoring, detection, and intervention 
systems; application of best practices protocols for production, health, and 
biosecurity; and use integrated production systems. A notable example is Mexico’s 
National Service for Agri-Food Health, Safety, and Quality (SENASICA), which has 
successfully adopted the risk management concept. With the launch of its Health 
Intelligence Unit, the incorporation of preventive medicine services, and the creation 
of the Internal Rapid Alert Network for the timely exchange of data and generation 
of strategic information, the country has been able to successfully comply with the 
commitments it acquired upon joining the World Trade Organization, and over the 
past 10 years has doubled the value of its agri-food exports, which has reached 
US$30 billion. According to the OIE, Mexico’s preventive actions have enabled it to 
obtain an animal health status held by only five countries in the world (Australia, 
United States, Portugal, Switzerland, and Mexico).23 

1.11 Livestock health in Paraguay. Paraguay has obtained official status as an 
FMD-free country where vaccination is practiced and as a country free from classical 
swine fever (CSF), pursuant to the World Organisation for Animal Health’s 
Terrestrial Animal Health Code (OIE, 2017). Despite these achievements, the 
country is a prime example of potential vulnerability due to emergency risk 
scenarios. Indeed, Paraguay has the region’s highest proportion of farm animals to 
humans, which reduces its capacity to contain epidemiological outbreaks. And as a 
landlocked country with more than 3,500 km of land borders with three other 
countries, it is highly exposed to the entry of infectious agents (Naranjo, 2017).  

1.12 According to a study24 conducted in 2012, the country suffered losses worth 
US$54 million in beef cattle and US$74 million in dairy cattle due to brucellosis and 
tuberculosis, and lost revenue of US$33 million due to CSF and US$72 million due 
to Newcastle disease in poultry. In 2011, FMD reappeared in Paraguay. The impacts 
of this outbreak caused economic losses of US$170 million in exports alone, 
equivalent to 7.2% of the livestock contribution to GDP (Giménez Rolón, 2012). 
These figures are consistent with reports by the OIE, which attribute more than 20% 
of global livestock production losses to various diseases.  

1.13 Some economically important prevalent diseases25 are still having a significant effect 
on the productivity of the national livestock herd; these diseases have a high 
zoonotic risk and are included among export certification requirements. Addressing 
these diseases is a priority in order to reduce productivity gaps and minimize barriers 
to exportation, as well as because they pose a high risk to public health. Bovine and 
caprine brucellosis are both on the rise in the country. These diseases have high 

                                                
22  OIE, 2004. Handbook on Import Risk Analysis for Animals Products, Vol. 2 quantitative risk analysis. OIE, 

2010. Terrestrial Animal Health Code. Paris, France. 
23  National Service for Agri-Food Health, Safety, and Quality of Mexico. https://www.gob.mx/senasica/ 

articulos/unidad-de-inteligencia-sanitaria-101745?idiom=es. 
24  Análisis del Gasto Publico en Servicios de Sanidad Agropecuaria [Analysis of Public Expenditure on 

Agricultural Health Services] (Giménez Rolón, 2012).  
25  The prevalence of a disease is the total number of individuals who have the disease or a characteristic at 

a given time or during a given period of time, divided by the population at that moment in time or halfway 
through the period. It quantifies the proportion of individuals in a population who have a disease at a given 
time. 

https://www.gob.mx/senasica/%20articulos/unidad-de-inteligencia-sanitaria-101745?idiom=es
https://www.gob.mx/senasica/%20articulos/unidad-de-inteligencia-sanitaria-101745?idiom=es


  - 5 - 

prevalence rates and cause significant losses26 to affected producers (low 
reproduction rates due to abortions, subfertility, and infertility); they also are 
hazardous to human health, principally for family farmers (SENACSA, 2017). 
Although bovine tuberculosis has been sporadically detected in some breeding 
herds, up-to-date information that would make it possible to estimate its prevalence 
and incidence rates is not available. 

1.14 Health services in Paraguay. SENACSA27 is the national body responsible for 
making, regulating, coordinating, implementing, and overseeing the country’s 
policies on and management of animal health and quality. The Ministry of Agriculture 
and Livestock28 is responsible for furthering livestock policies in coordination with 
SENACSA. As the government veterinary service, SENACSA is committed to 
maintaining the health statuses achieved in Paraguay,29 as well as to eliminating 
prevalent diseases, including zoonotic diseases, making greater efforts to process 
samples for surveillance and control throughout the country, including on the 
borders.  

1.15 In 2013, the OIE evaluated SENACSA’s performance (OIE-PVS,30 2014), assessing 
the strengths and weaknesses of the government veterinary service. Among its 
strengths, the service has material resources, including infrastructure, equipment, 
and vehicles. It has been successfully administering the FMD control program for 
years, which has given it experience in managing health programs. SENACSA’s 
veterinary service is highly specialized in the fight against FMD and has 
demonstrated the ability to fulfill its professional obligations of surveillance, control, 
and certification for the safe export of beef to the most selective markets in the world. 
SENACSA has also demonstrated its high level of commitment to the OIE process 
of improving veterinary services. 

1.16 The following are among the weaknesses identified for SENACSA’s transition to a 
risk management approach: (i) shortage of highly trained human resources; (ii) lack 
of infrastructure and modern equipment; (iii) limited capacity for identifying health 
risks, as well as for the control and surveillance of prevalent and emerging diseases; 
and (iv) weaknesses with regard to simplifying procedures and processes that would 

                                                
26  Quantifications of losses due to brucellosis calculated in Brazil in 2013 show an average loss of 

US$120 and US$210 for each female infected with brucellosis in the meat and milk production systems, 
respectively (Bovine Brucellosis Program 2017, IICA-SENACSA). 

27  Law 2426/2004. 
28  SENACSA and the Ministry of Agriculture (Law 81/92) are two independent institutions with 

complementary functions. They coordinate to optimize their respective resources, plans, and programs. 
Specifically, the Ministry of Agriculture, through its Office of the Deputy Minister of Livestock Farming 
(Resolution 1783/11), enforces government policy on the livestock sector and proposes, evaluates, and 
coordinates the enforcement of regulations on the health and quality of products and inputs for national 
and international sales, as well as other functions.  

29  Such as the statuses achieved with regard to FMD, rinderpest, bovine spongiform encephalopathy, peste 
des petits ruminants (also known as sheep and goat plague), among other diseases.  

30  The PVS is the OIE Tool for the Evaluation of Performance of Veterinary Services. The PVS gap analysis 
allows the veterinary services to define the objectives to be reached in the next five years, in compliance 
with OIE quality standards and based on national priorities and limitations. The OIE PVS Tool determines 
the effectiveness of the veterinary services, identifies gaps and weaknesses, and establishes 
recommendations for 40 competencies grouped into four components: (i) human, technical, and financial 
resources; (ii) technical authority and capability; (iii) interaction with interested parties; and (iv) access to 
markets. Each competency is evaluated from 1 to 5, with the latter being the most advanced. The resulting 
values can be expressed as a percentage. In November 2017 the OIE performed a new PVS of SENACSA, 
which will be used as a baseline once published. 



  - 6 - 

make it possible to lower transaction costs.31 Paraguay achieved an average 
performance value of 64% in the PVS evaluation, which is worse than other 
countries in the region like Uruguay (83%), Chile (82%), and Colombia (70%).  

1.17 The PVS also identified the lack of an overall management system as one of the 
government veterinary services’ greatest weaknesses. With the current data 
management system, it is not possible to synthesize useful information for adequate 
analysis, control, and/or planning. SENACSA does have SIGOR32 (the regional 
office computerized management system) in place; this system can record and 
analyze data on establishments and producers, livestock inventories, cattle 
movements, progress on anti-FMD vaccine campaigns, etc. However, there are no 
computerized systems in place for the laboratories, quarantines, food producer 
inspections, and waste control, among other issues. Although SENACSA’s Animal 
Health Bureau uses an animal health system (SISA)33 that was designed to inform, 
store, and maintain a database about animal health in the country through 
SENACSA’s zonal units, it is not integrated into SIGOR. SIGOR and SISA are both 
key tools for the risk management model. 

1.18 In addition, according to the user survey and demand study (Ferrari, 2017), 
incorporating new information technologies into SENACSA’s services is a priority, in 
order to streamline procedures, lower transaction costs, and facilitate the expansion 
of services to users.34 The following key processes that can be improved were 
identified as a result of the study: (i) reduction of in-person procedures; (ii) 24/7 
availability of the online system; (iii) incorporation of functionalities for small livestock 
producers; (iv) strengthening of services associated with the opening and 
development of markets for new export chains; and (v) simplification of import and 
export procedures.  

1.19 Lastly, one of the main limitations observed in the PVS stems from the structure of 
SENACSA’s annual budget. Funds come from several sources: the National 
Treasury contribution (22%), internal resources from the provision of services (21%), 
and taxes on the movement of animals and meat exports (57%). This reliance on 
contributions from the livestock sector for services provided is a disadvantage of the 
government veterinary services’ specialization in beef production, as it can create a 
dependence on beef exports, meaning that if they are restricted for health reasons, 
funding could be affected. A recent analysis of the effectiveness of various health 
systems in Latin America (OVE, 2015) concluded that it was important to allocate 
resources to generating public goods from the services. This analysis highlighted 
the achievements of health campaigns in terms of reducing the effects of diseases, 
as well as the social return on those initiatives.  

                                                
31  In the 2013 PVS, SENACSA achieved scores of 66% and 53% in the categories of (i) human, technical, 

and financial resources; and (ii) technical authority and capacity, respectively.  
32  SIGOR is a web-based system developed to manage the services provided by SENACSA throughout the 

country. SIGOR manages health information, the control of poultry and cattle movement, revenue under 
Law 808/96, and proceedings in legal cases. The system is used in facilities including zonal units, livestock 
fairs, control posts, and meat packing plants. SIGOR has 12 modules in place and 3 online services offered 
through the institution’s portal. 

33  SISA has four modules in place (property georeferencing, immediate notification of diseases, attention to 
suspected cases, and monthly epidemiological records). 

34  This study sought to identify evidence of benchmarking associated with foreign trade practices involving 
similar procedures, but did not find any. SENACSA does not have any studies on procedure costs. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/15%20LifeCycle%20Milestones/Draft%20Area/POD%20-%20Enlace%20opcional%20-%20Estudio%20de%20Demanda%20SENACSA%20-%20PR-L1148.pdf


  - 7 - 

1.20 The same assessment made recommendations for putting together joint strategies 
for the public and private sectors, promoting the recovery of costs for institutional 
sustainability, preventive health work, the economic evaluation of outcomes, and the 
development of new health capacities. In Paraguay, public-private collaborative 
efforts in animal health have been successful.35 SENACSA’s involvement with the 
cattle sector is effective and encouraged, due to the importance of beef exports to 
the country. However, coordination with other productive sectors, such as the dairy, 
pig, small ruminant, and poultry sectors, is still incipient (OIE-PVS, 2013). 
Accordingly, the Government of Paraguay is interested in emulating the public-
private sector coordination achieved in the cattle subsector in other livestock 
subsectors (e.g., pig, sheep, goat, and poultry). 

1.21 Bank experience. Between 2002 and 2014, the Bank approved 17 investment 
loans to strengthen agricultural health and food safety systems in the region, for 
US$359 million, approximately 10% of the total sector portfolio (OVE, 2015).36 Based 
on those operations, as well as on some recently approved ones (Peru 4457/OC-PE, 
Uruguay 3800/OC-UR, Bolivia 3797/BL-BO, Guyana 3798/BL-GY, and Mexico 
3864/OC-ME), and taking into account the conclusions and recommendations that 
issue from the OVE document Comparative Project Evaluation of Agriculture Health 
and Food Safety 2002-2014, Table 1 below shows the main lessons learned and 
how they have been incorporated into the design of the proposed operation. 

 
Table 1. Incorporation of recommendations into program design 

Recommendations  Incorporation into program design 

Participation of the private 
sector, through joint work and 
the incorporation of new 
information and 
communications technologies.  

The program makes it a priority to make more services 
available online, so as to streamline and improve the 
efficiency of service delivery. Animal health control programs 
will be executed in coordination with producers.  

Make the laboratories 
sustainable. 

The laboratories currently operated by SENACSA are self-
financed, but they do not have the capacity required to 
execute the public disease control programs. The program 
will finance the improvement of the laboratories’ capacities. 
The laboratories will continue to be self-financed. 

Evaluation and outcomes, with 
regard to the direct 

beneficiaries.  

The program includes a monitoring and evaluation program, 
and an impact assessment plan, which will analyze the 

impacts of the program actions on its direct beneficiaries. 

 

1.22 Country strategy with the sector. The project is first and foremost aligned with the 
guidelines and objectives of the National Development Plan 2030, the Agriculture 
Strategic Framework 2014-2018, and SENACSA’s Institutional Strategic Plan 
2013-2018. The project is linked to the following strategic pillars of the National 
Development Plan 2030: (i) inclusive economic growth and (ii) Paraguay’s 
international integration, as well as with the crosscutting pillar of efficient and 
transparent public management. The program will also contribute to the Agriculture 
Strategic Framework strategic pillar of “livestock and farm development,” which 
prioritizes establishing disease monitoring and control programs, maintaining and 

                                                
35  Law 808/96 declared the national FMD eradication program to be mandatory and created the Interagency 

Commission, forming a public-private partnership (PPP) made up of representatives of SENACSA and the 
Rural Association of Paraguay. 

36  Of the 17 loans approved for agricultural health between 2002 and 2014, none involved Paraguay. 



  - 8 - 

improving the health status of livestock production, and upgrading and modernizing 
the laboratory system. It is also aligned with the national contribution, which identifies 
livestock farming as a priority sector for climate adaptation and highlights the 
country’s commitment to reducing its vulnerability to climate change.37 

1.23 IDB country strategy. The operation is aligned with the IDB Country Strategy with 
Paraguay (2014-2018) (document GN-2769), since it contributes to the strategic 
objective of increasing “the supply of agricultural public goods and services.” 

1.24 Strategic alignment. The program is aligned with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and with the challenge of productivity and 
innovation, by improving the provision of essential public goods, like health services 
for rural development and economic integration. The program is also aligned with 
the crosscutting areas of: (i) strengthening institutional capacity and the rule of law, 
by strengthening an institution that is strategic for rural development; and (ii) climate 
change and environmental sustainability, by providing mechanisms that contribute 
to climate change adaptation. It also contributes to the Corporate Results 
Framework 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6), through the indicator: “government 
agencies benefitted by projects that strengthen technological and managerial tools 
to improve public service delivery.” In addition, the operation is included in the 2018 
Operational Program Report (document GN-2915). The program is also consistent 
with the first dimension of success of the Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document (document GN-2709-5), which calls for 
achieving high levels of agricultural productivity in the region and proposes that 
high-quality health services and public goods be provided; the Food Security Sector 
Framework Document (document GN-2825-3) with regard to the dimension of 
access to safe and nutritious foods; and the Climate Change Sector Framework 
Document (document GN-2835-3), in that it promotes higher agricultural productivity 
through the adoption of climate change adaptation practices. 

1.25 Approximately 41% of operation resources will be invested in climate change 
mitigation and adaptation activities, in accordance with the Multilateral Development 
Banks’ joint methodology for estimating climate finance.38 These resources 
contribute to the IDB Group’s target of increasing financing of climate-change-
related projects to 30% of combined total approvals by the end of 2020. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost  

1.26 Objective. The program’s general objective is to help improve the productivity of the 
livestock sector. The specific objectives are to: (i) improve the effectiveness of 
animal health services with a risk management approach; and (ii) expand the 
coverage of veterinary services, including for smaller species. 

1.27 To those ends, investments are planned in two components, described below: 

1.28 Component I. Health risk management (US$10.8 million). This component will 
strengthen SENACSA’s capacities for identifying, assessing, and managing risk, by 
expanding the functions of its information systems to generate epidemiological 
information for decision-making. With a properly equipped monitoring network, 
inspection processes at entry points, and posts for monitoring farm animal 
movements, protocols will be established for responding to health events, and 

                                                
37  National Contributions of the Republic of Paraguay (Republic of Paraguay, 2015). 
38  See optional electronic link 5 for detailed information.  

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-17


  - 9 - 

strategies will be drawn up for mitigating their potential effects. The institutional 
strengthening will also include the training of human resources and the provision of 
specific inputs and equipment. A health intelligence network will be implemented 
while improving physical infrastructure at certain identified priority points; this will 
involve equipping and modernizing the SENACSA laboratories. A network of public 
and private laboratories will also be set up and provided with a comprehensive 
management system to expand and speed up diagnostic and control capacities, as 
required by the risk management approach. In addition, given the potential of 
individual identification and traceability as a tool for health risk management, the 
component will finance the design of software and the procurement of the equipment 
necessary for animal identification and individual traceability. Moreover, in keeping 
with the risk management approach, the component will support the Reproductive 
Diseases Program in eradicating brucellosis, by helping to improve SENACSA’s 
capacities for managing, preventing, and responding to that type of health event. In 
short, this component will finance: (i) a health intelligence network (for identification 
and prevention, with an early alert system for preventive communication and an 
emergency response system); (ii) the modernization and expansion of physical 
infrastructure (in the various regions, at control posts, and on the border) and 
equipment to support the tasks of diagnosis, surveillance, and control; (iii) the 
identification of individual animals for traceability; (iv) support for the national 
brucellosis program; and (v) a program to modernize the organization. 

1.29 Component II. Expansion of services (US$3.1 million). This component will 
improve and expand service delivery to users by simplifying and digitizing 
procedures,39 emphasizing the most important ones, to decrease transaction costs. 
The component will also develop new computer functionalities, including expanding 
and optimizing SIGOR, to facilitate decision-making and the provision of health 
services. This will include not only expanding the systems’ capacities and improving 
telecommunications, but also securing computer services to ensure availability 
remotely and in zonal offices. The program will include training for human resources 
on generating services for users and risk management capacities. The expansion of 
SENACSA’s services is expected to involve the preparation and implementation of 
health plans that will include the identification, registry, health management, 
vaccination, surveillance, and certification of smaller species (sheep, goat, pigs, 
poultry). To facilitate the process of executing the health plans and providing 
services to small and medium-sized producers, the component will finance the 
formation and operation of a public-private partnership40 that will include 
representatives of SENACSA and of small livestock producer associations. The 
component includes support activities to obtain the effective participation of 
producers, such as: (i) training; (ii) certification of private technicians; and (iii) the 

                                                
39  This is aligned with the “infrastructure and connectivity” pillar of the digital agenda that the Bank is 

promoting in Paraguay; among other improvements, the ability to use an electronic signature for priority 
procedures will be incorporated.  

40  The PPP will be formed by representatives of SENACSA and of the small livestock production sector 
(Rural Association of Paraguay, associations of sheep, goat, pig, and poultry farmers). It will have one 
standing member and one alternate from each institution, who will be unpaid and will each have a single 
vote; it will be led by SENACSA, which will be responsible for auditing and certifying all national and 
international processes. It will have one coordinator, and the Commission will decide how the allocated 
resources are to be handled. Among its functions, the PPP will: (i) actively participate in health plans and 
campaigns; (ii) ensure the use of best practices with regard to animal wellbeing and the defense of the 
environment; (iii) implement compartmentalization for health campaigns; and (iv) update and train the 
various actors. 



  - 10 - 

preparation of materials for dissemination. To summarize, this component will 
finance: (i) the incorporation of new functionalities into the computer system, new 
online services, and the implementation of electronic signatures to improve 
efficiency in the delivery of services to users; and (ii) the preparation and 
implementation of health plans (identification, registration, health management, 
vaccination, surveillance, and certification) for small species (sheep, goat, pigs, 
poultry); a public-private partnership will be formed to that end, and will facilitate 
implementation of the health plans as well as the development and strengthening of 
small livestock chains. 

1.30 Program administration (US$1.1 million). Program administration resources will 
be used to fund the formation and operation of the Program Execution Unit (PEU), 
as well as for contingencies and reporting. 

1.31 Activities from both components, in particular those focused on identifying, 
monitoring, assessing, and managing health risks, and the training sessions for 
technicians and producers, contribute to climate actions (optional electronic link 5). 

C. Key results indicators  

1.32 The program has a Results Matrix agreed upon with the borrower (Annex II) that 
contains the program impact, outcome, and output indicators, and the respective 
baselines and targets. In line with the program’s objective, the principal impacts will 
be: (i) improved cattle offtake rate (proxy for improved productivity); and 
(ii) increased small species exports. The expected outcomes are: (i) improved 
effectiveness of the animal health services (SENACSA’s score on specific aspects 
rated in the PVS, including risk management); (ii) reduced prevalence of brucellosis; 
and (iii) health coverage expanded to new categories, emphasizing small livestock.  

1.33 The incorporation of the risk management approach and the implementation of the 
health surveillance unit represent important innovations that will improve the 
country’s health capacity. In this context, SENACSA will enter into partnership 
agreements with institutions that are leaders on this issue, such as Mexico’s 
SENASICA.  

1.34 Economic viability. An ex ante economic analysis (optional electronic link 2) of the 
program has confirmed its expected viability. Based on a comparison of the costs 
and benefits expected over a 20-year period, the analysis estimates that the 
program will have a net present value (NPV) of US$58.4 million and an internal rate 
of return (IRR) of 34.2%. 

1.35 These estimates take into account the potential positive effects of the program in 
terms of fewer losses from possible disease outbreaks, improved access to markets, 
improved productivity, and SENACSA’s more efficient service delivery. More 
specifically, the analysis includes the expected program benefits with regard to the 
following: (i) beef productivity, production, and exports, as a result of improved 
control of FMD, bovine brucellosis, and implementation of a traceability system; 
(ii) pork production and exports, as a result of improved control and prevention of a 
potential CSF outbreak; (iii) chicken productivity, production, and exports, as a result 
of improved control of avian influenza and Newcastle disease, and the expansion of 
SENACSA services to small species; and (iv) SENACSA’s administrative 
management of services. It should be noted that other important benefits (like the 
improvements in public health derived from the improved control of zoonotic 
livestock diseases) were not considered in the analysis due to the difficulty of 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-17
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-18


  - 11 - 

accounting for them. Therefore, the program’s NPV and IRR may be 
underestimated. 

1.36 In terms of economic costs, the analysis took into account the program investment 
as well as the associated incremental costs, namely: (i) incremental costs incurred 
by SENACSA (on staff, transportation, control and monitoring, laboratories, 
traceability, and operation of the SISA); and (ii) additional sanitation costs incurred 
by the producers. 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 The program is designed as a specific investment loan under the Flexible Financing 
Facility (document FN-655-1). It has a total cost of US$15 million, fully financed by 
the Bank from Ordinary Capital resources.  

 
Table 2. Program cost and financing (US$ thousands) 

Description IDB % 

Component I. Health risk management  10,860 73 

Component II. Expansion of services 3,074 20 

Administration (audit, evaluation, and contingencies) 1,066 7 

TOTAL 15,000 100 

 

2.2 The program’s disbursement period will be five years starting from the loan 
contract’s effective date. Program funds will mostly be disbursed as advances of 
funds, but the direct payment and reimbursement of expenditures modalities may 
also be used.  

 
Table 3. Disbursement schedule (in US$) 

 Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

Total 1,191,162 6,898,277 4,901,727 1,054,167 954,667 15,000,000 

% 8 46 33 7 6 100 

 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.3 The program has been classified as a Category “B” operation according to the 
Bank’s Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (sector policy OP-703); 
Disaster Risk Management Policy (sector policy OP-704); Access to Information 
Policy (operational policy OP-102); Gender Equality in Development (sector policy 
OP-761); Indigenous Peoples Policy (sector policy OP-765); and Involuntary 
Resettlement Policy (sector policy OP-710). 

2.4 The Environmental and Social Analysis (optional electronic link 8) performed for the 
program indicates that the construction works for the service facilities (regional, 
zonal, and at border points) may have low to moderate localized, short-term 
environmental and social impacts, such as: elimination of the plant cover; increased 
noise levels; emission of gases, particulate matter, and dust; generation of waste; 
and increased accident rates. An environmental and social management plan 
(ESMP) was designed to prevent and mitigate these impacts. None of the projects 
analyzed will entail resettlement, expropriation of lands, or significant harm to 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1327205104-7


  - 12 - 

indigenous communities or territories. The ESMP also includes a plan for improving 
the environmental management of SENACSA’s central laboratory, to be 
implemented prior to the equipment procurement bidding process. Although natural 
threats in the project areas include drought, forest fires, and heat waves, the 
associated risk is considered to be low. Nonetheless, the ESMP includes measures 
to prevent exacerbation of the risk from heat waves (limiting construction work hours, 
ensuring systems are in place for providing water at the work sites) and fires 
(ensuring fire prevention systems are in place at the construction areas and in the 
design of projects). 

2.5 Meaningful consultations were held for the projects in Campo Aceval, Villa Hayes, 
Filadelfia, Puerto Casado, Puerto Falcón, and Ciudad del Este. Queries included 
requests for materials to be procured and labor contracted locally, and for horse 
tie-up sites to be planned. The consultations report was published on the Bank’s 
website (optional electronic link 9). The program will strengthen SENACSA by 
financing the design and implementation of a socioenvironmental management 
system. To ensure compliance with the program’s socioenvironmental 
commitments, the coordinating unit will include a socioenvironmental specialist.  

C. Fiduciary risks  

2.6 The following aspects of SENACSA’s institutional capacity were evaluated during 
preparation of the operation: capacity for programming and organizing; capacity for 
executing the programmed and organized activities, including systems for managing 
staff, goods, services, and finances; and control capacity. According to the 
evaluation, in general the executing agency has technical competencies in fiduciary 
matters, and the consolidated result of the evaluated capacities reveals that it has a 
satisfactory degree of development. However, its lack of prior experience in 
executing projects with multilateral financing, principally in the area of procurement, 
is considered a weakness. Accordingly, the project has been assigned a medium 
level of risk. As an action to mitigate the risk of delays in project procurement 
processes, the area responsible for procurement requires strengthening with 
competent staff knowledgeable about the policies of multilateral organizations, as 
well as through specific workshops and courses on IDB procurement policies. 

D. Other project risks  

2.7 The following principal risks were identified, with their principal mitigation measures: 
(i) as high risk: delay in processing of the loan law; and (ii) as medium risk: (a) a lack 
of candidates interested in holding key positions in the PEU; (b) limited internet 
connectivity and access speed; (c) traceability software not developed due to the 
lack of a legal framework; and (d) execution times or priority affected by a change of 
government. The respective mitigation activities were defined and agreed upon, and 
are especially supported by SENACSA and the Rural Association of Paraguay, with 
leading public and private sector agents, to reinforce the policy-level work in the 
critical institutions identified. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements  

3.1 Borrower and executing agency. SENACSA will be the borrower and the 
executing agency. The guarantee by the Republic of Paraguay will be limited to 
SENACSA’s financial obligations in the context of the loan (including repayment of 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1327205104-8


  - 13 - 

principal, payment of interest, and other lending charges) and will not cover 
performance obligations or local counterpart contributions.41 Accordingly, the Board 
of Executive Directors is being asked to approve a partial waiver of the Bank’s policy 
on Guarantees required from the borrower (document GP-104-2). The executing 
agency will be SENACSA, acting through the Project Management Unit (PMU) with 
the support of the Bureau of Administration and Finance (DIGEAF).  

3.2 For program management, the executing agency will form a Program Execution Unit 
(PEU), which will report to the program management unit (PMU) and will be directly 
responsible for and have jurisdiction over the program’s technical and operational 
issues. For execution and monitoring, the PEU will work in coordination with the 
DIGEAF for the fiduciary processes involved in program management.42 The PMU 
will play the strategic role of the program’s technical and operational management, 
and will also be responsible for coordinating relations with other institutions and 
SENACSA units involved in program execution. The program’s fiduciary procedures 
will be carried out through SENACSA’s DIGEAF, which will determine how to 
coordinate with the PEU and the functions for which the PEU is responsible.  

3.3 The key program execution positions established for the PEU are: (i) general 
coordinator; (ii) component I coordinator; (iii) component II coordinator; (iv) financial 
and administrative specialist; (v) procurement specialist; (vi) planning and 
monitoring specialist; and (vii) socioenvironmental specialist. 

3.4 The following will be special contractual conditions precedent to the first loan 
disbursement: (i) the PEU will have been formed according to the terms 
agreed upon with the Bank; and (ii) the borrower will have presented, to the 
Bank’s satisfaction, evidence that the program Operating Regulations have 
entered into force.43 These conditions will be fulfilled before the start of program 
execution. The program Operating Regulations define the basic rules applicable 
during loan execution (for example, field work, regional coordination and oversight, 
data processing and analysis, in addition to the fiduciary considerations), as well as 
the PEU members’ levels of responsibility.  

3.5 Procurement of works, goods, consulting and nonconsulting services. 
Procurement financed in whole or in party with Bank resources will be conducted in 
line with the Policies for the Procurement of Works and Goods Financed by the 
Inter-American Development Bank (document GN-2349-9) and the Policies for the 
Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the Inter-American 
Development Bank (document GN-2350-9). Pursuant to document GN-2538-11 of 
October 2013, the use of the electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding 
subsystems of Paraguay’s public sector procurement system (SCSP) will apply to 
the operation in the terms specified in the Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 
(Annex III). The Procurement Plan contains a breakdown of the procurement 

                                                
41  SENACSA is an autonomous, self-governing legal entity of the Republic of Paraguay subject to public law, 

which is able to finance its budget with resources from national and/or international loans. SENACSA has 
sufficient capacity to execute the obligations assumed with respect to the Bank. Therefore, the waiver will 
not affect the operation’s risk profile. 

42  This arrangement will be maintained while SENACSA requests that the Finance Ministry change the 
PMU’s status to Financial Administration Subunit and Procurement Operations Subunit, so it will be able 
to manage the program independently from the DIGEAF. 

43  For the Operating Regulations to enter into force, they must be approved by resolution of SENACSA’s 
highest authority. 



  - 14 - 

processes to be implemented during execution, as well as the procedures the Bank 
will apply to review them. 

3.6 The Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements (Annex III) establish the framework 
for the financial management, planning, supervision, and execution of procurement 
involved in program execution. No specific situations that require special 
arrangements or treatments are foreseen with regard to procurement. 

3.7 Disbursements. Disbursements will be made as established in the financial 
management guidelines set forth in document OP-273-6. Preferably, advances will 
be made on a semiannual basis, once at least 80% of the advanced amount has 
been justified with the required presentation of the accountability forms and the 
financial planning spreadsheet. 

3.8 Audits. During execution, the PEU will present, on an annual basis, the audited 
financial statements for the program, in the terms required by the Bank. An 
independent audit firm acceptable to the Bank will be selected for the program. The 
audited financial statements will be presented within 120 days following the close of 
the fiscal year, with the closing statements being presented within the 120 days 
following the date set for the last disbursement.  

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results  

3.9 The project has a detailed monitoring and evaluation plan that has been agreed 
upon with SENACSA, which, through the PEU, will be responsible for generating the 
information necessary to monitor the indicators contained in the Results Matrix, and 
for sharing it with the Bank. 

3.10 Monitoring. During project execution, the PEU will prepare semiannual monitoring 
reports and send them to the Bank no later than 60 days following the end of each 
six-month period. These reports will provide a detailed account of the physical and 
financial execution of the project, as well as of the progress made on all Results 
Matrix indicators. The reports will also provide a detailed account of the problems 
encountered during project execution and the corrective measures taken, and will 
explain any deviation from the project management instruments (multiyear 
execution plan, annual work plan, procurement plan). No later than the final quarter 
of each year of project execution, the PEU will present, to the Bank’s satisfaction, 
the AWP for the following year and the maintenance plan for the equipment 
purchased with loan proceeds, as well as compliance with the program’s 
environmental and social requirements established in the ESMP. Bank staff will 
make periodic inspection visits during which they will meet with PEU staff to discuss 
the progress made on the activities set forth in the AWP, the degree of compliance 
with the indicators established in the Results Matrix, the AWP for the following year, 
and the Procurement Plan for the next 12 months. 

3.11 Pursuant to the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan, the project will include a midterm 
and final evaluation. The midterm evaluation will be performed within 90 days 
following the date on which 50% of the loan proceeds are committed, or when the 
execution period is half over, whichever occurs first. The purpose of this evaluation 
will be to review the progress of all activities, analyze the causes of any potential 
deviations from the planned progress, and propose corrective measures. The final 
evaluation will be conducted within 90 days following the date on which 95% of loan 
proceeds have been disbursed. These reports will include: (i) financial execution by 
subcomponent and financing source; (ii) progress made with regard to the Results 



  - 15 - 

Matrix outputs, outcomes, and impacts; (iii) compliance with the ESMP; 
(iv) summary of the financial statements, procurement, disbursements, and internal 
control; (v) review of implementation; and (vi) lessons learned. The midterm and 
final evaluations will both be performed by non-PEU external consultants. 

3.12 Impact evaluation. As set forth in the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan (required 
electronic link 3), the program as a whole will be evaluated reflectively based on the 
indicators included in the Results Matrix. Given that the program is an intervention 
to strengthen a national institution, it is not feasible to construct a counterfactual 
analysis that would make it possible to compare the final value of the impact and 
outcome indicators with what would have occurred without the program being in 
place. 

3.13 Nevertheless, the impact of the reproductive diseases program, financed in 
Component I, will be evaluated, since the its characteristics make this possible. This 
program consists in the application of a treatment procedure to eliminate brucellosis 
in infected beef-production establishments. As a pilot program, it will only treat 
300 establishments, to be identified through serological tests of the cows brought to 
cattle fairs.  

3.14 The impact evaluation will follow an experimental methodology, using a treatment 
group of 300 establishments and a control group of the same size. Both groups will 
be selected randomly from among the infected establishments (of which there are 
around 3,000). Once selected, the establishments in both groups will be notified that 
they are infected. The control group establishments will be quarantined and will be 
given a document with recommendations for carrying out the treatment at the 
property. The treatment group establishments will be quarantined and the same 
treatment procedure (which was merely recommended to the control group 
establishments) will be performed there at no cost. 

3.15 The treatment process will last five years and will fundamentally consist in 
vaccinating the entire herd and in appropriately managing the infected animals, by 
separating them out. As part of the treatment process, and to monitor brucellosis 
prevalence and incidence rates, at each establishment a representative sample of 
animals will be taken. These animals will be identified with tags and will be tested 
throughout the treatment process. The information obtained from the samples at 
each establishment, together with the administrative information from the 
reproductive diseases program and a series of surveys performed at the beginning, 
middle, and end of the program, will be used to perform a difference in differences 
analysis of the treatment and control groups, before and after the reproductive 
diseases program has been carried out. 

3.16 The evaluation is important because it will make it possible to rigorously measure 
the effectiveness of the treatment program implemented by SENACSA versus the 
effectiveness of merely providing the producers with information on how to perform 
the procedure. There appears to be some evidence (from Chile and Uruguay) that 
the intervention of health authorities in implementing this type of treatment process 
is highly effective, leading to a notable reduction of the disease’s incidence rate in 
the short term. However, to date there is no rigorous empirical evidence showing 
that it does so, above all compared to the possibility of voluntary implementation for 
which the producers themselves are responsible. 

 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-23
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-23


Annex I - PR-L1148 

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2769

     Country Program Results Matrix GN-2915

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to 

country strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Evaluable
8 326 10

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution

     3.1 Program Diagnosis

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis

     4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs

     4.3 Reasonable Assumptions

     4.4 Sensitivity Analysis

     4.5 Consistency with results matrix

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms

     5.2 Evaluation Plan

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary Yes

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended 

beneficiaries and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the 

public sector entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the 

project

Yes

1.0

8.0

1.8

4.0

2.2

9.0

3.0

3.0

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

2.0

8.0

2.5

5.5

0.0

The objective of the program is to contribute to improving the productivity of the livestock sector. The specific objectives are: (i) to improve the effectiveness of animal health 

services with a risk management approach; and (ii) expand the coverage of veterinary services, including minor species. The relative low productivity of the livestock sector is 

well articulated and supported, as well as its relationship with livestock health. However, little empirical evidence is presented about current weaknesses in managing health 

risks.

The results matrix exhibits vertical logic and presents medium-term impact indicators associated with productivity. Not all indicators classified as outcome indicators are 

outcome indicators, or have well-established baselines and goals.

The ex-ante economic analysis captures the benefits associated with the reduction of losses, improvements in access to markets and prices, and administrative efficiency. 

The key assumptions are mostly clearly presented and well supported. The sensitivity analysis includes the key assumptions. Although the economic analysis incorporates 

improvements in administrative efficiency, these indicators are not part of the results matrix.

Strategic Planning National System, Monitoring and 

Evaluation National System, Environmental 

Assessment National System.

Medium

Yes

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting 

and Reporting.

Procurement: nformation System, parison.

-Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological and 

managerial tools to improve public service delivery (#)*

-Farmers with improved access to agricultural services and investments  (#)*

-Beneficiaries of IDBG projects that contribute to at least one key dimension of 

food security  (#)*

Yes

Increase the supply of agricultural public goods and 

services

The intervention is included in the 2018 Operational 

Program.

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Yes

-Productivity and Innovation

-Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability

-Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law

I. Corporate and Country Priorities



Annex II 
Page 1 of 4 

 

RESULTS MATRIX 

Project objective: 
The program’s general objective is to help improve the productivity of the livestock sector. The specific objectives are to: (i) improve the effectiveness 
of animal health services with a risk management approach; and (ii) expand the coverage of veterinary services, including for smaller species. 

 

EXPECTED IMPACT 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measurement 
Baseline  

Baseline 
year 

Final target Means of verification Comments 

IMPACT: Increase in the beef cattle offtake rate and the volume of pork and poultry meat exports 

Slaughter rate1/Cattle 
population  

Percentage 13.8% 
2014-2016 

average 
18% SENACSA report 3-year average 

Number of export 
markets 

Number of 
countries for 
which meat 
exports are 
authorized 

13 
2014-2016 

average 
16 SENACSA report 

Export markets with SENACSA health 
agreements 

Volume of pork and 
poultry meat, offal, and 
giblets exports  

Tons 5,754 2016 7,500 
Volume of exports 

reported by SENACSA 

This indicator is used as a proxy for production 
due to the lack of statistics. Annual growth 
estimated at 5% 

 

EXPECTED OUTCOMES 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measurement 
Baseline  

Baseline 
year 

Final 
target1 

Means of verification Comments2 

OUTCOME 1: More effective risk management and animal health services  

Response time to 
notifications of 
suspected vesicular 
diseases 

Hours 4 2017 3 
SENACSA report based on 
specific records 

Refers to the response time between the notification of 
and attention to the suspected case 

Rating in Chapter II of 
the PVS (OIE)  

Rating 32 2017 3.6 OIE PVS report Chapter II is “Technical Authority and Capability” 

PVS critical 
competencies rating 
(OIE) 

Rating 3 2017 3.6 OIE PVS report 
Average rating obtained for critical competencies II.1 
(laboratories), II.5 (epidemiological surveillance and 
early detection) and II.6 (emergency response) 

                                                           
1  Slaughter in meat packing facilities with veterinary inspection. This is a more reliable proxy for the offtake rate that refers to the population addressed by the project.  
2  To be confirmed. In November 2017 an OIE mission performed the fieldwork for a new evaluation that will serve as a baseline for the project. 



Annex II 
Page 2 of 4 
 
 

OUTCOME 2: Reduced prevalence of brucellosis 

Reduced prevalence of 
bovine brucellosis 

% 6% 2017 4.5% SENACSA report 
Number of positive reactions divided by total number 
of tested animals 

OUTCOME 3: Health coverage expanded to new categories, emphasizing small livestock  

Health plans in 
operation  

Number of 
plans 

2 2017 4 SENACSA report 

Implies the existence of a registry of establishments, 
owners, and the movements of poultry, sheep, goat, 
and pigs, used as a basis for the health actions 
defined by SENACSA. 

 

OUTPUTS 

Outputs 
Unit of 

measure-
ment 

Baseline 
Baseline 

year 
Year 

1 
Year 

2 
Year 

3 
Year 

4 
Year 

5 
Final 

target1 
Means of 

verification 
Comments2 

Component I: Health risk management  

SISA’s functions 
expanded and SISA 
integrated into SIGOR  

Score 
Not 

available =0 
Available=1  

0 2017   1   1 SENACSA report  

Health surveillance 
unit implemented 

Command 
unit 

0 2017   1   1 SENACSA report  

Entry point controls 
operating in 
accordance with 
international 
standards 

Score 
Not 

available =0 
Available=1  

0 2017    1  1 

SENACSA report and 
OIE observations 
contained in the PVS.  
CVP project reports 
(ATN/OC-16011-RG)  

 

Simulations of foot-
and-mouth disease 
outbreaks performed 

Number of 
simulations 

0 2016  1 1  1 3 
Foot-and-mouth 
disease outbreak 
simulation reports 

 

Samples processed 
by laboratory 
networks 
 
 
 
New diagnostic 
techniques 
implemented 

Number of 
samples 

(thousands) 
 
 
 
Number of 
techniques  

120 
 
 
 
 
 
 

0 

2016   

10 
 
 
 
 
 
 

80 
 
 
 
 
 

2 

30 
 
 
 
 
 
2 

240 
 
 
 
 
 

4 

Report based on 
laboratory 
management system 

In addition to the 
number of samples, the 
following should be 
verified: (a) SENACSA 
laboratory network has 
been integrated with 
equipped private 
laboratories 
(10 laboratories in total) 
and (b) comprehensive 
laboratory management 
software is operational  



Annex II 
Page 3 of 4 

 

Outputs 
Unit of 

measure-
ment 

Baseline 
Baseline 

year 
Year 

1 
Year 

2 
Year 

3 
Year 

4 
Year 

5 
Final 

target1 
Means of 

verification 
Comments2 

SENACSA facilities in 
the field built or 
renovated 

Number of 
facilities  

0 2017   7 4 6 17 
SENACSA report 
based on inspection 
of works 

 

Computer system 
implemented for 
managing individual 
traceability 

Computer 
application 

0 0    1  1 SENACSA report 

 

Properties treated in 
the brucellosis 
eradication program  

Number of 
properties  

0 2017  100 200   300 SENACSA report 

In addition to the 
properties in the 
brucellosis eradication 
program, the disease 
protocol should be 
checked.  

Strategic staff 
members trained for 
SENACSA's new 
management model 

Number of 
persons 
trained 

0 2017  50 100 100  250 

SENACSA report 
specifying 
implementation of the 
new management 
model and the 
number of persons 
trained for it 

 

Component II: Expansion of services 

Records of sheep and 
goat stock counted 
and control of 
movements 
functioning  

Records 
system 

0 2017     2 2 
SIGOR-based 
SENACSA reports 
 

 

Health plans that 
include 
epidemiological 
surveillance 
implemented for 
sheep and goats 

Health plans 0 2017  1 1   2 

SENACSA reports on 
epidemiological 
surveillance results 
for the two species 

 

Poultry and pig farms 
under surveillance 
and certification 
programs 

Number of 
farms 

0 2017   5 10 10 25 

SENACSA report 
including updated 
self-declaration of 
status as free from 
Newcastle disease, 
avian influenza, and 
CSF 

 

Small livestock PPP 
operating  

Not 
operating=0 
Operating=1 

0 2017 1     1 

Acting coordinator 
and documentation of 
periodic meetings of 
the PPP’s governing 
body 

 



Annex II 
Page 4 of 4 
 
 

Outputs 
Unit of 

measure-
ment 

Baseline 
Baseline 

year 
Year 

1 
Year 

2 
Year 

3 
Year 

4 
Year 

5 
Final 

target1 
Means of 

verification 
Comments2 

Technicians and 
producers trained on 
sheep, goat, and pig 
health 

Number of 
persons 
trained 

Government 
technicians. 

Private 
technicians. 
Producers 

 

0  
30 
30 
 

30 
30 

400 

30 
30 

600 

 
 

600 

90 
90 

1,600 

Training reports 
prepared by the PPP 

The training sessions 
include materials for 
mass distribution to 
participants  

Improved 
efficiency 
in the 
provision 
of 
services 
to users  

Online 
proce-
dures 

and pay-
ments 

% of proce-
dures 

20 2017   20 20 20 80 

SENACSA report 
with list of procedures 
at the start and end 
of the program 

Volume of online 
procedures/total 
volume of procedures 
(in person + electronic) 

Improved 
efficiency 
in the 
provision 
of 
services 
to users  

New 
modules 
in SIGOR 

Number of 
modules 

12 2017  1 1 1 1 16 

Report on 
incorporated modules 
Initial baseline report 
with the current 
number of modules 
(2017) and a 
description thereof 

 

 



Annex III  
Page 1 of 6 

 

FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS 

 

Country: Paraguay 

Project name:  Project to Improve and Expand Animal Health Services in 
Paraguay  

Project number: PR-L1148 

Executing agency: National Service for Animal Health and Quality (SENACSA) 

Prepared by:  Fernando Glasman, Bruno Candia, and Jorge Luis Gonzalez 
(fiduciary specialists)  

  

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 The institutional assessment for the project’s fiduciary management was based on: 
(i) the fiduciary context of the country; (ii) the findings of the fiduciary risk 
evaluation and project risk management workshop; and (iii) the September 2017 
report on findings using the Institutional Capacity Assessment System on the 
executing agency SENACSA. The fiduciary agreements applicable to project 
execution have been prepared as a result of this assessment.  

II. THE COUNTRY’S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT  

2.1 In general terms, the country systems for financial management have a medium 
level of development. Nevertheless, these systems need to be supplemented for 
the execution of Bank-financed projects. Specific financial reports are prepared 
through auxiliary accounting systems. Financial control tools such as the 
Integrated Financial Administration System (SIAF), the Integrated Accounting 
Subsystem (SICO), and other subsystems allow the executing agency to manage 
payment transfers to vendors under acceptable conditions through the Central 
Bank of Paraguay. The integration of these tools will allow audited financial 
statements for a program or project to be prepared in the SIAF in the future. Until 
then, parallel systems are being used. External control is currently performed 
through private audit firms. 

2.2 In terms of the country’s public sector procurement system (SCSP), Bank 
operations make full use of the public procurement information system, as well as 
the country’s electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding subsystems, for 
the amounts and categories established in the agreements for the use thereof 
signed between Paraguay and the Bank on 17 June 2014.  

III. THE EXECUTING AGENCY’S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT  

3.1 The executing agency will be SENACSA, acting through the Project Management 
Unit (PMU) with the support of the Bureau of Administration and Finance 
(DIGEAF). The PMU reports to the Office of the President of the institution, and will 
provide general coordination of program execution, programming, and monitoring, 
ensuring that the conditions and targets set in the loan contract are met; the PMU 
will be the main contact between the IDB and the borrower during execution. In 



Annex III  
Page 2 of 6 
 
 

turn, the DIGEAF will handle administrative and financial activities, as well as 
procurement and contracting.  

3.2 The following aspects of SENACSA’s institutional capacity were assessed during 
the preparation of the operation: capacity for programming and organizing; 
capacity for executing the programmed and organized activities, including systems 
for managing staff, goods, services, and finances; and control capacity. According 
to the assessment, SENACSA has overall technical competencies in fiduciary 
matters. However, its lack of prior experience in executing projects with multilateral 
financing, principally in the area of procurement, is considered a weakness. 
Consequently, although the consolidated result for the SENACSA capacities 
assessed using the ICAS shows a satisfactory level of development, the program 
has been assigned a medium level of risk. 

IV. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

4.1 Based on the evaluations of SENACSA, opportunities for improvement should 
focus on:  

a. Implementing a financial and accounting information system that makes it 
possible to record the transactions and issue information required by the 
Ministry of Finance, SENACSA, and the Bank; 

b. Designing and developing the profiles of the PEU positions; 

c. Strengthening accounting and internal control in Bank financial management 
policies.  

4.2 Procurement management. In the September 2017 ICAS report, SENACSA was 
considered to have a satisfactory overall level of development. However, the 
specific assessment of the goods and services administration system yielded 
medium levels of development and risk. Accordingly, as mitigation actions, the 
area responsible for procurement needs to be strengthened with competent staff 
knowledgeable about the policies of multilateral organizations, as well as through 
specific workshops and courses on IDB procurement policies.  

4.3 Financial management. The internal control unit lacks formal procedures for 
monitoring project-related activities. Therefore, SENACSA will draw up these 
procedures in a fiduciary manual for the PEU, contained in the Operating 
Regulations and to be approved by the competent authorities. 

V. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE CONTRACT 

5.1 The following agreements and requirements should be considered in the special 
provisions: for the purposes of Article 4.10 of the General Conditions, the parties 
agree that the exchange rate to be applied will be the one indicated in section 
(b)(ii) of that article. The agreed-upon exchange rate will be the exchange rate on 
the effective date on which the borrower, the executing agency, or any other 
person or legal entity given the power to incur expenses, makes the respective 
payments to the contractor, vendor, or beneficiary. 



Annex III  
Page 3 of 6 

 

VI. FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION 

6.1 The applicable procurement policies for this loan are documents GN-2349-9 and 
GN-2350-9. The Bank’s Board of Executive Directors also approved (in document 
GN-2538-11) the use of the electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding 
subsystems of Paraguay’s public sector procurement system (Law 2051/03). The 
use of other country systems accepted subsequent to approval of the project will 
be implemented automatically, and so stated in the Procurement Plan. 

 Procurement execution 

6.2 Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services. Contracts for 
works, goods, and nonconsulting services1 subject to international competitive 
bidding (ICB) will be executed using the standard bidding documents issued by the 
Bank. In turn, the bidding procedures subject to national competitive bidding (NCB) 
will be executed using national competitive bidding documents agreed upon with 
the Bank. The project’s sector specialist will be responsible for reviewing the 
technical specifications of procurement items during the preparation of selection 
processes. Initially, there are no plans for selection processes involving single-
source selection.  

6.3 Selection and contracting of consultants. Contracts for consulting services 
arising under the project will be executed using the standard request for proposals 
issued by or agreed upon with the Bank. The project’s sector specialist is 
responsible for reviewing the terms of reference for contracting consulting services.  

a. Selection of individual consultants. Pursuant to procurement policies 
contained in document GN-2350-9. 

b. Training. Procurement workshops will be held. 

c. Use of country system. Pursuant to document GN-2538-11 of October 
2013, the use of the SCSP electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding 
subsystems in Bank-financed operations will apply:  

(i) To all contracts for goods and nonconsulting services subject to the 
use of the electronic reverse auction procedure under the SCSP and 
involving amounts below the Bank’s established threshold for the 
shopping method for off-the-shelf goods (for reference, US$250,000);  

(ii) To all contracts for works involving amounts below the Bank’s 
established threshold for use of the shopping method for complex 
works (for reference, US$250,000), and to contracts for goods and 
nonconsulting services up to the amount established by the Bank for 
the use of the shopping method for complex goods and services (for 
reference, US$50,000); 

(iii) Contracts for amounts greater than or equal to the aforementioned 
amounts will be governed by Bank policies (document GN-2349-9). 

6.4 Section 1 of the Bank policies (document GN-2349-9) will continue to be applicable 
to all executed contracts, regardless of amount or procurement method. Any 
system or subsystem approved subsequently will be applicable to this operation. 

                                                
1  Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank 

(document GN-2349-9) paragraph 1.1: Nonconsulting services are treated as goods. 



Annex III  
Page 4 of 6 
 
 

The operation’s Procurement Plan and updates thereto will indicate which 
contracts are to be executed through the approved country systems.2 

6.5 Advance procurement/retroactive financing. None foreseen for this operation. 

6.6 Domestic preference. None foreseen for this operation.  

Table 1. Thresholds for ICB and international shortlist (US$)  

Method ICB works 
ICB goods and 

nonconsulting services 
International shortlist in 

consulting services 

Threshold 3,000,000 250,000 200,000 

 

Table 2. Main procurement items 

Activity Method 
Estimated 

date 

Estimated 
amount 
(US$) 

Works 

Contracting of construction firm for the construction of works for 
SENACSA 

ICB Year 3 3,380,000 

Goods 

Procurement of equipment for DIGELAB. 57 items ICB Year 1 2,307,500 

Procurement of equipment ICB Year 2 330,000 

Mobile inspections ICB Year 2 300,000 

Nonconsulting services     

Contracting of treatment services for infected establishments ICB Year 2 540,000 

Contracting of logistical support services for training sessions, 
workshops, and seminars 
 

ICB Year 1 285,000 

Consulting firms    

Development of software for traceability 
 

QCBS Year 1 1,830,000 

Design and development of new SIGOR features, systems 
security plan, and electronic signature functionality 

QCBS Year 1 705,000 

 

Table 3. Total amounts by category 

Categories Total amounts (US$) 

Works 3,380,500 

Goods 3,862,500 

Nonconsulting services  895,000 

Consulting firms 4,535,500 

Individual consultants  1,256,500 

Training sessions 670,000 

Total, Procurement Plan 14,600,000 

 

6.7 Procurement supervision. All procurement processes governed by procurement 
policy documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 will be subject to ex ante review by 
the Bank. Supervision of all procurement processes governed by the SCSP 

                                                
2  If another system or subsystem is approved by the Bank, it will be applicable to the operation, in 

accordance with the loan contract. 



Annex III  
Page 5 of 6 

 

electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding subsystems (document 
GN-2538-11) will be conducted through the country system.3 

6.8 Special provisions. No special provisions are anticipated beyond those specified 
in paragraph 5.1. 

6.9 Records and files. The systems, formats, and procedures available to or agreed 
upon with the Bank should be used for the preparation and filing of project reports. 

VII. FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR FINANCIAL EXECUTION  

 Financial Management 

7.1 Programming and budget 

a. The PEU, reporting to the Office of the President of SENACSA and in 
coordination with the DIGEAF, will centralize the coordination of execution, 
supported by other departments and units of SENACSA, as necessary. 

b. SENACSA will be responsible for budget programming, administration, and 
execution, under the zero-based budget system.  

7.2 Accounting and information systems. The country uses modified cash basis 
accounting; however, cash basis accounting is used for the accountability process 
of IDB-financed projects.  

a. Information systems. The PEU will have access to the SIAF through the 
DIGEAF. The country systems do not issue the reports necessary for the 
Bank. These reports are prepared using different systems, which entails 
additional work for the PEU. 

b. Disbursements and cash flow. Program disbursements will typically be 
made through advances of funds, which must be corroborated through the 
monthly submission of one detailed financial plan for up to six months, and 
one for a longer period, which can be used to determine the program’s actual 
needs based on the multiyear execution plan, annual work plan, and 
procurement plan. The second and subsequent disbursements will be subject 
to justification of at least 80% of the previous advance. If requested, 
disbursements may also be made as direct vendor payments or 
reimbursements for payments made. 

c. Exchange rate. The exchange rate agreed upon with the executing agency 
for accountability will be the monetization rate.  

d. Internal control and internal audit. The ICAS establishes that there is an 
advanced level of internal control. However, the SENACSA internal audit 
office does not include Bank-financed projects in its audit plan.  

e. External control and reports. The executing agency will deliver annual 
program audit reports prepared by an independent audit firm accepted by the 
Bank, in accordance with the terms of reference previously approved by the 
Bank. The project’s financial statements include a cash flow statement, 
statement of accrued investments, notes to these financial statements, and 
the statement from the project management team. The audit report will 

                                                
3  Depending on the scope of the use of the system, supervision may be supplemented by project audits. If 

so, it should be mentioned in this Annex. 



Annex III  
Page 6 of 6 
 
 

include an evaluation of the internal control system. The project will require 
the selection of an eligible independent audit firm. External audits will be 
covered by the loan proceeds, estimated at US$200,000 over the planned 
five years of execution of the loan. 

f. Financial supervision plan. Financial supervision may be adjusted based 
on project execution and audit reports. 

Table 4. Financial supervision plan 

Nature/scope Frequency   

 
Ex post review of disbursements 1 per year 

 
Financial audit and delivery of financial statements Annual 

 
Review of disbursement requests and attached 
reports 

2/3 per year 
 

Inspection visit/analysis of internal controls and 
control environment at the executing agency 

Annual 
 

7.3 Execution arrangements. As described in Section III.A. of the loan proposal. 

7.4 Other financial management agreements and requirements, as set forth in 
paragraph 3.11 of the loan proposal. 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/18 
 
 
 

Paraguay. Loan ____/OC-PR to Servicio Nacional de Calidad y Salud Animal (SENACSA) 
Project to Improve and Expand Animal Health Services in Paraguay 

 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized, 
in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as may be 
necessary with Servicio Nacional de Calidad y Salud Animal (SENACSA), as Borrower, and with 
the Republic of Paraguay, as Guarantor, for the purpose of granting the former a financing to 
cooperate in the execution of the Project to Improve and Expand Animal Health Services in 
Paraguay. Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$15,000,000 from the resources of 
the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the 
Special Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ ____________ 2018) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/CSC/EZSHARE-746870777-7480 
Pipeline No.: PR-L1148 

 


	DEM pr-l1148_spd_validation_opc.pdf
	Summary (I, II, III) 



















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

BOLIVIA 

 

 

 

RURAL LAND REGULARIZATION AND TITLING PROGRAM 

(BO-L1113) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Eirivelthon S. Lima 
(RND/CPE) and Juan Manuel Murguía Baysse (RND/CBO), Project Team Co-leaders; 
Álvaro García Negro (RND/CPR); Juan de Dios Mattos (CSD/RND); Mario González Flores 
(SPD/SDV); Michael Kent and Rachel Atkinson (VPS/ESG); Javier Jiménez (LEG/SGO); 
Carolina Escudero (FMP/CBO); Abel Cuba (FMP/CBO); Gina Peñaranda (CAN/CBO); and 
Yolanda Valle (CSD/RND).  

 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of 
Executive Directors simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. 
Should the Board approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be made 
available to the public, thus superseding and replacing the original version.  

 



 

CONTENTS 

PROJECT SUMMARY 
 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................. 1 

A. Background, problems addressed, and rationale .......................................... 1 
B. Objectives, components, and cost. The objective of the program is to 

increase legal certainty over rural property. ................................................... 8 
C. Results matrix and key indicators. ................................................................ 9 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................... 10 

A. Financing instruments ................................................................................ 10 
B. Economic viability ....................................................................................... 10 
C. Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 11 
D. Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 12 
E. Other project risks ...................................................................................... 12 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 13 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 13 
B. Summary of results monitoring arrangements ............................................ 15 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  



 - ii - 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXES 

PRINTED ANNEXES 

Annex I Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) 

Annex II Results matrix 

Annex III Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED 

1. Multiyear Execution Plan  

2. Annual Work Plan 

3. Monitoring and Evaluation Plan 

4. Environmental and Social Management Plan  

5. Procurement Plan 

OPTIONAL 

1. Economic Analysis of the Project 

2. Institutional Analysis 

3. Sector Analysis 

4. Strategic Environmental and Social Evaluation of the Program 

5. Draft Program Operating Regulations 

6. Consolidated Budget  

 
  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319369
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319371
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319624
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319558
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319364
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319553
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319629
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319484
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40320821
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40320765
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319541


 - iii - 
 
 
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS 

ABT Autoridad de Fiscalización y Control Social de Bosques y Tierra [Forest 
and Land Social Control and Oversight Authority] 

APMT Autoridad Plurinacional de la Madre Tierra [Mother Earth Plurinational 
Authority] 

AWP Annual Work Plan 
CIOC Comunidades Interculturales Originarias [Original Intercultural 

Communities] 
DDRR Registro de Derechos Reales [Real Property Rights Registry] 
DGP Dirección General de Planificación [Planning Bureau] 
ESMP Environmental and Social Management Plan 
ESMR Environmental and Social Management Report 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations  
FSO Fund for Special Operations 
INE Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas [National Statistics Institute] 
INRA Instituto Nacional de Reforma Agraria [National Agrarian Reform 

Institute] 
MDRyT Ministry of Rural Development and Land 
MEF Ministry of Economy and Public Finance 
MPD Ministry of Planning and Development 
PCR Program Completion Report 
SESA Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment 
SIC Sistema Integrado de Catastro [Integrated Cadastre System] 
SIMAT Sistema de Mantenimiento y Administración de Tierra [Land 

Maintenance and Management System] 
TIOC Territorios Indígena Comunitario Campesino [Rural Community 

Indigenous Territories] 
VIPFE Office of the Deputy Minister for Public Investment and External 

Financing  
 
 



 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

BOLIVIA 
RURAL LAND REGULARIZATION AND TITLING PROGRAM 

(BO-L1113) 
 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Plurinational State of Bolivia  OC FSO 

Amortization period: 30 years 40 years 
Executing Agency: National Agrarian Reform Institute (INRA) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace period: 6 years 40 years 

IDB (OC): 51,000,000 51 
Inspection and supervision 
fee: 

(a) 
N/A 

IDB (FSO): 9,000,000 9 Interest rate: SCF fixed
(b) 

0.25% 

Local cofinancing: 40,000,000 40 
Credit fee: 

(a) 
N/A 

Approval currency: US$ US$ 

Total: 100,000,000 100 

Project at a Glance 

Program objective/description: To increase legal certainty over rural property. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan: (i) the borrower, through the Ministry of 

Economy and Public Finance, the Ministry of Development Planning, and the National Agrarian Reform Institute (INRA) will sign a 
subsidiary agreement defining the following matters, among others: (a) the method to be used to transfer the loan proceeds to INRA; 
and (b) INRA’s commitment to conduct program activities in accordance with the terms of the loan contract (paragraph 3.2); 
(ii) appointment of the Director of INRA’s Planning Bureau (DGP) as the program’s general coordinator and of the program 
component coordinators, in accordance with the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank; and the contracting of the following 
specialists: financial, procurement, planning, environmental management, and social management, through a competitive process, in 
accordance with terms previously agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.4); and (iii) the entry into force of the program’s Operating 
Regulations, under terms previously agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.7). 

Special contractual conditions by component: Evidence of the signing and entry into force of the following interagency 

cooperation agreements: (i) between INRA and the Real Property Rights Registry prior to the disbursement to finance activities 
related to public registries under Component 2 (paragraph 3.5); (ii) between INRA and the Forest and Land Social Control and 
Oversight Authority, the Madre Tierra [Mother Earth] Plurinational Authority, and the Office of the Deputy Minister for Land, prior to 
disbursement to finance activities related to the program’s Environmental and Social Management Plan in Component 2 (paragraph 
3.5); and (iii) between INRA and the National Statistics Institute, prior to disbursement to finance activities related to the baseline of 
the program’s monitoring and evaluation plan (paragraph 3.5). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges
(b)

: SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Cross-cutting issues
(c)

: GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a)
 The credit fee and the inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the 

Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with relevant policies. 
(b)

 The borrower will pay interest on the outstanding balances of the Ordinary Capital portion of the loan at a LIBOR-based rate. Once the outstanding 
balance reaches 25% of the net amount approved or US$3 million, whichever is greater, the rate will be set for this balance. 

(c)
 SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 

(d)
 GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law). 

 
 

 



 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problems addressed, and rationale 

1.1 Property rights over land and agricultural competitiveness. The agriculture 
sector is one of the most important sectors of the Bolivian economy. Between 2002 
and 2014, average annual growth in the sector was 4.16%, accounting for close to 
13.4% of gross domestic product. It employs 30% of the total labor force nationally 
and is even more significant in rural areas where it employs 62% of the labor force. 
The agriculture sector also makes a significant contribution to Bolivian exports; 
between 1999 and 2014, exports grew at an average annual rate of 13%, leaping 
from US$247 million to US$1.29 billion. Over this period, the agriculture sector 
accounted for between 14% and 18% of the total value of the country’s exports.1 
Considering that the economy of rural households is closely tied to agricultural 
activities, growth in the sector contributed to a 21 percentage point reduction in 
rural poverty levels, with poverty falling from 62% to 39% (Castellani and Zenteno, 
2015).  

1.2 Despite the importance of the agriculture sector, a detailed examination shows low 
productivity levels. According to the United Nations’ Food and Agricultural 
Organization (FAO), agricultural yield from grain production is 57% of the average 
for South America and 39% in the case of starchy root crops. In addition, a Bank 
analysis shows that growth in Bolivia’s total factor productivity has been lower than 
the regional average, with a decline in efficiency but increases in technological 
change (Nin-Pratt et al., 2015). Data from the Social and Economic Policy Analysis 
Unit indicate that the area under cultivation increased by 460,000 hectares 
between 2006 and 2014. This means that sector growth has been due more to 
expansion of the area under cultivation than to increased productivity. Sector 
growth was concentrated in a small group of items intended for export in the 
eastern part of the country, where producers have benefited from the region’s 
natural characteristics (soils, topography, and water), a good level of public 
spending on sector public goods, and private investments in intensive systems of 
production with access to financing and the latest technologies. 

1.3 The agriculture sector’s potential contribution to economic growth and rural poverty 
reduction depends on farmers’ increased productivity, particularly among small and 
medium-sized producers (World Bank, 2008; Escobal, J., 2012). In Bolivia, most 
small and medium-sized producers are located in the valleys and highlands. The 
main items of those agricultural producers are crops such as potato, corn, and 
grains. More than 80% of the parcels with pending regularization and titling belong 
to the small farmer category, which includes rural producers with fewer than two 
hectares in the highlands and up to 50 hectares in the lowlands. These agricultural 
producers are estimated to represent 83% of the country’s rural households.2 

1.4 Improving agriculture sector productivity and thus efficiency and sustainability in 
the use of land in Bolivia requires investments in sector public goods to promote 
farmers’ private productive investments (Lopez, 2004, Blackman et al. 2014, 
Quisumbing and Kumar, 2014; Ali, et al., 2014). A requirement for achieving this 

                                                
1
 The Observatory of Economic Complexity (OEC). What Does Bolivia Export? 

(http://atlas.media.mit.edu/en/profile/country/bol/) and National Statistics Institute (INE, 2012). 
2
  http://bolivia.um.dk/es/danida-es/programas-sectoriales/agricultura 

http://atlas.media.mit.edu/en/profile/country/bol/
http://bolivia.um.dk/es/danida-es/programas-sectoriales/agricultura


- 2 - 

objective is to establish secure property rights over land. According to the available 
empirical evidence, such rights reduce the risk of expropriation and give farmers 
the incentive to make investments that increase productivity and the sustainability 
of rural properties. In the Bolivian case, the empirical evidence is limited because 
no rigorous assessments of the impacts of titling on the productivity and 
sustainable management of agricultural producers’ natural resources have been 
done. Nonetheless, empirical evidence in the region shows the positive impact of 
titling on the use of inputs, increased productive investments, stimulation of the 
land market, reduced deforestation, and farmers’ income (Aldana and Fort, 2001, 
Ghatak and Besley, 2010; Deininger and Chamorro, 2004; Hernández and 
Reardon, 2012; Foltz, Larson and Lopez, 2000, Torrero and Field, 2005; Zegarra, 
2008, Gignoux, J. et al. 2013; Lawry et al. 2014; and Rockson et al., 2013). 

1.5 Property rights, sustainability, and conflicts. Property rights in and of 
themselves do not guarantee the sustainable use of natural resources. In 
Nicaragua, the assignment of property rights improved agricultural productivity and 
also increased the rate of deforestation (Liscow, 2013). The preliminary data for 
Bolivia (Santa Cruz) indicate that land titling, particularly for ranchers, increases 
deforestation (Murguia, 2016). Thus, if the regularization of rural property rights is 
not accompanied by a legal framework and the corresponding environmental 
management instruments, the results of rural titling tend to generate environmental 
degradation. In this regard, the evidence shows that a requirement for ensuring the 
positive impacts of rural land titling on environmental management is the ability to 
monitor and penalize violations (OECD, 2009). With respect to social conflicts, 
10% of the last 25 million hectares subject to intervention are paralyzed by social 
conflicts. This problem is estimated to be significant in the area where property 

rights are yet to be regularized, covering 15 million hectares (paragraph 1.6), in that 
small landholdings (minifundios) are involved (Carrasco, 2016). Under this 
scenario, dispute resolution is important to remove barriers to titling. 

1.6 Status of regularization and titling. The Bolivian government has made 
significant strides in the regularization of rural property and the regularization, 
cadastre, titling, and registration of rural lands is reaching its final stage. Table 1 
indicates that the regularization and titling target was approximately 106 million 
hectares. Between 1996 and 2014, the National Agrarian Reform Institute (INRA) 
has been involved in interventions covering approximately 93 million hectares as 
follows: (i) it regularized and titled approximately 41 million private hectares, which 
included collective properties (Territorios Indígenas Comunitarios Campesinos 
[Rural Community Indigenous Territories] (TIOCs) and Comunidades 
Interculturales Originarias [Native Intercultural Communities (CIOCs)) and 
individual properties; (ii) it regularized approximately 25 million hectares of public 
lands; and (iii) it made headway with the regularization of rural lands that did not 
yet comply with all the legal and technical requirements, involving 27 million 
hectares. The work of regularization, titling, and registration of rural lands that is 
pending for the next few years is to continue in the areas not yet subject to 
intervention, amounting to 15 million hectares, and to finalize the regularization 
process in 25 million hectares that were already subject to intervention but have 
not yet complied with all the requirements of the regularization process. 

1.7 The indigenous peoples and intercultural communities were the primary 
beneficiaries of INRA’s interventions, for a total of approximately 32 million titled 
hectares, which represents 78% of the total titled area in the country (Table 1). 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40320821/R


- 3 - 

This is the result of the effect of Law 3,545, which gave priority to the regularization 
and titling of TIOCs and CIOCs. Small and medium-sized properties occupy 
second place in terms of titled area, with 5.6 million hectares, which represents 
14% of the country’s titled area. According to INRA, this individual titling progress 
occurs in settlement areas, Andean-Amazonian transition areas, and integrated 
management areas of the Amboró National Park (Cochabamba and Santa Cruz). 
Lastly, three million hectares held by agricultural companies were dealt with in the 
regularization process, representing 8% of the country’s titled area. The company-
held properties are located in Santa Cruz, Pando, and Beni. 

Table 1. Status of Regularization and Titling between 1996 and 2014. 

Categories 
Titles 

(Number) 

Area 

(Hectares) 
% 

A. Regularization and titling target  - 106,751,722 100 

B. Titled Area 391,685 40,786,475 38.2 

B1. Small property  377,802 3,852,050 9.4 

B2. Medium-sized property 3,148 1,667,651 4.1 

B3. Agricultural company 1,374 3,091,530 7.6 

B4. Community properties (CIOCs)    8,921 9,176,971 22.5 

B5. Rural Community Indigenous Territories (TIOCs) 440 22,998,273 56.4 

C. Regularized public lands - 24,542,520 23.0 

D. Area in the process of being regularized - 26,867,679 25.2 

E. Area without regularization and titling - 14,555,048 13.6 

Source: INRA, 2016 and Colque et al. 2016. 

 

1.8 According to data from INRA (Andrade, 2016), the areas still not covered by the 
titling policy are distributed throughout the country. Nonetheless, the demand for 
titling of rural lands is concentrated primarily in La Paz, Potosí, Oruro, 
Cochabamba, Beni, and Santa Cruz. In terms of the number of titles to be 
delivered, La Paz (48%) has the highest percentage, followed by Potosí (15%) and 
Cochabamba (14%). The departments with the largest areas to be titled are: 
Santa Cruz (30%), La Paz (22%), and Beni (22%). 

1.9 Institutional framework of property rights.  The institutional structure for 
establishing property rights over rural land was developed under the Agrarian Law 
of 1953. That law created the National Agrarian Reform Service, which is headed 
by the President and implemented through the National Agrarian Reform Council. 
The Council controlled the operational aspects of the work of titling rural lands at 
that time. This institutional framework was redesigned in 1996 with the enactment 
of Law 1,715/96. With the new law, the Council was replaced by INRA, identified 
under Law 1,715/96 as a technical and legal institution with operational 
responsibilities for defining rural land ownership rights. In 2006, Law 3,545/06, 
which reinstituted the agrarian reform on a community basis, amended Law 
1,715/96 by facilitating the titling of collective lands and establishing that all 
available public lands would preferably be assigned to indigenous or campesino 
peoples or communities that had limited land. It also established that private lands 
(medium-sized property owners and companies) would revert to the State if they 
failed to serve an economic and social function (Endo, 2016; Colque et al., 2016). 

1.10 Laws 1,715/96 and 3,545/06 retained the National Agrarian Reform Service as the 
body responsible for planning, executing, and consolidating the agrarian reform 
process. The Service is made up of: (i) the President, the supreme authority 



- 4 - 

responsible for signing title deeds, among other duties; (ii) the Ministry of Rural 
Development and Land (MDRyT), which is responsible for implementing policies 
and other strategic activities in the sector; (iii) the National Agrarian Commission, a 
mixed government/civil society agency charged with community oversight and the 
strategic course of the agrarian reform process; (iv) the Agrarian Judicatura [bench 
of judges], a specialized body for the administration of agrarian justice, made up of 
the Agri-Environmental Tribunal and the Agri-Environmental Courts, for the 
resolution of disputes arising from land ownership and property rights, which was 
conceived as an independent institution and is thus not part of the Service; and 
(v) INRA, an autonomous decentralized public agency under the MDRyT 
responsible, among other things, for steering, coordinating, and executing agrarian 
property regularization policies (Endo, 2016; Colque, et al., 2016). 

1.11 Law 1,715/96 kept unchanged the rural property types previously defined by the 
Agrarian Law of 1953. Rural property types include: campesino site, small 
property, medium-sized property, and agricultural enterprise. However, Law 
1,715/96 added a new type of collective property, the Native Community Land, and 
recognized equal property rights for men and women, defining parity criteria in land 
distribution, management, tenure, and use. Another important change introduced 
by Law 1,715/96 was the development of new instruments recognizing rural 
property rights. The regularization instruments were developed to implement the 
multiple objectives of Law 1,715/96: to regularize property rights, consolidate 
indigenous territories, recover idle lands, certify public lands and distribute them to 
those who need them, resolve disputes, and develop the rural cadastre (Endo, 
2016). 

1.12 The Real Property Rights Registry (DDRR) supplements the institutional 
framework of property rights mentioned above. The DDRR is the Judicial Council 
entity responsible for recording all entries and annotations covering real property 
rights, including real estate and real estate rights, in Bolivia. It was created by the 
Law on the Registration of Real Property Rights of 1887; its operational rules are 
defined in the Civil Code and the regulations approved by Supreme Decree 29,757 
of 2004. For a large-scale rural land regularization and titling operation like that 
proposed in this program, the technical, operational, and technological link 
between INRA and the DDRR is very important for expediting the registration of 
rural properties that have been regularized and surveyed. The workloads 
generated by INRA exceed the existing capacities of the DDRR, which sometimes 
receives packets of more than 10,000 property titles in files and titling data maps 
all at once. 

1.13 Bank actions and other sources of financing. Various funding agencies have 
supported the activities involved in regularizing rural land property rights. The 
World Bank granted a loan of US$24.7 million; the Nordic Development Fund 
financed US$7.5 million; the Kingdom of the Netherlands provided support through 
a nonreimbursable fund of US$8.8 million; the European Union contributed 
US$4 million to the process. The Bank began its support for land titling in Bolivia 
through the “Environmental and Social Protection Project in the Santa Cruz – 
Puerto Suárez Corridor” (1099/SF-BO), through which it financed a titling 
subcomponent amounting to US$2.4 million. The Bank consolidated its 
participation in this area with a land titling operation for US$22 million called the 
“Land Regularization and Legal Cadastre Program” (1512/SF-BO). These funds 
totaled US$70 million and were executed between 1996 and 2012. 



- 5 - 

1.14 The advances made in the area of land regularization are part of a series of 
reforms in the country’s legal framework. Since the National Agrarian Reform 
Council was replaced by INRA, a series of rules was developed to expedite the 
process of regularizing rural lands. Although an institutional structure was created, 
INRA still lacked the capacity to implement the new legal framework for land 
regularization. To overcome the institutional constraints, the decision was made to 
contract land regularization companies, which transferred regularization 
technologies and trained local specialists during contract implementation. With the 
entry into force of Law 3,545/06, the method whereby companies were contracted 
for land regularization became obsolete and INRA assumed the direct execution of 
land regularization. The existing financial resources were thus reallocated to 
finance INRA’s specialized brigades (equipment, vehicles, and specialists). The 
Bank also supported the development, implementation, and linkage of the initial 
versions of the rural property cadastre and registration systems.3 

1.15 Problems in land regularization, cadastre, titling, and registration. The 
diagnostic assessments of the process of regularization, titling, and registration of 
rural land indicate that the following issues need to be addressed:  

1.16 Limitations of the regulatory framework. According to the diagnostic 
assessment of the existing legal framework (Endo, 2016), the latter permits 
program execution to start. Nonetheless, the following problems must be 
overcome during program execution: (i) the regularization, titling, and cadastre 
manuals are outdated; (ii) the rural land regularization procedures are not entirely 
suited to the new areas of intervention; (iii) the rural land regularization procedures 
do not incorporate technological changes that will have a positive impact on titling; 
(iv) the current dispute resolution mechanism needs to be reformulated to reduce 
the burden of pending litigation in titling processes; (v) the ability to use land as a 
guarantee for obtaining credit is restricted to medium-sized property and 
agricultural enterprises; and (vi) the costs for maintaining the formal status of rural 
properties are high and the incentives for maintaining the rural cadastre are 
insufficient. 

1.17 Limitations of the regularization process. The cadastral sweep (barrido 
catastral)4 is the most efficient methodology for large-scale regularization of land 
tenure in rural areas with large numbers of producers and low titling levels. The 
cadastral sweep takes advantage of economies of scale; per title costs are thus 
lower than regularization based on individual demand. Operation 1512/SF-BO 
helped the government to implement the cadastral sweep method. Operation 
1512/SF-BO financed the basic inputs for implementing the sweep, including: 
(i) the formation of regularization specialist brigades – contracting of specialists; 
(ii) the purchase of equipment for the field work; and (iii) logistical support. 
According to the regularization diagnostic assessment (Andrade, 2016), in order to 
achieve the program targets, it is essential that: (i) brigade staff members working 
in INRA under contingent contracts be retained throughout program execution; 
(ii) equipment for the field work be modernized; and (iii) the logistical support 
infrastructure be replaced. An estimated 150 to 200 field brigades will need to be 

                                                
3
  The project completion reports (PCR) for project 1099/SF-BO and program 1512/SF-BO detail the efforts 

made by the Bank and the government to overcome the challenges of regularization work in Bolivia. 
4
  The cadastral sweep is a methodology for systemic surveying of each and every one of the rural parcels 

in an area to gather the technical and legal information on the property and its owner for the mass 
regularization of rural property tenure.  

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40323309/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40319504/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/37382628/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/36662436/R


- 6 - 

financed each year. These brigades are made up of seven regularization 
specialists. Each brigade’s field operations require a minimum infrastructure of 
GPS equipment, portable computers, complete stations, and vehicles. 

1.18 Deficiencies of the technological platform. According to the diagnostic 
assessment of the technological platform (Solíz, 2016), the current technology is 
capable of continuing the rural land regularization, cadastre, titling, and registration 
process. However, the following problems must be overcome: (i) consolidating the 
Land Maintenance and Management System (SIMAT) and the Integrated Cadastre 
System (SIC) as technical tools; (ii) migrating data from the Integrated 
Regularization and Titling System (SIST) to the SIMAT/SIC systems; (iii) replacing 
the use of the SIST with the SIMAT/SIC in all INRA offices; (iv) improving the 
electronic link between INRA and the DDRR for the large-scale property tilting and 
registration process; (v) reorganizing the data centers and updating the data 
servers; (vi) updating the equipment (computers); (vii) developing the INRA nexus 
with GeoBolivia; (viii) reviewing and consolidating administrative systems; 
(ix) cleaning spatial data; (x) completing the process of digitization and indexation 
of the INRA documentary collection; and (xi) developing the INRA platform. 

1.19 Limitations of environmental and social management tools. According to the 
results from the program’s Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment 
(SESA) (see Carrasco, 2016), the current legal framework is sufficiently developed 
for the environmental and social management of the rural property regularization 
process. However, the management tools for handling potential environmental and 
social problems stemming from rural property regularization are not fully 
developed. The main conclusion of the SESA indicates that the above weaknesses 
produce a situation in which current regulations are not fully enforced and/or 
compliance with them is not verified. Accordingly, the following problems must be 
overcome during program execution: (i) forest coverage monitoring does not 
generate information in real time for monitoring and controlling deforestation; 
(ii) the rural cadastre does not include the environmental information needed to 
facilitate monitoring and control at each rural property; and (iii) the tools that INRA 
has for managing social conflicts are inadequate for addressing the complexity of 
the conflicts and the processes for resolving them.  

1.20 Lessons learned. The proposed project has taken into account lessons learned 
from loans 1099/SF-BO and 1512/SF-BO and other similar Bank-financed 
operations in the region (see Table 2).  

  

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40323300/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40320821/R


- 7 - 

Table 2. Lessons learned from the Bank’s experience in the sector 

Problem by work area Reflected in project design 

Legal framework. It is necessary to 

ensure that the legal framework 
allows rural titling to be carried out. 

While the current legal framework allows for moving 
forward with the regularization, titling, and registration of 
rural lands, the program will finance activities to improve 
the regulatory framework. 

Institutional organization. Titling 

requires the participation of various 
public agencies that neither share 
information nor coordinate activities 
well. 

The project will finance the strengthening of key 
institutions involved in the process of regularizing rural 
property.  

Information safeguards. The rural 

cadastre information must be 
protected.  

The working methodology for the cadastral survey will be 
100% digital with backup systems.  

Cadastral survey. The cadastral 

sweep methodology has yielded good 
results. 

The sweep methodology will be improved for working in 
highland areas with small landholdings, through the use 
of unmanned aerial vehicles, for example. 

Monitoring and quality control 
system. The lack of monitoring 

systems makes it difficult to manage 
progress made in rural titling. 

The project will develop an integrated system for 
monitoring progress, including the reactivation of 
participatory monitoring mechanisms. 

Community participation. The 

communities’ participation in the 
titling process was a key factor in the 
success of the operation. 

The program will reinstall the interagency titling 
committees with the participation of authorities from 
indigenous communities and territories. 

Support for permanent institutions. 

It is important to focus efforts on 
supporting permanent institutions. 

The project will support INRA, the DDRR, the Forest and 
Land Social Control and Oversight Authority (ABT), and 
the Mother Earth Plurinational Authority (APMT), which 
are permanent government institutions, in the work of 
regularization and environmental and social 
management of rural property.  

Management of the regularization 
brigades. It is critical to design a 

cadastral sweep methodology with 
incentives and penalties. 

In the first year of program execution, funds will be 
earmarked for the design of a system to monitor the field 
brigades, taking into account incentives for achieving 
goals and penalties. 

Source: OVE, 2014. Comparative Evaluation: Land Regularization and Management, PCRs for the following 
projects: 906/OC-PE, 1340/OC-PE, 1099/SF-BO, and 1512/SF-BO. 

 

1.21 Conceptual overview of the operation. The project is conceived as an operation 
that continues the rural property regularization process initiated by the Government 
of Bolivia through loans 1099/SF-BO and 1512/SF-BO. The project design 
emphasizes the key aspects identified in the diagnostic assessment of the current 
situation: (i) the strengthening of integrated mass sweep campaigns for the 
regularization of rural property, which will make it possible to proceed with rural 
titling on a cost-effective basis; (ii) modernization of the cadastre and public 
registry system, which will help to strengthen the integration of titling entities and 
public registries, as well as the efficient and secure management of cadastral 
information; (iii) strengthening of environmental and social management tools, 
which will help to reduce the environmental and social problems identified; and 
(iv) maintenance of the cadastre and public registry of rural properties, which will 
help to reduce transaction costs for the end user. 

1.22 Strategic alignment with the Update to the Institutional Strategy 2010-2020, 
the Corporate Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019, and the Bank’s strategy 
with Bolivia 2016-2020. The program is consistent with the Update to the 
Institutional Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008). Specifically, the program is 



- 8 - 

in line with the challenge of low productivity and innovation, by increasing farmers’ 
productivity related to the establishment of secure land ownership rights. The 
program is aligned with the Bank’s country strategy with Bolivia 2016-2020 
(document GN-2843) in that it contributes to the priority area of increasing 
productivity and diversification in the economy as well as with its strategic 
objectives: (i) promotion of innovation and (ii) provision of quality public goods and 
services. The operation is included in the 2016 Country Programming Document  
and the 2016 Operational Program Report (document GN-2849). Lastly, the 
program is consistent with the Agriculture and Natural Resources Management 
Sector Framework (document GN-2709-5), which identifies security of land tenure 
as a key activity for improving productivity and the sustainable use of natural 
resources. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost. The objective of the program is to increase 
legal certainty over rural property. 

1.23 Target population. The program beneficiaries are small and medium-sized 
agricultural producers and indigenous communities. Small and medium-sized 
producers characteristically have small family farming operations, primarily for their 
own consumption and with low levels of access to financing and productive 
technologies. The livelihood of the indigenous communities is based on the use of 
natural resources, along with small-scale farming usually occupying less than one 
hectare.  

1.24 Component 1: Land regularization, titling, and registration (US$74.9 million). 
This component will support rural land regularization, titling, and registration. In this 
respect, the following stages in the process need to be financed: (i) preparatory 
stage, which will support: evaluations of the areas of intervention, preparation of 
the technical and legal diagnostic assessment, increased density of geodetic 
points; (ii) field survey, which will support: dissemination of regularization, signage 
of vertices and boundaries, signing of records of agreement, survey of the rural 
property file, verification of the social function and/or social and economic function, 
dispute resolution, and development of the cadastral database; and (iii) titling and 
registration, which will finance: the preparation of draft resolutions, the signing of 
resolutions, the issuance of property titles, and registration of the titles in the 
DDRR. This component will also support management of social conflicts and the 
activities to be financed include: dispute resolution training for INRA staff; 
implementation of dispute resolution brigades; strengthening of the 
Agri-Environmental Tribunal for dispute resolution, development and 
implementation of customer service protocols and mechanisms, and strengthening 
of INRA’s Transparency Unit. 

1.25 Component 1 will use loan proceeds to finance key inputs for continuing with rural 
land regularization (paragraph 1.17). The key inputs for carrying out the 
regularization work include: (i) retention of INRA temporary staff; (ii) purchase of 
computer equipment, navigation and measuring equipment, and furniture; and 
(iii)  purchase of logistical support vehicles. Up to US$47 million in loan proceeds 
will be used to finance staffing requirements, to hire technical personnel to perform 
land regularization work. The “service delivery contractor” model indicated in 
paragraph 3.21 of the Policies for the selection and contracting of consultants 
financed by the IDB (document GN-2350-9) was identified as being suited to 
INRA’s needs. According to this Bank policy, this model is recommended when 



- 9 - 

project execution requires the hiring of large numbers of individuals who deliver 
services on a contract basis. 

1.26 Component 2: Land management (US$14.04 million). This component will 
finance: (i) modernization of INRA’s rural cadastre technological platform and the 
DDRR’s rural land registration platform to facilitate the administration of mass rural 
land cadastre, titling, and registration processes; and (ii) the program’s 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), which will contribute to the 
social and environmental management of titled land. 

1.27 To modernize INRA’s cadastral system, the component will finance: the 
consolidation of the SIMAT and SIC as technical tools for rural land administration, 
the development and implementation of the INRA–GeoBolivia nexus, the design 
and implementation of the INRA services platform, and the digitization and 
indexation of the INRA documentary collection. To modernize the DDRR 
registration system, the component includes: the development of the DDRR 
services platform; training for DDRR office staff in the use of the platform 
developed; and the implementation of the cadastral maintenance campaigns. To 
implement the ESMP, the component will finance: the strengthening of the national 
forest coverage monitoring system; the development of the environmental 
dimension of the rural cadastre; indigenous land management measures; and 
measures to strengthen the gender focus and interculturality in the titling process.5 

C. Results matrix and key indicators 

1.28 The program has a results matrix (see Annex II) agreed upon with INRA; it shows 
impact, outcome, and output indicators with their respective baselines, targets, and 
means of verification. The program’s main outcomes are: (i) to regularize and title 
approximately 24.5 million hectares; (ii) to record property rights in the DDRR for 
approximately 1,340,000 parcels of small and medium-sized rural producers, 
benefiting approximately 490,000 families; (iii) to regularize and title the pending 
indigenous territories; (iv) to modernize the cadastral and registration information 
systems; and (v) to institutionally strengthen the Bolivian government in order to 
improve the environmental and social management of land. Over the long-term, 
the impact of the program will be reflected in increased agricultural income for 
small and medium-sized agricultural producers.  

Table 3. Main Results Matrix Indicators 

Impact Indicators 
Frequency of 
measurement 

Rationale for selection 

Per household agricultural 
income (US$) 

Baseline and final 
evaluation of the program 

See paragraph 1.3. Increased productivity 
results in higher income.  

Gross value of agricultural 
production per hectare 
(US$/ha) 

Baseline and final 
evaluation of the program 

See paragraphs 1.3 and 1.4. Greater 
certainty regarding land tenure increases 
productive investment; and this investment 
increases agricultural productivity. 

 

                                                
5
  In the final stage of the design of the Rural Land Regularization Program, the Ministry of the 

Environment and Water, the technical focal point for the Global Environment Facility (GEF), asked the 
IDB for an additional project to be financed by the GEF Fund to implement the environmental dimension 
of the rural cadastre in the amount of approximately US$6 million. This additional project will 
complement the activities envisaged in the program (ESMP). 



- 10 - 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 The total cost of the program is US$100 million, which will be financed by the Bank 
through a blended loan as follows: US$51 million from Ordinary Capital funds and 
US$9 million from the Fund for Special Operations (FSO). The local counterpart is 
US$40 million. The distribution of the financing by source is shown in Table 4 
below: 

Table 4. Program costs and financing (in millions of U.S. dollars) 

Investment category IDB Local Total % 

I. Administration 2.80 4.44 7.24 7.24 

Execution unit 2.80 4.44 7.24 7.24 

II. Direct costs 56.32 35.56 91.88 91.88 

Component 1. Regularization, titling, and 

registration 
46.92 28.01 74.93 74.93 

Component 2. Land management 9.40 7.55 16.95 16.95 

III. Monitoring and evaluation 0.58 - 0.58 0.58 

IV. Audit 0.30 - 0.30 0.30 

Total 60.00 40.00 100.00 100.00 

 

2.2 The program is structured as a specific investment operation, to be executed over 
five years according to the following disbursement schedule and the preliminary 
financial plan: 

Table 5. Program costs and financing (in millions of U.S. dollars) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

IDB Total  20.95  19.11 9.07  6.95 3.92 60.00 

% 34.9% 31.8% 15.1% 11.6% 6.5% 100% 

 

B. Economic viability 

2.3 The ex ante economic analysis of the program uses a cost-benefit methodology. 
The analysis is based on the program’s expected incremental costs and benefits 
using a time horizon of 15 years and a discount rate of 12%. Program costs 
include investment, operation, and maintenance. The benefits stem from an 
estimate of marginal changes in agricultural income as a result of improvements in 
land tenure certainty and reduced processing time for registering property. Data 
from the 2008 Agricultural Survey, the 2013 Agricultural Census, and INRA titling 
databases were used to quantify the direct benefits associated with an 
improvement in the land tenure situation. The results indicate that the families that 
obtained title to their land increased their annual agricultural income by US$336 
and the gross value of agricultural production by US$216/household. Surveys and 
process analyses at both INRA and the DDRR office were used to estimate the 
benefits of reduced costs and processing time at the DDRR office. The results 
show benefits amounting to US$22.1 million due to a 16% reduction in processing 
times. The cost-benefit analysis indicates that the program has a positive net 
present value and an internal rate of return (IRR) of 51%. An analysis was done of 
the sensitivity to variations in the speed with which the benefits of titling were 
generated. In the worst case, in which the benefits increase gradually, the IRR is 
36%. The benefits of reduced processing time for registration exceed the expected 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40319553


- 11 - 

costs of maintaining the cadastre, which increases system sustainability by 
transferring these benefits to the users. 

C. Environmental and social risks 

2.4 This program has been classified as a Category B operation in accordance with 
the Bank’s Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (OP-703). During the 
preparation of the program a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment 
(SESA) was developed; it determined that the program would have significant 
positive impacts and negative risks and impacts. The principal risks identified in the 
SESA were summarized in the program’s environmental and social management 
report (ESMR). They include: (i) failure to meet the indigenous peoples’ demand 
for titling due to conflicts already existing in the area of intervention; (ii) weakening 
of campesino communities’ organizations due to the demand for individual titling; 
(iii) maintenance of gender inequality in terms of access to and use of the land; 
(iv) exacerbation of existing social conflicts and creation of new conflicts due to 
land titling; and (v) loss of biodiversity and ecosystem services in lowlands due to 
the deforestation of titled properties. A program environmental and social 
management plan (ESMP) was developed to mitigate these risks and negative 
impacts. Table 6 summarizes the main risks and mitigation measures proposed in 
the ESMP. Thus, the requirements of the Bank’s safeguard policies have been 
fulfilled, especially those of the Indigenous Peoples Policy (OP-765). The ESMR 
presents compliance with the safeguards policies in detail (paragraph 3.18 of the 
ESMR). Lastly, consultation processes have been carried out, resulting in records 
of agreement with the program signed by the principal national organizations 
representing the program’s beneficiaries (paragraphs 3.22 and 3.23 of the ESMR). 

Table 6. Main Risks and Mitigation measures  

Problem and risks (ESMR) Main Mitigation Measures (ESMP) 

Problem: Remaining demand from indigenous 

people in lowlands consists of lands where 
third parties are present.  
Risk: Failure to provide titling for indigenous 

populations and potential fragmentation of 
their territories. 

(i) Participatory mechanisms will be implemented for the 
titling of the remaining areas; 
(ii) The extent to which the territorial demand of the 
indigenous populations is met will be evaluated; 
(iii) INRA will be trained to incorporate the intercultural 
approach in rural land titling activities.  

Problem: Parceling of collective lands in 

peasant communities. 
Risk: Weakening of community organizations. 

(i) Will contribute to making decisions that are appropriate 
for communities by providing information on the 
advantages and disadvantages of collective and individual 
titling. 

Problem: Gender inequality in access to and 

use of land. 
Risk: Continued gender inequality in access to 

and use of land through rural titling. 
 

(i) INRA’s Gender Unit will be strengthened; 
(ii) INRA will be trained to implement a gender approach 
in titling and registration; 
(iii) Women’s knowledge/exercise of their rights over the 
land will be promoted.  

Problem: Exacerbation of existing conflicts 

and emergence of new social conflicts; 
Risk: Delay in the regularization of property 

rights.  

(i) A comprehensive strategy for resolving disputes over 
rural land will be implemented; 
(ii) INRA staff will be trained in dispute resolution; 
(iii) Specialized dispute resolution brigades will be formed 
in INRA; 
(iv) The dispute resolution capacity of the Agri-
environmental Tribunal will be strengthened. 

Problem: Increased deforestation of titled 

properties; 
Risk: Loss of biodiversity and ecosystem 

services.  

(i) The national plant cover monitoring system will be 
strengthened; 
(ii) The environmental dimension of the rural cadastre will 
be developed; 
(iii) Soil use plans will be updated. 

Source: Program’s Environmental and Social Management Report and Environmental and Social 

Management Plan, 2016. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40320821/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40319558/R


- 12 - 

D. Fiduciary risks 

2.5 Based on the results of the institutional assessment, INRA has the institutional 
capacity needed to assume responsibilities as the executing agency for the 
proposed operation. The results indicate that programming and organizational 
capacity, execution capacity, and control capacity are at a satisfactory level of 
development and present a low level of risk. However, based on the risk analysis, 
some institutional weaknesses affecting the institution’s fiduciary capacity have 
been identified. Accordingly, an institutional development plan was drawn up to 
mitigate the risks identified. The main actions include: (i) contracting procurement 
and financing specialists to strengthen execution capacities; (ii) deepening and 
institutionalizing an operational framework for risk management; and 
(iii) developing a framework of internal procedures for accounting and cash flow, as 
well as updating internal administrative management documents. 

E. Other project risks 

2.6 The SESA has identified the risk that the presence of third parties with legitimate 
rights within the lowland TIOCs may become an obstacle for completing the titling 
of all the territory claimed by these TIOCs. This could turn into a reputational risk 
for the Bank. To mitigate this risk, Component 1 includes participatory titling 
mechanisms6 that involve the authorities of the TIOCs, to reach consensus on 
titling processes and results. In addition, the ESMP includes a diagnostic 
assessment of the extent to which the territorial demand of lowland indigenous 
peoples is met, as well as the formulation of new public policies in the event that 
this demand has not been addressed. An extensive process of consultation with 
the principal organizations representing those benefiting from and affected by land 
titling was carried out during the preparation of the program. These consultations 
have resulted in the signing of records of agreement with the program by the 
participants, beyond what is required for projects with the identified level of risk and 
impacts (see paragraphs 3.20 to 3.24 of the ESMR for more details on the 
consultations). 

2.7 As indicated earlier, the Bolivian government has been financially supporting the 
regularization of rural property for the last 20 years. The proposed program, with a 
total cost of US$100 million, will complete the work of regularizing rural lands 
throughout the country, involving 106 million hectares. Once the investment for 
regularizing rural properties is completed, long-term sustainability will depend on 
the ability of the key stakeholders to keep the information on rural properties up to 
date, both in the rural cadastre system (INRA) and in the Real Property Rights 
Registry (DDRR) system, as identified in the report on the legal framework for the 
regularization of rural property (Endo, 2016). The program seeks to improve, 
simplify, and reduce the costs of rural cadastre and property registration services, 
as well as to generate information on obligations and benefits so that owners will 
have incentives and will report to the official entities the existence of changes in 
property rights (through market transfers or inheritance) or through cadastral 
conservation processes (subdivisions or consolidations). 

                                                
6
  The Interagency Titling Committees are the main mechanism of participation. The participants in these 

committees are the authorities of indigenous and campesino organizations and the representatives of 
the program’s beneficiaries. The role of the committee is to reach agreement with INRA on the work 
plans for the titling of beneficiary communities and TIOCs and to promote the beneficiary population’s 
participation in and monitoring of the execution of these plans. The role of the committees will be duly 
clarified in the program’s Operating Regulations. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40323309/R


- 13 - 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower will be the Plurinational State of Bolivia and the executing agency will 
be INRA, legally established under Law 1,715/96 as a decentralized public entity of 
the MDRyT with national jurisdiction and legal status.  

3.2 INRA’s responsibilities as executing agency include: (i) maintaining consolidated 
accounting records that make it possible to identify the sources and uses of 
program funds by component; (ii) preparing and submitting disbursement requests 
and supporting documentation to the Bank, together with the financial statements 
for the components under its responsibility; (iii) contracting the program’s annual 
external audits and submitting the respective reports to the Bank; (iv) preparing 
open calls for proposals and bid processes, processing contracts and payments, 
and providing technical supervision of the contracts for activities under its 
responsibility; (v) preparing the consolidated monitoring and evaluation reports 
required, submitting them to the Bank, and making them publicly available; and 
(vi) ensuring compliance with the contractual clauses established in the loan 
contract, the program’s Operating Regulations, and the agreements signed for 
program implementation. A condition precedent to the first disbursement will 
be the signing of a subsidiary agreement between the Ministry of Economy 
and Public Finance, the Ministry of Development Planning, and INRA 
defining the following aspects among others: (i) the method to be used to 
transfer the loan proceeds to INRA; and (ii) INRA’s commitment to conduct 
program activities in accordance with the terms of the loan contract.  

3.3 Program execution will use INRA’s existing organizational structure, in both 
technical and fiduciary (procurement and finances) and legal matters. In this 
respect, the Planning Bureau (DGP) will be designated as the entity responsible for 
the general coordination of the program and the ESMP; the Regularization and 
Titling Bureau will be designated as the entity responsible for the execution of 
Component 1; the Land Management Bureau will be designated as the entity 
responsible for the execution of Component 2; and, lastly, the Administration and 
Finances Bureau will manage the program’s budget, procurement, legal analysis, 
and financial control. 

3.4 The Director of INRA’s DGP will serve as the general coordinator of the program 
with sufficient autonomy to make operational decisions, prepare all documents, 
program actions, and coordinate with the participating entities and the IDB. A 
condition precedent to the first disbursement will be the appointment of the 
Director of INRA’s DGP as the general coordinator of the program, 
appointment of the program component coordinators, in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank, and the contracting of 
financial, procurement, planning, environmental management, and social 
management specialists through a competitive process, in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank.  

3.5 During program preparation, provision was made for the signing of interagency 
collaboration agreements between INRA and the DDRR Office, the APMT, INE, 
and the ABT. These agreements will lay the foundation for cooperation among 
those involved and will describe the activities covered under the agreement, the 
parties’ commitments, including the operation and maintenance of investments, 



- 14 - 

and other conditions necessary for execution. Evidence of the signing and entry 
into force of the following interagency cooperation agreements: (i) between INRA 
and the DDRR, will be a special condition for the disbursement of financing for 
activities related to public registries under Component 2; (ii) between INRA, the 
ABT, the APMT, and the Office of the Deputy Minister for Land, will be a special 
condition for the disbursement of financing for activities related to the program’s 
ESMP under Component 2; and (iii) between INRA and INE, will be a special 
condition for the disbursement of financing for activities related to the baseline of 
the program’s monitoring and evaluation plan. 

3.6 To facilitate implementation of the ESMP, in the context of the program, INRA may 
provide cooperation and technical coordination to the relevant public institutions 
that assist in achieving the program’s objective. 

3.7 Program Operating Regulations. Execution of the program will be governed by 
the program’s Operating Regulations. These regulations establish guidelines and 
operational procedures related to: (i) the responsibilities of the entities participating 
in the program; (ii) operational procedures for the planning and programming of the 
activities to be financed; (iii) financial and procurement instructions; (iv) procedures 
for the program’s environmental and social management; and (v) operational 
instructions for the implementation of activities to monitor and evaluate the 
program’s impact. The entry into force of the program’s Operating 
Regulations, under terms previously agreed upon with the Bank, will be a 
contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement.  

3.8 Procurement. The procurement of works, goods, and consulting services funded 
with program resources will be carried out in accordance with the Bank’s policies 
as set forth in documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 and the provisions of the 
loan contract and the program’s Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements (see 
Annex III), including the procurement plan for the first 18 months. That plan 
includes the purchase of vehicles, operations and computer equipment, furniture, 
the contracting of individual consultants and consulting firms, and other items. In 
addition, the procurement plan includes the contracting of “service delivery 
contractors” corresponding to the staff engaged in the regularization and titling 
process (paragraph 1.25). The contracting procedures currently used by INRA for 
annual or multiyear periods will continue to be used for these individual 
consultants. The procurement plan will be updated each year or whenever there 
are substantial changes, subject to the Bank’s approval. Procurement may be 
made using the ex post review method as established in Annex II. 

3.9 Recognition of retroactive expenses. The Bank may recognize and charge 
against the local contribution up to US$6,000,000 (15% of the local contribution) in 
eligible expenses incurred by INRA prior to the loan approval date for operational 
and temporary staffing expenses, provided that requirements substantially similar 
to those established in the loan contract have been met. Said expenses must have 
been incurred on or after 6 January 2016, the program profile approval date, but in 
no case may they include expenses incurred more than 18 months prior to the loan 
approval date. 

3.10 Audit. During the loan disbursement period, within 120 days following the end of 
INRA’s fiscal year, the program’s annual audited financial statements will be 
submitted to the Bank. The audit will be performed by a firm of independent 
auditors acceptable to the Bank. The determination of the scope and other related 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40320765


- 15 - 

aspects will be governed by the Guide to Financial Management for Projects 
Financed by the IDB (OP-273-6) and the guide on financial statements and 
external audit.  

B. Summary of results monitoring arrangements 

3.11 Monitoring. The program has a monitoring and evaluation plan. INRA will prepare 
and send a monitoring report to the Bank no later than 60 days following the end of 
each six-month period during project execution. These reports will focus on the 
achievement of the output indicators and progress made in terms of outcomes, the 
identification of problems encountered and corrective measures adopted. INRA will 
submit to the Bank’s satisfaction the annual work plan (AWP) corresponding to the 
upcoming year, no later than within the final quarter of each year during project 
execution. INRA will perform two independent evaluations financed using loan 
proceeds: (i) the midterm evaluation will be submitted to the Bank no later than 
90 days after 50% of the loan proceeds have been executed; and (ii) the final 
evaluation will be conducted no later than 90 days after 90% of the project’s funds 
have been executed. These reports will include an evaluation of the quality of the 
data in the monitoring system, the degree to which the expected outputs, 
outcomes, and impacts established in the Results Matrix have been achieved, as 
well as the level of compliance with the ESMP, including progress made in the 
social and environmental indicators. 

3.12 Evaluation. The impact estimates will be based on the differences-in-differences 
method applied to a panel of households that includes a treatment group and two 
control groups. To this end, provision has been made for two surveys, a baseline 
and the final evaluation. The proposed sample includes the non-random 
identification of a group of municipios with a high percentage of titling in the first 
two years of the program. Later, through a propensity score matching process, a 
control group of municipios with a high percentage of titling prior to 2016 (control 
group 1) and another control group of municipios that will be titled at the end of the 
program (control group 2) will be identified. The municipios in control group 1 will 
serve to verify the proportion of attributable marginal change over time, while the 
municipios in control group 2 will be used to measure the program’s impact in the 
execution period. The sample for the baseline study is estimated to include 3,500 
farmers distributed in 50 municipios (20 treated and 30 in the two control groups; 
households will be selected at random within each municipio). A similar sample will 
be used for the final evaluation. The data collection budget has been included in 
the project. The design of the operation provides a good opportunity for generating 
empirical evidence on the impact of rural land titling on productivity, income, and 
the sustainable use of natural resources. 

 



Annex I - BO-L1113

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Strategic Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Regional Context Indicators

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Strategy Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2843

     Country Program Results Matrix GN-2849

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to 

country strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Highly Evaluable Weight Maximum Score

9.8 10

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution 9.3 33.33% 10

     3.1 Program Diagnosis 3.0

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions 3.6

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality 2.7

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis 10.0 33.33% 10

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General 

Economic Analysis
4.0

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits 1.5

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs 1.5

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions 1.5

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis 1.5

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 10.0 33.33% 10

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms 2.5

     5.2 Evaluation Plan 7.5

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended 

beneficiaries and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality Yes

Labor

Environment Yes

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public 

sector entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close 

knowledge gaps in the sector that were identified in the project document and/or in 

the evaluation plan

Yes

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting 

and Reporting.

Procurement: Information System.

The objective of the program is to increase the legal security of rural property. This is expected to lead to the increase in income of beneficiary rural households, through an increase in the 

gross value of agricultural production. The diagnosis provided in the document and documentation that supports it is robust with respect to the current situation, shortcomings and causes 

of insecurity of tenure in the country. Likewise, the proposed interventions under components 1 and 2 clearly respond to the deficiencies identified in the diagnosis and evidence is 

presented that validates the effectiveness of the proposed actions in other contexts.

The vertical logic of the results matrix is well delineated. Overall, indicators at all levels are SMART. The baseline for some impact and results indicators is from 2008,  therefore does not 

represent the starting point of the program.

Ex ante economic analysis of the program uses a cost-benefit methodology. The benefits come from the estimated marginal changes in agricultural income by improving the security of 

land tenure and the reduction in processing time in the land registry.

The Monitoring and Evaluation Plan proposes the identification of causal impacts through the use of differences in difference with Propensity Score Matching methods. Overall the plan 

meets the requirements established in the DEM Guidelines.

The Environmental and Social Management Plan includes 

a series of measures to strengthen the participation of 

women in the benefits of land titling. These include 

strengthening the INRA with a specialist in gender; the 

adoption of gender mainstreaming in all activities of 

INRA; a communications strategy to increase awareness 

by women of their rights and the benefits of titling.

The program will strengthen the deforestation monitoring 

system and the inclusion of the environmental dimension 

in the cadastre. These environmental management tools 

will improve the Government’s capacity to monitor and 

sanction environmental infractions such as illegal 

deforestation.

The program will generate valuable information on the 

causality between titling and: i) increased productivity; ii) 

increase in intra investments - property taxes; and iii) 

increased use of financial services.

Low

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

Aligned

Improve the provision of quality public goods and 

services.

The intervention is included in the 2016 Operational 

Program.

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Aligned

-Productivity and Innovation

I. Strategic Alignment



 Annex II 
Page 1 of 5 

 
RESULTS MATRIX 

 

Project objective: The general objective of the program is to increase legal certainty over rural property.  

 

EXPECTED IMPACT 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measure-
ment  

Baseline Target 
Means of verification Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

EXPECTED IMPACT 

Impact: Increase total net 

household incomes 

 

Indicator: Increase in total net 

household income 

US$/year 801 2008 974 2021 
Program Impact 

Evaluation Report 

Data from the National Agricultural Survey 
(2008) were used to estimate growth in net 
household income that farmers would have 
with more secure land tenure. Data at the 
municipal level (2000-2006) from INRA were 
used to identify producers’ title status. The 
estimate was based on a simple income 
function model based on farmers’ assets 
and characteristics (Zegarra, 2016). The 
lower bound confidence interval was used. 

Impact: Increase agricultural 

productivity of agricultural 

producers 

 

Indicator: Increase in the Gross 

Value of Agricultural Production 

(GVAP) 

US$/ha 870 2008 1,075 2021 
Program Impact 

Evaluation Report 

Data from the National Agricultural Survey 
(2008) were used to estimate growth in net 
household income that farmers would have 
with more secure land tenure. Data at the 
municipal level (2000-2006) from INRA were 
used to identify producers’ title status. The 
estimate was based on a simple income 
function model based on farmers’ assets 
and characteristics (Zegarra, 2016). The 
lower bound confidence interval was used. 

 

 

 



Annex II 
Page 2 of 5 

 
 

EXPECTED OUTCOMES 

Expected outcomes 
Unit of 

measure
ment 

Baseline Intermediate Targets Means of 
verification 

Observations 
Value Year Value Year Value Year 

Final outcome. Increase in 

productive investment. 
 
Indicator. Value of  agricultural 

producers’ productive 
investment (machinery and 
equipment) 

US$ 
invested 
per year 

215 2008 - - 241 2021 

Program 

Impact 

Evaluation 

Report 

- The target value is based on estimates of the 
program’s economic evaluation. The estimates’ 
lower bound confidence interval was used. 
 

- These values will be verified with baseline 
surveys and follow-up of the program’s impact 
evaluation. 

Intermediate outcome. 

Reduced cost of titling rural 
properties. 
 
Indicator. Average cost of 

complete rural property titling 
process 

US$ per 
hectare 

8.31 2016 - - 7 2021 

INRA 

Monitoring 

and Follow-up 

System 

- The baseline value is the result of the diagnostic 
assessment of regularization, cadastre, titling, 
and registration of rural land (Andrade, 2016). 
 

- The target value is based on recommended 
improvements in land regularization processes, 
operational infrastructure, and technology, which 
could reduce per hectare titling cost by 15%. 

Intermediate outcome. 

Reduced average time to record 
property purchase/sale 
 
Indicator. Timed needed to 

record purchase/sale of property 
in Public Registries  
 

Number of 
working 
days 

39.7 2016 - - 25 2021 

Program 

Monitoring 

and Follow-up 

System 

- The baseline value is the result of the diagnostic 
assessment of the time spent by citizens and 
legal entities in procedures to record property in 
the Office of Real Property Rights (Medeiros, 
et al., 2016). 
 

- These values will be verified with the study of 
strategies for maintaining regularization planned 
for the first year of program execution. 

Intermediate outcome. 

Reduction of the area of 
intervention with disputes due to 
regularization and titling  
 
Indicator. Number of hectares 

with conflicts due to 
regularization and titling of rural 
property 

Millions of 
hectares 

5 2016 - - 3 2021 

Program 

Monitoring 

and Follow-up 

System 

- The baseline value is the result of the Strategic 
Environmental and Social Evaluation (Carrasco, 
et al., 2016 and Endo, 2016). 
 

- The target value is based on recommended 
improvements in dispute resolution instruments 
(Carrasco et al., 2016 and Endo, 2016) 

Intermediate outcome. 

Institutional strengthening of 
INRA and the DDRR 
 
Indicator. INRA and the DDRR 

offices sharing cadastre and 
registry information automatically 

% 0 2016 0 2019 100 2021 

Program 

Monitoring 

and Follow-up 

System 

- The value is based on the recommendations 
from Component 2 (Solíz, 2016). 



 Annex II 
Page 3 of 5 

 
 

OUTPUTS 

Outputs  
Estimated 
cost (US$) 

Unit of 
measurement 

Baseline Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 
Final 
target 

Means of 
verification 

Component I: Rural land regularization, titling, and registration  

Output #1. Rural property titles delivered to agricultural producers and indigenous communities 

Indicator 1.1. Number of 

beneficiaries with titles 
registered at the DDRR 
offices 74,938,706 

Households 566,356 104,707 151,866 107,635 82,217 49,650 1,062,431 Program 

Monitoring and 

Follow-up System Indicator 1.2 Number of 

property titles registered at 
the DDRR offices 

Title 653,535 296,320 426,990 292,354 212,185 115,289 1,996,732 

Output #2. Intercultural conflict management   

Indicator 2.1. INRA staff 

training on social conflict 
resolution 

70,000 
Number of 

people trained 
0 200 300 300 100 - 900 

Program 
Monitoring and 

Follow-up System 

Indicator 2.2. Implementation 

of a specialized brigade on 
social conflicts 

150,000 
Number of 
brigades 

0 1 - - - - 1 

Indicator 2.3. Strengthening 

of Agri-environmental 
Tribunal for dispute resolution 

150,000  
Number of 
specialists 

trained  
0 30 30 50 20 30 160 



Annex II 
Page 4 of 5 

 
 
 

Output #3. Development and implementation of land regularization, cadastre, titling, and registration customer service mechanisms 

Indicator 3.1. Development of 

customer service protocols 
and mechanisms  

50,000 
Number of 
protocols 

0 1 - - - - 1 
Program 

Monitoring and 
Follow-up System 

Output #4. Strengthening of INRA Transparency Unit 

Indicator 4.1. Update of 

transparency manual  

108,000 

Number of 
manuals 

0       
Program 

Monitoring and 
Follow-up System 

Indicator 4.2. Implementation 

of manual in all INRA offices 

Number of 
specialists 

trained 
0 200 300 300 100 - 900 

          
 

Component II: Land management 

Output #1. Update and implementation of SIMAT/SIC to complete regularization of rural properties 

Indicator 1.1.  Update of 

SIMAT/SIC  
824,802 

Software 
updated 

0 2 0 0 0 0 2 
Program 

Monitoring and 
Follow-up System Indicator 1.2. Implementation 

of SIMAT/SIC  

Number of 
offices using 

software  
1 5 4 - - - 10 

Output #2. Development of the information technology (IT) platform for real property rights services 

Indicator 1.3. Implementation 

of the IT platform for real 
property rights services 

800,000 Platform 0 - 1 - - 
- 

1 
Program 

Monitoring and 
Follow-up System 

Output #3. Design and implementation of the INRA services platform 

Indicator 1.4. Design of the 

platform 
3,868,430 

Number of 
platforms 
designed 

0 1    
 

 Program 
Monitoring and 

Follow-up System Indicator 1.5. Implementation 

of the platform 
Platform 
launch 

0 - 1 - - - 1 



 Annex II 
Page 5 of 5 

 
Indicator 1.5. Implementation 

of GeoBolivia nexus 
Nexus in 
operation 

0 - 1 - - - 1 

Output #4. Cadastral maintenance 

Indicator 1.6. Cadastral 

maintenance campaigns 
600,000 

Number of 
campaigns 

0 1 1 1 1 1 5 
Program 

Monitoring and 
Follow-up System 

Output #5. Digitization and indexation of INRA documentary collection 

Indicator 1.7. Digitization and 

indexation of files 
1,900,000 

Number of 
files digitized 
and indexed 

0 1000 1000 1000 1000 1000 5000 
Program 

Monitoring and 
Follow-up System 

Output #6. Strengthening of INRA Operations Center 

Indicator 1.8. Permanent 

infrastructure for INRA 
6,044,172 

Number of 
offices 

improved or 
constructed 

2 - 3 4 1 - 10 
Program 

Monitoring and 
Follow-up System 

 



Annex III 
Page 1 of 8 

 
 

FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS 

 

Country: The Plurinational State of Bolivia 

Project number/ 
name: 

BO-L1113 – Rural Land Regularization and Titling Program II 

Executing agency: National Agrarian Reform Institute (INRA) 

Prepared by: Carolina Escudero (PRM) and Abel Cuba (FM) 

 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 This Annex III has been prepared on the basis of the following elements, used to 
determine the level of fiduciary risk associated with the program: (i) results of the 
most recent Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment, 
2009; (ii) analysis of institutional capacity used during the design of the INRA 
operation. 

1.2 Program execution will be the responsibility of INRA, a decentralized entity of the 
Ministry of Rural Development and Lands (MDRyT). 

1.3 Accounting records for the operation will be maintained in the Public 
Management System (SIGEP). The IDB’s Integrated Project Administration 
System (SIAP-IDB), developed by the Country Office in Bolivia (CAN/CBO), will 
be used for the financial reports required by the Bank. The IDB’s standard 
bidding documents or other documents agreed upon with the Office of the 
Deputy Minister for Public Investment and External Financing (VIPFE) and made 
available through SICOES1 will be used for execution of this operation. Similarly, 
SICOES will be used for the publication of specific procurement notices. 

1.4 The Government of Bolivia and the Bank have drawn up an agreement for 
making partial use of the Basic Standards of the Goods and Services 
Management System (NB-SABS) in IDB-financed operations in Bolivia. This 
program may apply that agreement once it enters into force. 

II. FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY 

2.1 As a public agency, the MDRyT is governed by Law 1,178 of 20 July 1990 on 
Government Control and Administration. This law regulates the administration 
and control systems for government resources, and their relationship with 
country public investment and planning systems.  

2.2 INRA uses SIGEP for all of its financial records. SIGEP offers secure and reliable 
access to budget execution information. With Bank support, an Accounting 

                                                
1
  Government Contracting Subsystem, which has been approved for use in Bank operations. 



Annex IIIError! Reference source not found. 

Page 2 of 8 
 
 

Management Module has been developed in this system, which systematizes 
reporting based on the financing structures and the currency of loans from 
international development partners, which is expected to come on line in 2017. 
Until then, INRA will use SIAP-IDB as a supplementary accounting and reporting 
system for accountability and financial reporting purposes. As a State agency, 
INRA is supervised by the Office of the Comptroller General and an internal audit 
unit. 

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION MEASURES 

3.1 The Institutional Capacity Assessment System (ICAS) assessment of INRA 
indicates an adequate level of institutional development and capacities and a 
LOW level of fiduciary risk. However, provision has been made to strengthen the 
team that will be responsible for program execution, by contracting staff working 
full-time in the areas of financial management and procurement, and by holding 
training update workshops on Bank policies on fiduciary matters.  

IV. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF THE CONTRACT 

4.1 Operating Regulations. The Operating Regulations will include details of 
execution arrangements, procedures, and information flows, previously agreed 
upon between the Bank and the parties.  

4.2 Exchange rate agreed upon with the executing agency for rendering 
accounts. The exchange rate used will be the one in effect in the borrowing 
country on the effective date of the conversion of funds into local currency in the 
executing agency’s accounts. 

4.3 Financial statements and other audited reports. For the duration of the 
program disbursement period, audited program financial statements will be 
submitted to the Bank within 120 days after the end of each of the executing 
agency’s fiscal years. The statements will be audited by an independent auditing 
firm acceptable to the Bank. The final report will be submitted to the Bank within 
120 days following the date stipulated for the last disbursement under the loan. 

4.4 The terms of reference for contracting the independent auditing firm will be 
subject to the Bank’s prior approval and may include outputs under the 
International Standards on Auditing, related to the financial audit of the program, 
and related audit tasks. 

V. CONSIDERATIONS TO BE MENTIONED IN THE SINGLE ANNEX, IN THE DESCRIPTION 
OF THE CORRESPONDING COMPONENT 

5.1 The program provides for the purchase of 41 4x4 light trucks totaling up to 
US$1,762,178 for INRA’s regularization and titling activities. The details on the 
purchase terms, procurement method, and estimated prices are set out in the 
procurement plan duly agreed upon with the Bank. In addition, the program 
Operating Regulations include the technical and legal analysis supporting the 
need to purchase vehicles as well as the technical specifications to be used in 
the bidding process. 



Annex III 
Page 3 of 8 

 
 

VI. PROCUREMENT EXECUTION AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS  

6.1 Procurement execution. Procurement will be carried out in accordance with 
Bank policies set forth in documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9.  

6.2 Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services. Contracts for 
works, goods, and nonconsulting services provided for in the program and 
subject to international competitive bidding (ICB) will be carried out using the 
Standard Bidding Documents issued by the Bank.  

6.3 Works for an estimated amount of less than US$3 million will be contracted via 
the shopping method, using the standard price comparison document for works 
procurement prepared by the Bank for operations in Bolivia; works for an 
estimated amount of less than US$250,000 will be contracted via the Shopping 
method, using the document for requesting quotes for small contracts agreed 
upon with VIPFE, which is available in SICOES. 

6.4 Off-the-shelf goods (computer equipment, furniture, etc.) for an estimated 
amount of less than US$200,000 will be procured via the shopping method and 
using the document for requesting quotes for the purchase of goods agreed upon 
with VIPFE, which is available in SICOES.  

6.5 Selection and contracting of consultants. Consultants will be selected using 
the selection methods in the Bank’s procurement policies (GN-2350-9), taking 
the following into account: 

a.  Selection of consulting firms. Consulting firms for the project will be 
selected using the Bank’s Standard Request for Proposals and Request 
for Proposals documents for amounts of less than US$200,000 agreed 
upon with VIPFE, which are available in SICOES.  

b.  Shortlist of consulting firms. The list may be comprised entirely (100%) 
of Bolivian firms, for contracts with a value of up to US$200,000. 

c.  Selection of individual consultants. Individual consultants will be 
selected on the basis of a comparison of the candidates’ individual 
qualifications. When the call for proposals is made through SICOES, one 
qualified candidate will suffice; when the call is by invitation, the 
qualifications of at least three qualified candidates will be compared. 
When the tasks involve working with other people in providing 
administrative or operational assistance, the advisability of using 
individual consultants with supplementary services will be examined on a 
case-by-case basis. 

d. Services contractors. As explained in the Proposal for Operation 
Development, the program needs to retain temporary staff members who 
have received training and are currently working on the process of land 
regularization, titling, and registration, in order to ensure achievement of 
program targets in due time and manner. Accordingly, such staff will be 
financed with loan funds in an amount up to US$47,000,000 within the 
framework of provision 3.6 of Policy GN-2350-9. 

6.6 Procurement planning. INRA will publish the procurement plan in the 
Procurement Plan Execution System (SEPA) and will update it at least once 



Annex IIIError! Reference source not found. 

Page 4 of 8 
 
 

each year to reflect the project’s actual execution needs and the progress 
achieved.  

6.7 Advance procurement/retroactive financing. The Bank may recognize and 
charge against the local contribution up to US$6,000,000 (15% of the estimated 
amount of the local contribution) in eligible expenses incurred by INRA prior to 
the loan approval date, for operating and temporary personnel expenses, 
provided that requirements substantially similar to those established in the loan 
contract have been met. Such expenses must have been incurred on or after 
6 January 2016, the program profile approval date, but in no case may they 
include expenses incurred more than 18 months prior to the loan approval date. 

6.8 Domestic preference. The application of domestic preference will not be 
considered in the procurement processes envisaged for this operation.  

6.9 Terms of reference and technical specifications. The executing agency, in 
coordination with the program’s Project Team Leader, is responsible for 
reviewing the shortlist selection criteria, terms of reference, and/or technical 
specifications. In all cases these must be agreed upon ex ante. 

6.10 Table of threshold amounts (in US$000)  

Works Goods and Nonconsulting Services Consultancies 

International 
Competitive 

Bidding 
Shopping 

International 
Competitive 

Bidding 

National 
Competitive 

Bidding 
Shopping 

International 
Publicity for 
Consulting 

Services 
(except when 
CQS is used) 

Shortlist 100% 
National 

(except when 
CQS is used)  

> US$3,000 
< 

US$3,000 
> US$200 ≤ US$200 

≤ US$50 
and 

≤ US$200 
for 

common 
goods and 
services 

> US$200 ≤ US$200 

 

6.11 Main procurement processes(*). The main procurements for this operation are 
detailed below:  

Activity 
Type of 
Bidding 
Process 

Estimated 
Date 

Estimated Amount 

(US$ 000) 

Consulting firms    

14 contracts for services related to verification of land use, 
conceptual framework of rural environmental cadastre, 
national environmental cadastre system, analysis of 
ecological easements, strengthening of national plant 
coverage monitoring system, et al.  

CQS  
 

According to 
data in the 

procurement 
plan 

US$1,160 



Annex III 
Page 5 of 8 

 
 

 

Activity 
Type of 
Bidding 
Process 

Estimated 
Date 

Estimated Amount 

(US$ 000) 

Consulting for formulation of eight indigenous territorial 
management plans, according to prioritization 

 

QCBS 

 

Year 2 – 1Q 

 

US$960 

Consulting to support strengthening of the Agri-
environmental Tribunal in the area of dispute resolution 

 

QCBS 

 

Year 1 – 2Q 

 

US$150 

External audit of the program QCBS Year 1 – 4Q US$300 

Development of program baseline QCBS Year 1 – 1Q US$275 

Final evaluation of the program QCBS Year 5 – 4Q US$275 

Individual consultants    

Service delivery contractors. Direct contracting of INRA’s 
temporary staff who have been trained in and are 
familiar with: 

- Regularization, titling, and registration processes 

- Tasks of coordination and planning, administrative 
and financial management, legal advice, 
departmental coordination and management, and 
social and environmental management of the 
program 

 

 

 

 

 

DC 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Based on 
procurement 

plan data 

 

 

 

 

 

US$47,594 

Various contracts to integrate technical teams 
responsible for: 

- Updating the SIMAT/SIC 

- Development of IT platform for real property rights 
services 

- Design and implementation of INRA services platform 

- Classification of small property 

- Support on interculturality topics 

- Design and development of protocols for customer 
services mechanisms, and 

- Strengthening of the INRA Transparency Unit 

IICQ 

or NICQ 

Based on 
procurement 

plan data 
US$3,932 

Goods    

3 contracts (two of them in several lots) for purchase of 
IT equipment 

ICB Based on 
procurement 

plan data 

US$3,046 

Navigation (GPS) equipment ICB Year 1 – 2Q US$1,210 

41 4x4 light trucks ICB Year 1 – 2Q US$1,762 

2 contracts to purchase furniture for INRA’s 
decentralized offices  

Shopping Based on 
procurement 

plan data 

US$96 

2 contracts to purchase software Shopping Based on 
procurement 

plan data 

US$155 



Annex IIIError! Reference source not found. 

Page 6 of 8 
 
 

 

Activity 
Type of 
Bidding 
Process 

Estimated 
Date 

Estimated Amount 

(US$ 000) 

Works    

Various contracts for construction or improvement of 
existing infrastructure for INRA 

Shopping Based on 
procurement 

plan data 

US$6,044 

Nonconsulting services    

Digitization and indexing of titling files ICB Year 2 – 4Q US $1,900 

Preparation and execution of communication and 
registration campaigns to update and maintain the 
cadastral database 

 

ICB 

 

Year 2 – 1Q 

 

US$600 

Development of training manuals and activities for INRA 
staff on the institution’s new services platform 

 

Shopping 

 

Year 2 – 1Q 

 

US$268 

Various contracts for various services related to training 
activities, etc. 

 

Shopping 

Based on 
procurement 

plan data 

 

US $441 

* To access the procurement plan for the first 18 months, click here. 

 

6.12 Procurement supervision. The project may be executed based on ex post 
review of procurement processes worth up to 100% of the threshold for NCB, as 
set out in the table below. (Direct contracting and procurement transactions not 
included in this table will be subject to ex ante review.) The external audit firm for 
the program will conduct the annual ex post review of procurement. Although the 
level of fiduciary risk is rated LOW, the Bank will offer ongoing training and 
advisory services during program execution. 

Threshold for Ex Post Review 

Works 
Goods and 

Nonconsulting 
Services 

Consulting firm 
services 

Shortlist may be 
100% national 

Consulting Services 
Individuals 

Contracts for amounts 
≤ US$3,000,000 

Contracts for amounts 
≤ US$200,000 

Contracts for amounts 
≤US$200,000 

Not subject to any 
limit. 

 

6.13 Operating or recurring expenses. These are expenses (operational and 
maintenance, among others) necessary for the program to operate. They will be 
agreed upon with the Project Team Leader and included in the procurement plan. 
This type of expenses will be executed according to the executing agency’s 
administrative procedures, as referenced in the Operating Regulations.  

6.14 Direct contracting.2 Goods and nonconsulting services (for example 
workshops/meetings: rental of hall/site, audiovisual equipment, transport, 

                                                
2
  OP-272-2 establishes a threshold of up to US$750,000 for direct purchases or contracting of goods, 

works, and nonconsulting services and provision 3.6(a) of document GN-2359-9 refers to cases in which 
neither the savings nor the efficiency of competitive bidding is justified. 



Annex III 
Page 7 of 8 

 
 

facilitators, etc.) for individual amounts below US$500 and totaling no more than 
US$5,000, may be contracted directly in order to achieve economy and efficiency 
in execution. These contracts are to be approved by the Project Team Leader 
through the procurement plan. 

6.15 Files. INRA will be responsible for establishing the supporting documentation, 
procedures, and controls necessary for project execution, as well as for 
safeguarding them in accordance with the terms of the loan contract and local 
laws. 

VII. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS  

7.1 Programming and budget. INRA will utilize an administrative division3 under 
which the project will be created. This will allow budget records to be based on 
individual identification of the sources of financing and funds used in project 
execution. Initial inclusion in the budget as well as future budget modifications 
will be based on the annual work plan and project execution plan agreed upon 
with the Bank. Budget modifications must also be approved through a Ministerial 
Resolution by the Ministry of Development Planning (MPD), through the MDRyT.  

7.2 Accounting and information systems. Program transactions will be recorded 
in SIGEP. This system integrates the various accounting events at different 
points in time in a single registry and complies with budgetary requirements 
(budget execution), recording of financial position (assets, liabilities, equity, and 
earnings), and cash management (cash transfers), on an accrual basis. In 
addition, for purposes of project accounting, a chart of accounts will be prepared 
to allow for the identification of expenditures incurred in each period on a cash 
basis, aligning the program’s investment categories with the respective budget 
line items and accounts. Moreover, until such time as the SIGEP Accounting 
Management Module is in operation, INRA will use the SIAP-IDB as a 
supplement on an interim basis for financial reporting.  

7.3 Disbursements and cash flow. The loan will primarily be disbursed in the form 
of advances of funds, based on the program’s financial programming, which will 
be updated periodically. The Bank may make a new advance of funds once at 
least 80% of previously disbursed fund advances have been accounted for. Loan 
proceeds will be deposited in a separate account in U.S. dollars, and 
subsequently transferred to another account in local currency (both within the 
CUT).4 

7.4 Internal control and internal audit. INRA financial management is subject to 
annual reliability reviews by the internal audit unit and given the relative 
importance of the program it is expected to be included in this type of review. As 
a strategic activity under its mandate, the Bank will arrange annual coordination 
meetings with the internal audit units, in order to identify monitoring activities for 
the program. 

                                                
3
  Under SIGEP’s budgetary programming structure, an administrative division may include several 

projects with independent records and controls.  
4
  Unified Treasury Account. 



Annex IIIError! Reference source not found. 

Page 8 of 8 
 
 

7.5 External control and reports. In order to comply with the annual submission of 
the program’s audited financial statements, INRA will hire an independent 
auditing firm acceptable to the Bank, following Bank policies, the cost of which 
will be covered from program funds.  

7.6 Financial supervision plan. The planning and frequency of supervision will be 
based on identified fiduciary risks. The following activities are envisaged: (i) the 
annual external audit by the firm hired for the review of program financial 
statements; (ii) onsite visits to the program’s investment sites; and (iii) visits to 
verify compliance with the internal control recommendations issued by the 
program’s external auditor. 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/16 
 
 
 

Bolivia. Loan ____/BL-BO to the Plurinational State of Bolivia 
Rural Land Regularization and Titling Program 

 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Plurinational State of Bolivia, as Borrower, for the purpose of 
granting it a financing to cooperate in the execution of a rural land regularization and titling 
program. Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$51,000,000 from the resources of 
the Single Currency Facility of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, corresponds to a parallel loan within 
the framework of the multilateral debt relief and concessional finance reform of the Bank, and 
will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of 
the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __  ______ 2016) 
 
 
 
BO-L1113 
LEG/SGO/CAN/IDBDOCS#40403194-16 

 
 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/16 
 
 
 

Bolivia. Loan ____/BL-BO to the Plurinational State of Bolivia 
Rural Land Regularization and Titling Program  

 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Plurinational State of Bolivia, as Borrower for the purpose of granting 
it a financing to cooperate in the execution of a rural land regularization and titling program. 
Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$9,000,000 from the resources of the Bank's 
Fund for Special Operations, corresponds to a parallel loan within the framework of the 
multilateral debt relief and concessional finance reform of the Bank, and will be subject to the 
Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary 
of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ ________ 2016) 
 
 
BO-L1113 
LEG/SGO/CAN/IDBDOCS#40403179-16 
 

 
 


	o_proyectos_2016_bolivia_bo-l1113_lp_lp---paquete-para-directorio---bo-l1113.pdf
	LP - limpio - BO-L1113
	Documento del Banco Interamericano de Desarrollo
	Propuesta de Préstamo
	1.1 Derechos de Propiedad sobre la Tierra y la Competitividad Agropecuaria. El sector agropecuario es uno de los sectores más importantes de la economía boliviana. Entre 2002 y 2014, el sector tuvo un crecimiento anual promedio del 4,16%, contribuyend...
	1.2 A pesar de la importancia del sector agropecuario, un examen detallado muestra niveles bajos de productividad. Según la Organización de las Naciones Unidas para la Alimentación y la Agricultura (FAO), el rendimiento agrícola de la producción de ce...
	1.3 La contribución potencial del sector agropecuario al crecimiento económico y reducción de la pobreza rural depende del incremento de productividad de los agricultores, especialmente los pequeños y medianos productores (Banco Mundial, 2008; Escobal...
	1.4 Para mejorar la productividad del sector agropecuario y por ende, la eficiencia y sostenibilidad en el uso de la tierra en Bolivia, se requiere inversiones en bienes públicos sectoriales para facilitar inversiones productivas privadas de los agric...
	1.5 Derechos de Propiedad, Sostenibilidad y Conflictos. Los derechos de propiedad por sí mismo no garantizan el uso sostenible de los recursos naturales. En Nicaragua, la asignación de derechos de propiedad mejoró la productividad agraria y también in...
	1.6 Estado de Avance del Saneamiento y Titulación. Los avances en materia de saneamiento de la propiedad rural por el Gobierno de Bolivia han sido significativos, el proceso de saneamiento, catastro, titulación y registro de tierras rurales está llega...
	1.7 Los pueblos indígenas y las comunidades interculturales fueron los principales beneficiarios de las intervenciones del INRA, sumando aproximadamente 32 millones de hectáreas tituladas, lo cual representa el 78% del área total titulada en el país (...
	Cuadro 1. Estado de avance del proceso de saneamiento y titulación entre 1996 y 2014.
	1.8 Según los datos del INRA (Andrade, 2016), las áreas que aún no fueron atendidas por la política de titulación están distribuidas por todo el país. No obstante, la demanda por titulación de tierras rurales se concentra principalmente en La Paz, Pot...
	1.9 Marco Institucional de Derechos de Propiedad. La institucionalidad para el establecimiento de derechos de propiedad sobre las tierras rurales fue desarrollada con la Ley Agraria de 1953. Esta Ley creó el Servicio Nacional de Reforma Agraria (SNRA)...
	1.10 Las Leyes 1715/96 y 3545/06, mantuvieron al SRNA como organismo responsable de planificar, ejecutar y consolidar el proceso de reforma agraria. El SRNA está conformado por: (i) el Presidente, autoridad máxima encargada de firmar los títulos ejecu...
	1.11 La Ley 1715/96 mantuvo sin cambios los tipos de propiedad rural definidos anteriormente por la Ley Agraria de 1953. Los tipos de propiedad rural incluyen: solar campesino, pequeña propiedad, mediana propiedad y empresa agropecuaria. Sin embargo, ...
	1.12 El Registro de Derechos Reales (DDRR) complementa el marco institucional de derechos de propiedad mencionado arriba. El DDRR es el órgano del Consejo de Magistratura encargado de efectuar todas las inscripciones y anotaciones que recaigan sobre d...
	1.13 Acciones del Banco y otras fuentes de financiamiento. Las actividades de formalización de derechos de propiedades sobre tierra rural han sido apoyadas por varios financiadores. El Banco Mundial otorgó un crédito de US$24,7 millones; el Fondo Nórd...
	1.14 Los avances en saneamiento de tierras se enmarcan en el conjunto de reformas del marco legal del país. Después que el CNRA fue reemplazado por el INRA se desarrollaron un conjunto de normas para acelerar el proceso de saneamiento de tierras rural...
	1.15 Problemas en Saneamiento, Catastro, Titulación y Registro de Tierras. Los diagnósticos del proceso de saneamiento, titulación y registro de tierra rural indican que los siguientes temas ameritan atención:
	1.16 Limitaciones del marco normativo. Según el diagnóstico del marco legal vigente (Endo, 2016), el mismo permite iniciar la ejecución del programa. No obstante, los siguientes problemas deben ser superados durante la ejecución del programa: (i) los ...
	1.17 Limitaciones del proceso de saneamiento. El barrido catastral3F  es la metodología más eficiente para regularizar de forma masiva la tenencia de la tierra en áreas rurales donde exista un gran número de productores y bajos niveles de titulación. ...
	1.18 Deficiencias de la plataforma tecnológica. Según el diagnóstico de la plataforma tecnológica (Solíz, 2016), la tecnología vigente permite continuar el proceso de saneamiento, catastro, titulación y registro de tierras rurales. Sin embargo, los si...
	1.19 Limitaciones de las herramientas de gestión ambiental y social. Según los resultados de la Evaluación Ambiental y Social Estratégica (EASE) del programa (ver Carrasco, 2016), existen en la actualidad un marco legal suficientemente desarrollado pa...
	1.20 Lecciones aprendidas. El proyecto propuesto ha tomado en cuenta las lecciones de los préstamos 1099/SF-BO y 1512/SF-BO y otras operaciones similares financiadas por el Banco en la región (ver Cuadro 2).
	1.21 Conceptualización de la operación. El proyecto se conceptualiza como una operación que continua el proceso de formalización de la propiedad rural iniciado por el Gobierno de Bolivia a través de los préstamos 1099/SF-BO y 1512/SF-BO. El diseño del...
	1.22 Alineación estratégica con la Actualización de la Estrategia Institucional (UIS) 2010-2020, el Marco Corporativo de Resultados CRF 2016-2019 y la Estrategia del Banco con Bolivia 2016-2020. El programa es consistente con la Actualización de la Es...
	1.23 Población Objetivo. Los beneficiarios del programa son pequeños y medianos productores agropecuarios y comunidades indígenas. Los pequeños y medianos productores se caracterizan por tener explotaciones pequeñas de agricultura familiar, orientadas...
	1.24 Componente 1: Saneamiento, titulación y registro de tierras (US$74,9 millones). Este componente apoyará el saneamiento, titulación y registro de las tierras rurales. En este sentido se requiere financiar las siguientes etapas del proceso: (i) pre...
	1.25 El Componente 1 financiará con recursos del préstamo los insumos claves para continuar con el saneamiento de tierra rural (1.17). Los insumos claves para llevar a cabo el trabajo saneamiento incluyen: (i) la manutención del personal eventual del...
	1.26 Componente 2: Administración de Tierras (US$14,04 millones). Este componente financiará: (i) la modernización de la plataforma tecnológica de catastro rural del INRA y la plataforma de registro de tierras rurales del DDRR para facilitar la admini...
	1.27 Para la modernización del sistema catastral del INRA, el componente financiará: la unificación del SIMAT y SIC como herramientas técnicas para la administración de tierras rurales, el desarrollo e implementación del nodo INRA-GeoBolivia, el diseñ...
	1.28 El programa cuenta con una matriz de Resultados (ver Anexo II) acordada con el INRA que presenta los indicadores de impacto, resultados, y productos con sus respectivas líneas de base, metas, y medios de verificación. Los principales resultados d...
	Cuadro 3. Principales Indicadores de la Matriz de Resultados
	2.1 El costo total del programa es de US$100 millones que serán financiados por el Banco de forma Blend de la siguiente forma: US$51 millones con cargo a los recursos del Capital Ordinario (CO) y US$9 con cargo al Fondo de Operaciones Especiales (FOE)...
	2.2 El programa se estructura bajo la modalidad de Operación de Inversión Especifica, a ser ejecutado en 5 años con el siguiente cronograma de desembolso y de acuerdo al plan financiero preliminar:
	2.3 El análisis económico ex ante del programa utiliza una metodología de costo-beneficio. El análisis se basa en los costos y beneficios incrementales esperados del programa utilizando un horizonte de análisis de 15 años y una tasa de descuento del 1...
	2.4 De acuerdo a la Política de Medio Ambiente y Cumplimiento de Salvaguardias (OP-703) este programa ha sido clasificado como Categoría “B”. Durante la preparación del programa se ha desarrollado una Estratégica Ambiental y Social Estratégica (EASE) ...
	2.5 Los resultados de la evaluación institucional permiten concluir que el INRA cuenta con la capacidad institucional para asumir las responsabilidades de organismo ejecutor de la operación propuesta. Los resultados demuestran que la capacidad de prog...
	2.6 La EASE ha identificado el riesgo que la presencia de terceros con derechos legítimos dentro de los Territorios Indígena Originario Campesinos (TIOCs) de tierras bajas se vuelva un obstáculo para culminar la titulación del territorio pleno reivind...
	2.7 Como se identificó anteriormente, el Gobierno de Bolivia viene apoyando financieramente la formalización de la propiedad rural en los últimos 20 años. El programa propuesto con un costo total US$100 millones finalizará el trabajo de saneamiento de...
	3.1 El prestatario será el Estado Plurinacional de Bolivia y el INRA será el Organismo ejecutor, legalmente constituido a través de la Ley 1715/96 como entidad pública descentralizada del MDRyT con jurisdicción nacional y personalidad jurídica.
	3.2 Las responsabilidades del INRA como Organismo Ejecutor incluyen, entre otras, las siguientes: (i) mantener registros contables consolidados que permitan identificar las fuentes y usos de los recursos del programa por componente; (ii) preparar y pr...
	3.3 La ejecución del programa utilizará la estructura organizacional existente del INRA, tanto en materia técnica como fiduciaria (adquisiciones y finanzas) y jurídica. En este sentido, la Dirección General de Planificación (DGP) será designada como  ...
	3.4 El Director de la DGP del INRA actuará como Coordinador General del programa con autonomía suficiente para la toma de decisiones operativas, la preparación de toda la documentación, programación de acciones y la coordinación con las entidades part...
	3.5 Durante la preparación del programa se ha previsto la suscripción de convenios de colaboración interinstitucional entre el INRA y Oficina de DDRR, Autoridad Plurinacional de la Madre Tierra (APMT), Instituto Nacional de Estadísticas (INE), y la Au...
	3.6 Para facilitar la implementación del PGAS, el INRA, dentro del marco del programa, podrá brindar cooperación y coordinación técnica a las instituciones públicas pertinentes, que coadyuven a lograr el objetivo del programa.
	3.7 Reglamento Operativo del Programa. La ejecución del programa se regirá por un Reglamento Operativo del Programa (ROP). El ROP establece directrices y procedimientos operativos relacionados con: (i) las responsabilidades de las entidades que partic...
	3.8 Adquisiciones. Las adquisiciones de obras, bienes y servicios de consultoría financiadas con recursos del programa se llevarán a cabo conforme a las políticas del Banco establecidas en el GN-2349-9 y GN-2350-9 y conforme a los establecido en el Co...
	3.9 Reconocimiento de gastos retroactivos. El Banco podrá reconocer con cargo al aporte local, hasta la suma de US$6.000.000 (15% del aporte local), como gastos elegibles efectuados por el INRA antes de la fecha de aprobación del préstamo en gastos op...
	3.10 Auditoria. Durante el período de desembolsos del préstamo, dentro de los 120 días siguientes al cierre del ejercicio fiscal del INRA, se presentarán al Banco los estados financieros auditados anuales del programa. La auditoría será efectuada por ...
	3.11 Seguimiento. El programa cuenta con un plan de monitoreo y evaluación. El INRA elaborará y enviará al Banco, a más tardar 60 días después del fin de cada semestre durante la ejecución del proyecto, un informe de seguimiento. Estos informes se foc...
	3.12 Evaluación. Las estimaciones de impacto se basarán en el método de diferencias en diferencias de un panel de hogares con un grupo de tratamiento y dos grupos control. Para esto se han previsto dos encuestas, línea de base y evaluación final. Se p...


	IDBDOCS-#40384160-v1-BO-L1113_DEM_SPD_Validación_Resumen
	LP - Anexo II (limpio) - Matriz de Resultados - BO-L1113
	LP - Anexo III (limpio) - Acuerdos y Requisitos Fiduciarios - BO-L1113
	1.1 El presente Anexo III se elaboró considerando lo siguiente en la determinación del nivel de riesgo fiduciario asociado al Programa: (i) resultados del último informe de gasto público y rendición de cuentas PEFA 2009; y (ii) análisis de la capacida...
	1.2 La Ejecución del Programa estará a cargo del INRA, entidad descentralizad del Ministerio de Desarrollo Rural y Tierras (MDRyT).
	1.3 Los registros contables de la operación se llevarán dentro del Sistema de Gestión Pública (SIGEP). Para los reportes financieros requeridos por el Banco utilizarán el Sistema de Administración de Proyectos del Banco (SIAP-BID), desarrollado por CA...
	1.4 El Gobierno de Bolivia y el Banco han elaborado un acuerdo a través del cual se adoptaría el uso parcial de las Normas Básicas del Sistema de Administración de Bienes y Servicios (NB-SABS) en las operaciones financiadas por el BID en Bolivia. Este...
	2.1 El MDRyT, como entidad pública se rige por la Ley No.1178 de Administración y Control Gubernamentales del 20 de julio de 1990 (SAFCO), que regula los sistemas de administración y de control de los recursos del estado y su relación con los sistemas...
	2.2 El INRA utiliza para todos sus registros financieros el SIGEP que permite la disponibilidad de información sobre la ejecución presupuestaria, de forma segura y confiable. Con apoyo del Banco, se ha desarrollado en este sistema un Módulo de Gestión...
	3.1 La evaluación SECI practicada al INRA determinó un grado de desarrollo institucional y capacidades adecuadas y un nivel de Riesgo Fiduciario BAJO. Sin embargo, se prevé fortalecer el equipo que estará a cargo de la ejecución del Programa, con la c...
	4.1 Reglamento Operativo del Programa (ROP). Deberá incluir el esquema de ejecución, procedimientos y los flujos de información, previamente acordado entre las partes y el Banco.
	4.2 Tipo de cambio acordado con el ejecutor para la rendición de cuentas. Se utilizar el tipo de cambio vigente en el país del prestatario en la fecha efectiva de la conversión de recursos en moneda extranjera a moneda local, en las cuentas de los eje...
	4.3 Estados financieros y otros informes auditados. Dentro del plazo de ciento veinte (120) días siguientes al cierre de cada ejercicio económico del Organismo Ejecutor y durante el plazo para desembolsos del financiamiento, se presentarán al Banco lo...
	4.4 Los términos de referencia para la contratación de la FAI deben contar con la aprobación previa del Banco, los cuales podrán incluir productos enmarcados en las NIA, relacionados con la auditoría financiera del Programa y trabajos relacionados de ...
	5.1 El Programa prevé la compra de 41 camionetas 4x4 por un monto de hasta US$1.762.178 para las actividades de saneamiento y titulación del INRA. Los detalles sobre los plazos para la compra, el método de adquisición y precio estimado se definen en e...
	6.1 Ejecución de las adquisiciones. Las adquisiciones se realizarán en el marco de las políticas GN-2349-9 y GN-2350-9.
	6.2 Adquisiciones de Obras, Bienes y Servicios Diferentes de Consultoría. Los contratos de Obras, Bienes y Servicios Diferentes de Consultoría previstos en el Programa, y sujetos a Licitación Pública Internacional (LPI), se ejecutarán utilizando los D...
	6.3 La contratación de obras estimadas en montos por debajo de US$3.000.000 se ejecutarán aplicando el método de Comparación de Precios, utilizando el Documento Estándar de Comparación de Precios para la Contratación de Obras elaborado por el Banco pa...
	6.4 La adquisición de bienes comunes (equipo informático, mobiliario, etc.) estimados en montos por debajo de US$200.000, se realizará aplicando el método de Comparación de Precios y utilizando el Documento de Solicitud de Cotizaciones para Compra de ...
	6.5 Selección y Contratación de Consultores. La selección de consultores se realizará aplicando los métodos de selección de las Políticas GN-2350-9, teniendo en cuenta lo siguiente:
	a. Selección de Firmas Consultoras. La selección de firmas consultoras para el proyecto se hará utilizando la Solicitud Estándar de Propuesta (SEP) emitida por el Banco y Documentos de Solicitud de Propuestas para contratos por montos inferiores a US$...
	b. Lista Corta de Firmas Consultoras. La lista podría estar integrada en su totalidad (100%) por firmas bolivianas para contratos con valor de hasta US$200.000.
	c. Selección de Consultores Individuales. La selección de Consultores Individuales se realizará sobre la base de comparación de las calificaciones individuales de los candidatos. Cuando la convocatoria se realice por el SICOES bastará contar con un ca...
	d. Contratistas de Servicios. El Programa, según se explica en el POD, requiere mantener al personal eventual que ha recibido capacitación y está actualmente trabajando en el proceso de saneamiento, titulación y registro de tierras, para asegurar el c...

	6.6 Planificación de las adquisiciones. El INRA publicará el Plan de Adquisiciones en el Sistema de Ejecución de Planes de Adquisiciones (SEPA), y lo actualizará por lo menos anualmente para reflejar las necesidades reales de ejecución del proyecto y ...
	6.7 Adquisiciones Anticipadas/Financiamiento Retroactivo. El Banco podrá reconocer con cargo al aporte local, hasta la suma de US$6.000.000 (15% del monto estimado del aporte local), como gastos elegibles efectuados por el INRA antes de la fecha de ap...
	6.8 Preferencia Nacional. Para la ejecución de esta operación, no se considera la inclusión de preferencia nacional en los procesos de adquisición.
	6.9 Términos de Referencia y Especificaciones Técnicas. La revisión de los criterios para la selección de listas cortas, los TdR y/o de las especificaciones técnicas son responsabilidad del Organismo Ejecutor en coordinación con el Jefe de Equipo de P...
	6.10 Tabla de montos límite (miles US$).
	6.11 Adquisiciones principales(*). Las adquisiciones principales previstas en esta operación se detallan a continuación:
	6.12 Supervisión de Adquisiciones. El proyecto puede ejecutarse aplicando la modalidad de revisión ex post a los procesos de hasta el 100% del Umbral de LPN, conforme la siguiente cuadrícula (las contrataciones directas y no enunciadas en la cuadrícul...
	6.13 Gastos Operativos o Recurrentes. Son aquellos gastos (operativos, de mantenimiento, entre otros), requeridos para poner en funcionamiento el Programa, y que serán acordados con el JEP e incluidos en el PA. Este tipo de gastos se ejecutarán siguie...
	6.14 Contrataciones Directas1F . Las contratación de bienes y servicios diferentes de consultoría (por ejemplo para talleres/reuniones: alquiler de salas/locales, equipo audiovisual, transporte, facilitadores, etc.) por montos individuales menores a U...
	6.15 Archivos. El INRA será responsable de establecer los documentos de soportes, procedimientos y controles necesarios para la ejecución del Programa, así como el resguardo de los mismos conforme a lo establecido en el contrato de préstamo y a las le...
	7.1 Programación y presupuesto. El INRA utilizará una Dirección Administrativa (DA)2F , bajo la cual se creará el Proyecto, permitiendo de este modo que presupuestariamente exista un registro e identificación individualizada de las fuentes de financia...
	7.2 Contabilidad y sistemas de información. Las transacciones del Programa se registrarán en el SIGEP. Este sistema integra en un único registro sus diferentes momentos contables y cumple con los requisitos presupuestarios (ejecución del presupuesto),...
	7.3 Desembolsos y flujo de caja. El préstamo se desembolsará bajo la modalidad de anticipos de fondos principalmente, en función de la programación financiera del Programa, a ser periódicamente actualizada. El Banco podrá efectuar un nuevo anticipo de...
	7.4 Control interno y auditoría interna. Anualmente, la gestión financiera del INRA es sujeta de revisiones de confiabilidad por parte de la Unidad de Auditoría Interna (UAI), y dada la importancia relativa del Programa se prevé que el Programa será i...
	7.5 Control externo e informes. A fin de cumplir con la presentación de los Estados Financieros del Programa Auditados anualmente, el INRA contratará una firma de auditoría independiente aceptable para el Banco siguiendo las políticas del BID, cuyo co...
	7.6 Plan de supervisión financiera. Los planes y periodicidad de la supervisión estarán diseñados en base a los riesgos fiduciarios identificados. Las acciones que se contemplan son: (i) la realización de la auditoría externa anual contratada para rev...

	Resoluciones legales español
	IDBDOCS-#40385375-v1-Proyecto_de_Resolucion_-_BL-_OC
	IDBDOCS-#40385407-v1-Proyecto_de_Resolucion_-_BL_-_FOE


	PR-4410-E.pdf
	resoluciones-legales-inglés.pdf
	IDBDOCS-#40403179-v2-PROPOSED_RESOLUTION_-_BL_FOE
	IDBDOCS-#40403194-v2-PROPOSED_RESOLUTION_-_BL_OC






















































 

PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

 
 
 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

HAITI 
 
 
 
 
 
 

AGRICULTURAL AND AGROFORESTRY TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION 
PROGRAM - PITAG 

 
 

(HA-L1107, HA-G1038) 
 
 
 

GRANT PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Carmine Paolo De Salvo 
(RND/CHA) and Bruno Jacquet (RND/CHA), Co-Team Leaders; Lina Salazar and Gonzalo Muñoz 
(CSD/RND); Sebastien Gachot and Geraud Albaret (RND/CHA); Regine Lafontant (CDH/CHA); 
Renaud Tahon (VPS/ESG); Nicola Magri (CTI/CHA); Romina Kirkagacli (VPC/FMP); Marise 
Salnave (VPC/FMP); Monica Centeno Lappas (LEG/SGO); Jennifer Doherty-Bigara (CSD/CCS); 
and Lisa Sofia Restrepo (CSD/RND). 

 
In accordance with the Access to Information Policy, this document is being released to the public and 
distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors simultaneously. This document has not been approved 
by the Board. Should the Board approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be made 

available to the public, thus superseding and replacing the original version

 
 



 

CONTENTS 
 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY ......................................................................................................... 1 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................................. 2 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, and Justification ...................................... 2 
B. Objective, Components and Cost ............................................................... 12 
C. Key Results Indicators ................................................................................ 13 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ................................................................ 15 

A. Financing Instruments................................................................................. 15 
B. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks ................................................ 16 
C. Fiduciary Risk ............................................................................................. 17 
D. Other Key Issues and Risks ........................................................................ 17 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 19 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements ................................................ 19 
B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results ...................................... 20 
C. Significant Design Activities Post Approval ................................................. 20 

 
 
 
 
  



- ii - 

 

 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) - Summary 

Annex II Results Framework 

Annex III Fiduciary Arrangements  

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED (REL) 

1. Pluriannual Execution Plan (PEP) and Annual Operational Plan (POA) 

2. Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 

3. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR)  

4. Procurement Plan  

OPTIONAL (OEL) 

1. Technical Documents for Component I 

2. Technical Documents for Component II 

3. Economic Analysis 

4. Draft Operational Manual 

5. Technical References  

6. Safeguard Policy Filter (SPF) and Safeguard Screening Form (SSF) 

  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-5
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-13
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-15
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-7
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-8
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-22


- iii - 

 

 

ABBREVIATIONS 

APAGRO Agroalimentary Productive Support Program 

CIRAD Centre de Coopération Internationale en Recherche Agronomique pour 
le Développement 

CRF Corporate Results Framework 

CRI Climate Risk Index 

CRIAR Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives 

IDB Inter-American Development Bank 

IFAD 

IICA 

International Fund for Agricultural Development 

Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture 

INDC Intended National Determined Contribution 

IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 

IRR Internal Rate of Return 

EA Executing Agency  

ESMP Environmental and Social Management Plan 

ESMR Environmental and Social Management Report 

ESS Environmental and Social Strategy 

FAMV Faculty of Agronomy and Veterinary Medicine 

FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 

FIES Food Insecurity Experience Scale 

FONRED Fonds national de recherche pour un développement durable 

GAFSP Global Agriculture and Food Security Program 

GDP Gross Domestic Product 

GHI Global Hunger Index 

GSSE General Services Support Estimate 

KBA Key Biodiversity Areas 

LAC Latin America and the Caribbean 

MARENA Natural Resources and Water Basins Management Program 

MARNDR Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development  

MOU Memorandum of Understanding 

NAIP National Agriculture Investment Plan 

PAES Environmental Program of El Salvador 

PATCA Technological Innovation Program 

PEU Project Execution Unit 

PITAG Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program 

PMDN Natural Disaster Mitigation Program 

POD Proposal for Operation Development 

POM Program Operating Manual 

PSE Producer Support Estimate  

PSG 

PTTA 

Project Specific Grant 

Technology Transfer to Small Farmers Program 

RESEPAG Agricultural Services Strengthening Program 

RGA General Agricultural Census 



- iv - 

 

 

ABBREVIATIONS 

SECAL Food Security Support Program 

SIGI Système Intégré de Gestion des Informations 

SME Small and Medium Enterprises 

SPF Safeguard Policy Filter 

SSF Safeguard Screening Form 

TSE Total Support Estimate 

UEP Studies and Planning Unit 

UNDP United Nations Development Program  

UPMP Unité de Passation des Marchés Publics 

USAID United States Agency for International Development  

WFP World Food Program 

 
 
 
 
  



 

PROJECT SUMMARY  

HAITI  

AGRICULTURAL AND AGROFORESTRY TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION PROGRAM - PITAG 

(HA-L1107, HA-G1038) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Beneficiary: Republic of Haiti Amortization Period: N/A 

Executing Agency (EA): Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources 
and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

Disbursement Period: 60 months 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace Period: N/A 

IDB (Grant Facility – HA-L1107):     55,000,000 
 

71.6 
Supervision and 
Inspection Fee: 

N/A 

Other/Co-financing (GAFSP – HA-G1038): 10,000,000 13 
Interest rate: N/A 

Credit Fee: N/A 
Other/Co-financing (IFAD)(a): 10,859,305 14.1 

Local: 1,000,000 1.3 

Currency of Approval: US Dollars  
Total: 76,859,305 100 

Project at a Glance 

Project Objective/Description: The general objectives of the program are to increase agricultural income and 
food security for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti. The specific objectives are to increase agricultural 
productivity and improve the use of natural capital through the adoption of sustainable technologies. 

Special Contractual Clauses prior to the first disbursement of the financing: (i) the approval by the Executing 
Agency and entry into effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms and conditions 
previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.1); (ii) see Annex III that includes a special disbursement; and (iii) see 
Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) (REL-3). 

Special Contractual Clauses of execution: see (i) ESMR (REL-3); and (ii) special execution requirements 
contained in Annex III. 

Exceptions to Bank Policies:  None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges(b): SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Cross-Cutting Themes(c): GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a) International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) contribution is, as of today, parallel (co-financing) but might be 
received by the Bank as a Project Specific Grant (PSG), subject to IFAD’s Board approval.  

(b) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(c) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity 

and Rule of Law). 

 
 
 
 
 
 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6


- 2 - 

 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, and Justification 

1.1 The agricultural sector and food security in Haiti. With a per capita annual 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of US$818 (2015) and 59% of the population living 
in poverty (World Bank, 2012),1 Haiti stands among the poorest countries in the 
world. The United Nations Development Program (UNDP) Human Development 
Index’s socio-economic indicators for 2014 placed Haiti 163rd out of 188 countries.2 
According to the World Bank Group,3 in rural areas, the poverty rate is even higher 
(75%), and more than 80% of Haitians who live in extreme poverty live in rural 
areas, where access to basic services remains very limited. In fact, it is estimated 
that only 10% of the rural population has access to electricity and less than 8% to 
drinkable water. 

1.2 Food insecurity is widespread in Haiti. The country is ranked 115th out of 
118 countries in the 2016 Global Hunger Index (GHI). Results of a recent World 
Food Program (WFP) analysis (2015) indicate that approximately 47% of the 
households are moderately or severely food insecure. In addition, households with 
children of less than five years of age are much more exposed to frequent food 
shortages.4 Therefore, one fifth of children less than five years old are chronically 
malnourished (DHS, 2012).5 

1.3 In this setting, the performance of the agricultural sector is strategic to help raise 
rural households’ incomes and improve their food security.  The sector contributes 
25% of GDP and 85% of employment in rural areas (UNDP, 2015). Haitian 
agriculture, though, presents very low levels of productivity, even when compared 
to other countries in the region (Table I-1 shows yields for the main crops grown in 
Haiti as a proxy for productivity), and per capita income in the Haitian agricultural 
sector has stagnated in recent years. Annual agricultural GDP per capita is 
currently estimated at US$400 per year. 

Table I-1. Yields for main Haitian crops compared to regional yields* 

Product Haiti's yields as % average yields in Central America and the Caribbean 

Cocoa 99% 

Mango 91% 

Sorghum 39% 

Avocado 47% 

Banana 25% 

* Countries considered for this comparison are Central American and Caribbean countries included 
in the FAOSTAT database, years 2010-2014.  

1.4 Agricultural productivity can be influenced by a wide range of factors such as land 
tenure status, human capital level, availability of agricultural inputs, access to 
finance, agricultural services provision (such as information, agricultural research 

                                                 
1  Please see OEL-5 for complete Technical References.  
2  UNDP Human Development Index. 
3  Haiti: Des opportunités pour tous-Diagnostic-Pays Systématique, May 2015. 
4  World Bank and ONPES, 2014. 
5  Haiti Demographic and Health Surveys. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 3 - 

 

and technology transfer, irrigation, agricultural health and food safety) and 
macroeconomic and trade policies. Some of the main factors that exacerbate low 
productivity include: 

a. Low level of investment and access to technologies. Most producers in 
Haiti are still using basic techniques predominantly for subsistence agriculture 
and lack of access to certified high-quality seeds, appropriate soil conservation 
techniques, inputs for production (i.e. pesticides and fertilizers)6 as well as 
basic tools and equipment. The General Agricultural Census (RGA) shows that 
only 7% of the farmers used mechanical equipment. Also, the baseline data 
collected for Technology Transfer to Small Farmers Program (PTTA) show that 
only 9% of the farmers had used improved seeds and only 22% have 
knowledge of certified seeds. The number of providers is limited in the country 
and their geographical locations do not allow to serve the vaste majority of 
smallholder farmers.7 In addition, a constrained access to factors of production 
(capital, land, labor, water availability)8 greatly limits the capability of farmers 
to increase productivity. This is explained in part by the significant financial 
constraints faced by farmers, due notably to the lack of agricultural credit, 
particularly in rural areas, where financial markets are thin or non-existent. 
Data collected for the evaluation of the agroforestry technology provided by 
PTTA in the North Department show that 28% of the farmers have a bank 
account and 19% have received a credit for agricultural purposes. Lack of 
information about existing technologies, farming techniques, access to 
markets, natural risks and climate change is also a contributing factor.  

b. Lack of financial and human resources to develop agricultural 
innovation. Agricultural research and extension has been virtually 
non-existent in Haiti for nearly three decades, (Cirad, 2015). Aggregate 
numbers show that over the last three decades technical efficiency in the 
Haitian agricultural sector has fallen drastically, at a -1.8% average yearly rate 
(Nin-Pratt, A. et al. 2015). Factors that contribute to explain these findings are 
the outdated institutional research framework, and the lack of technology 
transfer and extension systems. The lack of local expertise in applied and 
adaptive agricultural research as well as technology transfer is in turn partially 
explained by the very limited training and educational opportunities in these 
areas (some universities, such as FAMV, offer academic courses, but the 
quality of their curriculum remains low).9 The institution in charge of agricultural 
research is the Innovation Directorate of the MARNDR, which has 
71 employees distributed across the country, with only 6% of them having an 
education sufficient to conduct research activities. The 2009 RGA reports that 
43% of the farmers identified weak agricultural research and extension 
services as a constraint for the development of the sector. Moreover, only 
2.6% of farmers mentioned receiving some type of technical assistance. 

                                                 
6  In a study conducted by USAID in the North of Haiti in 2017, it is estimated that 28% of farmers use pesticide. 

Fertilizers is used by 4% of cacao producers, 13% of banana producers and 95% of rice producers. 
7     See Technical Document for Component II (Bellande, 2016). 
8  Only 13% of agricultural land has access to water, according to the 2009 General Agricultural Census. 
9   Cirad, 2015. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 4 - 

 

c. Climate risks. Haiti is one of the countries with the highest Climate Risk Index 
(CRI Germanwatch, 2016) and natural disaster risk index in the world 
(WB, 2005; UNDP, 2004), including climate hazards (Kreft et al., 2015). The 
climatic risks faced by farmers and their ability to cope with them also limit the 
long-term growth of the productivity of the agricultural sector in Haiti, especially 
in a context where watersheds are characterized by severe soil erosion risk 
and, on average, 50% of the upper watersheds is deforested.10 For instance, 
hurricane Matthew caused severe economic damages and estimated losses 
that amounted to US$1.9 billion. The damages and losses in perennial crops 
(coffee, cocoa, breadfruit, coconut, avocado, citrus and other fruit), which are 
extremely important for food security and rural income, were particularly high 
and represented US$433 million, further decreasing capital assets and 
sources of income for Haitian farmers. For the future, climate models predict 
temperatures to increase up to 0.8°C for the 2020s; and precipitation scenarios 
a drying trend in the mid-2020s with 3 to 4% less rainfall in the annual mean 
(IDB, 2016), translating into losses of 25% in average key crops such as 
banana, manioc and beans (UNDP, 2015). The limited access of farmers to 
agricultural technologies (¶1.4a) reduces their ability to cope with these natural 
and climate risks. 

1.5 The agricultural sector policy context. According to the Inter-American 
Development Bank (IDB) Agrimonitor database, total public support to the 
agricultural sector represented, on average, 5.3% of GDP in the period 2006-2012, 
but only 3.2% of the resources are allocated to finance public goods (the lowest 
level in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC), with funding to research basically 
inexistent), although, in LAC, such public spending has proven higher economic 
return rates than expenditures directed to the financing of private goods 
(Anriquez et al., 2016). 

1.6 Recent reforms. In recent years, the Government of Haiti, with the support of the 
IDB through Policy Grants 2731/GR-HA and 2945/GR-HA, has progressed in key 
areas of agricultural policy that would improve agricultural productivity and 
competitiveness in Haiti, as summarized below. 

a. Agricultural Research.  In 2013 the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources 
and Rural Development (MARNDR) and other agricultural research 
stakeholders, with the support of the IDB: (i) reviewed and analyzed the 
agricultural research programs and activities implemented in the last three 
decades; (ii) worked on the strategic issues on which research financing should 
focus; and (iii) reviewed different research financing instruments. This work 
resulted in the drafting of a new research institutional framework and a 
financing mechanism (Fonds National de Recherche pour un Développement 
Durable, FONRED), which is expected to be implemented in 2017. 

                                                 
10  Agricultural exploitation stressed the environment and have led to soil erosion and deforestation to be endemic 

problems in Haiti (McClintock, 2003). The great deforestation of the country began during the colonial period 
and was intensified in 1730 with coffee introduction, then other agricultural practices as monoculture and 
clean-cultivation caused rapid erosion and exhausted soil nutrients (Paskett and Philoctete, 1990). Most 
hillsides are eroded and a third of the land is severely degraded (White and Jickling, 1995). Also, gully erosion 
is chronic, which compromises soil fertility, infrastructure quality, and productivity (Wahab et al., 1986). 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 5 - 

 

b. Farmers’ access to technologies. A two-fold strategic approach was 
proposed to address the limited access of farmers to improved technologies: 
(i) create a legal and policy framework for a modern agricultural research 
system in the country (see above); and (ii) expand progressively the incipient 
market-friendly system of “smart subsidies” for promoting the adoption of 
agricultural technologies, reducing the supply-driven distribution of subsidized 
inputs and avoiding the crowding out of private suppliers. 

c. Institutional reform of the Ministry of Agriculture. In 2013, the MARDNR 
created a procurement unit (UPMP, Unité de Passation des Marchés Publics) 
to improve its capacity to absorb and administer financial resources. The 
Studies and Planning Unit (UEP) was staffed with high-level professionals, and 
launched the preparation of programmatic plans, with the objective of 
rationalizing budget preparation. 

1.7 In Haiti, the Bank is already financing investments for the provision of several 
agricultural public goods (agricultural health and food safety, land administration, 
fisheries management, rural infrastructure) through the following operations: 
Natural Disaster Mitigation Program II (3622/GR-HA), Artisanal Fisheries 
Development Program (3492/GR-HA), Modernization of Public Agricultural Health 
Services (3260/GR-HA) and Land Tenure Security Program in Rural Areas 
(2720/GR-HA). Investments in agricultural research and technology transfer 
complement the existing portfolio. 

1.8 Synergies with other initiatives. Several national and international institutions 
are partnering with the MARNDR on the provision of incentives to smallholder 
farmers and on applied agricultural research and training in Haiti: (i) the World 
Bank, USAID and the French Development Agency for the agricultural incentives 
program; and (ii) FAO, the Embassy of France in Haiti, USAID, IICA, the University 
of Quisqueya, the Faculty of Agronomy and Veterinary Medicine (FAMV), and 
NGOs for applied agricultural research and training. 

1.9 On the Bank side, the second phase of the Natural Disaster Mitigation Program 
(PMDN II - HA-L1097/HA-G1031), implemented by the MARNDR since 2016, 
offers possible synergies, notably related to watershed protection (combination of 
infrastructure provided by PMDN and sustainable farming practices promoted by 
PITAG), and to the strengthening of the FAMV curriculum. Other synergies (both 
on content and geographical areas) are envisaged with the Land Tenure Security 
Program in Rural Areas (2720/GR-HA), Water Management Program in the 
Artibonite Basin (3089/GR-HA), the Program to Establish a Partial Credit 
Guarantee Fund for Enterprise Development (2416/GR-HA), and MIF 
interventions in all suitable intervention areas. Collaboration with the last two 
programs will be particularly useful to facilitate the integration of farmers into the 
value chain and their access to broader markets. 

1.10 In order to maximize synergies, avoid duplication and adequately define the 
activities of PITAG, a coordination process was conducted with the various 
initiatives of the institutions listed above and will be continued during program 
execution through regular meetings and especially through the Agricultural 
Sectorial Group (a donor coordination mechanisms) that the Bank’s chairs in Haiti. 



- 6 - 

 

1.11 Lessons Learned. During the period 2011-2016, the MARNDR implemented the 
PTTA (2562/GR-HA), through funding provided by the Bank and the Global 
Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP), and the Natural Disaster 
Mitigation Program (PMDN – 2187/GR-HA). These programs covered a total area 
of 20,240 hectares across the South, North and Northeast departments. They 
benefitted a total of 43,956 small agricultural producers: 9,043 for PMDN and 
34,913 for PTTA 1. While PMDN focused on the promotion of agroforestry 
technological packages, PTTA promoted technological packages for irrigation, 
sisal, annual crops (rice, sweet potato, peanuts and vegetables), and agroforestry 
(coffee, cocoa, diversified crop systems). Qualitative and quantitative evaluations 
assessed that with an average adoption rate of 80%, and with average incentive 
values of US$595/farmer for PMDN and US$700/farmer for PTTA, agroforestry 
technological packages have generated positive results, since they contributed to 
the reforestation of about 13,082 hectares in the country, and led to significant 
increases in gross value added per plot ranging from 10% to 109%. The 
evaluations also found that results have been more limited for the annual crops 
(rice and vegetables), with no significant improvement of gross value added, since 
farmers did not modify their agricultural production practices. However, the 
subsidies contributed to reduce farmer decapitalization, as farmers used the 
vouchers to avoid selling cattle (an average effect of US$227) or contract informal 
and expensive credit to buy agricultural inputs (a 10% points difference between 
treatment and control groups).  

1.12 From a conceptual and operational standpoint, the proposed operation has been 
therefore designed on the basis of the lessons learned through PTTA and several 
other programs that implemented similar incentive mechanisms in Haiti: (i) the 
Agricultural Services Strengthening Program I and II (RESEPAG), financed by the 
World Bank and GAFSP; (ii) the Natural Disaster Mitigation Program II (PMDN 
II- 3622/GR-HA), financed by Bank; and (iii) the Food Security Support Program 
(SECAL), financed by the European Union and the French Development Agency. 
Other similar programs have been financed by the IDB in other countries, such as: 
(i) the Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives II (CRIAR) in 
Bolivia (3536/BL-BO); (ii) the Agroalimentary Productive Support Program 
(APAGRO) in Nicaragua (2055/BL-NI); and (iii) the Technological Innovation 
Program II (PATCA) in the Dominican Republic (2443/OC-DR). In addition to the 
lessons learned through the aforementioned operations, the design of the 
proposed operation takes into account: (i) the Review of the Bank's Support to 
Agriculture, 2002-2014, published (OVE, 2015); and (ii) the analysis of the 
performance of the incentive mechanism of the programs implemented in Haiti 
(IRAM, 2015). The main lessons learned and their inclusion in the design of the 
program are summarized in Table I-2.



- 7 - 

 

Table I-2. Incorporation of Lessons Learned in the Design of the Proposed Program  

Lesson Learned Source of the 
Lesson 

How the lesson shaped the 
design of the program 

(i) PTTA provided vouchers to rice and vegetable 
producers in order to purchase inputs such as labor, 
fertilizer, and pesticides. The results of the evaluation show 
that while the vouchers led to some adjustments in crop 
choices and input use, these changes did not translate into 
increased agricultural productivity or income. 

A randomized 
control trial impact 
evaluation of PTTA 
(rice and vegetable 
vouchers) (Gignoux 
et al., 2016). 

Agricultural and Agroforestry 
Technological Innovation 
Program (PITAG) shifts its focus 
from subsidies to inputs that are 
widely known and used by 
farmers (i.e. most rice-growers 
reported to have applied urea 
(88%), other chemical fertilizer 
(71%), and pesticide (79%) in the 
baseline survey), towards the 
promotion of more suitable 
technologies and agroforestry 
systems, which enhance soil 
conservation and generate 
positive environmental 
externalities.  

 

(ii) Agroforestry vouchers could be used for services such 
as pruning and grafting, or inputs such as seedlings and 
pesticides. The evaluation shows that, compared to the 
control group, beneficiary farmers increased the total 
number of plots planted and specifically the number of plots 
with annual crops. The project also had a positive impact 
on the use of labor and increased the expenditure in 
permanent seedlings. In addition, the program determined 
a 23% increase in farmers’ expected production, 38% in 
expected income and 78% in expected profits. 

An impact evaluation 
using a propensity 
score matching on 
agroforestry 
vouchers provided 
by PTTA 
(Fahsbender et al., 
2017) 

(iii) Include robust monitoring and evaluation arrangements 
in project design that will establish with certainty which 
elements of the program are effective. 

OVE, 2015 PITAG is built on the lessons 
learned through rigorous impact 
evaluations, and will measure its 
impacts through a rigorous 
monitoring and evaluation 
strategy. 

(iv) In designing projects, place as much emphasis on 
technical assistance as on the productive capital goods to 
be offered to beneficiaries. 

OVE, 2015 Technical assistance to farmers 
and technology providers has 
been strengthened in PITAG, 
through specific activities 
included in Component II. 

(v) The design of new technological packages must be 
directly related to the results of applied agricultural 
research, while considering the diversity of climates and 
social contexts in which they will be implemented. 

IRAM, 2015; PMDN I 
Mid-Term and Final 
Evaluations 

PITAG includes applied research 
component (Component I). 

(vi) The menu of technologies should be designed as to 
enhance agricultural productivity and contribute to climate 
change adaptation, without damaging the environment. 
Also, the promotion of technologies and practices should 
be avoided if certain conditions related to access to factors 
of production (especially water) are not fulfilled. 

IRAM, 2015; PMDN I 
Mid-Term and Final 
Evaluations 

PITAG makes a particular effort 
at identifying specific 
technologies that will facilitate 
climate change adaptation. 

(vii) It is necessary to develop synergies and 
complementarities among projects at local level (i.e., 
watershed protection through the combination of 
infrastructure, adoption of sustainable cropping practices 
and land tenure security; value chain development through 
support to agribusiness and Small and Medium Enterprises 
(SME) and adoption of sustainable cropping practices) to 
maximize impacts. 

PMDN I Mid-Term 
and Final 
Evaluations 

PITAG is designed in 
coordination with other 
complementary initiatives (see 
par. 2.7-2.9). 



- 8 - 

 

1.13 Justification for public intervention. From an economic perspective, several 
reasons justify public investment in agricultural research and training, as well as 
technology transfer services to farmers. Public investment in agricultural research 
and technology transfer schemes show high rates of social and economic returns 
(Alston et al., 2000). In addition, the proposed program will focus its support in 
promoting technologies (mainly agroforestry) that will generate positive 
environmental externalities. Moreover, with regards to technology transfer 
interventions, the literature also recognizes the existence of several market failures 
that hinder the process of agricultural technology adoption in developing countries, 
including: (i) lack of access to information and/or asymmetric information; (ii) input 
and output market inefficiencies (Feder, Just and Zilberman, 1985; Jack, 2013); 
(iii) liquidity constraints and insufficient access to credit; and (iv) risk aversion. 

1.14 The lack of information limits technology adoption not only because agricultural 
producers lack knowledge on the effective use of these technologies, but also 
because they lack information regarding location of private providers or costs of 
production. For instance, in the case of Nepal, Joshi and Pandey (2005) show that 
farmers’ perceptions regarding different rice varieties influence adoption decisions. 
Therefore, the authors conclude that it is important to disseminate information 
broadly using different methods to form accurate perceptions of the technologies 
to be promoted among farmers. Similarly, Conley and Udry (2004) demonstrate 
the importance of learning and information effects on the technological adoption in 
Ghana. Specifically, the authors show that pineapple producers changed their 
input use patterns only when they gained access to information regarding 
production yields from neighboring farmers. Finally, Bentley et. al (2011) measured 
the effect of farmers´ field schools where free information regarding plant health 
and agricultural practices is provided to farmers in Bolivia. The authors found that 
adoption rates are higher (about 82%) for producers who received the information, 
in comparison with the control group. 

1.15 As for the presence of thin markets for technology providers in rural regions, this 
is mainly caused by the small population density spread in remote and large areas 
without accessible roads and high transaction costs (IFAD, 2003). Therefore, it is 
not profitable for technology providers to be located in areas under these 
conditions without certainty of a demand for their technologies. On the other hand, 
it is difficult for farmers to reach technology providers as these are primarily located 
in urban or suburban areas. The presence of liquidity constraints and credit 
restrictions is one of the principal factors that limit smallholder farmers’ technology 
adoption, as mentioned in ¶1.4.  

1.16 Finally, the fourth obstacle that limits technology adoption is risk aversion. This 
factor limits technology adoption because producers prefer certainty regarding the 
future yields that will be obtained with new technologies before incurring the initial 
cost. Thus, producers tend to postpone technology investments until they can 
confirm the benefits associated with the adoption of such technologies through 
experience from other farmers (Feder, 1980). Several studies provide evidence on 
the negative impact of risk aversion on technology adoption such as Abadi 
Ghadim, Pannell y Burton (2005) and Besley and Case (1994), which in the case 
of Haiti could be further accentuated by climate uncertainty.  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 9 - 

 

1.17 The Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program (PITAG) aims 
to improve technology adoption by reducing the aforementioned market failures. 
Specifically, the provision of a matching grant that partially covers the cost of an 
agricultural technology aims to ease liquidity and credit constraints faced by 
smallholder farmers. Secondly, the provision of technical assistance to farmers 
aims to reduce the barriers related to risk aversion and information asymmetry. 
Lastly, the implementation of technology fairs aims to reduce the lack of 
information and eliminate problems related to shortage of supply and thin markets 
by bringing together demand (small farmers) and supply (technology private 
providers). Given the ability of the program to mitigate these three market failures, 
together with high social returns of agricultural research and technology transfer 
and the positive environmental externalities the program would produce, public 
intervention is justified. 

1.18 Evidence of the relevance of the selected thematic areas of intervention. 
Agricultural productivity can be influenced by a wide range of factors such as land 
tenure status, human capital level, availability of agricultural inputs, climate 
change, access to finance, the provision of agricultural services (such as 
information, agricultural innovation, irrigation, agricultural health and food safety) 
and macroeconomic and trade policies. A strategy to improve the agricultural 
sector’s performance requires a set of well-defined policies geared towards 
promoting efficient factor and product markets.  

1.19 The economic literature presents ample evidence of the linkage between 
agricultural services and agricultural productivity, which is a main driver of 
competitiveness. Research and technology transfer have been shown to be among 
the key determining factors of improvements in agricultural productivity over the 
past 50 years (Pardey et al., 2012). Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations (FAO, 2012) reports that research and technology transfers are 
priorities in order to meet the growing demand for food because of their high 
returns. Specific studies obtain rates of return ranging from 43% to 67% for 
investments in research and technology transfer (Alston et al, 2014; Jin and 
Huffman, 2015).  

1.20 In addition to the PTTA impact evaluations (mentioned above), other studies have 
analyzed the impact of similar programs in Latin America and the Caribbean. 
Gonzalez et. al. (2009) evaluate the impact of an agricultural technology transfer 
program, Technological Support in the Agricultural Sector, that aims to reduce the 
barriers that limit technology adoption among farmers in the Dominican Republic. 
The study presents evidence that the adoption of the promoted technologies 
increases productivity levels for beneficiary producers of rice and livestock. As for 
technologies that aim to increase agricultural productivity through the promotion of 
environmentally friendly technologies, there is evidence of their impact on income 
and productivity. Specifically, different studies of the Environmental Program of El 
Salvador (PAES), which promoted the adoption of conservation technologies and 
product diversification show that the project had positive effect on household 
income (Cocchi and Bravo-Ureta, 2007; Bravo-Ureta, 2006). Also, (Bravo-Ureta et 
al. (2010) analyze the impact of the Natural Resources and Water Basins 
Management Program (MARENA) in Honduras, which promoted agroforestry and 
soil conservation technologies with the goal to increase diversified farming and 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 10 - 

 

enhance soil, water and forest management. They find positive results of the 
project on the total value of agricultural production. 

1.21 The adoption of sustainable practices can increase the resilience of crop yields, 
which are expected to drop between 5-10% by 2060 because of temperature 
increase and shift in precipitation patterns,11 and improve watershed management 
and soil conservation. The promotion of resilient crops, through the adoption and 
multiplication of agroforestry, and the dissemination of climate change awareness 
has proven to increase system resilience and, therefore, enhance livelihoods. For 
example, use of cover crops in Brazil over maize increased its production by 
198-246% (Altieri, 2001), and intercropping can enhance soil fertility, reduce 
reliance on chemical fertilizers, and therefore reduce the carbon footprint of the 
agricultural sector (Conant, 2010). 

1.22 Finally, with regards to food security, (Salazar et. aAl., 2016) assesses the impact 
of the CRIAR program in Bolivia that aims to improve access to agricultural 
technologies through a voucher-based subsidy scheme. The results show that 
beneficiary households are 20–30% more likely to be food secure than the control 
group and 22% less likely to be concerned about lack of food. This increase was 
driven both by food availability and food access. The annual value of production 
per hectare increased by 92% and the value of production sold by 360%, and the 
results also show that participation in CRIAR increased net annual agricultural 
household income by 36% and per capita household income by 19%.  Also, an 
ongoing study of the PATCA II, that provides voucher-based subsidies to farmers 
to improve agricultural technology adoption, shows that beneficiary farmers 
increased food security by 27% (Salazar et. al., 2016). 

1.23 Consistency with national priorities. The proposed program is consistent with 
the 2010-2025 Agriculture Policy Document, the 2010-2016 and 
2016-2021 National Agriculture Investment Plan (NAIP), the 2011-2016 
Agricultural Extension Plan, and Haiti’s Intended National Determined Contribution 
(INDC, 2015). These documents envision to build-up and strengthen a modern 
agricultural sector based on the efficiency and effectiveness of family agriculture 
and agribusiness. 

1.24 Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy (UIS) 2010-2020 (AB-3008) and is strategically aligned with the 
development challenges of: (i) productivity and innovation, through the generation 
of sustainable agricultural technologies and improving access to those 
technologies, as reflected by the impact indicator “Annual household value of 
agricultural production.” The program is also aligned to the cross-cutting themes 
of: (i) climate change and environmental sustainability, through the generation and 
promotion of climate change adaptation and sustainable technologies, as reflected 
in the result indicators “Beneficiaries who adopted soil protection and restoration 

                                                 
11  According to a vulnerability study for the agricultural sector in Haiti’s National Adaptation Plan of Action (PANA), 

the temperature increase is estimated to vary between 1°C by 2030 and up to 1.7°C by 2060 and precipitation 
patterns are expected to decrease between 20% by 2030 and up to 35.8% by 2060, with a specific impact on 
irrigated crops. Corn projection scenarios foresee a decrease of 4% by 2030 and 7.7% by 2060; b) for rice 
decreases will attain 9% by 2030 and 15% by 2060 and potato will reach a 5% decrease by 2030 and 10% by 
2060. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 11 - 

 

technologies,” “Additional hectares of land applying agroforestry technologies,” 
and (ii) gender equality and diversity, through the reduction of gender inequalities 
and the promotion of women’s participation, as reflected in the result indicator 
“Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives.” The program 
contributes to the Corporate Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019 (GN-2727-6) 
through the indicators of: “beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable 
use of natural capital,” “women beneficiaries of economic empowerment 
initiatives,” “farmers with improved access to agricultural services and 
investments” and “beneficiaries of IDBG projects that contribute to at least one key 
dimension of food security. The program is aligned with the Bank’s Country 
Strategy with Haiti 2011-201512 (GN-2646), which sets agriculture as a priority 
sector of intervention. The program is also included in the 2017 Operational 
Program Report (GN-2884) and is aligned with the Country Strategic Objective 
“Protect the environment, respond to climate change and enhance food security”. 
The program is also consistent with the “Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document” (GN-2709-5) as it focuses on the 
provision of public agricultural goods and promotes access to technology, with the 
“Food Security Sector Framework” (GN-2825-3), as it will increase agricultural 
productivity and therefore contribute to food security, and the “Climate Change 
Sector Framework” (GN-2835-3) as the program enhances resiliency of vulnerable 
farmer communities through adaptation measures. According to the joint MDB 
approach on climate finance tracking, an estimated 64.56% of total IDB funding for 
this project result in climate change mitigation and adaptation activities. This 
contributes to the IDBG’s climate finance goal of 30% of combined IDB and IIC 
operational approvals by year’s end 2020.  

1.25 Gender mainstreaming. In the context of PTTA, a gender gap analysis was 
conducted. This study combined qualitative data from focus groups and 
quantitative data from the baseline survey. The main conclusions are the following: 
(i) women heads of household have less time to allocate to agricultural activities 
and therefore, have higher labor expenditures than men (310 Gdes vs. 280 Gdes); 
(ii) women heads of household have smaller plots and less access to land; 
(iii) women sell a lower proportion of their production and allocate more to home 
consumption compared to men (52% vs. 64% in the case of rice); (iv) more 
female-headed households face severe food insecurity (86% vs 71%); 
(v) female-head of households are less educated than men (55% never attended 
school vs. 30%); and (vi) female-headed households have lower annual income 
(US$176 vs. US$347) (Coelho, 2015). 

1.26 As a result of the gender gap assessment the following activities will be included 
as part of PITAG, with the objective of reducing gender inequalities and promoting 
women’s participation. First, PITAG will include an information campaign that 
targets women directly. Second, Component I will allocate financial resources to 
five applied research projects with the objective of developing new agricultural 
technologies that are directly targeted towards women’s needs or crops usually 
grown by women. Third, Component II will promote post-harvest technologies that 
are targeted towards agricultural activities usually conducted by women (i.e. mills 
and moisture meters). Fourth, the agroforestry packages will include crop varieties 
that aim to reduce food insecurity such as moringa and mirlinton, which are usually 

                                                 
12  Currently in effect until December 2017 (GN-2646-2). 

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807


- 12 - 

 

grown by female farmers. Fifth, the program will be monitored and evaluated using 
sex-disaggregated indicators. 

1.27 Climate change. The National Determined Contribution of Haiti defines a 
conditional target of 31% GHG emissions reduction, and includes key agricultural 
adaptation and mitigation actions such as development of crops resilient to climate 
change, sustainable practices and conservation of agricultural genetic resources, 
soils and water resources to attain its commitment. The program contributes to the 
NDC target through the development and promotion of sustainable and climate 
resilient technologies (mainly focusing on agroforestry packages), which will also 
contribute to the reforestation of the country and the reduction of net emissions.13 

B. Objective, Components and Cost 

1.28 The general objectives of the program are to increase agricultural income and food 
security for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti. The specific objectives 
are to increase agricultural productivity and improve the use of natural capital 
through the adoption of sustainable technologies. The channels through which 
increases in agricultural productivity are expected to increase food security are 
twofold. First, higher agricultural productivity will translate into higher agricultural 
yields, increasing food production for home-consumption. Second, higher 
agricultural productivity will increase agricultural income from increased production 
sales which, in turn, will improve household’s purchasing power for, amongst other 
goods, foodstuffs. To achieve its objectives, the program will be structured in two 
components. 

1.29 Component I. Applied research and training (US$14,600,000). The objective of 
this component is to generate and disseminate applied agricultural research and it 
will finance the following activities: (i) applied and adaptive agricultural research 
projects developed and implemented by national and/or international institutions. 
These research projects will create, improve and/or adapt sustainable agricultural 
technologies that will enhance the supply of technological options available to 
farmers. Eight main projects (total budget: US$9,318,000) were identified through 
a prioritization exercise based on an index that summarized economic, social, and 
environmental indicators as well as the yield gap vis-à-vis other countries in the 
region. All research projects will include climate considerations and foster 
adaptation and mitigation measures. Seven additional smaller projects will be 
demand-driven (total budget: US$3,080,000) and will be selected through a similar 
prioritization exercise; (ii) the strengthening of the higher education curriculum 
through activities conducted within the research projects (scholarships, among 
others), in order to improve applied and adaptive research and technology transfer 
capabilities in Haiti; and (iii) the institutional strengthening of the MARNDR 
Innovation Directorate (ID), through: (a) technical and scientific support; 
(b) materials and equipment; (c) strengthening of the technical and scientific profile 
of its professionals; and (d) an innovation information system. The component will 
be executed by the ID of the MARNDR. The selection of the various proposals will 
be conducted by a panel composed by Ministry staff and external experts (faculty 

                                                 
13  According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), agroforestry is a climate smart practice, 

as it has a mitigation potential of 1.1–2.2 Pg carbon over the next 50 years and also provides proven resiliency 
assets. 



- 13 - 

 

members from Haiti and abroad). The results of Component I will progressively 
provide inputs for the technology menu promoted by Component II, including 
climate considerations. A behavioral study will be also conducted to determine 
farmers’ willingness to pay for the new technologies (resulting from the adaptive 
research) to be introduced in the menu. The activities of the component are 
consistent with the recent reforms supported by the IDB as represents a first 
opportunity of application of the FONRED guidelines, whose development was 
supported by the IDB. 

1.30 Component II: Promotion of sustainable agricultural technologies 
(US$55,909,305). This component will finance the adoption of profitable, climate 
smart, and sustainable agricultural technologies that will improve farm profitability, 
generate positive environmental externalities, and facilitate the mitigation of and 
adaptation to climate change. The component will be implemented through the 
agricultural incentives mechanism implemented by the MARNDR. A preliminary 
technology menu has been selected through a prioritization exercise based on the 
relative importance of the different crops, their socio-economic relevance and their 
environmental sustainability. This menu will include: pre-harvest, harvest and 
post-harvest technologies, as well as sustainable soil recovery and conservation 
practices (i.e. agro-forestry systems, sustainable soil management techniques).14 
This menu will be updated each year, taking into consideration the results of 
Component I. To become beneficiaries of this component, interested farmers will 
participate in a series of fairs that will be organized to match demand and supply 
for the various technologies. The component will cover 90%15 of the costs of the 
technologies through a matching grant, and farmers will cover, in cash, the 
remaining 10%. The maximum amount of subsidy will depend on the specific 
technology chosen by farmers and will go up to US$2,000, with a weighted 
average of US$950. Given the damages experienced by farmers in the areas 
affected by hurricane Matthew (South and Grand’Anse Departments), the 
component will finance the total cost of the technologies in these regions. The 
demonstrated results of the selected technologies ensure the sustainability of the 
intervention (see Table I-2). The component will also finance: an information 
system for program implementation, technical assistance for farmers (specific 
assistance on how to choose and apply the technologies and general, strategic 
assistance on farm management and commercialization), and technical assistance 
for technology providers (mainly focused on quality control and environmental 
management). Technical operators will facilitate the implementation of the 
Program in the different intervention areas. 

1.31 Other project costs (US$6,350,000). Other activities to be financed include: 
(i) administration (e.g., consultants, travel, equipment, operational costs, audits); 
(ii) mid-term, final, and impact evaluations; and (iii) contingencies. 

C. Key Results Indicators 

1.32 The Results Framework (Annex II) has been agreed with the Government of Haiti 
and includes the program’s objectives, impacts, results and products, as well as 

                                                 
14  The initial list of technologies includes: motor-pompes, animal traction, cane mills, threshers, stocking 

equipment, different types of agroforestry packages, different types of forestry packages, forages. 
15  This percentage is meant to represent an average across technologies, and was determined on the basis of 

previous experiences, income data, and indicators collected during the evaluation of related programs. 



- 14 - 

 

their respective indicators. Table I-3 summarizes the program’s key impact 
indicators, measurement period and selection rationale. 

Table I-3. Key Indicators 

Impact/ Results indicator Measurement 
period 

Selection rationale 

(i) Percentage of male-headed 
households who are severely 
food insecure using the Food 
Insecurity Experience Scale 
(FIES) 

Y1 and Y5 This indicator measures the degree of food 
insecurity faced by the household, and it will 
be measured separately for male and 
female headed households, and compared 
with a control group. 

(ii) Annual value of agricultural 
production (US$/household) 

Y1 and Y5 This indicator is a proxy for agricultural 
productivity. 

(iii) Additional hectares of land 
applying agroforestry 
technologies 

Y1 and Y5 This indicator will measure the adoption of 
agroforestry technologies and monitor forest 
coverage, and will be measured separately 
for male and female farmers. 

1.33 Economic analysis. The program’s ex-ante economic analysis is based on a cost 
benefit methodology that examines the economic viability for each of the 
technologies selected as well as for the program as a whole. The costs considered 
include the investment (i.e., asset cost, technical assistance and private 
investment), operation, maintenance and reposition of the technologies as well as 
additional production costs and opportunity costs. The net benefits attributed to the 
adoption of the technologies were estimated using technical coefficients for labor 
and inputs obtained from the impact evaluation of agroforestry technologies 
provided with PTTA as well as from the technical report for Component II. The 
results of the analysis, using efficiency prices, an adoption rate of 75%, a 12-year 
horizon, and a discount rate of 12%, confirm that the program is economically 
viable with a net present value of US$28,000,000 and Internal Rate of Return (IRR) 
of 27%. Table I-4 shows the expected effects from each of the options offered in 

the technological menu with their respective IRR. 

Table I-4. Expected Effects and Internal Rates of Returns for the Technologies 

Technology Direct Effects IRR 

Agroforestry Increase productivity and improve soil quality 41.7% 

Irrigation Increase productivity and crop diversification 67.9% 

Animal traction Increase production 22.7% 

Post-Harvest equipment Increase income due to food processing 49.3% 

1.34 Beneficiaries. The program will have the following beneficiaries: (i) 3,000 direct 
beneficiaries of the agricultural applied research and training projects 
(Component I); and (ii) 65,048 farmers that will directly benefit from the matching 
grant mechanism promoting the adoption of technologies (Component II). It is 
expected that women would represent at least 40% of these beneficiaries. The 
departments targeted by the program are: North, North-East, Artibonite, South, 
and Grand’Anse. The first three departments have been selected because of the 
foreseen synergies with other complementary programs and the South and 
Grand’Anse were included to re-capitalize these departments after the damages 
caused by hurricane Matthew. Based on information obtained through PTTA, the 
expected beneficiaries will be farmers who, on average, have access to 



- 15 - 

 

1.4 hectares of land and plant 0.7 hectares; have low levels of income 
(US$248 annual household agricultural income and US$208 income from 
livestock); and low levels of schooling (53% are illiterate, 26% have incomplete 
primary school, 9% finished primary school and 2% have a high school degree). 
Given the program’s limited resources, the proposed targeting will help to: 
(i) ensure the coordination with other rural development programs financed by the 
Bank and other partners (see ¶2.6); and (ii) focus attention on farmers who are in 
most need of the proposed technological changes.

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing Instruments 

2.1 The total program amount is US$76,859,305. The Grant Facility will finance 
US$55,000,000, the GAFSP16 will finance US$10,000,000, and International Fund 
for Agricultural Development (IFAD)17 will finance the remaining US$10,859,305. 
The local counterpart will finance US$1,000,000 to cover recurrent costs. IFAD 
might elect, by the end of 2017, to contribute to the project through a Project 
Specific Grant (PSG) administered by the Bank, in place of a parallel cofinancing, 
for the budgeted amount. Such additional non-reimbursable funding will contribute 
to the project according to Table II-1. In this case, the Bank would establish a 
commitment from IFAD through an administrative agreement without the 
requirement of preparing or approving a separate project proposal. Under such 
administrative agreement, the resources provided by the donor will be 
administered by the Bank. The Bank will not charge an administrative fee for donor 
contributions to projects in Haiti.  The Board is therefore requested to authorize the 
President, or such representative as he shall designate, to enter into such 
agreements as may be necessary with IFAD and with the Republic of Haiti to 
receive, administer, and allocate to this operation the PSG resources aimed at 
supporting and executing the components of this operation. Table II-1 provides the 
cost summary by investment categories and components. The budget includes all 
costs associated with risks mitigation measures identified in the ESMP and the risk 
analysis.

                                                 
16  This co-financing is subject to the entry into effect of a specific agreement for the financing of this program to 

be signed between the IDB and GAFSP. 
17  This parallel financing is subject to IFAD´s approval. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6


- 16 - 

 

Table II-1. Costs and Sources of Financing (US$) 

Investment categories IDB GAFSP IFAD Local Total 

Components 

Component I. Applied 
research and training 14,600,000  

 

 14,600,000 

Component II. Promotion 
of sustainable 
agricultural technologies 35,050,000 10,000,000 

 
 

10,859,305  55,909,305 

Other project costs 

Administration 4,000,000  
 

1,000,000 5,000,000 

Audits 150,000  
 

 150,000 

Monitoring & Evaluation 700,000  
 

 700,000 

Contingencies 500,000  
 

 500,000 

TOTAL 55,000,000 10,000,000 
 

10,859,305 1,000,000 76,859,305 

• IFAD contribution is, as of today, parallel (co-financing) but might be received by the Bank as 
a PSG, subject to IFAD’s Board approval. 

 

2.2 The program is an investment grant operation and it is designed to be disbursed 
in 60 months. The disbursement calendar is presented in Table II-2 and is based 
on the Pluriannual Execution Plan (PEP) (see REL-1).  

 

Table II-2. Disbursement Projections (US$) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

IDB 3,123,865 4,150,926 14,565,837 16,471,691 16,687,681 55,000,000 

GAFSP 1,000,000 2,000,000 3,000,000 3,000,000 1,000,000 10,000,000 

IFAD 1,000,000 2,859,305 3,000,000 2,000,000 2,000,000 10,859,305 

Local 200,000 200,000 200,000 200,000 200,000 1,000,000 

TOTAL 5,323,865 9,210,231 20,765,837 21,671,691 19,887,681 76,859,305 

% 6.9 12.0 27.0 28.2 25.9 100 

A. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks 

2.3 According to OP-703, the program was classified as Category “B.” The expected 
negative impacts are considered to be low, and avoidable through adequate 
mitigation measures. During project preparation, an Environmental Assessment 
and an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) were prepared and 
consulted.18 Key project impacts and risks include: (i) water resource exploitation 
by the introduction of water pumps for irrigation purposes. This risk will present a 
negligible negative impact, based on an ex-ante hydrological assessment of the 
accumulated pumping capacity of the small number of water pumps (450 over all 

                                                 
18  The preliminary draft of the Environmental Assessment (and ESMP) was posted on the Ministry of Agriculture’s 

website (http://agriculture.gouv.ht/view/01/) on January 13, 2017 for public view, as well as on the IDB website 
on January 17, 2017. An updated version, integrating the results of the first consultations, was posted on 
February 16, 2017, prior to QRR. No further update was needed after last consultation events in 
September 2017. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3
http://agriculture.gouv.ht/view/01/
http://www.iadb.org/en/projects/project-description-title,1303.html?id=HA-L1107
http://www.iadb.org/en/projects/project-description-title,1303.html?id=HA-L1107


- 17 - 

 

intervention zones) to be financed throughout the life of the program. Moreover, a 
Water Resource Assessment will be completed prior to project execution to allow 
for a better understanding of the present state of water resources in the proposed 
intervention zones. The use of these water pumps will also be monitored; 
(ii) possible conflicts generated by program activities regarding agricultural use of 
land in protected areas/Key Biodiversity Areas (KBA).19 To mitigate this risk, the 
program will only take place in areas where management plans exist and are in 
effect, and will be implemented in accordance with the respective protected area 
management plan, including abiding by existing sustainable development zoning 
regulations; (iii) possible promotion of the use of invasive species. To address this 
concern, during the first year of the program’s implementation, a study on invasive 
and non-invasive species will be completed to identify alternatives. If no alternative 
is found, a management plan relating to the use of the invasive species will be 
prepared and implemented. The beneficiary shall comply with the environmental, 
social, health and safety and labor requirements set forth in the Environmental and 
Social Management Report (ESMR); and (iv) emissions associated with energy 
forests. To address this risk, for the first years of the PITAG project, energy forest 
packages will not be offered. Rather, during this time more research will be 
completed to determine the emissions (particularly of carbon dioxide and black 
carbon) that may be released due to energy forests. This research will examine 
the relationship between carbon emissions and sequestration, and the possible 
contribution to climate change, as well as potential human health impacts from 
burning biomass (in the form of charcoal or fuelwood). 

B. Fiduciary Risk 

2.4 An update of PTTA/RESEPAG institutional assessment related to its financial 
management and internal control processes was completed in January 2017. 
Based on its results, the Bank considers PTTA/RESEPAG overall risk rating to be 
medium due to following weaknesses: (i) financial reports are prepared manually, 
which increases the possibility of errors in financial reporting as SYSCOMPTE 
does not automatically generate financial reports; (ii) limitations identified in the 
Système Intégré de Gestion des Informations (SIGI), system used for the 
management of subsidies to farmers; and (iii) absence of a code of ethics. To 
mitigate those risks the EA: (i) has launched an evaluation of the functionality and 
the design of the SIGI information system which will advise on the best option to 
choose for the implementation of PITAG; (ii) will need to set up SYSCOMPTE 
parameters to allow the automatic generation of financial reports and the 
monitoring and execution of budget; and (iii) includes a code of ethics and 
professional conduct in the POM. The fiduciary risk related to procurement delays 
is classified as medium and its mitigation measures include: (i) anticipation and 
good planning for complex procurement processes; (ii) strengthening of the UPMP; 
and (iii) support to the MARNDR to simplify the procedures for contract approval 
and signature. 

C. Other Key Issues and Risks 

2.5 The design of the program used the methodology “Program Risk Analysis for 
Sovereign Guaranteed Loans.” A risk identification and management workshop 

                                                 
19  Sites contributing significantly to the global persistence of biodiversity.  



- 18 - 

 

was conducted during program preparation, to identify program risks and 
mitigation measures. All main counterparts (IDB, MARNDR, private sector, 
development partners) have been consulted as part of the definition of the risk 
matrix and its mitigation measures. The high risk identified is the insufficient quality 
and quantity of technology providers. Several mitigation measures were identified 
for this risk, namely: (i) strengthened selection process of potential providers, 
including quality and quantity control; (ii) trainings; (iii) updated quality standards 
for technologies; (iv) possibility to exclude providers who do not follow the rules; 
and (v) technology transfer to providers through Component I. The development 
risk related to the cash constraints of suppliers is medium, and its mitigation 
measures include: (i) strengthened selection process of potential providers, 
including quality and quantity control; (ii) promotion of link with microfinance 
institutions, including programs financed by IDB and Ministry of Commerce; and 
(iii) good planning of the campaigns in terms of areas and quantities of subsidies. 
The development risk linked to the lack of local financial counterpart is medium 
and its mitigation measure is the preliminary planning and communication with the 
Ministry of Finance. Extreme climatic events have been identified as a medium 
development risk and the related mitigation measures are: (i) promotion of 
technologies that are resilient to climate change; (ii) research on climate resilience; 
and (iii) good planning of the campaigns in terms of areas and seasons. The 
complexity of the subsidy management process is a medium development risk and 
its mitigations measures include: (i) updated operational procedure, based on 
PTTA experience; and (ii) improvement of information system (SIGI). The limited 
number of actors that can execute quality research in the country is a medium 
development risk, whose mitigation measures are: (i) promotion of consortia with 
national and international research centers; and (ii) efforts to give maximum 
visibility to calls for proposals. The limited transfer of research outputs to producers 
is a medium development risk and its mitigation measures include: 
(i) strengthening of coordination between the two Components, the Innovation 
Directory of the MARNDR; (ii) inclusion of dissemination activities in Component I; 
and (iii) monitoring of research activities in the country. The difficulty to access 
intervention areas has been identified as a medium governance risk, whose 
mitigation measure is the timely preparation of providers and the selection of 
providers that will have access to difficult areas. Finally, a medium sustainability 
risk was identified: value added by the technological packages absorbed by 
household consumption expenses. Its mitigation measures include: (i) promotion 
of synergies with microfinance initiatives; and (ii) introduction of the matching grant 
mechanism. 

2.6 The Government of Haiti and the MARNDR expressed high interest in this program 
and are committed to the sustainability of the activities supported by the Program 
beyond its execution period, since the program is aligned with the Road Map of 
the current administration, the 2010-2025 Agriculture Policy Document, the 
2010-2016 and 2016-2021 National Agriculture Investment Plan (NAIP), the 
2011-2016 Agricultural Extension Plan, and Haiti’s Intended National Determined 
Contribution (INDC, 2015). 



- 19 - 

 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements 

3.1 The beneficiary of the program will be the Republic of Haiti, and the EA will be the 
MARNDR, which has been in charge of the execution of most Bank-financed 
operations in the sector, and currently manages an active portfolio totaling 
approximately US$140 million. The EA will manage the program through: (i) the 
technical and administrative team of PTTA/RESEPAG executing unit (PEU); and 
(ii) the UPMP, which have demonstrated their capacity to execute similar programs 
in the past. The EA will be responsible for the overall administration of the program, 
including: planning and reporting technical and fiduciary aspects; execution of 
procurement activities; supervision of firms and service providers; financial and 
accounting management; risk management; monitoring and evaluation; 
supervision and execution of the environmental and social management plan. The 
Innovation Directorate will be responsible for the planning and technical 
supervision of Component I. The approval by the Executing Agency and entry 
into effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms 
and conditions previously agreed with the Bank constitutes a Special 
Contractual Clause prior to the first disbursement of the financing, justified 
by the need to have designated personnel for the execution of the program and 
clear procedures that will guide its implementation. 

3.2 Program Operating Manual (POM). The POM, which establishes standards and 
procedures for the MARNDR with regard to programming activities, procurement 
audits, and monitoring and evaluation, among others, will govern program 
execution. The POM will include, among others, the following: (i) a detailed 
description of the implementation agreement of each component; (ii) roles and 
responsibilities of the agencies involved in the implementation of the program; 
(iii) criteria and procedures to select and contract goods and services; (iv) criteria 
and procedures for management and financial control of the program; 
(v) monitoring and evaluation arrangements; (vi) specific environmental and social 
measures of the program, as described in the ESMR (annexed to the POM); 
(vii) presentation of evidence that the MARNDR has selected a program 
coordinator and a financial officer according to the terms and conditions previously 
agreed with the Bank; and (viii) a provision according to which a technical 
verification of the use of agricultural subsidy funds by the beneficiary will be 
performed on a quarterly basis by an individual consultant who will be hired 
according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank. A 
preliminary manual of procedures was prepared during program preparation.  

3.3 The following are some salient elements that will be included in the POM regarding 
the execution of Component II. The main selection criteria for beneficiaries are the 
following: (i) to be registered in the MARNDR farmers’ registry; (ii) to be domiciled 
in the area of intervention; (iii) to work on an area equal to or greater than 0.25 Ha; 
(iv) not having received a previous MARNDR technology subsidy; and (v) to meet 
the specific criteria for the desired technical package. The selected farmers will 
pay their contribution to a financial institution and technology providers will provide 
the technology to the farmers. The program will pay the remaining part of the cost 
of the technology to technology providers once it has been verified that they have 



- 20 - 

 

delivered the technology to the farmers. All the transactions and validation will be 
tracked by an updated version of the SIGI. 

3.4 Procurement. All program-related procurement activities will be performed 
following Bank’s Procurement Policies: Policies for the Procurement of Goods and 
Works financed by the Bank (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and 
Contracting of Consultants financed by the Bank (GN-2350-9) as applicable.  

3.5 Financial and Auditing reports. The program will submit to the Bank the following 
documents: (i) semi-annual financial reports of the program included in the 
semi-annual progress report; (ii) annual financial statements of the program, 
audited by an independent auditor are to be submitted to the Bank within 120 days 
at the end of each fiscal year, beginning with the fiscal year in which the first 
expenditures are incurred; and (iii) a final financial audit report of the program is to 
be submitted by the MARNDR within 120 days after the date of the last 
disbursement.  

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results 

3.6 It will be the PEU´s responsibility to put in place a monitoring system to collect data 
related to all the indicators in the Results Framework. This system will be 
instrumental for the PEU to be able to submit to the Bank semi-annual progress 
reports that will describe, among others: (i) the physical progress of the program 
(i.e., in terms of output indicators); (ii) the progress made in terms of outcomes and 
impacts, as stipulated in the Results Framework; and (iii) the status of applicable 
environmental and social mitigation measures. 

3.7 An impact evaluation will be conducted to measure the program’s impact and 
results. Specifically, the impact evaluation will be a combination of experimental 
and quasi-experimental techniques. Component I will be evaluated using a before 
and after calculation. On the other hand, Component II will use a randomization 
methodology to analyze the impact of the adoption of those technologies that will 
experience a demand higher than project’s capacity to supply it (i.e., irrigation), 
and combine it with a quasi-experimental approach of difference-in-difference for 
technologies such as agroforestry and post-harvest. For this purpose, a sample of 
2,000 farmers (1,000 beneficiaries and 1,000 control, representative by gender) 
will be surveyed for baseline and a follow-up surveys. The data collection will be 
representative of female-headed households and separate analysis will be 
performed in order to measure impact by gender. The total budget for the impact 
evaluation amounts to US$550,000 that will be covered with resources from this 
grant. Details on the monitoring and evaluation activities are provided in the 
Monitoring and Evaluation Plan prepared for the program. 

C.  Significant Design Activities Post Approval  

3.8 There will be no significant design activities post approval.  

 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-5


Annex I - HA-L1107/HA-G1038

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2646

     Country Program Results Matrix GN-2884

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country 

strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution

     3.1 Program Diagnosis

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic 

Analysis

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms

     5.2 Evaluation Plan

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries and/or 

public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality

Labor

Environment

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector entity 

prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps in 

the sector that were identified in the project document and/or in the evaluation plan
Yes

1.5

9.6

2.5

7.1

8.5

4.0

0.0

1.5

1.5

Evaluable
10.0

3.0

4.0

3.0

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

The objective of the program is to lower the levels of poverty and food insecurity in rural areas of Haiti by improving access to adequate and climate resilient agricultural 

technologies and increasing agricultural productivity among smallholder farmers. To increase adoption of such technologies, the program proposes the provision of agricultural 

incentives and technical assistance, as well as the development of applied and adaptive agricultural research projects, along with a strengthening of the high education 

curriculum and institutional capacities to conduct and apply research. 

The documentation is well-structured. The diagnostic is based on empirical evidence of the major challenges faced by the country with regards to the vulnerability of Haiti’s 

agricultural sector and outlines various market, environmental, and institutional factors contributing to the current levels of low productivity. The proposed solution is then 

linked to the problems identified. The results matrix (RM) reflects the objectives of the program and establishes a clear vertical logic, including impact indicators that can capture 

the program’s overall effect on income and food security. The RM includes SMART indicators at the impact (except one), outcome and output level, with their respective baseline 

values and targets and the means to gather information.  

The economic analysis includes a Cost-Benefit Analysis that considers the intervention’s benefit on the income of targeted smallholder farmers as measured in terms of gross 

value added. In general, the benefits are based on a good understanding of the theory of change, and the economic costs include all resource costs as well as costs from a social 

perspective. However, the quantification of benefits under Component I and II does not clearly separate between the distinct beneficiaries, which may lead to issues of double 

counting. Overall assumptions appear reasonable and appropriate; a sensitivity analysis contemplates key parameters and various break-even points.

The monitoring and evaluation plan presents all outputs and associated costs. The evaluation plan proposes a before-after comparison for Component I (no attribution), as well 

as a randomized control trial with an instrumental variable approach and a difference-and-difference method with matching for Component II. The plan provides sufficient detail 

on methodological and logistical considerations, though the power calculations should have been conducted separately for male and female beneficiaries given the focus on 

heterogeneous impact by gender.

The risk matrix identifies eleven risks; three are classified as Low, seven as Medium, and one as High. All of them seem reasonable and include appropriate mitigating actions 

and compliance indicators.

There is an impact evaluation plan that aims to measure the effect of 

the program on the adoption of agricultural technologies.

Medium

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

-Beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable use of natural capital (#)*

-Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives (#)*

-Farmers with improved access to agricultural services and investments  (#)*

-Beneficiaries of IDBG projects that contribute to at least one key dimension of food security  (#)*

Yes

Protect the environment, respond to climate change, and enhance food 

security.

The intervention is included in the 2017 Operational Program.

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Yes

-Productivity and Innovation

-Gender Equality and Diversity

-Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability

I. Corporate and Country Priorities



Annex II – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 1 of 6 

RESULTS MATRIX 

Project Objective: To increase food security and agricultural income for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti.  

Specific Objective: Increase agricultural productivity and improve the use of natural capital through the adoption of sustainable technologies. 

 

EXPECTED IMPACTS 

Indicators Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

IMPACT 1: Improve Food Security 

Indicator 1.1: Percentage of male-
headed households who are 
severely food insecure using the 
Food Security Scale (ELCSA)  

% 71 2013 35 2022 

 

Agricultural Household 
Surveys for baseline 
and follow-up. 

The baseline number will be 
updated through surveys to be 
conducted prior to program 
implementation. The baseline 
values correspond to baseline 
values of PTTA. Target numbers are 
based on the CRIAR impact 
evaluation conducted in Bolivia and 
apply to program beneficiaries. 

Indicator 1.2: Percentage of 
female-headed households who are 
severely food insecure using the 
Food Security Scale (ELCSA) 

% 86 2013 50 2022 

 

Agricultural Household 
Surveys for baseline 
and follow-up. 

The baseline number will be 
updated through surveys to be 
conducted prior to program 
implementation. The baseline 
values correspond to baseline 
values of PTTA. Target numbers are 
based on the CRIAR impact 
evaluation conducted in Bolivia and 
apply to program beneficiaries. 

 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

Indicator 1.3: Beneficiaries of 
IDBG projects that contribute to at 
least one key dimension of food 
security 

# 0 2017 65,048 2022  

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

This number corresponds to the 
total number of program 
beneficiaries. IDB finances 39,679 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 13,010, and 
IFAD 12,359. 

IMPACT 2: Increase Agricultural Income 

Indicator 2.1:  Annual agricultural 
income  

USD/ 
household 

170 2015 268 2022 

 The baseline number will be 

updated through surveys to be 

conducted prior to program 



Annex II – HA-L1107 
Page 2 of 6 

 

Indicators Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

• Annual agricultural income for 
female-headed agricultural 
households 

USD/ 
household 

68 2015 107 2022 

Agricultural Household 

Surveys for baseline 

and follow-up.  

implementation. The baseline and 

target values are obtained from the 

impact evaluation of the PTTA. The 

income increase corresponds to 

58%. Targets apply to program 

beneficiaries. 

This includes only income from crop 

related agricultural activities 

(livestock is not included) 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

•  Annual agricultural income for 
male-headed agricultural 
households 

USD/ 
household 

197 2015 311 2022 

Indicator 2.2: Annual agricultural 
profits 
 

USD/ 
household 

98 2015 160 2022 

 

Agricultural Household 

Surveys for baseline 

and follow-up. 

The baseline number will be 

updated through surveys to be 

conducted prior to program 

implementation. The baseline and 

target values are obtained from the 

impact evaluation of the PTTA. The 

profit increase corresponds to 

63%.Targets apply to program 

beneficiaries. 

Profits correspond to the agricultural 

revenues minus the cost of variable 

inputs and transportation for crop 

activities. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

• Annual agricultural profits of 
female-headed agricultural 
households 
 

USD/ 
household 

30 2015 49 2022 

• Annual agricultural profits of 
male-headed agricultural 
households 

USD/ 
household 

116 2015 189 2022 

IMPACT 3: Increase Agricultural Productivity 

Indicator 3.1: Annual value of 
agricultural production 

USD/ 

Household
/year 

347 2015 478 2022 

Agricultural Household 
Surveys for baseline 
and follow-up. 

This corresponds to an increase of 
38% in the value of production. This 
target corresponds to the results 
obtained in the impact evaluation of 
PTTA. Targets apply to program 
beneficiaries. 

 



Annex II – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 3 of 6 

 

EXPECTED RESULTS 

Results Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

 RESULT 1: Improve use of Natural Capital  

Indicator 1.1: Beneficiaries of 
improved management and 
sustainable use of natural 
capital. 

# 0 2017 61,224 2022  

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

This number corresponds to 
beneficiaries from agroforestry 
technologies. IDB finances 37,347 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 12,245, and 
IFAD 11,632. 

Indicator 1.2: Beneficiaries 
who adopted soil protection and 
restoration technologies 

# 0 2017 
45,918 

2022 

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

This number corresponds to 
beneficiaries from agroforestry 
technologies multiplied by an 
adoption rate of 75% (adoption rate 
observed in similar projects in the 
region). IDB finances 28,011 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 9,183, and 
IFAD 8,724. 

Indicator 1.3:  Additional 
hectares of land applying 
agroforestry technologies 

Has 0 2017 27,900 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target corresponds to 
estimates made for the economic 
analysis. IDB finances 17,019 
hectares, GAFSP 5,580, and IFAD 
5,301. 

RESULT 2: Improve Agricultural Innovation Services 

Indicator 2.1: Research and 
development expenditure as 
percentage of Agricultural GDP 

% 0.12 2017 0.3 2022 

Ministry’s executed 
budget. 

Baseline is taken from IDB 
Agrimonitor estimations for the 
average of the period 2008-2012.  

This indicator will be measured 
before and after the implementation 
(reflexive methodology). The target 
is based on calculations that 
include the value of the investment 
in research made by this and other 
related programs of the Ministry. 

Indicator 2.2: New 
technologies developed or 

# 0 2017 8 2022 
Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

These new technologies 
correspond solely to those 



Annex II – HA-L1107 
Page 4 of 6 

 

Results Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

adapted by new applied 
research projects 

developed by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 

Indicator 2.3: Male farmers 

who adopt the technologies 

developed by new applied 

research projects. 

# 0 2017 1,800 2022 

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

These new technologies 
correspond solely to those 
developed by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 

Indicator 2.4: Female farmers 

who adopt the technologies 

developed by new applied 

research projects. 

# 0 2017 1,200 2022 

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

These new technologies 
correspond solely to those 
developed by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

RESULT 3: Increase Adoption of Agricultural Technologies 

Indicator 3.1: Percentage of 
beneficiary producers who 
adopt agricultural technologies. 

% 0 2017 75% 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target represents the 
percentage of adopters observed in 
similar projects in the region 
including the PATCA in Dominican 
Republic and CRIAR in Bolivia. 

 

Indicator 3.2: Percentage of 

beneficiary women who adopt 

agricultural technologies 
% 0 2017 75% 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target represents the 
percentage of adopters observed in 
similar projects in the region. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

Indicator 3.3. Farmers who 

adopt agricultural technologies # 0 2017 48,786 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target represents the 
percentage of adopters observed in 
similar projects in the region. IDB 
finances 29,760 farmers, GAFSP 
9,757, and IFAD 9,269. 



Annex II – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 5 of 6 

Results Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

Indicator 3.4. Women 

beneficiaries of economic 

empowerment initiatives 
# 0 2017 26,019 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up.  

Project Report. 

This includes the total number of 
women to benefit from the program 
(40% of total beneficiaries from 
component I and II). IDB finances 
15,872 beneficiaries, GAFSP 
5,204, and IFAD 4,943. “Pro 
Gender Flag” 

 

PRODUCTS 

Products  Unit  
Base 
line 

Year 
1 

Year 
2 

Year 
3 

Year 
4 

Year 
5 

Final 
Goal 

Means of 
verification 

Observations 

Component I: Applied research and training 

1.1. Applied agricultural research 
projects implemented for the 
development/adaptation or 
improvement of new agricultural 
technologies  

# 
0 0 2 2 6 5 15 

Project 
progress 
report. 

The initial research projects 
will include: rice, banana, 
tubers, horticulture products, 
legumes, and agroforestry. 

MS. 1.1.1. Applied agricultural 
research projects implemented for 
the development/adaptation or 
improvement of agricultural 
technologies that specifically target 
female farmers 

# 
0 0 0 0 0 3 3 

Project 
progress 
report. 

Research projects on 
horticulture, tubers, and 
legumes  

“Pro Gender Flag” 

MS. 1.1.2. Applied agricultural 
research projects implemented for 
the development/adaptation or 
improvement of agricultural 
technologies that specifically target 
climate change adaptation or 
mitigation 

# 
0 0 0 0 0 3 3 

Project 
progress 
report. 

Three research projects on 
agroforestry. 

1.2. Scholarships to support the 
implementation of new innovation 
projects delivered to research 
fellows  

# 
0 0 2 3 3 2 10 

Project 
progress 
report. 

Research fellows include 
students, scientists and 
academics from Haiti that 
work in the new lines of 
agricultural research 
developed by the project.  



Annex II – HA-L1107 
Page 6 of 6 

 

Products  Unit  
Base 
line 

Year 
1 

Year 
2 

Year 
3 

Year 
4 

Year 
5 

Final 
Goal 

Means of 
verification 

Observations 

1.3. Directorate of Innovation 
strengthened  

# 
0 0 0 0 1 1 1 

Project 
progress report  

Strengthening of the 
Innovation Directorate 
includes provision of 
equipment and contracting a 
supervisor for the research 
program. Also, the 
implementation of the 
innovation information 
system. 

MS. 1.3.1. Innovation information 
system implemented 

# 
0 0 0 1 1 1 1 

Project 
Progress 
Report  

This corresponds to a system 
to monitor the research 
initiatives in the country. This 
system will be implemented 
by the MARDR. 

Component II: Promotion of sustainable agricultural technologies 

2.1. Beneficiary farmers who 

received technological packages # 

 

0 

       

3,252  

       

6,505  

     

19,514  

     

19,514  

     

16,262  

     

65,047  

Project 
progress 
report. 

IDB finances 39,679 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 13,010, 
and IFAD 12,359. 

MS. 2.1.1. Female farmers who 

received technological packages  # 
0 1,301 2,602 7,806 7,806 6,504 26,019 

Project 
progress 
report. 

This corresponds to 40% of 
total beneficiaries. IDB 
finances 15,872 beneficiaries, 
GAFSP 5,204, and IFAD 
4,943. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

MS. 2.1.2. Beneficiary farmers who 

received technological packages 

for climate change adaptation and 

mitigation. 

# 
0 

  

3,061  

  

6,122  

  

18,367  

  

18,367  

  

15,306  

  

61,223  

Project 
progress 
report. 

This number corresponds to 
beneficiaries receiving 
agroforestry technologies. 
IDB finances 37,347 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 12,245, 
and IFAD 11,632. 

2.2. Beneficiary farmers who 

received technical assistance # 

 

0 1,650 3,300 9,900 9,900 8,250 33,000 

Project 
progress 
report. 

IDB finances 24,750 
beneficiaries, and IFAD 
8,250. 

 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 1 of 6 

 

FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTS 
 

COUNTRY:    Republic of Haiti 

PROGRAM Nº:    HA-L1107/HA-G1038  

NAME:  Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program - 
PITAG 

EXECUTING AGENCY (EA): The Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural 
Development (MARNDR)  

FIDUCIARY TEAM:   Marise E. Salnave and Romina Kirkagacli (FMP/CHA) 

 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 The general objectives of the program are to increase agricultural income and food 
security for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti. The specific objectives are to 
increase agricultural productivity and improve the use of natural capital through the 
adoption of sustainable technologies. The EA will be the MARNDR, which will implement 
all program components through: (i) its Executing Unit named “PTTA/RESEPAG,” which 
will ensure program technical and financial management; and (ii) the procurement unit of 
the MARNDR named “UPMP,” which will perform procurement activities. The program is 
composed of two components: Component I - Applied research and training and 
Component II – Promotion of sustainable agricultural technologies. The total program 
amount is estimated at US$76,859,305; financed by the IDB Grant Facility for up to the 
amount of US$55,000,000; the GAFSP will co-finance up to the amount of 
US$10,000,000; the IFAD will finance the remaining US$10,859,305. The national 
counterpart will finance US$1,000,000 to cover recurrent costs linked to Component I and 
administrative expenses. 
 

1.2 The latest evaluation of the public financial management systems of the Republic of Haiti 
is contained in the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment 
report conducted in 2011 and published in February 2012. The Government of Haiti has 
shown continued commitment in improving the country system and has adopted in May 
2014 Public Financial Management reform strategy including an action plan 2014-2016 to 
consolidate basic public financial management functions focus on: (a) continuing the 
implementation of a Single Treasury Account (STA) with the support of IMF; (b) reaffirming 
the role of public accountants in the monitoring of expenses in all line ministries, and 
(c) improving the monitoring of public debt. Despite these measures, the    
country financial management systems and external control mechanism would require 
further improvements prior to conform to levels consistent with their utilization for the 
fiduciary management of Bank’s funded programs. As a result, no country systems will be 
used for the financial management of program. An evaluation of the National Procurement 
System was performed in 2013, applying the methodology established by the Organization 
for Economic Co-operation and Development. A certain number of recommendations were 
identified through an action plan for the modernization of the national procurement system. 
Based on the current situation and the need to align the national system to international 
standards and best practices, the Bank’s procurement policies will govern procurement 
activities foreseen under this program. Therefore, to mitigate these risks the Bank will 
continue in the foreseeable future to: (i) rely on special program executing units for the 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 2 of 6 

 

execution of all programs while at the same strengthening institutional capacities; and 
(ii) to implement special fiduciary arrangements for program implementation and to 
conduct close supervision of program executing units. External control will be performed 
for all Bank operations by independent audit firms acceptable to the Bank in accordance 
with the Bank’s financial reporting and audit guide. 

II. EXECUTING AGENCY´S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT AND COLLABORATION WITH OTHER ENTITIES 

2.1 The EA will be responsible for the overall program execution and administration, including: 
planning and reporting technical and fiduciary aspects; execution of procurement activities; 
supervision of firms and service providers; financial and accounting management; risk 
management; monitoring and evaluation; supervision and execution of the environmental 
and social management plan. The MARNDR will execute the aforementioned tasks 
through: (i) its Executing Unit named “PTTA/RESEPAG,” which will ensure the financial 
management of the program; and (ii) the procurement unit of the MARNDR named 
“UPMP”, which will perform the procurement activities of the program. The PEU has 
gained experience in the execution of Bank financed operations over the past five years, 
during the execution of the Technology Transfer Program for Small Farmers Program 
(HA-L1059, 2562-GR-HA, PTTA I). The program coordinator will report to MARNDR’s 
General Director. The EA will be responsible for the fiduciary aspects of the program and 
overall administration including financial reporting.  
 

2.2 The UPMP, which is the procurement unit of MARNDR, was created through a Ministerial 
Decree “M-AIDG/(C-17)09-13:1659 (bis)” of September 17, 2013, has been in place and 
operational since early 2014. Based on findings of the technical assistance conducted by 
the Bank’s Procurement team, this unit has proved to possess a solid technical knowledge 
in the application of the Bank’s procurement policies. As of now, 12 procurement 
specialists are working in the unit. The UPMP can count on an organized system to treat 
purchase requests and conduct procurement processes, and is developing an improved 
filing system.  

 
2.3 A Steering Committee (SC) will be created after program start-up workshop to ensure 

strategic overall guidance and coordination among the different institutions involved in 
program implementation. The SC will meet at least once a year in order to discuss 
strategic issues, as well as to approve the multi-year execution plan, annual operation 
plans and progress reports. This committee will be chaired by MARNDR’s General 
Director.  

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

3.1 An update of PTTA/RESEPAG institutional assessment related to its financial 
management and internal control processes was completed in January 2017. Based on 
the results, the Bank considers PTTA/RESEPAG overall risk rating to be medium due to 
following weaknesses: (i) financial reports are prepared manually which increases the 
possibility of errors in financial reporting as SYSCOMPTE does not automatically generate 
financial reports; (ii) Limitations identified in SIGI information system used for the 
management of subsidies to farmers; and (iii) absence of a code of ethics. To mitigate 
those risks the EA: (i) has launched an evaluation of the functionality and the design of the 
SIGI information system which will advise on the best option to choose for the 
implementation of new program; (ii) will need to set up parameters SYSCOMPTE to allow 
the automatic generation of financial reports and the monitoring and execution of budget; 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 3 of 6 

 

and (iii) include a code of ethics and professional conduct in the POM. The fiduciary risk 
related to procurement delays is classified as medium and its mitigation measures 
include: (i) anticipation and good planning for complex procurement processes; 
(ii) strengthening of the UPMP; and (iii) support to the MARNDR to simplify the 
procedures for contract approval and signature. 
 

3.2 Based on the most recent capacity evaluation of the UPMP conducted by the Bank, the 
risk level in terms of procurement is considered as medium. However, the following risks 
and mitigation measures have been identified: (i) a heavy workload is being handled by 
UPMP with the execution of several parallel programs financed by the IDB and other 
donors. Mitigation: hiring a new procurement specialist or designating a specific 
procurement specialist already working with the Unit to support the additional workload; 
(ii) a lengthy contract approval process at the level of the Ministry, which impacts the 
program timeframe. Mitigation: the EA will submit an annex to the POM describing the 
procedure and timeframe applicable to the MARNDR’s internal and external approval 
process for procurement contracts; (iii) with a centralized structure, the important 
number of transactions may also negatively impact on the execution timeframe. 
Mitigation: the Unit will work on consolidated procurement plans for the Ministry in order 
to improve its planning capacity and identify recurring purchases so as to reduce 
transactional costs and achieve best value for money; and (iv) contract archives are well 
organized but not yet available in electronic version. Mitigation: the program will support 
some of UPMP’s operational costs which will also be used to support the development of 
an electronic filing system. 

IV. ASPECTS TO BE CONSIDERED IN THE SPECIAL CONTRACTUAL CONDITIONS OF THE GRANT 

4.1 Prior to first disbursement of the financing. Special Accounts and authorized 
signatures: PTTA/RESEPAG will open four separate bank accounts at the Haitian 
Central Bank (two accounts for each financing source (IDB and GAFSP), one in US 
Dollars and one in Gourdes)..      

4.2 Adoption of program operation manual1. PTTA/RESEPAG shall update to the 
satisfaction of the Bank, their operations manual (OM) which shall set out the procedures 
to be followed by the EA with regard to planning and reporting of activities, financial 
management, audits, procurement and contracting, risk management, and monitoring and 
evaluation. The OM shall include, among others: (i) the role of each participant and 
collaborating institution for the implementation of the program; (ii) a code of ethics section; 
(iii) an annex describing the procedure and timeframe applicable to the MARNDR’s 
internal and external approval process for procurement contracts; (iv) the framework of 
Environmental and Social Management Plans; (v) the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan, 
procedures for the safeguard of financial information; and (vi) a chart of accounts. 

4.3 Audit special requirements: PTTA/RESEPAG will be responsible for the recruitment of 
external auditors eligible to the Bank to perform the financial audit of the program as 
follows: (i) annual financial audit of the program to be submitted within 120 days after the 
closure of each fiscal year for each executing unit; and (ii) a final financial audit of the 
program to be submitted within 120 days after the date of the last disbursement.  Audit 
may include audit of procurement processes under ex-post modality (this specific activity 
will be confirmed in the Terms of reference of the audit firm). For the audit of financial 

                                                 
1  The adoption of a program operating manual is considered critical and essential for insuring the efficient and effective 

execution of the program. 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 4 of 6 

 

statements, the Haitian fiscal year will be used. For Component II, a technical verification 
of the use of funds by the beneficiaries will be performed on a quarterly basis by an 
individual consultant based on terms of reference approved by the Bank.  

4.4 Special disbursement. To enable the EA to fulfill all the conditions prior to first 
disbursement, an initial disbursement of up to US$150,000 will be made to the extent the 
beneficiary fulfills, to the Bank’s satisfaction, all the standard general conditions prior to 
disbursement set forth in the grant agreement.  Funds will be used to finance the 
contracting of technical and fiduciary personnel, update the POM, prepare program’s 
chart of accounts and update program accounting and information systems (see ¶3.1). 

V. FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION 

5.1 The procurement fiduciary arrangements establish the conditions applicable to all 
procurement execution activities in the program. 

A. Procurement Execution  

5.2 All program related procurement activities will be performed by the MARNDR 
Procurement Unit (UPMP) and will be governed by the Bank’s Procurement Policies: 
Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works financed by the Inter-American 
Development Bank (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and Contracting of 
Consultants financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2350-9).  

a. Procurement of Works, Goods and Non-Consulting Services: The contracts for 
Works, Goods, and Non-Consulting Services2 generated under the program and 
subject to International Competitive Bidding will be executed through the use of the 
Standard Bidding Documents (SBDs) issued by the Bank. The processes subject to 
National Competitive Bidding (NCB) will be executed through the use of National 
Bidding Documents agreed to by the Bank.  

b. Selection and Contracting of Consultants: The consulting services contracts 
generated under this program will be executed through the use of the Standard 
Request for Proposals (SRFPs) issued or agreed to by the Bank. Research entities, 
Firms or Universities will be selected to develop research programs using Selection 
Based on Quality as procurement method. Approximately eight contracts will be 
signed for a total amount of US$13,000,000.  

B. Recurring Expenses 

5.3 Certain recurring expenses will be procured using program funds. These procurement 
activities will be carried out in accordance with the administrative procedures of the EA 
with the prior approval of the Bank who will assess and approve the use of these 
procedures.  

 

 

 

 

 

                                                 
2  Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2349-9) 

paragraph 1.1: The services different to consulting services have a similar process as procurement of Goods. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=774392


Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 5 of 6 

 

 

 

C. Main Procurement Activities 

Table V-1. Procurement Activities 

 
Activity 

Procurement 
Method 

Estimated 
Date 

Estimated 
Amount 
000’US$ 

FIRMS    

Development and implementation of research programs  

SBQ First two 
contracts to 
be signed in 
2018  

1,500,000 per 
contract  

Development of an information system to monitor and manage 
the research programs and the provision of agricultural subsidies  

SBQC December 
2017 

500,000 

Technical assistance and management of the agricultural 
subsidies scheme  

SBQC December 
2017 

5,000,000 

Technical assistance and training of service providers 
SBQC February 

2018 
600,000 

 INDIVIDUALS    

Supervisor of research program 
 
QIC 

 
March 2018 

500,000 for the 
entire duration of 

the program 

*To access the 18-month procurement plan, click here 

D. Procurement Supervision 

5.4 Based on the risks identified under Section II above, the major procurement activities 
foreseen under this operation will be subject to ex ante review by the Bank. Procurement 
activities using the shopping method for goods, works, non-consulting services and the 
recruitment of individual consultants selected under a competitive method might be 
subject to ex post review, as confirmed in the Procurement plan.  

E. Records and Files 

5.5 The EA will be required to keep files and track records of all procurement activities 
financed by the Bank in such a way that it be available for supervision visit by the 
fiduciary team. As confirmed by recent inspection visits, the UPMP is provided with an 
organized archiving system, despite space limitations which will be addressed with the 
creation of an electronic filing system with support from the Bank. Until the national 
legislation in Haiti will not recognize electronic documents, electronic archiving should 
not replace paper files. 

VI. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

A. Programming and Budget 

6.1 PTTA/RESEPAG will provide an annual operation plan (AOP), procurement plan and a 
12-month detailed financial plan. The financial plans and will respect the budget lines 
defined in the grant agreement (investment categories).   

B. Accounting and Information Systems 

6.2 SYSCOP will be used for program financial management. Detailed annual budget 
including activities to be financed will be included in system to facilitate the comparison 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3


Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 6 of 6 

 

of Actual vs Budget forecast at the end of each month and the production of financial 
reports by source of funds.  

C. Disbursements and Funds Flows  

6.3 Program financial management will be guided by OP-273-6. PTTA/RESEPAG will 
prepare annual planning of program cash flows to be revised every four months.  
Financial plans will be based on activities derived from the Annual Operation Plan and 
Procurement Plan and payment terms agreed with suppliers. Advance of funds 
methodology will be used for the disbursement of program funds. For each new 
advance, PTTA/RESEPAG will need to justify 80% of cumulated advance received. 
Disbursement Supervision will be ex-post. Local national counterpart will be used to 
finance recurring costs related to activities financed under Component I. Exchange rate 
on the date of conversion of the currency in which the disbursement is made will be used 
to record all expenses made in local currency; the Central Bank of Haiti exchange rate 
published for that date will be used at the reference rate. Payment of subsidies will be 
made via a financial institution which will be hired through a competitive bidding process. 
Payments by the financial institution will be subject to the farmer meeting set technical 
requirements to be validated by the Departmental Directorate of Agriculture (DDA) and 
the payment of a small contribution. The DDA will inform the EA that all technical 
requirements have been met following which the EA will send payment authorization to 
the financial institution. Amount to be disbursed will be subject to terms defined in 
matching grant agreement. 

D. Internal Control and Audit 

6.4 The internal control environment of the program will be strengthened with: (i) the 
updating and implementation of an operation plan; (ii) the updating of the current 
accounting system to include a module for budget preparation and monitoring and the 
automatic preparation of financial report; and (iii) the use of an information system for the 
management of subsidies to the farmers. 

E. External Control and Reporting 

6.5 Audits of financial statements will be performed in accordance with Bank’s Guidelines for 
Financial Reports and External Audits (OP-273-6) as described in Section IV of the 
Guidelines. Financial audit cost will be financed by IDB grant and estimated at 
US$150,000, including the audit of procurement aspects.    

F. Financial Supervision Plan  

6.6 During the first year of execution, fiduciary personnel of the Bank will perform inspection 
visits to review the execution of financial plan every four months and on a semi-annual 
basis for the following years, however the frequency of visits is subject to change based 
on findings from supervision missions.  

G. Execution Mechanism 

6.7 PTTA/RESEPAG will maintain proper financial management systems and will prepare 
an AOP and Procurement Plan and a twelve-month financial plan indicating cash flow 
needs. Disbursement of advances of funds will be for the equivalent of funding needs 
required for four months of program execution. Fund flows will be executed as stated in 
point 6.3 (Disbursement and Fund Flows) above.  

 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/17 
 
 
 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing ____/GR-HA to the Republic of Haiti 
Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological 

Innovation Program - PITAG 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

 That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, as Administrator of the IDB Grant Facility 
(hereinafter referred to as the “Account”), to enter into such contract or contracts as may be 
necessary with the Republic of Haiti, as Beneficiary, for the purpose of granting it a 
nonreimbursable financing to cooperate in the execution of the Agricultural and Agroforestry 
Technological Innovation Program - PITAG. Such nonreimbursable financing will be for an 
amount of up to US$55,000,000, which form part of the Account, and will be subject to the 
Terms and Financial Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions in the Project Summary 
of the Grant Proposal. 

 

 
 

(Adopted on __ ______________ 2017) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/HA/EZSHARE-1537888330-1429 
HA-L1107 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/17 
 
 
 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing GRT/__-_____-HA to the Republic of Haiti 
Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological 

Innovation Program - PITAG 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

 1. That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, as Administrator of the Global Agriculture 
and Food Security Program (GAFSP) Trust Fund (hereinafter referred to as the “Trust Fund”), to 
enter into such agreement or agreements as may be necessary with the Republic of Haiti, as 
Beneficiary, for the purpose of granting it a nonreimbursable financing to cooperate in the 
execution of the Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program - PITAG. Such 
nonreimbursable financing will be for an amount of up to US$10,000,000, which form part of the 
Trust Fund, and will be subject to the Terms and Financial Conditions and the Special 
Contractual Conditions in the Project Summary of the Grant Proposal. 

 

 2. That the authorization granted in paragraph 1 above shall be effective only once 
the Bank has entered into the specific contribution agreements. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ ______________ 2017) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/HA/EZSHARE-1537888330-1430 
HA-L1107 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/17 
 
 
 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing GRT/__-_____-HA to the Republic of Haiti 
Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological 

Innovation Program - PITAG 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

1. That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such agreements as may be 
necessary, and to take such additional measures as may be pertinent, to receive, administer 
and approve the use of nonreimbursable financing resources chargeable to the resources 
provided by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) described in Document 
PR-____, up to the amount of US$10,859,305 for the co-financing of any component to this 
nonreimbursable financing. 
 

2. That the authorization granted in paragraph 1 above shall be effective only once 
the Bank has entered into the specific contribution agreements. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ ______________ 2017) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/HA/EZSHARE-1537888330-1427 
HA-L1107 





















































 

PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

 
 
 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

GUYANA 
 
 
 
 
 
 

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 
 
 

(GY-L1060) 
 
 
 
 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Juan de Dios Mattos (CSD/RND) and Sybille 
Nuenninghoff (RND/CBL), Project Co-Team Leaders; Onil Banerjee (CSD/RND); Jamie Cotta (CSD/RND); 
Alan Mentis (CCB/CGY); Paula Louis–Grant (FMP/CGY); Emilie Chapuis (FMP/CGY); María Camila Padilla 
(FMP/CBA); Graham Watkins (CSD/CCS); Rachel Atkinson (VPS/ESG); Claudia Stevenson (IFD/CTI); 
Escarlata Baza (LEG/SGO); David Cotacachi (SCL/GDI); Maja Schling (SPD/SDV); and Lisa Restrepo 
(CSD/RND). 

 
In accordance with the Access to Information Policy, this document is being released to the public and 
distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors simultaneously. This document has not been 
approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be 
made available to the public, thus superseding and replacing the original version.

 



 

CONTENTS 
 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY ............................................................................................................ I 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING .................................................................. 2 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, Justification .............................................. 2 
B. Objective, Components and Cost .................................................................. 8 
C. Key Results Indicators ..................................................................................11 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ..................................................................11 

A. Financing Instruments...................................................................................11 
B. Economic viability .........................................................................................12 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Risks .................................................12 
D. Fiduciary Risk ...............................................................................................13 
E. Other Risks ...................................................................................................14 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ..............................................................14 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements ..................................................14 
B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results ........................................17 

 
 
 
 
  



- ii - 

 

 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) - Summary 

Annex II Results Framework 

Annex III Fiduciary Arrangements  

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED 

1. Pluri-annual Execution Plan (PEP) 

2. Annual Operational Plan (AOP) 

3. Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 

4. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) 

5. Procurement Plan  

OPTIONAL 

1. Technical design Component 1 

2. Diagnostic of the Agricultural Information System 

3. Technical design Component 2 

4. Institutional Capacity Assessment (ICAS) 

5. Technical design Component 3 

6. Analysis of gender and diversity inclusion  

7. Review of infrastructure proposals and ToR for design and supervision 

8. Impact evaluation proposal 

9. Ex ante economic analysis 

10. Environmental and Social Analysis and Management Plan  

11. Agricultural household survey in Regions 5, 9 and 10 

12. Draft Program Operating Manual 

13. Safeguard Policy Filter (SPF) and Safeguard Screening Form (SSF) 

  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40564707
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40586954
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40564750
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40647394
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40564551
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40588762
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40663628
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40663634
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40588559
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40589854
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40587422
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40590131
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40587606
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40588061
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40664054
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40590454
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40588248
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40280490


- iii - 

 

 

ABBREVIATIONS 

AIS Agricultural Information System 

ASDU Agricultural Sector Development Unit 

EPA Environment and Protection Agency 

ESMP Environmental and Social Management Plan 

ESMR Environmental and Social Management Report 

ESS Environmental and Social Strategy 

FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 

GBS Guyana Bureau of Statistics 

GDP Gross Domestic Product 

GMC Guyana Marketing Corporation 

GL&SC Guyana Land and Survey Commission 

GLDA Guyana Livestock Development Agency 

GoG Government of Guyana 

GRDB Guyana Rice Development Board 

GRIF Guyana REDD+ Investment Fund 

GSA Guyana School of Agriculture 

GUYSUCO Guyana Sugar Corporation 

IDB Inter-American Development Bank 

IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development 

IFPRI International Food Policy Research Institute 

LAC Latin America and the Caribbean 

M&E  Monitoring and Evaluation  

MIF Multilateral Investment Fund 

MoA Ministry of Agriculture 

MRV Monitoring, Reporting and Verification 

NAREI National Agriculture Research and Extension Institute 

NDIA National Drainage and Irrigation Authority 

NSC National Steering Committee 

OECD Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 

POM Program Operations Manual 

PS Permanent Secretary 

RLPA Rupununi Livestock Association  

RMC Regional Management Committee 

SPF Safeguard Policy Filter 

SPS Sanitary and Phytosanitary 

SSF Safeguard Screening Form 

TFP Total Factor Productivity 

WBSGA West Berbice Sheep and Goat Association 

 
  



 

PROJECT SUMMARY  
GUYANA 

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 

(GY-L1060) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Co-operative Republic of 

Guyana 

 

 OC FSO 

Amortization Period: 30 years 40 years 

Executing Agency: Ministry of Agriculture    

Disbursement Period: 5.5 years 5.5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace Period: 6 years 40 years 

IDB (OC): 7,500,000 50 Supervision and Inspection Fee: (a)  NA 

IDB (FSO): 7,500,000 50 Interest rate: FU fixed (b)  0.25% 

Total: 15,000,000 100 
Credit Fee: (a)  NA 

Currency of Approval: US$ US$ 

Project at a Glance 

Project Objective/Description: Increase productivity of the agricultural sector while maintaining a sustainable 

and climate resilient use of natural resources in Guyana. The specific objectives are: (i) produce high quality data 
for the agricultural sector; (ii) increase productivity, especially for medium and small farmers; and (iii) increase 
sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) standards and access to meat processing facilities. Higher productivity will also 
contribute to reduce pressure on forest and fragile ecosystems, and at the same time, increase income for small 
and medium-sized farmers. 

Special contractual conditions prior to the first disbursement of the financing: (i) the presentation of 

evidence that the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) has selected a program coordinator, a financial officer and a 
procurement officer according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.1); (ii) approval 
and entry into effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms and conditions previously 
agreed with the Bank (¶3.4); and (iii) presentation of an initial report, including, the Program’s Pluri-annual 
Execution Plan (PEP), the Procurement Plan, the Financial Plan and the Results Matrix according to the terms 
and conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.12).  

Special contractual execution conditions: (i) prior to the implementation of the activities related to the Guyana 

Bureau of Statistics (GBS) under Component 1, the subscription and entry into effect of an agreement between 
the MoA and the GBS, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.2); (ii) prior to 
the bidding of infrastructure works under Components 2 and 3, the subscription and entry into effect of an 
agreement between the MoA and the EPA, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the 
Bank (¶3.2); (iii) prior to the building of infrastructure works related to the meat processing facilities financed 
under Component 3, the subscription and entry into effect of an agreement between the MoA and a producer’s 
association responsible for operating the abattoir, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with 
the Bank (¶3.7); and (iv) compliance with the environmental and social conditions established in Section VI of the 
Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR). 

Exceptions to Bank Policies: None 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges
(c)

: SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Cross-Cutting Themes
(d)

: GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a)
 The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors during 

its review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with the relevant policies. 
(b) 

   The borrower shall pay interests on the outstanding balance of the Ordinary Capital loan at a Libor based rate. Each time 
the outstanding balance reaches 25% of the net approved amount or $3 million, whichever is greater, the interest rate will 
be fixed. 

(c)
 SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 

(d)
 GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity 

and Rule of Law).
 



- 2 - 

 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, Justification
1
 

1.1 Guyana’s green economy development model. Guyana has 10 administrative 
regions and more than 75% of the territory is 
covered with forest. Savannahs represent 
10% of the territory. Forest and savannah 
ecosystems offer a wide range of goods and 
environmental services, necessary for 
agricultural development. Since 2009, 
Guyana in partnership with Norway started a 
payment-for-performance, forest conservation 
program. This partnership aims to maintain or 
reduce deforestation rates, currently at 
0.56%, one of the lowest in the world. 
Because agriculture is one of the drivers of 
deforestation in Guyana, increased 
production and productivity need to consider 
secondary effects on forests and savannahs.   

1.2 Agricultural Production. In 2014, agriculture represented almost 18% of total 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP), contributed 20% of employment (70% in rural 
areas), and is one of the main sources of foreign exchange earnings, representing 
19% of total exports (GBS, 2016). Coastal regions (2, 3, 4 and 5, mostly) 
concentrate in agricultural production especially export crops like sugar and rice. 
Although Guyana experienced high rates of economic growth between 2009 and 
2013 (4.5% annual average), the share of agriculture in GDP (and natural 
resources in general) has decreased consistently (Modeste, 2016). This is in part 
due to lower international prices for commodities, but also low productivity, 
especially among small farmers.  

1.3 Although small farmers produce most of the fruits and vegetables grown in Guyana 
(80% of the country’s grains, 60% of coconuts, and 40% of all coconut oil [FAO, 
2012]); productivity is still considered low compared to other countries with similar 
farm production systems (yields of corn, beans, and small scale rice, on average, 
are 40% lower than the Caribbean average). Livestock production is focused on 
poultry, with cattle and small ruminants produced mainly on small farms, with 
similarly low productivity (FAO, 2012). In the aggregate, as a result of the farming 
structure and low levels of agricultural services, the sector’s efficiency, as part of 
Total Factor Productivity (TFP) is one of the lowest in Latin America and the 
Caribbean (LAC) (Nin-Pratt, et al., 2015). As Fuglie and Rada (2013) have shown, 
45% of growth in productivity in the agricultural sector (global average) can be 
attributed to the adoption of better technologies.  

1.4 Low productivity is not the only challenge. Agriculture in Guyana is also affected by 
changes in weather patterns, particularly drought severity. The drought of      

                                                 
1
  References included in this document can be found in IDBDocs40279510 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40279510/R


- 3 - 

 

2014–2015 was one of the longest and most severe of the last two decades, 
extending the dry days from 145 to 189 (OCC-MP, 2016). Such drought poses 
enormous risk to farmers, and food security, particularly those in the hinterlands 
(Region 9), where water availability is one of the main constraints to agriculture 
and livestock development. Climate change impacts, including intensified drought 
as well as flooding, increase the need to facilitate the identification and adoption of 
adaptation measures, both for large and small farmers (IFPRI, 2009).  

1.5 Agricultural production in Regions 9 and 10 requires the adoption of practices 
tailored to ensure long–term conservation and ecosystem service supply in these 
environments. Although more than 90% of households in the hinterlands practice 
agriculture, most are subsistence–based with only 35% with agriculture as their 
main source of income. This low percentage is the function of precipitation patterns 
in the region (six months on average with less than 50mm of rainfall per month), 
little information on regionally appropriate agricultural practices and a lack of       
all-weather road connection with Georgetown. Improved technologies and 
practices for water management and use are critical in these regions where 
seasonal variation in precipitation induces drought stress as well as flooding.  

1.6 A study commissioned by the Bank (2016) analyzed the relative support to 
producers using the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD) methodology (Derlagen, 2016). The main findings show that the 
Government of Guyana employs various policy instruments in support of the 
agricultural sector, including trade policies, fiscal measures as well as public 
investment in infrastructure, research, extension services and marketing. During 
the preparation of the Program, a diagnostic of these services was clustered in 
three sections: (i) information systems; (ii) research, innovation and extension; and 
(iii) SPS standards and compliance. These sub–sectors represent the bulk of 
public goods and services provided by the Government. Through these services 
the Government has the opportunity to improve productivity and the sustainable 
use of natural resources.  

1.7 Agricultural information system (AIS). The MoA has a Monitoring and 
Evaluation (M&E) Unit created in 2014 that aggregates information produced by 
the Guyana Marketing Corporation (GMC); National Agricultural Research and 
Extension Institute (NAREI), the Guyana Livestock Development Agency (GLDA), 
the Guyana Sugar Corporation (GUYSUCO) and the Guyana Rice Development 
Board (GRDB), among others. An assessment carried out by the FAO in 2015 
showed that nine agencies of the MoA collect statistical data, but standards and 
consistency are lacking (see Optional Link 2). The last national agricultural census 
was implemented in 1952 and there is scant information on the current 
configuration of farmers, farming systems and cost structures across the country. 
Regional and national development plans are based on population censuses, with 
little or anecdotal information about production activities or productivity. The 
evidence and historical experience is clear and unambiguous: strategic 
investments in agricultural sector information increase productivity (Alston, 2010) 
and private sector investment (Fuglie, 2016). 

1.8 Limitations of the AIS. Because data from non-traditional crops are collected on 
an ad hoc basis, farmer characteristics, particularly in the hinterlands, are not well 
known and therefore provide little input into the preparation of regional 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663628/R


- 4 - 

 

development plans and policies. Land use and pressure on the environment can 
currently only be assessed on an anecdotal basis. Furthermore, as the 
assessment of the agricultural information system of the MoA shows, data 
collection, processing, and reporting protocols and standards need to be 
established and staff trained as a prerequisite to improving the AIS (see Optional 
Link 2). Lack of quality data present problems for suppliers, by also for users, like 
the Government, private investors and development agencies. Fundamentally, a 
comprehensive census is needed to provide the necessary basis for data-driven, 
evidence-based policy and decision making, robust survey design for commodity 
and sector specific analysis; and an accurate portrayal of agriculture’s contribution 
to economic growth. In the absence of this information, both the public and private 
sectors develop their policies and investments in an environment of high 
uncertainty and risk; they face higher costs as a result, and; their probabilities of 
success are much lower than in environments where information is available and 
credible. 

1.9 Research, innovation and technology transfer. NAREI, established in 2011, is 
the leading research and extension agency in Guyana. NAREI has 30 researchers 
(three PhD and four MSc) and 20 experiments under implementation, but no 
research programs. NAREI has released at least 10 new varieties of                 
non-traditional crops and five new technologies in the last five years, but adoption 
is difficult to assess or quality of the genetic material. NAREI has a budget of   
US$4 million annually. Also, GUYSUCO and GRDB have their own research 
facilities and personnel to develop technologies for the sugar and rice industries. 
Together they invest approximately US$0.5 million annually in research and 
innovation. NAREI and GLDA only have 35 technical staff dedicated to extension 
and technology transfer, which given the number of farmers in Guyana, this is well 
below international best practices (FAO, 2008). Medium and large sugar and rice 
farmers are the ones benefiting most from current investment in research and 
innovation.  

1.10 Analysis at the regional (Avila et. al, 2010) and global level (Heisey, 2001) show 
that a higher proportion of research, innovation and technology transfer of the 
agricultural GDP is correlated with higher productivity and incomes. On average, 
for LAC, an increase in 10% in public expenditure in public services (including 
research, innovation and technology transfer) results in a 5% increase in the 
agricultural sector value added per capita (Foster, et. al. 2016). However, the total 
research budget of Guyana represented just 0.86% of the agricultural GDP in 
2014, which is below the average of 1.15% observed for LAC and the Anglophone 
Caribbean (Stads, et. al., 2016). Based on a systematic review, Waddington et. al. 
(2014) reported that access to extension and innovation increases revenues and 
use of sustainable practices, by 25% and 60% respectively. Moreover, a World 
Bank study (2011) of 86 impact evaluations (15 in LAC), found strong effects of 
research and extension on yields, income and productivity. An increase in 
productivity may result in less area used for pastures, reducing pressure on forest 
and ecosystems. Furthermore a survey conducted during the preparation of this 
loan showed that only 3% of farmers reported having received some kind of 
technical assistance; only 8% have access to credit and do not have access to 
public infrastructure. IFPRI (2009) reports a likely 25% fall in yields for an average 
of three global models for Guyana. Experience in LAC (Salazar, 2015; Mullally and 
Maffioli, 2014) show that a combination of technical assistance with incentives for 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663628/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663628/R
http://www.fao.org/nr/gen/gen_081001_en.htm


- 5 - 

 

adoption of new technologies have a positive effect on productivity and incomes, 
especially for small farmers.  

1.11 Limitations of the research, innovation and extension services in Guyana. 
Guyana lacks the necessary infrastructure and research programs to promote 
agricultural production, especially for non–traditional crops. Furthermore, although 
NAREI and GLDA have access to research stations, the scientific rigor of research 
program design and implementation is unlikely to generate substantive gains (see 
Optional Link 3). Limitations to collaborate with international research programs 
and institutions need to be resolved to access genetic material and reduce costs of 
validation and technology transfer in Guyana. In addition, little agricultural research 
and extension has been carried out in the ecologically (and socially) distinct 
savannahs of Regions 9 and 10 and thus knowledge of appropriate technologies is 
similarly lacking. High transaction costs, associated with the lack of research and 
innovation and the size of the market, limit the exposure of small famers in the 
target area to new technologies (Agriculture SFD). Increased attention is needed 
toward the identification and adoption of sustainable and climate resilient practices 
which protect fragile ecosystems and watersheds (including pasture/crop rotation, 
fertilizer use, and improved water storage and management), and reduce the risks 
of losses and food insecurity. 

1.12 Animal Health and Sanitary and Phytosanitary framework. GLDA was 
established in 2010. Its main objective is to provide services and research for the 
livestock industry. The GLDA is a semi-autonomous organization of the MoA and 
has offices in all regions, except Regions 1 and 8. GLDA staff is comprised of 148 
people and provides inspection and technical assistance services. GLDA also has 
eight authorizing officers that enforce the Animal Health Act in the country; the 
Veterinarian Act; and the Guyana Livestock Development Authority Act. Although 
the Animal Health Act was approved in 2011, regulations are still pending.  

1.13 Guyana has 10 registered abattoirs all of which are in poor condition and do not 
comply with current standards (see Optional Link 5). The Georgetown abattoir is 
the main abattoir and slaughters approximately 60% of all animals slaughtered in 
Guyana. Small producers in Region 9 process 35 animals per month, out of a 
current potential of 100. Overall, opportunities for the export of meat from Guyana 
are severely constrained by lack of infrastructure, adequate regulations, trained 
inspectors and supporting policies. Noncompliance increases risks of animal 
diseases (like foot and mouth) and compromises human health and environmental 
quality. OVE (2015) reports that investments in sanitary and phytosanitary 
activities increased competitiveness and productivity in the countries analyzed. 
Better access to infrastructure and technical assistance will increase productivity 
and prices for small producers, through higher quality and better prices (Agriculture 
SFD, 2016).  

1.14 Problems with meat processing and SPS standards. Current standards in 
Guyana compromise human health and environmental quality, as well as access to 
revenue from export markets. Meat inspections are carried out under the authority 
of the Public Health Ordinance of 1915 with updates circa 1977, as well as 
sections of the Food and Drug Act of 1972, also updated in 1977. Waste disposal 
is also under the Public Health Ordinance and the Environmental Protection Act, 
1996, that created the Environmental Protection Agency. Regulations of this act 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663634/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40589854/R


- 6 - 

 

are not available. Standards for abattoirs, are based on standards from India 
dating from 1979, and are outdated. A comprehensive analysis of the costs of 
complying with local and international standards is not available in Guyana. 
Practical implementation of standards and regulations is not readily available to the 
private sector to evaluate the feasibility of medium and large investments. There 
are important public goods associated with SPS standards, but small farmers also 
lack access to capital and knowledge to improve practices (Agriculture SFD). 
Access to processing facilities will generate incentives for higher productivity and 
quality, as demonstrated by Ding (2014). 

1.15 Bank interventions and other investments. The Bank has supported the country 
in the modernization of the agricultural sector since 2004 through operations 
1558/SF-GY and 1929/BL-GY. Also, operations 3106/BL-GY and 3422/BL-GY 
helped the Government to implement a Low Carbon Development Strategy, which 
included support for the agricultural sector. These two operations helped the 
Government of Guyana (GoG) to comply with agreements with the Government of 
Norway that aim to reduce the deforestation below 0.56% annually. 1558/SF-GY 
improved the competitiveness of the agricultural sector through investment in 
drainage and irrigation systems and 1929/BL-GY focused on non-traditional 
agricultural export like aquaculture, fruits, vegetables and livestock. It also 
facilitated the creation and startup of NAREI and GLDA. The MIF approved three 
projects for the agriculture sector (ATN/ME-12052-GY, ATN/ME-11699-GY and 
GY-L1062) and Compete Caribbean has financed two projects. The International 
Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) is preparing a new investment loan for 
up to US$9 million that will target Region 9 and Region 1. Also the European 
Union is financing a US$9 million project to facilitate the diversification of the sugar 
sector and the GRIFF is financing the land titling program in the hinterlands.  

1.16 Additionally, the Ministry of Business, with support from the Bank is preparing loan 
GY-L1059 (Enhancing the National Quality Infrastructure for Economic 
Diversification and Trade Promotion). Laboratories to be implemented with        
GY-L1059 funding will support a national system, for calibration and standards. 
Laboratories planned for Region 9 and Region 10 financed by the Program will be 
small facilities for soil analysis to support, mainly, research activities. However, 
investments in national standards and metrology supported by GY-L1059 will 
facilitate the implementation of Component 3 of this Program.  

1.17 Lessons learned. The proposed operation draws lessons from the final evaluation 
of loans 1929/BL-GY, 3106/BL-GY and 3422/BL-GY, and lessons from IFAD’s 
project 742-GY final evaluation – draft (see Table I-1). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



- 7 - 

 

Table I-1. Lessons learned from projects implemented by the Bank and IFAD 

Lessons learned How it was addressed in the design 

Legal framework and regulations take 
time to be reviewed and agreed 

The Program will facilitate the update and drafting of legislation 
and regulations focusing on meat processing (¶1.26). 
Documents to be updated have been identified and activities 
financed by the Program will target specific parts of the 
legislation to facilitate the implementation of pilot facilities 
(¶1.26).  

Support to farmers and producers 
associations are part of the social 
capital needed for success 

Producers associations will manage pilot facilities. Two 
producers associations have been identified and strengthening of 
their administrative, institutional and technical capacities will be 
implemented before the infrastructure is delivered (¶3.7).  

Infrastructure is a basic input, but 
needs to be accompanied with training, 
management and maintenance 
provisions 

The Program will finance training and startup operations of 
agriculture centers and pilot facilities (¶1.24 and ¶1.26). 
Research programs have been prepared in collaboration with 
NAREI and GLDA (¶1.24) and will include collaboration with 
international research institutions.  

Enforcement of environment 
management and mitigation measures 
has to be included in the design 

To ensure compliance with local legislation and Bank’s policies, 
the Program will finance the monitoring and supervision of 
environmental impact evaluations (¶1.24). The Program will also 
include training for MoA staff to facilitate the preparation of ToR, 
bidding documents and supervision as it related to environmental 
management. 

Baseline and monitoring need to start 
implementation before the project is 
approved 

During the preparation of the Program, a survey was 
implemented in Regions 5, 9 and 10. This baseline provided 
valuable information to prepare the impact evaluation and 
economic analysis (¶1.21).  

1.18 Conceptualization. This Program will contribute to the MoA strategy for the 
development of Guyana’s agricultural sector. Most agriculture is concentrated in 
the coast, facing climate change risks and reduced availability of water and 
suitable land. The MoA wants to increase production in the hinterlands (Regions 
10 and 9) where natural resources are available. By generating the necessary 
capacity for data collection and analysis, the MoA will be in the position to propose 
policy and investments that generate the highest return for the country, in line with 
the National Strategy for Agriculture (2013 – 2020). This document includes 
objectives for the collection and analysis of statistical information. Preparation of 
agricultural policies and regional plans will benefit from better information. Better 
information will reduce uncertainty and risk in both public and private investments 
of all scales, and will result in higher production and incomes. Productivity gains 
will be achieved through scientifically rigorous research program design and 
implementation, and an expansion of Guyana’s capacity to transfer these 
technologies to farmers. Farmers will have access to genetic material, practices 
and technologies not currently available, which will increase yields, production, 
incomes and food security. Improved agriculture and livestock technology will 
reduce pressure on fragile ecosystem and facilitate adaptation to climate change if 
sufficient guidance and adequate support is provided. Guyana’s ability to produce 
livestock safe for domestic and export consumption will be enhanced, spurring 
investment and growth. Public goods supported by the Program (¶1.8, ¶1.11 and 
¶1.14) will be enhanced with incentives for technology adoption (¶1.25) and 
access to infrastructure to add value to production (¶1.26) that address the costs 
and access to knowledge in Regions 9 and 10.  

1.19 Gender and diversity inclusion strategy. Twenty-eight percent of households in 
the target area are headed by women. Only 1.9% of women head of households in 



- 8 - 

 

Regions 5, 9 and 10 reported access to technical assistance and a very low use of 
sustainable agricultural practices (23%). Extension services will be implemented at 
the community level and will include strategies to promote the participation of 
women (for example providing childcare and food for the participants). Members of 
livestock producers associations are more than 50% women and will receive 
training and technical assistance. The agriculture census will assess the 
involvement of women and other vulnerable groups in agriculture. Because a large 
share of households in Region 9 is comprised of Amerindian communities, a 
specific strategy for technology transfer has been prepared for this region.   

1.20 Strategic alignment. This operation is consistent with the IDB Country Strategy 
with Guyana (GN-2690) through the priority area “Natural resources management” 
and cross-cutting issues related to indigenous population in Guyana. The Program 
is consistent with the Update to the Institutional Strategy (UIS) 2010-2020         
(AB-3008) and is strategically aligned with the development challenge of 
productivity and innovation by increasing productivity of farmers in Guyana (impact 
indicators). The Program is also aligned with the cross-cutting themes of:              
(i) climate change and environmental sustainability by reducing the pasture area 
allocated to livestock production; and (ii) institutional capacity and rule of law by 
the improvement of SPS regulations. The Program also contributes to gender 
equality and diversity by increasing the participation of women in agricultural 
technical assistance. Additionally, the Program will contribute to the Corporate 
Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019 (GN-2727-6) by increasing the number of 
farmers that improve the use and management of natural capital. This operation is 
also consistent with: (i) the Food Security SFD (GN-2825-3), contributing to two 
sources of food security: (a) access, and (b) availability; (ii) the Agriculture and 
Natural Resources SFD (GN-2709-5); and (iii) Gender and Diversity SFD         
(GN-2800), promoting livelihood opportunities for indigenous peoples.  

B. Objective, Components and Cost 

1.21 The main objective of the Program is to increase productivity of the agricultural 
sector while maintaining a sustainable and climate resilient use of natural 
resources in Guyana. The specific objectives are to: (i) produce high quality data 
for the agricultural sector; (ii) increase productivity, especially for medium and 
small farmers; and (iii) increase SPS standards and access to meat processing 
facilities. Higher productivity will also contribute to reduce pressure on forest and 
fragile ecosystems, and at the same time, increase incomes for small and  
medium-sized farmers. 

1.22 Target population. The main beneficiaries of the Program will be farmers of 
Regions 5, 9 and 10 and the MoA and its agencies (see Optional Link 9). The 
Population Census 2012 identifies 29,457 households in these regions (13,847 in 
Region 5, 4,929 in region 9, 10,681 in Region 10), of which 35% are farmers 
according to the 2002 estimation provided by the Guyana Bureau of Statistics 
(GBS). A survey prepared for the design of this operation shows that farmers in 
these regions are small on average. The Program will target 5,000 farmers in 
these three regions (out of a total of 10,310), 89% of them, cultivating less than 
five Ha. The main annual crops are cassava, beans and corn. Average annual 
household income for these farmers is US$4,649, with agriculture, livestock and 
forestry production accounting for more than 25% (up to 50% in Region 9). 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40588061/R


- 9 - 

 

Agricultural productivity is low, averaging 260 USD/Ha/year (and only 200 
USD/Ha/year in Region 9), compared to other countries of similar development. 
Only 3.6% of interviewed farmers report technical assistance and 8% have access 
to finance or equipment for agricultural production. Forty-eight percent report to be 
part of Amerindian communities (93% in Region 9) and have some productive 
activities at the community level.   

1.23 Component 1: Information for policy making and natural resource 
management (US$4.17 million). This component will enhance the capabilities of 
the MoA for data collection, analysis and dissemination. Data collected will be 
based on a nationwide agricultural census. This new information will be used not 
only by the Government, but also by the private sector to develop investments in 
agriculture, in line with the Green Development Strategy.

2
 Land use plans and 

promotion of sustainable practices will draw from the results of the census. The 
census will also contribute to monitoring of other variables, for example Monitoring, 
Reporting and Verification (MRV) related to the Guyana REDD+ Investment Fund 
(GRIF). The MoA through the M&E Unit will produce reports based on the census 
and data collected with support of the Program. The Program will finance:            
(i) strengthening of the MoA’s Agricultural Information System. This will include 
strengthening of the MoA’s M&E Unit; update of regulations and legal framework, 
training of MoA and the Guyana Bureau of Statistics staff, purchase of equipment 
and software, and dissemination; and (ii) the implementation of a national 
agricultural census. The agricultural census will collect data from all regions of 
Guyana and will use the latest technology for collection, analysis and quality 
control. Among other topics, the census will assess the involvement of women and 
vulnerable groups in the agricultural sector. Field activities will include training, 
pilot testing and a communication strategy. The implementation of the census will 
require the training of more than 600 enumerators and interviewing more than 
120,000 households.  

1.24 Component 2: Strengthening the agricultural innovation and extension 
system (US$6.39 million). This component will finance the implementation of 
research programs in Region 9 and Region 10, including the setup of an extension 
strategy tailored to the different groups of beneficiaries. Adoption of sustainable 
practices will be promoted through an incentives scheme targeting small farmers / 
communities. The main activities to be financed are: (i) the design and construction 
of an agricultural center in Region 9. This agriculture center will house research 
programs to be implemented by NAREI, GLDA and the Hydrometeorological 
Service. The agriculture center will also have facilities for the Guyana School of 
Agriculture (GSA) and the National Drainage and Irrigation Authority (NDIA);       
(ii) design and construction of a water reservoir for the agricultural center in Region 
9. This reservoir will harvest rainfall that will facilitate irrigation and livestock 
research in the agriculture center in Region 9; (iii) design and upgrade of facilities 
in Region 10 to implement a fully functional agricultural center in Ebini;                 
(iv) implementation of soil laboratories in both Region 9 and Region 10 for 
research purposes. These laboratories will facilitate the preparation of fertility 
maps for Region 9 and Region 10 and support extension services;                       
(v) implementation of research programs in each agricultural center. During 

                                                 
2
  Guyana’s Green Development Strategy is the strategy being developed by the current Government. It has 

four pillars: energy, environment security, ecological services and enterprise and employment.  



- 10 - 

 

preparation of the loan the following crops/areas of research were identified, 
among others: cassava, peanuts; orchards, livestock (cattle and small ruminants); 
and pastures. The POM will describe eligibility criteria to include other crops/areas 
of research in the Program. The design of these research programs, include the 
financing for visiting researchers; inputs for agricultural research; equipment and 
training for NAREI and GLDA staff; (vi) preparation and implementation of an 
extension strategy that will include incentives for technology adoption for small 
farmers. This strategy will include specific activities to include women in training 
events. Extension will be based on individual visits and group activities, centered in 
demonstration plots; and (vii) support to the EPA for environmental monitoring.  
The MoA has already requested the lease of land for the agriculture center in 
Region 9 to the GL&SC, which indicated that it is available.  

1.25 This component will also finance incentives targeting individual small farmers, and 
will be complementary to investments being prepared with IFAD funding. The IFAD 
funded project will provide support at the group (producer association or 
cooperative) and individual levels. Incentives will facilitate technology adoption and 
enhance the probability of increases in productivity. Farmers / communities will 
receive an incentive for at least 50% of the cost of the technology package 
financed by the Program. The POM will detail the process to identify and 
implement the incentives strategy (see ¶3.6).  

1.26 Component 3: Support for compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary 
standards (US$2.8 million). This component will finance the provision of technical 
assistance to develop the legal and regulatory framework and specific investments 
to improve SPS standards for meat processing. These investments will increase 
the volume of meat processed in accord to sanitary standards and lead to the 
attainment of better prices. The validation of the enforcement process and control 
will improve the safety of meat products for Guyanese and visitors and in the 
longer term, position the Food Safety System to be recognized by international 
trading partners and open the opportunity for export of meat products. The 
Program will finance the: (i) development and implementation of a simplified 
grading system for beef; (ii) update of abattoir standards and preparation of legal 
framework; (iii) technical assistance for the adaptation of the International Codex 
Alimentarius to the Guyana context; (iv) provision of support to GLDA to enforce 
standards; (v) technical assistance for the preparation of regulations pertaining to 
the new Food Safety Act; (vi) financing of two meat processing centers (one in 
Region 9 and one in Region 5), that will include infrastructure for processing, 
waste management, and equipment. These facilities will be managed by producers 
associations, which are 50% women (¶3.7). The Rupununi Livestock Producers 
Association (RLPA) and the Weste Berbice Sheep and Goat Association (WBSGA) 
have been identified to manage these facilities. Processing facilities will include all 
environmental mitigation activities described in the ESMR; (vii) training of GLDA 
staff in meat inspection, effective enforcement and audit; and members of selected 
producers associations members in management; standards; best practices; and 
environment protection; and (viii) strengthening of producers associations to 
enhance management. 



- 11 - 

 

C. Key Results Indicators 

1.27 The MoA and the Bank have agreed on a Results Matrix for the Program. The 
principal results of the Program are: (i) higher private investment in the agricultural 
sector; (ii) regional development plans prepared based on the agricultural census; 
(iii) higher productivity at the farm level; (iv) adoption of sustainable agricultural 
practices; (v) higher value of products processed by pilot facilities; and                
(vi) increase in the use of practices that reduce pressure on ecosystems. At the 
end of the Program, productivity (measured as the gross value of production per 
hectare per year) will increase and pressure on fragile ecosystems will be reduced 
(see Annex 2).   

Table I-2. Principal indicators of the Program 

Impact indicators 
Proposed 

measurement 
Justification 

Gross value of farm’s agricultural 
production (increase expected) 

US$ per farm 
per year 

Higher gross value reflects higher productivity 
and lead to higher incomes 

Gross value of farm’s livestock 
production (increase expected) 

US$ per farm 
per year 

Higher gross value reflects higher productivity 
and lead to higher incomes 

Reduction of the area allocated to 
pastures for livestock production 

Area (hectares) Higher efficiency in land use reduces pressure 
on ecosystems and increases sustainability 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing Instruments 

2.1 The total Program amount is estimated at US$15,000,000 of which US$7,500,000 
will be financed by Ordinary Capital and US$7,500,000 will be financed by the 
FSO. The disbursement period will be 66 months. Table II-1 provides the cost 
summary by investment categories and components. The budget includes all costs 
associated with risks mitigation measures identified in the ESMP and the risk 
analysis. 

Table II-1. Costs and sources of financing (US$) 

 IDB Total % 

Component 1 4,170,000 4,170,000 27.8% 

Component 2 6,398,000 6,398,000 42.7% 

Component 3 2,800,000 2,800,000 18.7% 

Monitoring and Evaluation 400,000 400,000 2.7% 

Program Administration 1,232,000 1,232,000 8.2% 

Total 15,000,000 15,000,000 100% 

2.2 The Program is a specific investment operation and it is designed to be disbursed 
in five years and six months. The disbursement calendar is presented in Table II-2 
and it is based on the PEP (see Required Link 1).  

Table II-2. Disbursement projections (US$) 

 Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6
1
 Total 

IDB 1,326,935 3,633,645 5,218,345 3,163,525 1,111,475 546,075 15,000,000 

% 8.8% 24.2% 34.8% 21.1% 7.4% 3.6% 100% 

Total 1,326,935 3,633,645 5,218,345 3,163,525 1,111,475 546,075 15,000,000 
1 

Last year of implementation is only six months. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40647380/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40564707/R


- 12 - 

 

B. Economic viability 

2.3 The ex-ante economic evaluation includes all components of the Program, 
following the vertical logic (see ¶1.18). The analysis was undertaken in two stages 
and follows best practices (World Bank, 2011). In the first stage, a break-even 
analysis was conducted in an optimization and cost benefit analytical framework to 
estimate the minimum net economic return per adopting farming household 
required for the net present value (NPV) of the Program to be equal to zero at a 
12% discount rate (2017 to 2040). Costs follow directly from the PEP and include: 
Program costs estimated in the design stage, and operations and maintenance 
costs of the agricultural research centers and processing facilities. Costs also 
include opportunity costs of training for farmers. Key assumptions in the analysis 
are: the technological adoption ceiling, assumed to be 20% of the 5,000 targeted 
farming household beneficiaries, and the adoption path which is assumed to follow 
a logistical functional form. The minimum return per adopting household for the 
Program to be economically viable is US$2,196 per household/year.   

2.4 The second stage of the analysis characterized the current farming System 1 
based on the farming household survey described in Optional Link 11. Key 
variables include area planted, harvest output, prices, yields and costs. System 2 
is the potential farming system that the Program aims to achieve. The crops bora 
bean and cassava, as well as livestock were chosen to characterize System 2, 
based on Program design. Yields to characterize System 2 crops were extracted 
from statistics on actual national average yields supplied by NAREI and the 
Ministry of Agriculture (2014), while beef cattle yields were drawn from FAO 
(2013). 

2.5 Yields reported in the household farm survey are considerably lower than those 
reported by NAREI and FAO and therefore a conservative approach to scenario 
design was pursued. Three scenarios are evaluated: an average scenario where 
achieved yields are 35% of those reported by NAREI and FAO; an optimistic 
scenario where 50% of potential yields are achieved, and; a pessimistic scenario 
where only 25% of potential yields are achieved. Across scenarios, a low adoption 
ceiling of 20% of potential new beneficiaries and current farmers is used. The 
average scenario results in a net present value (NPV) US$1,531,706 and an 
internal rate of return (IRR) of 14%; the optimistic scenario generates a NPV of 
US$17,762,431 and an Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of 31%, and the pessimistic 
scenario resulted in a negative NPV of US$8,243,387. Sensitivity analysis around 
the adoption ceiling shows that the Program breaks even when the adoption 
ceiling is 16.25% or greater, which is considered low in comparison to similar 
investments in agricultural research, extension and information.    

C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Risks 

2.6 The Program is classified as Category “B” pursuant to the Bank's Environment and 
Safeguards Compliance Policy (OP-703) and an Environmental and Social 
Analysis (ESA) was conducted which incorporated inputs from consultations with 
stakeholders, via meetings and a public consultation. The main direct impacts of 
the project relate to inadequate siting, design and operation of the facilities, 
especially animal welfare and waste management from the abattoirs and the high 
water use for both the abattoir and research station. Additionally, given the 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40588061


- 13 - 

 

sensitive nature of the ecosystem (especially in Region 9) and the emphasis on 
sustainable agriculture there is a need to ensure that training and research does 
not lead to unsustainable agricultural development in the region. These programs 
must not lead to the introduction of invasive species, the excessive use of 
pesticides and herbicides or high water demands. These measures help reduce 
the Program’s indirect impacts.  

2.7 Based on the ESA, specific management actions and mitigation measures were 
recommended to address the Program’s direct and indirect impacts. The measures 
are incorporated into the procedures and requirements for execution as part of the 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The main mitigation 
measures identified in the Plan include effective measures for site selection, 
design and construction to high standards for all new infrastructures, ensuring 
capacity for the supervision of construction and operation, and ensuring training 
courses are inclusive of indigenous groups and women, and do not result in the 
introduction of invasive species. The Environmental and Social Management 
Report (ESMR) provides a summary of the ESA and ESMP in relation to Bank 
policies.  

2.8 The ESMP describes how the Program complies with the Disaster Risk 
Management Policy (OP-704), the policies on Indigenous Peoples (OP-765) and 
on Gender and Equality (OP-761).

3
 The Program will promote risk reduction, 

climate change adaptation and the building of resilience to natural disasters and 
climate change. The Program also promotes opportunities and empowerment for 
low income women and indigenous peoples participating in agricultural activities. 

D. Fiduciary Risk 

2.9 The Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) has the lead responsibility for reporting on 
fiduciary matters and overall Program progress to the Ministry of Finance and the 
IDB. Based on discussions with the MoA during Program preparation, the 
Agricultural Service Development Unit (ASDU) will serve as the project 
implementation unit. As described in Annex III to the present POD, the fiduciary 
risk has been ranked as medium. The main fiduciary risks relate to:                        
(i) procurement processing delays due duplication of efforts to meet internal 
controls requirements for multiple approvals within the MoA and at the national 
level as per GoG national procurement regulations; (ii) most activities will be 
implemented in Region 9 and 10, which will require a high level of coordination;  
and (iii) budget and institutional capacity constraints due to ability to retain qualified 
technical  consultants (e.g., engineers, contractors) to provide technical assistance 
on some procurements.  

2.10 These are being addressed through: (i) the design of an Program Operating 
Manual (POM) which seeks to provide adequate guidance and mitigation 
measures to discharge all fiduciary duties in accordance with the Bank’s rules and 
procedures; (ii) continuous support to streamline the timely execution of all 
fiduciary activities; and (iii) providing continuous technical supervision and training 

                                                 
3
  Section 6 of the ESMP describes in detail expected impacts and proposed mitigating activities. Section 7 

describes the management plan for all mitigating activities.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40664054
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40564651/R


- 14 - 

 

in financial management and procurement staff who will be responsible for 
fiduciary activities under the present Loan. 

E. Other Risks 

2.11 The design of the Program used the methodology “Program Risk Analysis for 
Sovereign Guaranteed Loans”. Besides environmental and fiduciary risks, this 
analysis identified the following risks: (i) coordination between agencies (a national 
and regional coordinating committees will support the MoA, ¶3.3); and (ii) delays in 
the design, environmental and social impact evaluation and procurement of 
infrastructure (two procurement specialists will support the ASDU in the 
implementation, ¶2.6).  

2.12 Agriculture centers in Regions 9 and 10 will be managed, maintained and 
supported by the MoA. Specific budget lines are available in NAREI and GLDA 
budgets.  

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements 

3.1 The Borrower is the Co-operative Republic of Guyana. The executing agency is 
the MoA, which will implement the Program through its ASDU. The ASDU is a 
specialized unit under the Permanent Secretary (PS) of the MoA. The ASDU will 
be responsible for all the fiduciary obligations to manage the Program, including:  
(i) planning of the technical and fiduciary aspects related to the Program activities; 
(ii) procurement of goods, works and services for the Program; (iii) the oversight 
and evaluation of Program activities; (iv) financial and accounting management of 
the Program, including the submission of disbursement requests and preparation 
of financial reports; and (v) risk management. The Program will strengthen the 
ASDU to facilitate the implementation of the Program, through the financing of 
specialized personnel dedicated to the Program, including among others; program 
coordinator; procurement officer; financial officer; civil engineer; and administrative 
assistant. The presentation of evidence that the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) 
has selected a program coordinator, a financial officer and a procurement 
officer according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the 
Bank will be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement of the 
financing.  

3.2 Support to partner agencies. Additionally, the Program aims at strengthening the 
capacity of GBS and EPA, through the financing of consulting services to support 
supervision and monitoring. For this purpose, the MoA will subscribe an agreement 
with each GBS and EPA, which shall include, inter alia, a description of the roles 
and responsibilities of each entity in the implementation of the Program activities. 
The subscription and entry into effect of an agreement between the MoA and the 
GBS, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank will 
be a special contractual condition prior to the implementation of the agricultural 
census included in Component 1. The subscription and entry into effect of an 
agreement between the MoA and the EPA, according to the terms conditions 



- 15 - 

 

previously agreed with the Bank will be a special contractual condition prior to the 
bidding of infrastructure works under Components 2 and 3. 

3.3 Institutional coordination. Coordination at the national level will use the same 
structure proposed by the IFAD funded loan. A National Steering Committee 
(NSC) will be established, and it will include: (i) the MoA; (ii) the Ministry of 
Indigenous People’s Affairs; (iii) Ministry of Public Health; (iv) Ministry of Business;        
(v) Ministry of Natural Resources (MNR); (vi) the Office of Climate Change at the 
Ministry of the Presidency; and (vii) the Ministry of Finance. The responsibilities 
and composition of the NSC will be detailed in the POM, but it will include:             
(i) support the implementation of loan; (ii) provide institutional and technical advice 
and support; and (iii) coordinate field activities. At the regional level, technical 
coordination will be implemented through the establishment of a Regional 
Management Committee (RMC). This RMC will include: (i) Regional Chairman;    
(ii) Regional representative of the Ministry of Indigenous People’s Affairs;            
(iii) Regional representative of the MNRE; (iv) Regional representative of each 
NAREI or GLDA; and (v) a regional representative of the beneficiaries. The roles 
and responsibilities of each of the members of the RMC, composition and its 
functions will be detailed in the POM, which will include: (i) support the 
implementation of the Program at the Regional level; (ii) support the ASDU in the 
implementation of the AOP; (iii) provide guidance to the AOP; and (iv) collaborate 
in coordinating with local and community leaders. 

3.4 Program Operating Manual (POM). The POM; which establishes standards and 
procedures for the MoA with regard to programming activities, procurement audits, 
and monitoring and evaluation, among others, will govern Program execution. The 
POM will include: (i) a detailed description of the implementation agreement of 
each component; (ii) roles and responsibilities of the agencies involved in the 
implementation of the Program; (iii) criteria and procedures to select and contract 
goods, services and works; (iv) criteria and procedures for management and 
financial control of the Program; (v) monitoring and evaluation arrangements; and 
(vi) specific criteria for environmental and social management of the Program, as 
described in the ESMR. The approval and entry into effect of the POM 
according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank will 
be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement of the 
financing. 

3.5 Incentives for technology adoption. Research programs under Component 3 
will generate technology packages to be transferred to farmers. To increase the 
likelihood of adoption, the Program will finance incentives to adopt new 
technologies targeting small farmers. The eligibility criteria will be: (i) area under 
production / fallow; (ii) agriculture / forestry is the main source of income;            
(iii) farmer have farms located in Region 5, 9 or 10; and (iv) evidence that the 
farmer has the property rights, possession, community rights or rights of use of the 
land, as applicable. 

3.6 The steps to identify and select participants in the incentives program are detailed 
in the POM, and will be: 



- 16 - 

 

a. Farmers will be selected from the lists prepared by the MoA during the 
promotion of the Program. The target number of beneficiaries for the 
incentives is 2,000.   

b. Farmers will be selected from a random sample of communities. As a part of 
the registration process, each farmer will sign an implementation agreement 
with the MoA. However, during the preparation of the loan, a progression of 
500, 700, 800 farmers per year was suggested (see Optional Link 8 and 12).  

c. Farmers will select the technologies they want to implement from the 
packages offered by the MoA. Each package will include: (i) inputs; (ii) land 
preparation; (iii) equipment; and (iv) technical assistance. Packages will be 
designed for a specific unit of production. 

d. Each farmer will receive the incentive in designated bank accounts or 
through vouchers, based on verification of the implementation of the 
technologies, according to the conditions established in the POM. Vouchers 
will be redeemed by service providers after verification from the MoA. The 
MoA will verify the implementation of the technology in the field and prepare 
a report.  

e. Additionally, an external verification process will be implemented. This 
verification process will review, at random, the implementation of 
technologies; support provided by the MoA; and financial flows. 

3.7 Management of meat processing facilities. The implementation of the meat 
processing facilities under Component 3 requires the strengthening of the 
producers associations, which will manage these facilities. The associations will 
sign an agreement with the MoA to manage the facilities, that will include: (i) the 
length of the lease or other form of transfer; (ii) responsibilities of the association, 
in terms of payments or fees to be paid to the MoA, liabilities, limitations of the 
agreement in terms of responsibilities of the MoA; and penalties; and                  
(iii) monitoring and evaluation to be implemented by the MoA. The subscription 
and entry into effect of an agreement between the MoA and a producer’s 
association responsible for operating the abattoir, according to the terms and 
conditions previously agreed with the Bank will be a special contractual condition 
prior to the building of infrastructure works related to the meat processing facilities 
financed under Component 3. 

3.8 Procurement. All Program related procurement activities will be performed 
following Bank’s Procurement Policies: Policies for the Procurement of Goods and 
Works financed by the Bank (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and 
Contracting of Consultants financed by the Bank (GN-2350-9) as applicable.  

3.9 The Program is currently looking into the possibility of a Direct Contract with the 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) for a total of   
US$4 million. This Direct Contract would be based on the FAO’s experience in 
carrying out Agricultural Surveys as described in Component 1 of the present Loan 
and hence, the request for same would be grounded on Section 3.10 (d) of       
GN-2350-9, which foresees that “Single-source selection may be appropriate only 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40587606/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40588248/R


- 17 - 

 

if it presents a clear advantage over competition: […] (d) when only one firm is 
qualified or has experience of exceptional worth for the assignment”

4
.  

3.10 Retroactive financing. The Bank may finance retroactively under the loan up to 
the amount US$350,000 (2.33% of the proposed loan amount), eligible expenses 
incurred by the Borrower prior to the date of loan approval to: (i) design, 
environmental and impact evaluation, and supervision of the infrastructure 
included in Components 2 and 3; (ii) contract specialized personnel of the ASDU 
dedicated to the Program; and (iii) finance the travel, per diem expenses and office 
supplies, provided that all the requirements substantially similar to those set out in 
the loan agreement requirements are adhered to. These expenses must have 
been incurred on or after June 16

th
, 2016 (PP approval date), and under no 

circumstances shall expenditures incurred more than 18 months prior to the loan 
approval date be included.  

3.11 Auditing. The Program will submit to the Bank the following documents:              
(i) semiannual financial reports of the Program are to be included in the 
semiannual progress report which will be submitted by the MoA to the Bank;         
(ii) annual financial statements of the project, audited by the Auditor General of 
Guyana are to be submitted to the Bank within 120 days at the end of each fiscal 
year, beginning with the fiscal year in which the first expenditures are incurred; and 
(iii) a final financial audit report of the Program is to be submitted by MoA within 
120 days after the date of the last disbursement. 

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results 

3.12 Monitoring. Indicators and targets will be monitored using the Agricultural 
Information System and the Results Matrix. The M&E Unit of the MoA will collect 
the data and prepare the reports. The Program will prepare reports for the Bank 
every six months, which will be submitted no later than 45 days after the end of 
each semester. Also, the MoA will submit to the Bank an Annual Operations Plan 
(AOP) no later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each calendar year. The AOP 
will include the update of the PEP and will detail the activities and procurement 
proposed for the year. The presentation by the Borrower of an initial report, 
including, the Program’s Pluri-annual Execution Plan (PEP), the Procurement 
Plan, the Financial Plan and the Results Matrix according to the terms and 
conditions previously agreed with the Bank, will be a special contractual 
condition prior to first disbursement of the financing. 

3.13 Evaluation. Two independent evaluations will be contracted by the MoA:              
(i) mid–term evaluation, to be implemented when 50% of the resources have been 
committed or thirty months after the date of effectiveness of the loan contract, 
whichever comes first; and (ii) a final impact evaluation, to be implemented when 
90% of the resources have been committed. These reports will be contracted 
based on Terms of Reference agreed with the Bank (see Required Link 3). 

                                                 
4
  This does not constitute a request for approval/no objection to the Direct Contract. Such request will be 

processed in accordance with the applicable rules during execution. FAO is a specialized agency of the 
United Nations and has executed similar censuses around the world. It is the only agency worldwide with 
this kind of experience, except national statistic agencies.  

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40564750/R


- 18 - 

 

3.14 Impact evaluation. The impact evaluation will have two parts. First, investments in 
Component 1 and Component 2 will be evaluated through a quasi–experimental 
design. The planned evaluation intends to assess the impact of data availability 
and research and extension services and seeks to answer the question whether 
these services, provided through the agricultural census, newly constructed 
agriculture centers, improved the production, productivity, and income of 
beneficiary farmer households. In order to answer this question, the evaluation 
relies on a difference-in-difference approach paired with randomized order of 
phase-in (see Optional Link 8). Specifically, the evaluation will take advantage of 
the staggered implementation of the Program over three years by using beneficiary 
farmers in later cohorts as the control group for the early treatment group. In this 
manner, the evaluation can control for potential bias from self-selection among 
beneficiary farmers and ensure a reliable impact estimate. A carefully planned 
selection mechanism (clustered randomized assignment) at the community level 
further allows the inclusion of such farmers who live in close proximity to 
beneficiaries and may enjoy indirect spillover effects that could increase program 
impact. The evaluation will rely on three rounds of surveys: (i) a baseline survey 
administered in year one prior to the provision of extension services to the first 
cohort; (ii) the first follow-up survey administered in year two prior to the provision 
of extension services to the second cohort; and (iii) a final follow-up survey 
administered in year three prior to the provision of extension services to the third 
cohort. A final impact evaluation report will be due at the end of year six of 
Program implementation. 

3.15 The second part of the evaluation will use a before – after approach to evaluate 
the impact of investments in pilot facilities for meat processing proposed under 
Component 3.  As a key impact indicator, livestock production (volume of meat, 
number of animals) will be measured both at the farm level and at the processing 
facility level. Also, prices received by farmers will be recorded to reflect changes in 
sales due to higher quality and compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary 
standards.  

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40587606/R


 Annex 1 - GY-L1060

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Strategic Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Regional Context Indicators

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Strategy Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2690

     Country Program Results Matrix

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country strategy or country 

program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Evaluable Weight Maximum Score

8.1 10

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution 7.7 33.33% 10

     3.1 Program Diagnosis 3.0

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions 2.4

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality 2.3

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis 7.0 33.33% 10

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic Analysis 4.0

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits 1.5

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs 1.5

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions 0.0

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis 0.0

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 9.6 33.33% 10

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms 2.5

     5.2 Evaluation Plan 7.1

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries and/or public sector 

entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality Yes

Labor

Environment

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector entity prior to 

approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps in the sector 

that were identified in the project document and/or in the evaluation plan
Yes

-Poverty headcount ratio (US $4 per day PPP) (%)

-Global Innovation Index (LAC average)

-Research and development expenditure as a percentage of GDP (%)

-Greenhouse gas emissions (kg of CO2 e per $1 GDP (PPP))

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Aligned

-Productivity and Innovation

-Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability

-Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law

I. Strategic Alignment

-Beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable use of natural capital (#)*

-Micro / small / medium enterprises provided with non-financial support (#)*

-Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological and managerial tools to improve public 

service delivery (#)

-Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives (#)*

Aligned

Support the development of productive use of the country's natural resources, 

while addressing the challenge of sustainable management of the natural 

resources at stake.

The intervention is not included in the 2016 Operational Program.

Medium

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

B

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

Financial Management: Budget, External control.

 The objective of the Program is to increase productivity of the agricultural sector while maintaining a sustainable and climate resilient use of natural resources.  The Program will implement three components: Information for Policy making and 

natural resource management (including an agricultural census that has not been updated since 1952); Strengthening the agricultural innovation and extension system; and Support for compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary standards. 

  

The documentation is well-structured, with a good diagnostic of the problems faced by the sector in terms of major limitations in the Agricultural Information Systems, Research, Innovation & Technology Transfer System, the Animal Health 

and Sanitary and Phytosanitary Framework, and the effects of climate change, all of which contribute to low levels of productivity. 

The proposed solution is clearly related to the magnitude of the problems identified.  The results matrix (RM) reflects the objectives of the program and shows a clear vertical logic for all components. The key outcome indicators have values 

that are the result of the ex-ante economic analysis; and lower-level indicators reflect the design of the three components. The RM includes SMART indicators at the levels of impact, outcomes (except for one) and outputs (except for two) with 

their respective baseline values and targets and the means to gather information. 

The economic analysis (EA) is based on a break-even and Cost-Benefit Analysis that uses data recently collected in the targeted areas.  The benefits are based on a good understanding of the theory of change and are derived from the 

expected gains in yields for two key crops and cattle and the expected rate of adoption by farmers.  The economic costs include all resource costs as well as costs from a social perspective.  In general, the assumptions made are reasonable; 

however, the assumed absolute change in gains for yields is rather high and not supported by empirical evidence. The EA undertakes a sensitivity analysis based on key variables (gains in yields and adoption rates) under three scenarios: 

optimistic; average; and pessimistic.  The Internal Rate of Return is above 12% for the optimistic (31% IRR) and average (14% IRR) scenarios; however, the pessimistic scenario yields an IRR of -1%.  Importantly, the pessimistic scenario 

might not be that pessimistic in the sense that it assumes increases of 1,276% in yields for one of the crops evaluated, which is quite high. Importantly, given the lack of data, the EA was not able to include the potential benefits to the sector 

arising from a new agricultural census. In this sense, one might consider these results as conservative.   

The monitoring and evaluation plan is well designed and the impact evaluation proposes a reasonable strategy based on a quasi-experimental design with random selection at the community level that aims to measure direct and indirect 

impacts of the program by measuring spill-over effects. Given the scant number of rigorous studies done in Guyana, the impact evaluation will make an important contribution to the knowledge base of the sector, the country, and the Bank.    

The risks identified in the risk matrix seem reasonable, except for one that does not comply with DEM guidelines; five are classified as Medium and three are classified as Low. The risks include mitigating actions and compliance indicators.

The Program will promote the participation of women in agricultural technical 

assistance and training, and the agricultural census will have a special focus on 

women for data collection.

An impact evaluation was prepareed during the design. A quasi - experimental 

analysis, based on the implementation strategy was agreed with the MoA. 



Annex II – GY-L1060 
Page 1 of 3 

 

Results Framework 

 

Objective:  To increase productivity of the agricultural sector and sustainable use of natural resources in Guyana. 

 

Expected Impact 

Indicators Units 
Baseline Target EOP* Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

Average gross 
value of farm’s 
agricultural 
production  
(increase expected) 

USD/farm US$582.39/farm  2016 US$848.20/farm  2021 
Baseline study 
Surveys for 
agricultural census 

Target EOP values 
based on expected 
yield increases for 
cassava, bean, and 
cattle

1
. 

Average gross 
value of farm’s 
livestock production  
(increase expected) 

USD/farm US$223.85/farm  2016 US$654.28/farm  2021 
Baseline study 
Surveys for 
agricultural census 

Target EOP values 
based on expected 
yield increases for 
cassava, bean, and 
cattle.

 1
 

Reduction on the 
pressure on fragile 
ecosystems by 
inefficient livestock 
production 
(inefficient use of 
pastures) 

Hectares 
removed 
from 
livestock 
production 

0 ha 2016 570 ha  2021 
Baseline study 
Surveys for 
agricultural census 

Suitable buffer zones 
around pasture areas 
established. 
Technology transfer will 
reduce use of pasture 
areas. Intensity 
(animals / ha) will 
increase.   

* EOP, End of Project 

 

Expected outcomes 

Indicator Unit 
Baseline Intermediate  EOP Target Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year Value Year 

Private investment in 
agriculture (increase 
expected) 

USD per 
year 

5.72 million 2008 
 

2019 7 million 2022 
Go-Invest 
reports 

Related to the 
census. At the 
national level 

Regional development 
plans prepared based on 
the agricultural census 

Plan 0 2016 
 

 3 2022 
Ministry of 
Communitie
s 

Assuming the 
agricultural census 
is available in 2019 

Productivity at the farm 
level of select crops 
(increase expected) 

MT/Ha 

Cassava: 
2,220 kg/ha 

 
Bora bean: 
215 kg/ha 

2016 

 

2019 

Cassava: 
3,883 
kg/ha 

 
Bora 
bean: 
4,143 
kg/ha 

2022 
Baseline 
and final 
evaluation 

Selected crops, 
Baseline value from 
survey, EOP Target 
computed as 35% 
of yields reported by 
NAREI and FAO 

Adoption of sustainable 
agriculture practices by 
farmers (disaggregated by 
gender) 

Number of 
technologie
s 

3 Male 
1 Female 

2016 

 

 
6 Male 

4 Female 
2022 

Baseline 
and final 
evaluation 

Baseline values 
based on 
agricultural 
household survey 

Average price of meat 
processed by pilot facilities 
(increase expected) 

USD / Kg 
USD / Lt 

3 2016 
 

2019 5 2022 
ASDU 
reports 

Return to the 
producers (value of 
the animal) 

Use of practices that 
reduce pressure on 
ecosystems (increase 
expected) 

Number of 
practices 
per 
household 

1.43 2016 

 

2019 3 2022 
Baseline 
and final 
evaluation 

Based on the 
survey 

 

                                                           
1
  Assumptions follow the ex-ante economic analysis: Increases in gross production value at end of project are based on increases in 

cassava, bean, and cattle yields: Cassava and bean yields increase to 35% of benchmark yields provided by NAREI with a 10% 
adoption rate among farmers. Cattle yields increase by 70% with a full adoption rate. Current market prices from survey used to 
compute gross production value. Based on the survey, livestock production contributes around 40% to total gross value of 
household production. 



Annex II – GY-L1060 
Page 2 of 3 

 

Outputs 

Indicator Cost* Unit 
Baselin

e 
Year 

1 
Year 

2 
Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 

EOP 
Target 

Means of verification 

Component 1: Generating Information for evidence – based policy making and natural resource management 

Agricultural census 
completed 

4,00
0 

Census 0   1    1 Results published 

MoA and GSB staff 
trained in data 
management 

70 
Number 
of people 

0 20 50 50 20 20 20 150 
Training for the survey 
and census 

M&E Unit 
strengthened 

100 Unit 0  1      
Consultants and 
equipment for the 
M&E Unit 

Component 2: Strengthening of the agricultural innovation and extension system 

Agriculture centers 
built and refurbished 
in Regions 9 and 10 

3,61
0 

Agricultur
e center 

  1 1   2 
 

ASDU reports 

Design and 
construction of a 
water reservoir in 
Region 9 completed 

500 
Water 

reservoir 
   1     ASDU reports 

Soil laboratories 
constructed and 
implemented 

350 
Laborator

y 
0   1 1   2 ASDU reports 

Research programs 
implemented 

225 Program 0  1 2 3 2 2 10 ASDU reports 

Extension programs 
implemented 

417 Program 0   1 2   3 ASDU reports 

Farmers trained in 
sustainable 
agriculture practices 
that do not receive 
incentives  

928 

Number 
of 

farmers 
(total) 

0 300 1200 1000 500 5,000  3,000 

ASDU reports 

Male 0 216 864 720    2,160 

Female 0 84 336 280    840 

Farmers trained in 
sustainable 
agriculture practices 
the use and benefits 
of technologies 
promoted by AC - 
incentives 

238 

Number 
of 

farmers 
(total) 

0 500 800 700    2,000 

ASDU reports 

Male 0 360 576 504    1440 

Female 0 140 224 196    560 

NAREI and GLDA 
staff trained 

65 

Number 
of people 

(total) 
0 10 10 10 10 10  50 

ASDU reports 
Male 0 8 8 8 8 8   

Female 0 2 2 2 2 2   

Environmental 
supervision visits for 
agriculture research 
and extension 

65 Reports   2 2 2 2 2 10 
EPA with support from 
the MoA 

Component 3: Support for compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary standards 

Pilot facility to 
process meat 
implemented 

1,75
0 

Facility 0   1 1   2 ASDU reports 

Number of producers 
associations 
strengthened 

685 
Producer 
associatio

n 
0  1 1    1 ASDU reports 

Annual review of 
compliance with 
hygienic and 
environmental 
standards 

25 Report 0   1 1 1  3 
Technical audit and 
EPA 

Number of people 
trained in SPS and 

30 
Number 
of people 

0 20 20 30 30   100 ASDU reports 



Annex II – GY-L1060 
Page 3 of 3 

 

Indicator Cost* Unit 
Baselin

e 
Year 

1 
Year 

2 
Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 

EOP 
Target 

Means of verification 

food safety standards Male 0 15 15 22 22   74 

Female 0 5 5 8 8   26 

Development and 
implementation of a 
simplified grading 
system for beef 

120 
Regulatio

n 
0 1      1 

Subscription and entry 
into effect. ASDU 
reports 

Update of abattoir 
standards and 
preparation of legal 
framework completed 

60 
Regulatio

n 
0  1     1 

Subscription and entry 
into effect. ASDU 
reports 

Adaptation of the 
International Codex 
Alimentarius to the 
Guyana context 
completed 

55 
Regulatio

n 
0   1    1 

Subscription and entry 
into effect. ASDU 
reports 

Support to the GLDA 
to enforce standards 
completed 

25 
Annual 
report 

0 1 1 1 1 1 1 6 
Annual reports of 
compliance 

* Thousand dollars 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 1 of 8 

 

Fiduciary Arrangements 

 

COUNTRY: Guyana 

PROJECT Nº: GY-L1060 

NAME: Sustainable Agricultural Development Program 

EXECUTING AGENCY: Ministry of Agriculture 

 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 The general objective of the program is to increase the productivity of the 
agricultural sector while maintaining sustainable and climate resilient use of natural 
resources in Guyana. The total estimated budget is US$15,000,000, all of which 
will be financed by the IDB from the OC/FSO resources. 

 
1.2 The Executing agency is the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA). MoA executed two Bank 

financed Loans – Agricultural Support Services 1558/SF-GY and Agricultural 
Export Diversification Program 1929/BL-GY. The latter loan was executed by the 
Agriculture Sector Development Unit (ASDU) of the MoA which was established in 
2007 to execute all foreign funded programs for the sector.  

 
1.3 An institutional capacity assessment of the ASDU of MoA was conducted in July 

2016 using the Institutional Capacity Assessment System (ICAS) methodology. 
The assessment combining previous experience and the findings from the ICAS 
conclude that the fiduciary risk is considered medium. A re-evaluation of the 
fiduciary risks will be conducted during execution as part of the regular fiduciary 
supervision to ensure efficient support to project execution. 

 
1.4 Fiduciary context of the country. An Integrated Fiduciary Assessment (IFA) was 

conducted in 2012/2013. It provided an update to the 2007 combined Public 
Expenditure and Financial Assessment (PEFA) performance measurement 
framework and OECD-DAC procurement assessment. The results of the 
2012/2013 IFA, like the 2007 PEFA, concluded that Guyana’s overall budget 
planning, accounting and reporting systems worked well; IFMAS (the financial and 
management accounting system used by the Government) operated consistently 
and reliably providing updated information about all elements of budget execution, 
and budget planning and reporting was being done in accordance with the cash 
basis of accounting and its standards. The Public Financial Management (PFM) 
indicator scores from the 2012/2013, indicate encouraging results with slight 
improvements in areas such as Strengthened External Audit Function, Budget 
Preparation Process, Revenue Administration etc. Notwithstanding, the IFA 
highlighted that attention needed to be paid to the internal control environment, 
Internal Audit, Payroll Control and Procurement Control among others. To date, 
confirmations from the Borrower on the results of the 2012/2013 IFA as well as 
2007 PEFA remain outstanding. The Bank’s Guide for the Use of Country Systems 
(GUS) Assessment was also conducted in 2013; this also has not been accepted 
by the Government. The Auditor General’s Office (AOG) is currently eligible to 
audit all Bank-financed TCs and loan operations deemed to be of low or medium 
complexity and risk. This was based on an assessment of the capacity of the AOG 
undertaken by the Bank in 2011 and the continued institutional strengthening 
support given by the Bank to the AOG. For this operation, the Bank is 
recommending: (i) the use of the national accounting system, Integrated Financial 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 2 of 8 

 

Management Accounting System – IFMAS, or any other system acceptable to the 
Bank, for the financial administration of the project; and (ii) for external control, a 
firm of independent public accountants acceptable to the Bank or the Auditor 
General of Guyana. 

 
1.5 With regards to procurement, assessments of the national system (MAPS) have 

been performed in 2007 and 2013. The results are not yet endorsed by the 
Government of Guyana (GoG). Guyana has a dedicated legislation that governs 
public procurement, namely the Procurement Act of 2003 and its associated 
regulations. The National Procurement and Tender Administration Board (NPTAB) 
was established in the same Procurement Act of 2003. It is responsible for 
exercising jurisdiction over the country’s tender processes, reporting to the Ministry 
of Finance with policy making, advisory oversight, and monitoring and information 
functions. In accordance with the existing legal framework, the NPTAB is a 
temporary entity while awaiting the creation of the Public Procurement Commission 
(PPC). The PPC is a Constitutional body with responsibility for overseeing that the 
purchasing of goods and services and the execution of works by public institutions 
is carried out in a fair, equitable, transparent, and competitive manner; its members 
are appointed by the President and approved by the National Assembly. 
The country is in the process of strengthening its centralized website for publication 
of opportunities for requests for proposals, but to date, it is not regularly used 
across procurement entities or by the independent public corporations. 
Additionally, efforts are being deployed to also strengthen capacity to retain 
records of procurement processes and related information, as well as a registry for 
protests, suspension and debarment and contractors’ performance. Statistics on 
public procurement awards is also an area of focus for GoG. Notwithstanding, to 
date, the Country Procurement System has not been approved and hence will not 
be used under the present Loan. Consequently, the Bank requires the use of its 
Procurement Policies GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 for all projects approved starting 
April 19, 2011. In the meantime, the Bank will bring adequate support to the 
procurement function to ensure that procurement activities are carried out in a way 
that support the prompt execution of the operation and in accordance with the 
Bank’s rules and procedures. 

 

II. FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY 

2.1. The ASDU of the MOA will be responsible for the execution of the Loan and for 
carrying out all related fiduciary activities.  In accordance with the existing structure 
at the MoA, the ASDU will discharge its duties coordinating with the Office of the 
Permanent Secretary. As per ICAS findings, the ASDU was established in 2007 as 
the sole “coordinating unit within MoA for the administration of international agency 
funded projects/programs. To strengthen the execution capacity of the ASDU Unit, 
a Financial Officer and a Procurement Officer will be recruited to discharge the 
expected fiduciary duties for the duration of the Loan.  

2.2. MoA, as a budget agency, uses the Integrated Financial Management Accounting 
System (IFMAS) of the country. ASDU uses IFMAS for the financial management 
and an off the shelf accounting system for detailed reporting. IFMAS was 
successfully piloted on previous IDB-financed loans. It is recommended that this 
program use IFMAS along with the off the shelf accounting package for the 
financial management and accounting of the program. 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 3 of 8 

 

2.3. As far as the procurement function is concerned, findings of the ICAS indicate that 
the procurement activities that will be conducted by the ASDU under this Loan will 
be placed under the responsibility of a procurement officer who is presently 
discharging procurement duties under a Loan financed by the World Bank. The 
procurement officer is one constituent of what is referred to as the Procurement 
Department in the current ASDU’s organizational structure. The position for the 
procurement manager is presently vacant. However, in accordance with the 
findings of the ICAS, it appears that, for in as much as the Procurement 
Department is placed under the Project Coordinator (currently, a vacant position as 
per findings of the ICAS), the Procurement Officer reports directly to the 
Permanent Secretary while coordinating activities with the Director of the ASDU. 
Most importantly however, the ASDU is presently operating in accordance with 
approved internal control mechanisms guaranteeing “the presence of internal 
controls throughout the Ministry’s governance, planning, administration, 
procurement and financial management, including support documentation for all 
commitment and payment transactions, authorizing signatories following GoG 
procedures and segregation of authority for most of its internal processes, among 
others”. In addition, an operation’s manual will be tailored and implemented to 
increase the ASDU’s capacity to implement the present Loan. Given the above, it 
is expected that the Procurement Function as structured for the present Loan will 
have the expected capacities to perform its fiduciary duties.  

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

3.1. The Project Team in consultation with the MoA and other stakeholders developed 
a preliminary Risk Mitigation Matrix included in the package of project documents 
to be approved for the present Loan Agreement. The Bank and the MoA will 
undertake joint reviews of the Matrix on a yearly basis, and introduce necessary 
additional mitigating actions as a result of such reviews and as deemed necessary. 

3.2. Taking into consideration the current ASDU organizational structure where a 
vacancy exists in the Accounting section, the capacity of the existing accounting 
staff to undertake the financial management for a new operation, the ICAS 
Assessment and the experience of the Bank with the previous loan, the financial 
management risk has been classified as medium. The recruitment of a financial 
officer to ensure adequate segregation of duties coupled with the provision of 
training on Bank policies and procedures should mitigate the existing risk and 
strengthen the control environment. 

3.3. With regards to the procurement activities, it is estimated that the overall level of 
risk is medium. The existing structure as described in Section 2.3 above is 
identified in the ICAS as presenting a low level of risk. In practice however, the 
current ASDU organizational structure indicates that the Procurement Department 
counts with 2 (two) positions and that only that of the Procurement Officer is filled 
to date. As indicated in the ICAS, the procurement officer is presently responsible 
for the procurement activities under a World Bank Loan. Given that the 
Procurement rules and procedures between the World Bank and the IDB are 
harmonized, it is expected that the experience acquired during the execution of the 
WB Loan will constitute a mitigation factor in itself. However, to avoid potential 
bottlenecks tied to an increased workload as indicated above, recruiting a 
procurement assistant appears to be a necessary additional mitigation measure to 
avoid potential bottlenecks in the execution of the procurement activities under the 
IDB financed Loan. Indeed, once the present Loan enters in execution, the 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 4 of 8 

 

Procurement Officer currently on duty would be responsible for several Loans 
above US$10M.This adapted structure should be reflected and catered for in the 
operation’s manual as approved under the conditions of Section 4.1 below. 

IV. SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF CONTRACT TO BE ADHERED TO 

4.1. Conditions prior to first disbursement: (i) the presentation of evidence that the 
Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) has selected a Program Coordinator, a Financial 
Specialist and a Procurement Specialist according to the terms and conditions 
previously agreed with the Bank(¶3.1 of the POD); (ii) approval and entry into 
effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms and 
conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.4 of the POD), and (iii) presentation 
by the Borrower of an initial report, including, the Program’s Pluri-annual Execution 
Plan (PEP), the Procurement Plan, the Financial Plan and the Results Matrix 
according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank(¶3.12 of the 
POD). 

4.2. Type of exchange rate to be used by EA. The type of funds to be used are 
established in the following manner: (i) Reimbursement of actual expenses: the 
effective rate of exchange on the date of payment of each expenditure, as 
published by the Central Bank of Guyana; (ii) Reporting on accounts (Advance of 
Funds): the effective rate of exchange used in the conversion of the currency of the 
operation to the local currency. In cases of reimbursement of a guarantee of letter 
of credit, the equivalent of the currency of the operation will be fixed in accordance 
with the amount effectively disbursed by the IDB. 

V. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

5.1 Financial Statements and Reports, audited or unaudited. (i) semi-annual 
financial reports of the program are to be included in the semi-annual progress 
report which will be submitted by the MoA to the Bank; (ii) annual financial 
statements of the project, audited by the Auditor General of Guyana are to be 
submitted to the Bank within 120 days at the end of each fiscal year, beginning 
with the fiscal year in which the first project expenditures are incurred; and (iii) a 
final financial audit report of the program is to be submitted by MoPH within 120 
days after the date of the last disbursement. 

5.2 Programming and Budget: The Borrower has committed to allocate, for each 
fiscal year of project execution, adequate fiscal space to guarantee the unfettered 
execution of the project; as determined by normal operative instruments such as 
the Annual Operating Plan and the PP. 

5.3 Accounting and Information Systems. It is expected that IFMAS accounting 
system will facilitate the recording and classification of all financial transactions, 
supported by an off-shelf accounting system. 

5.4 Disbursements and Cash Flow. The Bank will supervise the creation of an 
Advance of Funds, using the Advance of Funds methodology. Whenever resources 
from the financing are requested through an Advance of Funds, it will be deposited 
into a Special Account, denominated in US$, established exclusively for the Project 
at the Central Bank of Guyana. Required resources from this Special Account will 
be transferred to another bank account, denominated in Guyana Dollars to be 
utilized for payment of expenditures in local currency. 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 5 of 8 

 

5.5 The project will provide adequate justification of the existing Advance of Funds 
balance, whenever 80% of said balance has been spent. Advances will normally 
cover a period not exceeding 180 days and no less than 90 days. In order to 
request disbursements from the Bank, the EA will present the following forms and 
supporting documents: 

Type of 
Disbursement 

Mandatory Forms 
Optional forms/ information that 

can be requested by the IDB 

Advance Disbursement Request/ Financial 
Plan 

List of Commitments 
Physical/Financial Progress 
Reports 

Reimbursements of 
Payments Made 

Disbursement Request/ Project 
Execution Status/ Statement of 
Expenses 

List of Commitments 
Physical/Financial Progress 
Reports 

Direct Payment to 
Supplier 

Disbursement Request/ Statement of 
Expenses/Acceptable Supporting 
Documentation 

List of Commitments 
Physical/Financial Progress 
Reports 

 

5.6 Generally, supporting documentation for Justification of Advances and 
Reimbursement of Payments Made will be kept at the office of the EA. 
Disbursements’ supporting documents may be reviewed by the Bank on an ex-post 
basis.  

5.7 Internal Control and Internal Audit: The management of the project will assume 
the responsibility for designing and implementing a sound system of internal 
controls for the project. 

5.8 External Control and Reports. For each fiscal year during project execution, MoA 
will be responsible to produce semi-annual financial reports for the project, annual 
Audited Financial Reports of the Program and one final Audited Financial Report at 
the end of the Program, audited either by the Auditor General of Guyana or by a 
firm of independent public accountants acceptable to the Bank. 

5.9 Financial Supervision Plan. Financial Supervision will be developed based on the 
initial and subsequent risk assessments carried out for the project. Inspection visits 
will be performed based on the risk assessed, covering the following: (i) review of 
the bank reconciliation and supporting documentation for Advances and 
Justifications; (ii) compliance with procedures; (iii) review of compliance with the 
lending criteria; and (iv) ex-post review of disbursements. 

5.10 Execution Mechanism. MoA will be the EA and will be responsible for the 
financial administration of the program. MoA’s responsibility will include:                
(i) preparation of required project reports; (ii) monitoring product, output and 
outcomes achievement using established indicators; (iii) preparation and 
submission of disbursement requests to the Bank and justification of expenses;   
(iv) preparation of financial reports; (v) ensure compliance with all aspects of the 
Operating Manual; and (vi) maintain adequate documentation filing system. 

VI. REQUIREMENTS AND AGREEMENTS FOR EXECUTION OF PROCUREMENT 

6.1 Procurement Execution. Procurement activities for the proposed project will be 
carried out in accordance with the Policies for the Procurement of Works and 
Goods Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2349-9), of March 
2011, and the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed 
by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2350-9), of March 2011. They will 
also be subject to the provisions established in the Loan contract. In addition, for all 
projects, the Borrower is required to prepare and submit to the Bank, a draft 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 6 of 8 

 

General Procurement Notice as well as an initial procurement plan which will be 
updated in accordance with the applicable sections of the Policies and the Loan 
Agreement. 

6.2 Exception to Bank Procurement Policies. The operation does not foresee any 
exception to the Bank’s procurement policies. 

6.3 Procurement of Goods, Works, and Non-Consulting Services. In accordance 
with Section 1.2 of GN-2349-9, “the responsibility for the implementation of the 
project, and therefore for the award and administration of contracts under the 
project, rests with the Borrower”. In accordance with the findings of the ICAS for 
this Loan and given the level of risk as identified above, all procurement activities 
will be carried out under ex-ante supervision.  

6.4 Procurement of Consulting Services. In accordance with Section 1.4 of         
GN-2350-9, “The Borrower is responsible for preparing and implementing the 
project, and therefore for selecting the consultant, and awarding and subsequently 
administering the contract.” As such, the Borrower is responsible for preparing and 
implementing the scheduled activities, and therefore for preparing the TORs, short 
lists, selecting the consultants, awarding the contract and subsequently 
administering it. In accordance with the findings of the ICAS for this Loan and given 
the level of risk as identified above, all procurement activities will be carried out 
under ex-ante supervision as described in the following section of the present 
Annex III.  

6.5 Sole Source Selection and/or Direct Contracting. The Program is currently 
looking into the possibility of a Direct Contract with the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) for a total of US$4 million. This Direct 
Contract would be based on the FAO’s experience in carrying out Agricultural 
Surveys as described in Component 1 of the present Loan and hence, the request 
for same would be grounded on Section 3.10 (d) of GN-2350-9 which foresees that 
“Single-source selection may be appropriate only if it presents a clear advantage 
over competition: […] (d) when only one firm is qualified or has experience of 
exceptional worth for the assignment”. The FAO would be recruited by the Ministry 
of Agriculture and it is expected that the request for no-objection for the said 
contract will be submitted to the Bank for no-objection prior in accordance with the 
applicable rules and procedures governing Direct Contracting of Consulting 
Services. This does not constitute a request for approval/no-objection to the Direct 
Contract in question which, as mentioned above, will be processed in accordance 
with the applicable rules during execution. 

6.6 Selection of Individual Consultants. Individual consultants will be selected and 
recruited in accordance with Section V of GN-2350-9. 

6.7 Recurring Expenses. Include payment of utilities and other office operating 
expenses of the Executing Unit, if any. 

6.8 Advance Contracting/Retroactive Financing. The Bank may finance 
retroactively under the loan, eligible expenses incurred by the Borrower prior to the 
date of loan approval to: (i) design, environmental and impact evaluation, and 
supervision of the infrastructure included in Components 2 and 3; (ii) contract 
specialized personnel of the ASDU dedicated to the Program; and (iii) finance the 
travel, per diem expenses and office supplies, up to the amount US$350,000 
(2.33% of the proposed loan amount), provided that all the requirements 
substantially similar to those set out in the loan agreement requirements are 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 7 of 8 

 

adhered to. These expenses must have been incurred on or after June 16
th
, 2016 

(PP approval date), and under no circumstances shall expenditures incurred more 
than 18 months prior to the loan approval date be included.  

6.9 Domestic Preference. Domestic Preference is not requested under this Loan. 

6.10 Country Threshold. Table (US$ thousands) www.iadb.org/procurement  

International Competitive 
Bidding Threshold* 

 

National Competitive Bidding Range 
** (complex works and non-common 

goods)  

Consulting Services 

Works Goods Works Goods International Short List 

>1,000,000 >100,000 <1,000,000 <100,000 > 100,000 

* When procuring simple works and common goods and their amount is under the International 
Competitive Bidding thresholds, Shopping may be used. 
** When procuring non-complex works or common goods with amounts under the NCB range, 
Shopping shall be used. 

 

6.11 Procurement Plan. The Procurement Plan for the operation covering the first 18 
months of project execution can be accessed through the following electronic link. 
The on-line Electronic Procurement Execution System (known by its Spanish 
acronym as SEPA) will be used for the publication and updates of the Procurement 
Plan during project execution. It is expected that the EA will use the SEPA program 
for management of its procurement activities. The Procurement Plan will be 
updated annually or whenever necessary, or as required by the Bank 
(www.iadb.org/procurement; http://www.iniciativasepa.org/bid/sitio/guyana/index-
_ing.htm). The initial procurement plan for the operation lists all procurement 
activities foreseen under this operation. The table below includes the list of the 
main procurement activities for this Loan. 

Main Procurement Activities 

Activity Add’l Info. 
Procurement 

Method 
 

Estimated 
Amount 
 in US$: 

Estimated 
Amount  
BID %: 

Review 
Method 

 

Specific 
Procurement 

notice 

Contract 
Signature 

Buildings, 
Laboratories, 
Water Reservoir, 
and civil works in 
Region 9 

Works ICB 3,100,000 100 Ex-ante Q3 2017 Q4 2017 

Construction of 
abattoir and 
associated waste 
management 
facilities in 
Region 9 

Works ICB 1,200,000 100 Ex-ante Q4 2017 Q1 2018 

Laboratory 
equipment 
(autoclave; soil 
grinder; 
incubator; 
moisture content 
analyzer) 

Goods ICB 120,000 100 Ex-ante Q2 2018 Q2 2018 

Agricultural 
Census 

Consulting 
Services 

SSS 4,000,000 100 Ex-ante N/A Q1 2017 

Design & 
supervision Agri. 
Construction 
Infrastructure 

Consulting 
services 

QCBS 680,000 100 Ex-ante Q1 2017 Q2 2017 

http://www.iadb.org/procurement
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/WSdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38332109
http://www.iadb.org/procurement
http://www.iniciativasepa.org/bid/sitio/guyana/index_ing.htm
http://www.iniciativasepa.org/bid/sitio/guyana/index_ing.htm


Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 8 of 8 

 

 

6.12 Supervision. Under the present Loan, procurement activities (i) are not expected 
to be complex in nature, nor will they involve the acquisition of medical of 
therapeutic equipment; (ii) will be subject to ex-ante review given the level of risk 
as identified above; (iii) will be explicitly listed in the approved and updated 
procurement plan in SEPA; (iv) will be launched once all technical specifications 
and/or terms of reference are validated by the Bank’s Sector Specialist; and (v) will 
be documented in accordance with the general filing guidelines that will be 
provided as part of the inception training of the fiduciary staff and in accordance 
with the applicable Bank Policies. 

6.13 All modifications to the present arrangement are subject to a prior written 
agreement between the EA and the Bank. The evaluation of capacity and the level 
of risk may vary during the project’s execution depending on the findings of the 
regular supervision activities that will be conducted during the project’s lifespan. As 
such, supervision modalities may vary as capacity increases. 

6.14 Records and Files. All records and files will be maintained by the EA, according to 
accepted best practices and to the general guidelines that will be provided by the 
Bank at the initial training of the fiduciary staff. All records must be kept for seven 
(7) years beyond the end of the operation’s execution period. It is also 
recommended that the Executing Agencies develop electronic filing to avoid losing 
all paper files. 



















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

ARGENTINA 

 

 

 

PROVINCIAL AGRICULTURAL SERVICES PROGRAM – PROSAP IV 

(AR-L1198) 

 

THIRD INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE FOR 
INVESTMENT PROJECTS (CCLIP)  

(AR-X1006) 

 

 

 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Ricardo Quiroga (RND/CAR), 
Project Team Leader; Viviana Alva-Hart (RND/CAR), Project Team Co-leader. Juan de Dios 
Mattos and Maria Claudia Perazza (CSD/RND); Juan Manuel Leaño and Carolina Benitez 
(TSP/CAR); Alonso Chaverri-Suarez (LEG/SGO); Teodoro Noel, Marisol Pinto, and Carlos 
Carpizo (PDP/CAR); Denis Corrales and María Elena Castro (VPS/ESG); Gabriela Szarfer 
(CAR/CAR); and Elizabeth Chávez (CSD/RND). 

 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors 
simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the 
document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus superseding 
and replacing the original version. 

 





 

CONTENTS 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................................ 1 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale ............................................ 1 
B. Objectives, components, and cost .............................................................. 10 
C. Key results indicators ................................................................................. 12 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................... 12 

A. Financing instruments and costs ................................................................ 12 
B. Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 13 
C. Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 15 
D. Other project risks and special issues ......................................................... 15 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 15 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 15 
B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ....................................... 16 

 
 
 
 
 

  



 - ii - 
 
 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) 

Annex II Results Matrix 

Annex III Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED 

1. Multiyear Execution Plan 

2. Annual work plan (AWP) 

3. Monitoring and Evaluation Plan 

4. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) 

5. Procurement Plan 

OPTIONAL 

1. Program Operating Regulations (Preliminary) 

2. Complete Results Matrix 

3. PROSAP I Completion Report (899/OC-AR) 

4. PROSAP II Completion Report (1956/OC-AR) 

5. PROSAP III midterm evaluation (2573/OC-AR)  

6. Economic evaluation of the program (PROSAP IV) 

7. Ex post economic evaluation of the PROSAP III projects 

8. List of feasibility documents for the sample projects – major works 

9. List of feasibility documents for the sample projects – minor works 

10. Information on the projects in Component 2  

11. Bibliography 

 
  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676316
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676316
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679756
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40664746
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676313
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670869
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40673929
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679857
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40120638
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676141
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40678623
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40681141
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677463
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677618
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679522
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - iii - 
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS 

AGN Office of the National Auditor General 
CCLIP Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects 
CDC Country Development Challenge 
CRF Corporate Results Framework 
DCIP Development and competitiveness improvement plans 
EIRR Economic internal rate of return 
ESM Environmental and Social Manual 
ESMP Environmental and social management plan 
ESMR Environmental and social management report 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
GDP Gross domestic product 
GHG Greenhouse gases 
INDC Intended Nationally Determined Contribution  
MAGyP Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, and Fisheries  
NEA Northeastern region of Argentina 
NG Norte Grande 
NPV Net present value  
NRC Nonreimbursable contribution 
NWA Northwestern region of Argentina 
OC Ordinary Capital 
OVE Office of Evaluation and Oversight  
PCR Project completion report 
PROSAP Programa de Servicios Agrícolas Provinciales [Provincial Agricultural 

Services Program] 
PSAS Provincial strategies for the agrifood sector  
SMEs Small and medium-sized enterprises 
UIS Update to the Institutional Strategy  
URC Unit for Rural Change 
 
 



 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

ARGENTINA 
PROVINCIAL AGRICULTURAL SERVICES PROGRAM – PROSAP IV 

(AR-L1198) 
THIRD INDIVIDUAL OPERATION UNDER THE CONDITIONAL CREDIT LINE FOR INVESTMENT 

PROJECTS – (AR-X1006)  
 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Argentine Republic 
Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Amortization period: 25 years 

Executing agency: Ministry of Agroindustry 

Original WAL: 15.25 years 

Disbursement period: 4 years 

Grace period: 5.5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Inspection and supervision fee: (b) 

IDB (OC): 100,000,000 76 Interest rate: LIBOR based 

Local 31,426,000 24 Credit fee: (b) 

Total 131,426,000 100 Approval currency: 
U.S. dollars from the 
Ordinary Capital 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description:  

The objective of the Conditional Credit Line for Investment Projects (CCLIP) is to contribute to the competitiveness and development of 
regional rural economies through the execution of individual programs consistent with this purpose. Specifically, the third i ndividual 
operation proposed herein seeks improvements to productivity and an increase in sales and value-added for small and medium-sized 
agricultural producers, with a focus on increasing resilience to climate change. 

Special contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement of the loan proceeds: 

The executing agency, through the Unit for Rural Change (URC), will provide evidence that the updated program Operating Regulations 
have been approved and entered into effect, and have been reviewed in accordance with the terms previously agreed upon with the 
Bank, including the Environmental and Social Manual (ESM) (paragraph 3.3). 

Special contractual conditions for environmental and social execution: 

Those established in the environmental and social management report (ESMR) will be included (paragraph 2.6).  

Exceptions to Bank policies: None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(c) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(d) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

 
(a) Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes in the amortization schedule as well as 

currency and interest rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management considerations into account when reviewing such requests. 
(b) The credit fee and the inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the Bank’s 

lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 
(c) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration).). 
(d) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law). 

  



 
 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale 

 Recent context on the development of the agricultural sector in Argentina  

1.1 In Argentina, the agrifood sector accounts for around 10% of gross domestic product 
(GDP), and 20% of GDP including the agroindustry sector. The sector generates 
65% of total exports (US$35 billion) and 36% of employment. The country’s Pampa 
region1 generates 90% of agricultural production by value and 80% of the sector’s 
exports. The non-Pampa agriculture sector accounts for around 65% of agricultural 
exploitation, generates 20% of total production, and provides 54% of all rural jobs to 
220,000 rural families, the majority of them without their own capital (INDEC, 
Gallacher, and Lema, 2014).  

1.2 Over the last 10 years, Argentina’s agricultural sector passed through three distinct 
periods of sector and macroeconomic context that significantly affected its structure 
and performance. Between 2006 and 2012, the strong growth of the sector’s grain 
exports stood out, a result mainly of high demand from Asian countries and the 
agricultural capacity of the Pampa to meet growing international demand. Six 
products accounted for 65% of all exports, with a significant contribution from the 
soy chain and with export destinations highly concentrated: 82% of the soy was 
exported to China and 60% of the wheat to Brazil. For agricultural products, 30% is 
exported without any processing, and only 54% of agribusiness exports are products 
with basic processing (soy oil and flour). Although the expansion of soy was 
concentrated in the Pampa provinces, growing areas have also expanded to other 
regions, causing changes in land use and replacement of traditional crops (Anlló, 
Bisang, and Salvatierra, 2010).  

1.3 A second contextual period from 2012 to 2015 was characterized by the application 
of policies resulting in strong macroeconomic distortions: taxes and quantitative 
restrictions on agricultural exports (grains mainly), foreign-exchange controls and 
differentiated exchange rates, import controls, price controls, and targeted 
subsidies. Estimates from the IDB Agrimonitor (2014) show that from 2007 to 2012, 
producers generated net transfers to the public purse (via tax collection) and to 
consumers (through lower prices) that averaged US$11 billion annually, accounting 
for more than 30% of the value of the sector’s production. This policy framework 
caused productive and export activity in general to stall, but particularly impacted the 
non-Pampa regional economies, since as described in the following section, these 
regions face significant development gaps, forcing them to compete with greater 
disadvantages (Gallacher and Lema, 2014). 

1.4 A third period of context began with the change of government in December 2015, 
one of whose first measures was to eliminate the macroeconomic and sector policy 
distortions (Argentina, Country Development Challenge 2016 – CDC). Along these 
lines, restrictions on corn and wheat were eliminated and restrictions on soy were 
reduced; the exchange rate was free floated and foreign exchange restrictions were 
removed, as were administrative price and import controls. The new government 
seeks to reposition Argentine agriculture to make it competitive in external markets, 

                                                
1  Argentina’s provinces are grouped into the following five broad geographic regions: (i) Pampa region; 

(ii) Northeast region (NEA); (iii) Northwest region (NWA); (iv) Cuyo Region; and (v) Patagonia region. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 2 - 
 
 

 
incentivize private investment in cutting-edge technology, and focus attention on 
structural shortcomings and development gaps that affect the sector, particularly in 
the more vulnerable regional economies that have fallen behind in terms of social 
and economic development (Belgrano Plan). 

 Gaps in regional development and priorities for competitiveness and 
developing rural regional economies  

1.5 Development gaps in regional economies, particularly the Norte Grande (NG) 
provinces, are notable. The per capita GDP in the NG is 47.5% of that of the nation 
as a whole. With 20.7% of the total population, the NG only generates 9.8% of the 
country’s GDP and exports around 10% of the national total. (Meloni, 2012; 
Argentina CDC). In a study on production and technology gaps for the agricultural 
sector, Cuervo (2016) tracks the Global Yield Gap in Agriculture. The index 
measures the production gap based on maximum achievable yield and actual yield 
(farm yield) for national-scale field crops. The production gap shows low relative 
levels of technical efficiency: 41.5% for corn, followed by wheat with 41% and soy 
with 31.7%. Measured as “yield” differences in the production of national field crops 
(cereals and oilseeds) for the 2011-2014 period, the productive gap figures show 
that the NG’s technical efficiency index in corn is 62% that of the humid Pampa area, 
while for soy it is 82%, for wheat it is only 53%, sorghum stands at 62%, and 
sunflower at 74%. 

1.6 A number of factors affect the regional gaps in technology and development for 
Argentina’s rural regional economies, with the following generally standing out: (i) a 
deficit in production infrastructure, particularly irrigation, connectivity, and rural 
logistics infrastructure, as well as dependable access to energy sources; (ii) climate 
change and its implications for water availability for high quality and high volume 
agricultural production; (iii) deficits in services for improving competitiveness and 
value added, restricting productivity and innovation; and (iv) institutional, 
governance, and social participation weaknesses, both public and within private 
organizations and associations of small and medium-sized rural producers. (Lema, 
2010; Lissi and Losi, 2010; Leyva, 2016; Bisang, Campi, and Aniló, 2013). These 
factors are described below. 

1.7 Productive infrastructure: Irrigation. According to the 2014 National Irrigation 
Plan and the study “Potencial de Ampliación del Riego en la Argentina,” [Potential 
for Expanding Irrigation in Argentina, United Nations Food and Agriculture 
Organization (FAO), PROSAP, World Bank, 2015], Argentina has a little more than 
2 million hectares of irrigated land, with potential to expand that to around 6 million 
hectares.2 The non-Pampa regions are the most dependent on this infrastructure for 
agricultural development. Half of all irrigated land is in dry regions with annual 
precipitation of less than 500 mm (e.g. the Andean areas of Jujuy, Salta, Tucumán, 
Catamarca, La Rioja, San Juan, and Mendoza), while 20% is in the semi-dry central 
and northern regions, with between 600 mm and 800 mm of rain during the summer. 
The water stress situation in these regions is worsening due to the effects of climate 
change and more intense drought periods. Irrigation accounts for 70% of total water 
consumption in Argentina, and 75% of the water used for this purpose comes from 

                                                
2  Including expansion over existing areas, new areas, and complementary irrigation.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 3 - 
 
 

 
surface sources, generally reservoirs created by dams and river diversion, with the 
other 25% coming from aquifers through individual wells. 

1.8 The four irrigation systems identified by the program have low efficiency (60%) as a 
result of: (i) main canals that are not lined (75%); (ii) secondary canals that are not 
lined (80%); and (iii) little use of pressurized irrigation systems (25% of farmers). The 
records and technical evaluations of the systems rehabilitated by PROSAP show 
that it is possible to increase initial efficiency levels from 60% to over 90% in terms 
of water loss reduction. Also, in terms of technology, at the level of the individual 
farm, the use of inefficient irrigation technology is still prevalent (e.g. surface 
irrigation) partly due to limited management capacity and knowledge, but also 
because of the property investment costs. The improved gravity systems have an 
average cost of US$398/hectare, but with objective efficiency of 65%, while 
pressurized irrigation systems (micro spray, drip, pivot) that achieve efficiency of 
80% to 90%, cost between US$2,600/hectare and US$4,000/hectare 
(FAO-PROSAP).  

1.9 The PROSAP interventions address the investment niche needed to rehabilitate 
existing systems and expand irrigated areas in provinces with a high degree of water 
stress, while targeting the needs of small and medium-sized producers. In the NG, 
investments have been identified of around US$3.6 billion that would make it 
possible to increase arable land by between 22% and 50% (approximately 320,000 
hectares). In any case, the success of irrigation interventions requires ensuring 
proper coordination between three areas: (i) institutional and legal, including 
regulatory frameworks, land titling and registration, institution-strengthening, and 
development of financially-autonomous user organizations; (ii) economic, including 
accessible financing instruments, viable public-private partnership models, 
affordable water fees and prices, and tax incentives; and (iii) technical, for dealing 
with cutting-edge engineering and technology, modern water information systems, 
and environmental studies. Investments in irrigation infrastructure financed by 
PROSAP have included actions in these three areas and contributed to improving 
productivity in the intervention areas (see paragraphs 1.19, 1.20, and 1.21).  

1.10 Productive infrastructure: Rural roads and rural energy. Of the total volume of 
cargo transported, 95% is moved over the country’s road network. Annual average 
daily traffic has been increasing, but not evenly across all regions, with significant 
imbalances for cargo traffic (Agosta, R. 2010). For rural economies in the non-
Pampa provinces, the poor condition of secondary and tertiary roads results in: 
(i) high transportation and logistical costs; and (ii) poor accessibility to large 
expanses of territory. For example, the project for secondary route RT13 in 
Corrientes province shows that the route is closed on average more than 80 days 
out of the year. RT13 is 163 km, unpaved and without drainage. In the rainy season, 
70 km of it (43%) is impassable. This worsens the competitiveness of non-Pampa 
rural areas considering that for the main exportable grains and oilseeds, logistical 
costs of transportation to the ports or mill account for 30% of the price for NEA and 
NWA producers (IDEA. FIEL, 2009). Likewise, regarding the rural public energy 
infrastructure, significant gaps and coverage needs are evident. Nationally, more 
than 60% of rural homes do not have access to electricity, with the farms furthest 
from the grid’s main lines being the most affected (Mendoza, 2016).  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677487
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 4 - 
 
 

 
1.11 Climate change challenges. Given the fundamental role that Argentina plays in 

global food security, addressing extreme events resulting from climate change is of 
vital importance considering their impact on agricultural activity and the production 
and provision of food. Agricultural and livestock activity are estimated to contribute 
28% of the country’s total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, for which reason these 
sectors are a central focus for the government as it complies with its goal of reducing 
GHG emissions by 15% by 2030, as established in its intended nationally 
determined contribution (INDC) under the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change.  

1.12 According to Argentina’s Second National Message on Climate Change, there is 
evidence that the effects of climate change have contributed to glacier melt in the 
Andes Mountains, increasing desertification, and an increased recurrence in forest 
fires over the last 10 years. From the perspective of impact on agriculture, the most 
severe effects manifest themselves through water stress and water availability for 
production, particularly in the areas of Cuyo, NEA, and NWA where PROSAP is 
engaged (Argentina: Second National Message; ECLAC 2012; Ludeña, Wilk, and 
Quiroga).  

1.13 The Cuyo region has been under a water emergency during 7 of the last 10 years, 
and the trend toward declining availability of water directly impacts availability of the 
irrigation needed to maintain the current levels of irrigation-dependent wine and fruit 
production (Brown, 2015). According to a study entitled “The Economics of Climate 
Change in Argentina” (ECLAC, 2014), if adaptation measures are not taken, climate 
change-related productivity losses could reach 17% of the national agriculture 
sector’s value added, along with drops in yield of between 11% and 16% for wheat, 
15% and 24% for corn, and 14% and 25% for soy. In terms of its effect on irrigation, 
in a study of Argentina’s irrigation potential, the FAO reports potential climate 
change-related productivity losses in areas under irrigation equivalent to the loss of 
325,000 hectares, or production value of US$900 million. 

 
Table 1. Production losses due to climate change in areas under irrigation (in 1,000s of ha) 

 

*FAO-PROSAP World Bank (2015). 

51

74 78

58

18

62
29

9

1

8

22 24 22 19 7
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Central Cuyo NWA NEA Patagonia

Underground irrigation Surface irrigation

Losses (% of total surface area)

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 5 - 
 
 

 
 

1.14 Competitiveness services gaps. Integration of agricultural producers into clusters 
and value chains is necessary for regional economies to take off. The diagnosis of 
Argentina’s CDC indicates that the lower competitiveness of the non-Pampa 
agricultural systems can be partly attributed to the lower degree of sophistication of 
scientific-technological-educational subsystems and of management in general, as 
well as their poor links to agricultural technology supply companies. Along these 
lines, Martin, Mayer, and Mayneris (2008) find that the benefits of increased sector 
clustering are positive and highly significant, although to be effective it requires 
strengthened institutions. Likewise, using company-level data, Long and Zhang 
(2011) show that China’s rapid industrialization is characterized by the growing 
formation of clusters. They find that the clusters help overcome the credit restrictions 
that small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) face. Scalice (2016) finds in an 
analysis of nine agrifood supply chains in Argentina’s NG that more than 80% of 
small producers of are not part of a value chain, nor do they have access to financial 
services. The author also identifies a number of limitations to developing competitive 
chains and clusters, including: (i) low product quality; (ii) limited access to capital; 
(iii) lack of economies of scale; (iv) weak organizational capacity; and (v) limited 
capacity to innovate. Regarding access to capital, Sanguinetti (2011) identifies 
access to financial services as one of the main restrictions faced by rural areas of 
regional economies, and Lapelle (2007) finds that more than 80% of SMEs in 
regional economies are self-financing. 

1.15 Weaknesses in institutions, governance, and social participation. The various 
provinces are distinctly heterogeneous in terms of their institutional capacities. The 
provinces in the NWA and NEA have institutional quality gaps averaging -2.3 
and -1.2, respectively This means that, compared to the national average, these 
regions are being left behind. (Villalobos, 2015, CDC Argentina). In terms of social 
participation, which is an integral part of governance, unequal access for and 
participation by women is a key weakness. The URC report entitled “Las nuevas 
generaciones de mujeres rurales como promotoras de cambio (2015)” [New 
generations of rural women as agents of change] conducts a quantitative and 
qualitative analysis of the needs of and opportunities for young rural women. This 
study provides evidence of the relatively low impact of participation among women 
in rural areas, although regional differences are noteworthy (between 5% and 20%), 
and for young women facing a series of disadvantages that intensify in remote rural 
areas, the differences are related to difficulties participating in the labor market while 
caring for members of the household. PROSAP project design has found that only 
5% of the beneficiaries of training or technical assistance are women, and only 
between 0.3% and 3% of land owners in irrigator organizations are women.  

 Progress and outcomes of PROSAP loans from the CLIPP 

1.16 The national government implemented PROSAP in the mid-1990s to support 
agricultural development in the rural economies of the non-Pampa provinces. The 
implementation of this program was mainly focused on the construction of rural 
public works. PROSAP’s first phase was financed by the Bank through operation 
899/OC-AR. Based on that program’s outcomes, in 2008, the Government of 
Argentina requested a CCLIP (AR-X1006) for US$600 million. The CCLIP began 
with operation 1956/OC-AR (PROSAP II), execution of which completed in 2014. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 6 - 
 
 

 
The second operation, 2573/OC-AR (PROSAP III) was approved in 2011. Its level 
of execution is 90%, and it is set for closure in March 2017. Project completion 
reports (PCR) for loans 899/OC-AR and 1956/OC-AR, as well as the midterm 
evaluation for 2573/OC-AR, describe in detail the outputs and outcomes achieved, 
as well as the lessons learned in each operation. The following table summarizes 
the scope and main outputs of the PROSAP operations.  

 
Table 2. Outputs of PROSAP operations 

 
PROSAP I: 
899/OC-AR 

PROSAP II: 

1956/OC-AR 

First operation 
under the 

CCLIP 

PROSAP III: 
2573/OC-AR 

Second 
operation under 

the CCLIP 

Loan amounts (millions of US$) 322 200 230 

Irrigation and drainage systems built (km) 294 154 374 

Hectares irrigated 137,521 73,038 59,560 

Beneficiaries of irrigation systems 12,769 14,489 5,269 

Rural roads improved (km) 482 339 49  

Rural electrification (km of power lines) 5,251 1,020 45  

Producers receiving services, technical 
assistance, and training 

111,819 34,039 149,111 

Business plans financed—
Nonreimbursable contribution (NRC) 

133 85 229 

 

1.17 The types of outputs that have been generated from PROSAP I to PROSAP III 
reflect the evolution of the interventions from an approach predominately aimed at 
physical infrastructure to interventions that are more balanced with technical 
assistance and soft components on management and market development. The 
PCRs for the completed PROSAP projects show that they have achieved the direct 
outcomes and effects expected, including: (i) productive overhaul of irrigation 
projects, with increases in surface area irrigated, better water availability and quality 
throughout the year for irrigators, and improved irrigation efficiency; (ii) improved 
productivity at the level of individual farms for specific crops; (iii) irrigator 
organizations strengthened and taking over the operation, maintenance, and 
financial management of their systems; (iv) the rural roads that were financed are 
usable year-round; and (v) development and consolidation of clusters that have 
been able to diversify into and/or export processed products for the first time. An 
ex post economic assessment of the Canal del Norte and 25 de Mayo, San Juan 
rehabilitation projects and the project to improve rural roads in productive areas in 
Entre Ríos, Zone VII, based on surveys conducted upon project completion shows 
that both projects achieved economic benefits demonstrating their economic return, 
with economic internal rates of return (EIRR) of 21.1% and 19.4%, respectively.  

1.18 Other noteworthy outcomes of PROSAP are institutional and strategic. Among them, 
PROSAP has provided the Ministry of Agroindustry with a land management 
operating model that enables it to strengthen and leverage programs with greater 
scope and coverage in the provinces as part of its provincial strategies for the 
agrifood sector (PSAS) and its development and competitiveness improvement 
plans (DCIP). Among other outcomes, this has enabled the strengthening of an 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679857
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40120638
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676141


 - 7 - 
 
 

 
environmental and social area that enables it to move forward on these issues 
proactively, incorporating the inclusion of the gender dimension in rural 
development, as well as addressing climate change, resulting in the Ministry 
qualifying as an executing agency for the Climate Change Adaptation Fund.  

1.19 PROSAP impact evaluations. During the design of PROSAP I and PROSAP II, 
impact evaluations were not performed for experimental designs. Recently, 
PROSAP III has incorporated a methodology for evaluating the impact of quasi-
experimental designs that will enable analysis of how outcomes are attributed to the 
program’s investments. These evaluations will be conducted once PROSAP III ends 
in 2017. However, some partial and complimentary impact evaluations have been 
conducted using data generated by PROSAP projects, as described below. 

1.20 Using quasi-experimental methodologies, Gibbons, Maffioli, and Rossi (2016) and 
Rossi (2016) evaluated the impact of the PROSAP component providing improved 
irrigation channels in the provinces of Mendoza and San Juan. These studies 
conclude that PROSAP had positive impacts on both production and per-hectare 
productivity, showing that producers who participate in the program produce 9.4% 
more than nonparticipants, with per-hectare yields higher by 7%. 

1.21 Lastly, the Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture conducted a study 
entitled The Territorial Impact of Public Policies: The case of PROSAP (2016), which 
evaluated the outcomes of PROSAP I projects from 1998 to 2010. The study applied 
a synthetic methodology by comparing administrative data from departments that 
had PROSAP interventions with data from departments that did not. The study finds 
that out of all the departments, those with PROSAP projects had better development 
results in each of the dimensions analyzed and in the total synthetic index. The 
degree of overall development of the departments without PROSAP was almost 
37%, while for those benefiting from PROSAP it was almost 50%. 

 Lessons learned for PROSAP IV design and compliance with CCLIP 
requirements 

1.22 The main lessons learned from the execution of PROSAP II and III were taken into 
account when preparing this operation and formed the basis for the inclusion of 
certain adjustments. The following table provides a summary of these lessons. 

 
Table 3. Lessons learned and adjustment measures for PROSAP IV 

Lesson learned Agreed measures 

Institutional consolidation. The creation of a 

comprehensive strategic coordination 
structure, with the same functions as the URC, 
has been the basis for better PROSAP project 
performance  

The Ministry of Agroindustry has decided to 
maintain the URC’s functional structure and 
has launched a process to consolidate it 
internally as a specialized agency for 
coordinating investment with external funding. 

Coordination of public interventions in the 
field. Prioritizing projects in the framework of 

the PSASs, which were introduced starting 
with PROSAP II, has enabled participatory 
processes that offer better coordination and 
strategic synergy with a variety of initiatives, 
expanding the area of impact.  

The proposal is to strengthen and consolidate 
these processes for territory and microregion 
management in the framework of the PSAS so 
as to achieve synergies among PROSAP 
projects and other URC projects, in addition to 
better coordinating the intervention of other 
public policy instruments in the same areas. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676386


 - 8 - 
 
 

 
Table 3. Lessons learned and adjustment measures for PROSAP IV 

Lesson learned Agreed measures 

Priority on investment in public goods, 
complemented by direct support that is 
intelligent and well targeted on producers. 

The initial focus of the first PROSAP on 
building public works demonstrated the need 
for supporting small and medium-sized 
producers with technical assistance and NRC 
for in-field improvements and development of 
new products. The evaluations conducted, 
including those of the Office of Evaluation and 
Oversight (OVE), found that the instrument 
had positive outcomes, but that it was 
necessary to ensure that the NRCs were 
applied with stricter diagnostic, eligibility, real 
market failure justification, measurement, and 
variability criteria.  

The Technology Modernization Fund, which 
includes NRC, has been redesigned based on 
the standards established in the recent 
Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document: 
(i) focus on technological support for mitigation 
of and adaptation to climate change and 
environmental sustainability; (ii) eligibility of 
small producers lacking access to credit and 
associations organized to establish new local 
networks and value added in new markets; 
(iii) technical assistance to promote the 
participation of the banking sector in financing 
the sector’s technological modernization, in 
coordination with private sector operations; 
and (iv) transient nature of the support and 
transparent, flexible, and evaluable 
mechanisms for granting it.  

Minor infrastructure works for rural 
development. During PROSAP III, a pilot 

program of minor works intended to meet the 
local production needs of small producers was 
piloted successfully. These works, which are 
prioritized in the PSAS, saw high ownership 
and participation levels among producers. 

The minor works component is continued in a 
reinforced context of PSAS interventions in 
priority microregions, along with technical 
assistance for local organizations to ensure 
the works’ sustainability. 

 

1.23 Eligibility of the operation under the CCLIP. Compliance with the eligibility 
conditions for a new individual operation under CCLIP AR-X1006 of 17 April 2008 
has been verified: (i) the program is framed within the sectors and components 
defined under the CCLIP; (ii) its objectives are related to the Bank’s country strategy, 
and it is included in the country program; (iii) the aforementioned agreement 
stipulated that the executing agency would be the same for all the individual loans 
under the line, which is the case given that the URC will continue to be in charge of 
execution; (iv) the outcomes obtained by the URC in these two individual operations 
are satisfactory and have been supported by the corresponding performance 
evaluations for PROSAP II and PROSAP III, meaning the project team and national 
authorities can expect the new proposed program will perform satisfactorily; 
(v) regarding the financial execution of PROSAP III, under execution, 84% of the 
loan proceeds have been committed, while 94% of the proceeds have been 
disbursed; and (vi) the borrower and executing agency have fulfilled the conditions 
of the loan contract and the Bank’s policies on disbursements and procurement of 
goods and services, including updated financial statements.3 

 Design of PROSAP IV  

1.24 As the third individual operation under CCLIP AR-X1006, PROSAP IV has the same 
design as the first two operations. Specifically, PROSAP IV is designed to bolster 

                                                
3  The most recent report including audited financial statements includes a minor qualification that does not 

affect the reasonableness thereof. This minor qualification refers to a debt observed by the Office of the 
National Auditor General between contractors and the provinces of Mendoza, Entre Ríos, and Catamarca, 
set forth in a note to the financial statements, representing an integral part thereof. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40120638
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676141


 - 9 - 
 
 

 
local production systems via the strengthening of critical local assets (public goods: 
the economic infrastructure—irrigation, transportation, energy, social capital—
business culture; quality of regional associations and business networks) and 
improve the effectiveness of the intergovernmental framework. These actions 
contribute to improving the efficiency of local production systems by creating positive 
externalities through clustering and by resolving market and coordination failures. 

1.25 In particular, PROSAP IV will strengthen local development mechanisms, bolstering 
public-private partnerships in order to increase the competitiveness of producers 
and their associations. Also, the following specific objectives will be consolidated 
and strengthened: (i) internalization of measures for adapting to climate change with 
special emphasis on managing water resources and implementing climate-smart 
irrigation systems; (ii) the comprehensive incorporation of the gender dimension in 
the program through implementation of specific gender action plans for each 
provincial public investment project that include gender diagnostics, training, 
technical assistance, access to available funds, and monitoring of indicators; and 
(iii) consolidation of mechanisms for measuring outcomes and impacts.  

1.26 Strategic alignment with the Update to the Institutional Strategy (UIS) 
2010-2020, and the Corporate Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019. The 
program is consistent with UIS 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and strategically 
aligned with the development challenges of productivity and innovation through 
investments in productive public infrastructure and technical assistance that will 
enable increases in the productivity of rural producers in the program’s work areas. 
The program is also in line with the crosscutting issue of climate change and 
environmental sustainability through improved use of water and land via investments 
in irrigation technology. A full 100% of the proceeds of the operation are invested in 
climate change adaptation activities, according to the as climate financing for 
adaptation to climate change according to the multilateral development banks’ joint 
methodology for tracking climate finance. These resources contribute to the IDB 
Group target of increasing financing for projects related to climate change to 30% of 
all operation approvals through 2020. The program provides additionality in terms of 
gender equality through specific activities for promoting the participation of women 
in the training provided by the program through gender action plans. In addition, the 
program will contribute to the goals of CRF 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6) via 
the indicator of the number of beneficiaries that improve their management and use 
of natural resources. 

1.27 Alignment with the IDB country strategy. The operation is aligned with the IDB 
Country Strategy with Argentina 2012-2015 (document GN-2687), in particular with 
the priority area “Alleviating Obstacles to Growth” in the area of rural and agricultural 
development, the objectives of which include supporting investment programs in 
basic rural infrastructure in regional economies. It is also aligned with the priorities 
of the new Country Strategy with Argentina (2016-2019), which is in the approval 
process as of the distribution date of this loan proposal, in particular with the 
following strategic areas: (i) business climate improvement by fostering 
environmentally sustainable solutions; and (ii) strengthening of private-sector 
integration and insertion into value chains by developing public goods for innovation 
and cluster development.  

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807


 - 10 - 
 
 

 
B. Objectives, components, and cost 

1.28 The objective of the CCLIP is to contribute to the competitiveness and development 
of regional rural economies through the execution of individual programs consistent 
with this purpose. Specifically, the third individual operation proposed herein seeks 
improvements to productivity and an increase in sales and value-added for small 
and medium-sized agricultural producers, with a focus on strengthening resilience 
to climate change. The program is structured in two main components. 

1.29 Component 1: Investment to support competitiveness (loan amount: 
US$80.2 million). This component includes: (i) a subcomponent for strengthening 
public infrastructure of major works aimed at increasing the coverage and quality of 
rural infrastructure in the provinces by executing the public investment projects 
prioritized in the PSAS. Investments include the rehabilitation of irrigation and 
drainage systems, forest fire prevention, and tertiary roads in climactically vulnerable 
areas with a focus on adaptation and resilience, and (ii) a subcomponent for minor 
infrastructure works for building, overhauling, or expanding public works and 
community improvements. All investments include financing for the technical 
assistance and training necessary for execution, use, and maintenance of the works 
and for strengthening local governance and the provincial and municipal agencies 
that manage water resources for irrigation while managing the promotion of 
participation by women. The objective of all the works and activities under this 
component is to support adaptation of the agricultural productive activity to scenarios 
and conditions of climactic vulnerability, with technical designs that take those 
scenarios into account in the long-term.  

1.30 The major infrastructure works to be financed whose final technical, economic, 
social, climactic, and environmental designs are in place are the following:  

 

Table 4. Major Works Projects 

Project 

Total 
amount 

(US$ 
millions) 

Lining of the of the upper section of the Cacique Guaymallén irrigation channel. 
First section. Mendoza 

21.5 

Improvements to the Colorado River irrigation system. Second stage. Colonia 
Santa Rosa. Salta 

13.9 

Improvements to the Benavidez Gral. 9 de Julio Canal system. Departments of 
Rivadavia, Chimbas, Santa Lucía, and 9 de Julio. San Juan 

17.7 

Development of the Tala River system irrigation area. Department of Trancas. 
Tucumán 

19.4 

Improvement of rural roads in productive areas of the province of Corrientes. 
Provincial Route 13 

10.4 

Improvement of provincial fire management services for preventing and 
controlling fires in the Northwest of Chubut 

6.1 

Total 89.1 

 

1.31 For their part, the minor works being prioritized and whose technical, economic, and 
environmental designs are in place are: (i) overhaul of systems for surface irrigation 
and increasing production yields, located in Anjullon, La Rioja; (ii) irrigation 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677496
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677507
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677534
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677541
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677487
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677483
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677618


 - 11 - 
 
 

 
improvement project in Colalao del Valle, Tucumán; (iii) water system improvement 
project in Angulos, La Rioja; (iv) improvements to the irrigation infrastructure of the 
water system in Figueroa, Santiago del Estero; and (v) micro reservoirs in the Cano 
River basin, Córdoba.  

1.32 Component 2: Support services for competitiveness (loan amount: 
US$14.4 million). This component finances technical assistance and business 
plans aimed at strengthening the competitiveness and value-added of agricultural 
products in regional economies, with a priority on complementing the major and 
minor works projects of Component 1. The criteria for prioritizing and selecting 
business plans and technical assistance activities is detailed in the program 
Operating Regulations and the technical annexes for each of the three instruments, 
with technical, economic, financial, institutional, social, and environmental feasibility 
being a priority prerequisite: (i) Technology modernization fund, which uses NRCs 
to cofinance in-field  and partnership-building projects that contribute to closing 
technological gaps, bolstering value added at origin; and promoting environmentally 
sustainable practices and climate smart agriculture (CSA) to address the challenges 
of climate change. The focus of the fund is generating positive externalities and 
seeking synergies with private initiatives that promote producer access to formal 
banking and its financial product lines, including access to green financing;4 
(ii) Territorial development initiatives for financing development projects and 
consolidating agrifood clusters that are formulated and prioritized in the participatory 
framework of the DCIPs, which bring together public/private actors with 
scientific/technology actors and producers in the provinces. These projects finance 
technical assistance activities, generating knowledge and cutting edge technology 
that benefit the cluster and the regions where they are developed; (iii) Institutional 
strengthening and preinvestment, providing underlying and crosscutting support for 
technical assistance and training activities to improve management in provincial 
institutions, including raising awareness on climate change and improving capacities 
to identify, prepare, and monitor public investment projects. 

1.33 The program’s beneficiary provinces are the non-Pampa provinces, which will be 
prioritized based on the criteria set forth in the program’s Operating Regulations, 
including: (i) relative degree to which they lag behind; (ii) vulnerability to climate 
change; (iii) provincial sector strategies with a time horizon of at least 10 years; 
(iv) provincial association in place with adequate human and technical resources; 
and (v) due authorizations in place for the province to take on debt in order to accept 
PROSAP resources. The projects are chosen through a planning process consistent 
with the priorities of Argentina’s CDCs and the diagnostics performed. The program 
Operating Regulations defines project eligibility criteria, considering the different 
decision levels, type of project, criteria for analysis, and the project cycle from 
identification and preparation through to approval and execution.  

1.34 Program coordination, monitoring, and evaluation will also be financed. 
Under this item, support will be provided for the strengthening, operation, and 
maintenance of the project monitoring and evaluation system; the URC’s 
incremental operating expenses; the preparation of studies, including impact 

                                                
4  MIF project AR-T1170 includes financing technology packages for small producers and their cooperatives 

through a new line of credit between the Fund and Banco Credicoop. As part of the actions to integrate the 
IDB Group, once the MIF operation is approved, the proposal is to offer PROSAP producers this line of credit.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670869
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670869
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677606
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40677611
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679514
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679514


 - 12 - 
 
 

 
evaluations, progress reports, and audit reports; and environmental and social 
monitoring. 

C. Key results indicators  

1.35 The program has a Results Matrix agreed upon with the executing agency 
(Annex II). It includes indicators for impact, as well as outcomes and outputs, with 
their corresponding baseline values, targets, and means of verification. The main 
outputs include 31,638 hectares under irrigation, 71 km of main irrigation channels; 
and 44 km of rural roads. The main outcomes expected from the sample projects 
are described in Table 5. The program is expected to directly benefit 18,200 rural 
producers in six provinces. Over the long term, the program’s impact will be reflected 
in higher gross value of the production of rural producers and lower losses from 
drought associated with climate change. 

 

Table 5. Key Results Matrix Indicators 

Outcomes 
Time of 

measurement 
Proposed indicators 

Improved productivity for producers 
served by financed irrigation systems. 

Year 4  Average increase in land productivity 
(including both agriculture and livestock). 

Greater irrigation water use efficiency by 
rehabilitated systems. 

Year 4  Volume of water delivered to the farms / 
Volume of water that enters the system. 

Improved rural accessibility on Route 13 in 
the province of Corrientes. 

Year 4  Lower number of impassable days. 

Reduction of the average area affected 
annually by fire. 

Year 4  Average area affected by fire in the 
province of Chubut. 

Diversification of markets and/or products 
in regions served by the program. 

Annual  Number of business initiatives that 
increase sales by at least 20%. 

Users who adopt technologies for 
adaptation to climate change. 

Annual  Number of agricultural and livestock 
producers adopting pressurized irrigation 
technologies. 

1.36 Economic viability of the program. Overall analysis of the program yields an 
average weighted EIRR of 20.6% for a time horizon of 20 years. The benefits include 
marginal changes to productivity and increases in the area under irrigation. The 
costs include the total investment in the program, opportunity costs for training the 
farmers; operation and maintenance; and additional investment on the plot (see 
Annex). At a discount rate of 12%, overall net present value (NPV) is 
US$77.7 million. The sensitivity analysis considered: (i) modification of investment 
costs; (ii) changes in crop yields; (iii) changes in the costs of investment 
sustainability; (iv) delays in benefit realization; and (v) technology adoption rates. 
For a 30% increase in costs, the NPV is US$52.3 million, and the EIRR is 16.9%. 
For a three-year delay in benefit realization, the NPV is US$77.7 million and EIRR 
is 17.1%. For an adoption rate of 70%, the EIRR is 15.5%, with NPV of 
US$28.3 million.  

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments and costs  

2.1 The program’s cost is US$131,426,000, of which the Bank will finance 
US$100 million, chargeable to the Ordinary Capital in United States dollars under 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40681141


 - 13 - 
 
 

 
CCLIP AR-X1006.5 The needed for the works and interventions analyzed accounts 
for 100% of the available financing. It will be structured as an investment loan, with 
an execution period of four years, taking into consideration that the major works to 
be financed are all at the stage of executable projects ready for public tender, and 
that the annual disbursements under PROSAP III over the last four years have 
demonstrated execution levels in keeping with the proposed planning.  

 

Table 6. Program cost and financing (in US$) 

Investment categories* IDB 
Local 

contribution 
Total % 

1. Component 1: Support investments 80,200,000 26,476,000 106,676,000 81 

1.1  Strengthening public infrastructure 73,000,000 26,476,000 99,476,000 76 

1.2 Minor works 7,200,000 0 7,200,000 5 

2. Component 2: Support Services  14,400,000 3,600,000 18,000,000 14 

2.1  Technology modernization fund 5,600,000 1,400,000 7,000,000 5 

2.2  Territorial development initiatives 6,400,000 1,600,000 8,000,000 6 

2.3  Provincial institutional strengthening 2,400,000 600,000 3,000,000 2 

3.  Management, monitoring, and evaluation 5,400,000 1,350,000 6,750,000 5 

3.1  Management 5,013,900 1,253,475 6,267,375 5 

3.1  Monitoring and evaluation (includes 
environmental and social) 

378,000 94,500 472,500 0 

3.2  Audits 8,100 2,025 10,125 0 

Total 100,000,000 31,426,000 131,426,000 100 

Percentage 76 24 100   

 

2.2 Bank financing will be disbursed according to the timetable provided in Table 7 and 
detailed in the Multiyear Execution Plan. 

 

Table 7. Estimated disbursement timetable (in thousands of US$) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Total % 

IDB 23,626.00 33,530.00 34,194.00 8,650.00 100,000.00 76% 

Local 7,513.00 10,631.60 10,797.60 2,483.80 31,426.00 24% 

Total 31,139.00 44,161.60 44,991.60 11,133.80 131,426.00 100% 

% 24% 34% 34% 8% 100%  

 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.3 In accordance with the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy 
(Operational Policy OP-703), and pursuant to the applied safeguards forms, this 
program has been classified as a category “B” operation. This program is designed 
to promote better management of natural resources related to agricultural production 
and improve producers’ climate resilience and adaptation. Irrigation projects 

                                                
5  Total financing of the CCLIP (AR-X1006) was set at US$600 million, of which US$200 million were executed 

under the first operation (1956/OC-AR) and US$230 million were allocated to the second operation 
(2573/OC-AR), leaving US$170 million available. In the context of programming loans with the Bank for 2016, 
the government has decided to allocate US$100 million to the financing of this third operation, leaving a 
remainder of US$70 million. No additional operations are expected. 



 - 14 - 
 
 

 
internalize measures for adapting to hydrometeorological and climate change risks 
(e.g., expanding drainage for rural roads, reviewing hydrological series for irrigation 
works), as well as elements of sustainability and water use efficiency. Another 
benefit is climate change mitigation through the project to improve rural roads in 
Corrientes by reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 69.9 tons of CO2 equivalent 
thanks to reductions in fuel consumption, or an emissions cut of 43.2% from the 
scenario without the project. 

2.4 The execution of the PROSAP program is governed by the program Operating 
Regulations and the respective Environmental and Social Manual (ESM), with 
updated guides for environmental and social evaluation, including involuntary 
resettlement and mitigation and control procedures, as well as public consultation 
and monitoring and evaluation. In line with directive B.14 of Operational Policy 
OP-703, during preparation, an independent socioenvironmental review of the 
execution of PROSAP III was conducted. It found that the executing agencies had 
improved their socioenvironmental management capacity, and no 
socioenvironmental liabilities were identified. 

2.5 All of the infrastructure projects have socioenvironmental impact studies and 
environmental and social management plans that comply with IDB policies. The 
program Operating Regulations and ESM were reviewed mainly to incorporate 
gender equality opportunities and actions to prevent and adapt to the risks from 
disasters and climate change. Also, monitoring measures were strengthened by 
defining evaluation and monitoring indicators. Where applicable, projects include 
plans to ensure that indigenous peoples share in the projects’ benefits, in keeping 
with Operational Policy OP-765. Plans are also in place to address effects on assets, 
in keeping with Operational Policy OP-710. Likewise, all the projects include plans 
for pest management in their training and assistance programs, as well as plans for 
taking action on gender with a view toward increasing the participation of women in 
training programs, technical assistance, and other services, consistent with 
Operational Policy OP-761 of the Bank. 

2.6 Participatory consultative meetings were held in the areas to benefit from the 
projects as part of the design process. Prior to the Bank’s no objection for contracting 
the works, where necessary, the provinces will submit the pertinent environmental 
permits granted by the corresponding authorities. As established in the program 
Operating Regulations, prior to issuing the public tender for the works, the URC will 
present evidence to the Bank that it has obtained those permits. The environmental 
and social studies are available for consultation at the URC/PROSAP and Bank 
websites. The environmental and social management report (ESMR) summarizes 
the outcomes of and recommendations for environmental and social management 
to ensure the operation’s environmental and social sustainability. The borrower 
agrees to carry out—through the executing agency—the program activities in 
accordance with the environmental and social standards and recommendations 
included in the program Operating Regulations, including its ESM and the program’s 
environmental and social management plan (ESMP). The special contractual 
conditions on environmental and social management are detailed in paragraph 6.4 
of the ESMR. 

http://www.prosap.gob.ar/uas_evaluaciones.aspx
http://www.prosap.gob.ar/uas_evaluaciones.aspx
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40664746


 - 15 - 
 
 

 
C. Fiduciary risks  

2.7 The main fiduciary risks identified are associated with processes of interaction 
between the national and provincial levels, which are often complex. These risks 
include: (i) delays in procurement processes; (ii) delays in the submission of 
AWPs/procurement plans by the provinces and deficient quality thereof; and 
(iii) delays in providing accounting information to the Bank. Experience with 
execution has demonstrated that these risks are medium, that the executing agency 
has adequate execution capacity, and that the executing agency has been able to 
manage the aforementioned risks effectively in previous operations. The following 
were agreed upon as the main mitigation measures: (i) quarterly update and 
management of the procurement plan; (ii) implementation of Subcomponent 2.3: 
Provincial Institution Strengthening; and (iii) permanent 65% flexibility for justification 
of expenses for disbursement of advances of funds (see Annex III). 

D. Other project risks and special issues  

2.8 An inherent risk involved in rural infrastructure works is weak commitment by 
beneficiaries to operating and maintaining the infrastructure works. The main 
mitigation measure for this comes in the framework of participatory processes for 
local empowerment, as well as the implementation of training and technical 
assistance programs. Also, the risks associated with changes to the national and 
provincial government are: weak interagency coordination between the program’s 
executing agencies, as well as scattered and uncoordinated implementation of 
external financing for agricultural projects The main mitigation measure is thus the 
implementation of targeted training plans for the provincial execution units. 

2.9 Regarding the program’s overall sustainability, at the level of the provincial 
governments and producer organizations, PROSAP has been able to build 
management mechanisms and secure commitments to ensure the operation and 
maintenance of the works. It has also been able to consolidate the capacities and 
processes developed in Component 2 (See program Operating Regulations).  

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower is the Argentine Republic, and the Ministry of Agroindustry will be the 
executing agency, through the Unit for Rural Change (URC). The URC will be 
responsible for the execution, administration, and supervision of the program. Within 
it, the Program and Project Management Area will be in charge of executing the 
activities of the projects financed under the program. It will also have support from 
the crosscutting support areas and units that are part of the URC. 

3.2 The Ministry of Agroindustry is responsible for the local counterpart of the national 
projects. The URC’s main responsibilities include: preparing the budget and 
controlling and supervising fulfillment of the local contribution by the provinces and 
other participating agencies; supervising and coordinating the preparation of the 
AWPs, procurement plans, and financial plans; preparing and verifying 
disbursement requests; supervising work and providing legal and administrative 
support to the subexecuting agencies in procurement processes; paying contractors 
and suppliers; coordinating all program activities with the provinces and other 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670869


 - 16 - 
 
 

 
beneficiaries; monitoring and evaluating project and program activities; and 
commissioning and serving as counterpart for the external audit. 

3.3 The program’s execution is governed by the program Operating Regulations, which 
contain the details required to guide and regulate program operations, including the 
requirements for transferring resources to the provincial projects. The program 
Operating Regulations and their annexes also describe the specific execution 
mechanism for each component. As a special condition precedent to the first 
disbursement of loan proceeds, the executing agency, through the URC, will 
provide evidence that the updated program Operating Regulations have been 
approved and entered into effect, and have been reviewed in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank, including the ESM. The review 
will include updating the description of the program’s components and excluding 
investment projects with Category “A” socioenvironmental impacts under the 
environmental and social safeguard policies from eligibility. 

3.4 Component 1 of the program is executed through the URC’s Program and Project 
Management area and its Infrastructure and Services unit, which coordinates the 
relationships with the liaison entities and the units executing the projects at the 
provincial level, as established in the program Operating Regulations. For each 
case, specific planning, execution, monitoring, and evaluation functions are 
established for the projects. Component 2 of the program is executed by the 
Program and Project Management area through its Competitiveness unit and 
through NRC. The process for executing this component includes the following 
phases: identification and eligibility of clusters and territorial initiatives based on 
prioritization criteria; preparation and evaluation of specific plans for improving 
competitiveness; and implementation, monitoring, and technical evaluation of the 
projects. The execution of both components is supported by the following 
crosscutting areas of the URC: institutional development, environmental 
management, legal issues, internal control, finance and accounting, procurement, 
and management oversight and outcomes. 

3.5 Furthermore, the main fiduciary measures to be applied to the proposed operation 
were agreed upon during preparation. These measures are described in Annex III 
and include aspects of disbursements and audits, as well as thresholds for 
procurement processes, in accordance with the Bank’s policies and procedures as 
set forth in documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9. 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.6 Monitoring. The program has a Monitoring and Evaluation Plan. During project 
execution, the executing agency will prepare and send the Bank a monitoring report 
no later than 60 days from the end of each six-month period. These reports will focus 
on fulfillment of the output indicators and progress on outcomes, identifying 
problems encountered, and corrective measures taken. No later than during the last 
quarter of each year during project execution, the executing agency will submit the 
AWP for the following year, to the Bank’s satisfaction. 

3.7 Evaluation. The executing agency will conduct two independent evaluations funded 
by the loan proceeds: (i) the midterm evaluation will be submitted to the Bank no 
later than 90 days after 50% of the loan proceeds have been disbursed or two years 
have passed from the date of the Bank’s first disbursement of the loan proceeds, 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670869
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40679756


 - 17 - 
 
 

 
whichever occurs first; and (ii) the final evaluation, no later than 90 days after 90% 
of the loan proceeds have been disbursed by the Bank. These reports will include: 
(i) an evaluation of the quality of the data provided by the monitoring system; (ii) the 
level of fulfillment of the expected outputs, outcomes, and progress on the expected 
impacts as established in the Results Matrix; and (iii) the level of compliance with 
the ESMPs for the program and the investment projects, including a summary of the 
socioenvironmental audits and the progress in the social and environmental 
indicators. 

3.8 Impact evaluation. Evaluation of the program’s impact will have two parts. The 
proposed impact evaluation for public infrastructure will be conducted for two 
irrigation systems and a rural road. Impact estimates will be based on the difference 
in differences method applied to a panel of homes divided into a treatment group 
and a control group. For this, two surveys—a baseline and a final evaluation—are 
planned. The sample size for the treatment group will be 465, as well as 465 for the 
control group (total for the three projects). For the beneficiaries of the public 
investment projects, the control group will be comprised of farmers with no access 
to irrigation systems and/or improved roads. Farmers will be selected at random 
from the lists available in the executing agency’s archives.  

3.9 To evaluate the impact of the NRCs and clusters, the phase-in and difference in 
differences methods will be used. The implementation strategy will identify a 
treatment/control group based on the year in which producers enter the program. 
NRC not involving pressurized irrigation will be included in the evaluation (as they 
are included in the evaluation of public works investment). Thus, 220 NRCs will be 
evaluated. The sample will be 155 producers, selected at random from among the 
NRC. The control group will be defined based on farms that requested NRC but did 
not receive funding. 



Annex I - AR-L1198

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Strategic Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Regional Context Indicators

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Strategy Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2687

     Country Program Results Matrix GN-2849

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Highly Evaluable Weight Maximum Score

9.9 10

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution 9.6 33.33% 10

     3.1 Program Diagnosis 3.0

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions 3.6

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality 3.0

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis 10.0 33.33% 10

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic Analysis 4.0

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits 1.5

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs 1.5

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions 1.5

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis 1.5

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 10.0 33.33% 10

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms 2.5

     5.2 Evaluation Plan 7.5

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary Yes

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries and/or public sector entity in the following 

dimensions:

Gender Equality Yes

Labor

Environment

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector entity prior to approval to increase the 

likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps in the sector that were identified in the 

project document and/or in the evaluation plan
Yes

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

Financial Management: Budget, Accounting and Reporting, External control.

Procurement: Information System.

The objective of the CCLIP is to contribute to the competitiveness and development of the rural economies through the implementation of individual programs. This third individual operation seeks to improve productivity levels, increase sales and value added of small and medium-scale 

farmers, with a focus on building resilience to climate change. The program will implement two components: (i) competitiveness support, which includes the strengthening of public infrastructure via major works (rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage, fire prevention in forests, and tertiary rural 

roads), and a sub-component for minor works (public works and community improvement); and (ii) support services for competitiveness comprising: a technological modernization fund, territorial development initiatives and institutional strengthening and pre-investment.

The documentation is well structured, with a solid diagnosis of the problems faced by the prioritized areas and small- and medium-scale producers.

The proposed solution is related to the magnitude of the problems identified. The results matrix (RM) reflects the program objectives and shows a clear vertical logic for each component. The key top-level indicators have values that are the result of the ex-ante economic analysis. The lower-

level indicators reflect the design of the two components. The RM includes SMART indicators at the impact, outcome and output levels with their respective reference values, targets and means for collecting the information. The documentation alludes to rigorous empirical evidence on the 

effectiveness of similar interventions in other countries and Argentina, specifically on the PROSAP.

The economic analysis is based on a cost-benefit analysis for the major works for irrigation and rural roads and for the small works for fire control, and support to the private sector. The study provides results for each intervention, as well as a weighted average which yields a 20.6% IRR, and a 

NPV of US$77.7 million. A sensitivity analysis is performed based on key variables that can affect the benefits and major cost. The conservative scenario finds an IRR of 15.5% with an NPV of US$28.3 million.

The monitoring and evaluation plan proposes quasi-experimental evaluations to measure the impact of the irrigation systems, rural roads, and the non-reimbursable funds. The strategy is to measure the impact of these interventions, also the incremental impact of receiving two types of 

treatment (irrigation + non-reimbursable funds). Importantly, no rigorous impact evaluations in Argentina have been done for interventions on rural roads or for multiple treatments.  The impact evaluations will make an important contribution to the knowledge base of the sector, country and 

Bank.

The risks identified in the risk matrix seem reasonable and are classified as medium risks.  All of them include mitigation actions and performance indicators.

Gender action plans will be prepared for each major public work in order to facilitate the 

participation of women in training and technical assistance.

No rigorous impact evaluations in Argentina have been done for interventions on rural roads or for 

multiple treatments.  The impact evaluations will make an important contribution to the knowledge 

base of the sector, country and Bank.

Strategic Planning National System, Monitoring and Evaluation National System.

Medium

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

-Beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable use of natural capital (#)

-Micro / small / medium enterprises financed (#)

-Micro / small / medium enterprises provided with non-financial support (#)

-Roads built or upgraded  (km)*

-Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological and managerial tools to improve public service 

delivery (#)

Aligned

Improvement of rural infrastructure in regional economies, principally irrigation and drainage, that 

contribute to improving productivity and access to markets

The intervention is included in the 2015 Operational Program.

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Aligned

-Productivity and Innovation

-Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability

I. Strategic Alignment



Annex II 
Page 1 of 3 

 
 

SUMMARY RESULTS MATRIX 

(SEE COMPLETE RESULTS MATRIX) 

 

General objective: To contribute to the competitiveness and development of regional rural economies. 

 

Specific objective: To improve productivity and increase sales and value-added for small and medium-sized producers, with a focus on 
strengthening resilience to climate change. 

 

Impact Units 
Baseline Target* Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

Impact 1: Higher per-farmer annual 
gross production value in the area 
of influence of the selected projects 

US$/farm 50,032 2016 75,561 2020 

Infrastructure design 
documents; baseline 
and final program 
surveys 

Reports on major and 
minor works design; NRC; 
target reflects the target 
group 

Impact 2: Decreased production 
losses associated with drought  

% of total 
production/ 
farm/year 

20.5% 2016 15% 2020 

Infrastructure design 
documents; baseline 
and final program 
surveys 

Irrigation systems selected 
for impact evaluation (San 
Juan and Salta). Climate 
change is the main cause 
of increased drought in the 
program’s intervention 
area 

*  Target by program end. 

 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40673929


Annex II 
Page 2 of 3 
 
 

EXPECTED OUTCOMES 

Outcomes Units 
Baseline Target 

Means of verification Observations 
Value Year Value Year 

1. Improved productivity for 
producers served by financed 
irrigation systems  

       

Indicator: 

Average increase in land 
productivity (including both 
agriculture and livestock 
producers) 

US$/Ha 5,408 2016 6,866 2020 

Program monitoring and 
evaluation reports; 
baseline survey and 
ex post evaluations 

The assessment of 
physical productivity per 
hectare using the baseline 
product price for each 
project 

2. Greater irrigation water use 
efficiency by rehabilitated 
systems 

      
 

Indicator: 

Volume of water delivered to the 
farms / Volume of water that 
enters the system. 

% 66 2016 90 2020 

Individual project 
completion reports; final 
evaluation; impact 
assessment 

Includes all four irrigation 
systems 

3. Improved rural accessibility on 
Route 13 in the province of 
Corrientes 

       

Indicator: 

Lower number of impassable 
days 

Days 80 2016 30 2020 
Infrastructure design 
documents; baseline and 
final program surveys 

 

4. Reduction of the average area 
affected annually by fire 

      
 

Indicator:  

Average area affected by fire in 
the province of Chubut 

Ha 1,439.03 2016 719.5 2020 
Provincial firefighting 
service 

 



Annex II 
Page 3 of 3 

 
 

Outcomes Units 
Baseline Target 

Means of verification Observations 
Value Year Value Year 

5. Diversification of markets 
and/or products in regions 
served by the program. 

       

Indicator: 

Number of business initiatives 
that increase sales by at least 
20%. 

Initiatives 0 2016 22 2020 

Cluster diagnostic 
reports; design of 
productive initiatives; 
baseline and end-of-
program surveys 

Includes initiatives 
financed by: (i) the 
technology modernization 
fund; and (ii) territorial 
development initiatives 

6. Users who adopt technologies 
for adapting to climate change. 

      
Beneficiaries of major 
irrigation projects with 
support from Component 2 
or another source of 
financing for in-field 
investments. Pressurized 
irrigation includes drip 
irrigation, micro spray, 
spray, and hose 

Indicator: 

Number of agricultural and 
livestock producers adopting 
pressurized irrigation 
technologies 

People 0 2016 1,600 2020 
Project design reports; 
final evaluation report; 
URC reports 

 
 
 
 



Annex III 
Page 1 of 8 

 
 

FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS 
 

Country: Argentina 

Project number: AR-1198 

Name: Provincial Agricultural Services Program – PROSAP IV 

Executing agency: Ministry of Agroindustry 

Prepared by: Marisol Pinto Bernal (FMP/CAR), Teodoro Noel (FMP/CAR), 
and Carlos Carpizo (FMP/CAR) 

 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 The Provincial Agricultural Services Program (PROSAP IV) will be executed by the 
Ministry of Agroindustry through the PROSAP Execution Unit, supervised by the Unit 
for Rural Change (URC) created by MAGyP Resolution 45 of 9 December 2009, 
which have the experience and installed capacity to execute projects partially 
financed with Bank resources. 

1.2 PROSAP IV is the third PROSAP operation to be executed by the URC under CLIPP 
AR-X1006. The plan is to simultaneously execute two programs—PROSAP III 
(2573/OC-AR) and PROSAP IV—for several months until the first operation 
concludes in mid-2017.  

1.3 The risk assessment for this operation was performed in the framework of a Project 
Risk Management (PRM) workshop with the executing agency. The results of the 
methodology returned a medium level of financial management risk and a medium 
level of procurement risk. 

1.4 There were no plans to conduct a new institutional capacity assessment because 
the URC maintains the same internal structure and technical and management 
team, ensuring the adequate capacity it has demonstrated during execution of 
PROSAP III (2573/OC-AR) and three other IDB operations currently being executed 
(2853/OC-AR, 2740/OC-AR, and 3255/OC-AR). The URC’s adequate institutional 
capacity has also been verified continually through oversight visits by the Bank’s 
fiduciary team.  

1.5 The program does not include financing from the International Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development. A number of different actors are involved in 
execution and are coordinated by the URC/PROSAP.  

II. THE EXECUTING AGENCY’S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT  

2.1 As noted, the URC has a long track record of executing IDB-financed programs. 
Starting in 2009, the URC satisfactorily completed execution of two IDB operations 
(1956/OC-AR PROSAP II and 2086/OC-AR PROVIAR). Counting completed 
programs and programs currently being executed, the URC has managed a total of 
six Bank-financed projects.  



Annex III 
Page 2 of 8 
 
 

2.2 The fiduciary systems used for program execution are the budgetary system via the 
Integrated Financial Information System (IFIS) and the Information and Accounting 
System (UEPEX). 

2.3 As far as procurement of goods and services, the URC/PROSAP uses Bank policies 
for centralized purchases and verifies the application of those policies for the 
purchasing conducted at the provincial level. 

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

3.1 For analysis of the project’s fiduciary risks, the Bank’s PRM methodology was used 
to identify and rate fiduciary risks, and the project RMM was developed. The project’s 
fiduciary risk (financial and procurement) was determined to be medium and is 
related to the processes of interaction between the national and provincial levels, 
which are often complex. Nevertheless, experience has demonstrated that the 
executing agency has adequate execution capacity and has been able to manage 
the risks effectively.  

3.2 The supervision modality applicable to financial management and procurement has 
been determined based on the risks identified, although it could change during 
project execution pursuant to the evaluations conducted.  

 

Institutional Capacity and Fiduciary Risk 

Institutional Capacity N/A Tool: N/A 

Fiduciary risks Medium Tool: PRM 

Type 
of risk1 

Risk Rating Mitigation Actions 

FM 
Delays in submitting 
accounting information 

Medium 

Prepare and execute a plan for financial 
management staff to conduct annual visits 
to the execution unit to proactively identify 
delays in execution by coexecuting 
agencies. 

Apply the permanent 65% flexibility for 
justification of expenses for disbursement 
of advances of funds. 

P 

Delays in procurement 
processes due to weak 
planning that prevents early 
identification of appropriate 
procurement strategy 

Medium 

Comprehensive planning of the operation 
to coordinate the AWP with the 
procurement plan. 

Updating and management of the 
procurement plan as set forth in Article 
6.01(c) of the General Conditions. 

 

Delays in the submission of 
AWPs/procurement plans by 
the provinces and deficient 
quality thereof 

Medium 
Implementation of the Provincial 
Institutional Strengthening subcomponent. 

 

                                                
1  Financial Management (FM); Procurement (P). 



Annex III 
Page 3 of 8 

 
 

IV. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE CONTRACT 

4.1 To expedite negotiation of the contract by the project team, and the Legal 
Department in particular, the following is a list of agreements and requirements that, 
where applicable, will be taken into consideration in the Special Provisions or the 
Annex. They may be updated or changed during program execution, if necessary, 
with the corresponding documentation and authorization from the Bank. 

a. Conditions precedent to the first disbursement: The executing agency will 
provide evidence that the updated program Operating Regulations have been 
approved and entered into effect, and have been reviewed in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed upon with the Bank, including the Environmental 
and Social Manual (ESM).  

b. Disbursement management: The executing agency will submit the program’s 
financial planning in keeping with the guidelines agreed upon by the Bank and 
the country. The minimum percentage required for replenishment of an 
advance of funds will be 65%, as this is a decentralized program with complex 
execution (permanent flexibility). 

c. Exchange rate: For the purposes of Article 4.10 of the General Conditions, 
the parties agree that the applicable exchange rate will be the one indicated in 
paragraph (b)(i) of that Article. For the purposes of determining the equivalent 
of expenses incurred in local currency and charged to the local contribution or 
reimbursement of expenses charged to the loan, the agreed-upon exchange 
rate will be the rate established by the Central Bank of the Argentine Republic 
on the first working day of the month in which the borrower, the executing 
agency, or any other individual or legal entity delegated the authority to incur 
expenditures makes the corresponding payment to the contractor, supplier, or 
beneficiary. In addition, the exchange rate indicated in paragraph (b)(i) of 
Article 4.10 of the General Conditions will be used to determine the 
equivalence of expenses incurred in local currency and charged to the 
proceeds of the loan and the local contribution.  

d. Financial oversight: For the purposes of flexibility and to be able to adjust the 
loan portfolio to the capacity of the Office of the National Auditor General (AGN) 
to conduct audits in a timely manner, it is recommended that both the AGN and 
independent firms be contractually eligible to conduct audits of the program. 

e. Other specific requirements for the financial management of projects that 
will be established in the contract or agreement to be signed with the Bank: 
Disbursements will be made in accordance with the provisions of Articles 4.03, 
4.04, 4.05, 4.06, and 4.07 of the General Conditions of the loan contract. 

V. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION 

 Procurement execution 

5.1 The March 2011 Policy for the procurement of works and goods financed by the 
Inter-American Development Bank (document GN-2349-9) and the March 2011 
Policy for selection and contracting of consultants financed by the Inter-American 
Development Bank (document GN-2350-9) will be applied. It has also been agreed 



Annex III 
Page 4 of 8 
 
 

with the executing agency that the Procurement Plan Execution System (SEPA) will 
be used for the program’s procurement planning administration and management. 

5.2 Management of the proceeds from the transfers to be made under the program2 will 
be decentralized and under the supervision of the URC/PROSEP, in accordance 
with the program Operating Regulations. The URC/PROSAP will be responsible for 
following the guidelines established in the loan contract for all procurement under 
the program, both centralized and decentralized. 

a. Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services: Works, goods, 
and nonconsulting services contracts3 arising under the project and subject to 
international competitive bidding (ICB) will be executed using the Bank’s 
standard bidding documents (SBDs). Bidding processes subject to national 
competitive bidding (NCB) will be executed using national bidding documents 
acceptable to the Bank. The program’s sector specialist is responsible for 
reviewing the technical specifications for procurement when selection 
processes are being prepared. No direct contracting is provided for in these 
categories, but any direct contracting provided for during the course of the 
program will be identified in the procurement plans along with the 
corresponding justification. Selection processes requiring prequalification of 
bidders will also be identified.  

b. Selection and contracting of consultants: Consulting services contracted 
under the project will be included in the procurement plan and executed using 
the standard request for proposals (SRP) issued by the Bank. 

 Selection of individual consultants: In cases identified in the procurement 
plans, individual consultants will be contracted pursuant to the provisions of 
document GN-2350-9, Section V, paragraphs 5.1 to 5.4. For URC/PROSAP 
operations, consultants may be hired by direct selection if, at that time, they 
are performing work under contracts financed by other programs being 
executed by the unit.  

 Training: The procurement plan details the processes that are applied and 
contracted as consulting or nonconsulting services on a case-by-case basis. 

c. Incremental URC expenses: Incremental expenses required during the 
program will include: leasing and services; maintenance; common expenses; 
office supplies, courier and postage, cleaning services, computer supplies, 
insurance, telephone, and minor expenses required for operation of the 
URC/PROSAP that will be financed by the program counterpart and incurred 
in compliance with the administrative procedures of the executing agency. 
These operating expenses do not include salaries for civil servants. Fees, 
travel expenses, per diem, and health insurance expenses required for the 
regular performance of activities and consulting assignments contracted by the 
program will be charged to the loan proceeds under the corresponding 
component.  

                                                
2  Transfers refer to nonreimbursable contributions (NRCs) that are granted to different types of beneficiaries 

selected via the mechanisms described in the program Operating Regulations. 
3  Policies for the procurement of works and goods financed by the Inter-American Development Bank 

(document GN-2349-9), paragraph 1.1: Nonconsulting services are treated as goods. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=774396


Annex III 
Page 5 of 8 

 
 

d. Advance procurement/Retroactive financing: No advance procurement or 
retroactive financing are anticipated. 

e. National preference: For contracts subject to international competitive 
bidding, bids offering goods originating in Argentina will be subject to a price 
preference—pending Bank approval—equivalent to 15%. 

f. Appropriateness of expenditures: The appropriateness of an expenditure—
that is, its terms of reference, technical specifications, and the program 
procurement budget—will be the responsibility of the Project Team Leader and 
will always require no objection prior to the start of the procurement and 
pursuant to the Project Team Leader’s operational discretion. 

g. Other: There are no special provisions regarding grants, land acquisitions, 
rights, or rights-of-way needed for project execution. 

 

Thresholds for International Competitive Bidding and International Shortlists (US$) 

Method ICB works 
ICB goods and 

nonconsulting services 
International shortlist for 

consulting services 

Threshold ≥5,000,000 ≥500,000 ≥500,000 

Note: (1) In addition, contracts worth more than US$200,000 will be listed on the UNDB and Bank websites. 
(2) Goods worth less than US$100,000 can be procured through shopping, as can works for less than 
US$350,000. 

 

 Main procurement items: 

5.3 The following table provides a list of the main procurement items identified for the 
program thus far. 

 

Main Procurement Items 

Activity 
Selection 
method 

Estimated 
tender/announcement 

date 

Estimated 
amount 

Works       

Irrigation works – Tala River, Tucumán 
province. 

ICB 1 May 2017 16,242,821.00 

Irrigation works – Cacique Guaymallen – 
Jocoli system – Mendoza Province. 

ICB 1 February 2017 19,691,407.00 

Road work RP 13 – Corrientes Province ICB 30 October 2016 9,436,386.00 

* To view the 18-month procurement plan, click here. 

 

 Procurement supervision 

5.4 Procurement will be subject to ex post supervision for processes below the NCB 
thresholds for works, goods, and non-consulting services, as well as for consulting 
services of less than US$200,000 All ICB processes, direct contracting, and 

file:///D:/DATA.IDB/Documents/Argentina/Adquisiciones/2016/Anexo%20III/PROSAP%20IV%20AR-L1198/Copy%20of%20PROSAP%20IV%20Plan%20de%20Adquisiciones%20-%2012.09.16.xlsx%23RANGE!A11
file:///D:/DATA.IDB/Documents/Argentina/Adquisiciones/2016/Anexo%20III/PROSAP%20IV%20AR-L1198/Copy%20of%20PROSAP%20IV%20Plan%20de%20Adquisiciones%20-%2012.09.16.xlsx%23RANGE!A11
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40676313


Annex III 
Page 6 of 8 
 
 

consulting services of greater than or equal to US$200,000 will be subject to ex ante 
review, as will processes whose complexity or risk justify ex ante supervision. 

5.5 For individual consultants, all contracting for amounts over US$50,000 will be 
subject to ex ante review. Contracting for less than that amount will be subject to 
ex post review. 

5.6 For contracting in the framework of the transfers, the URC/PROSAP will supervise 
to ensure they meet the provisions of the loan contract and the program Operating 
Regulations.  

5.7 Ex post reviews will be conducted every 12 months in accordance with the project 
supervision plan by reviewing a sample extracted from all the processes carried out 
during the review period. The ex post review reports will include at least one physical 
inspection visit,4 selected from the procurement processes subject to ex post review.  

 

Ex Post Review Threshold 

Works 
Goods and nonconsulting 

services 
Consulting services 

<5,000,000 <500,000 <200,000 

Note: (1) The thresholds established for ex post review are applied on the basis of the executing agency’s fiduciary 
execution capacity and may be modified by the Bank to the extent that this capacity changes. (2) Goods of less 
than US$100,000 may be procured through shopping, as can works for less than US$350,000. In both cases, 
review will be conducted on an ex post basis. 

 

 Special provisions 

a. Measures to reduce the likelihood of corruption: The provisions set forth in 
documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 on prohibited practices will be followed. 
The executing agency is also responsible for checking the list of firms and 
individuals prohibited from participating in processes financed by multilateral 
development banks. 

b. Other special procedures: Keep the procurement plan updated in 
accordance with project needs and coordinated with project planning. The 
processes carried out under the program will be included in the procurement 
plan approved by the Bank before the public tender is announced. 

 Records and files 

5.8 The contracting area will be in charge of maintaining files on the project procurement 
conducted in the URC/PROSAP, while for procurement in the provinces, the original 
files will be maintained. 

                                                
4  The inspection verifies the existence of the acquisitions, leaving verification of quality and compliance with 

specifications to the sector specialist. 



Annex III 
Page 7 of 8 

 
 

VI. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS  

 Programming and budget  

6.1 The budget of the executing agency includes programmatic categories and other 
classifications by expenditure purpose (line items), including: personnel expenses; 
consumer goods; nonpersonnel services; fixed assets; transfers; financial assets; 
debt service and reduction in other liabilities; and other expenses.  

6.2 The URC is responsible for annual budget preparation and programming. It is in 
charge of carrying out all the procedures involved in preparing the annual budget for 
approval. As the need arises for expanding or reallocated budget items, the URC 
requests the changes and is in charge of securing their approval. The budgeted 
funds are executed via quarterly and monthly accrual quotas assigned by the 
National Budget Office (Ministry of the Treasury and Public Finance). 

6.3 No problems are expected in terms of budget management, timeliness of local 
counterpart contributions, or system delays affecting execution.  

 Treasury and disbursement management 

6.4 The National Treasury transfers the local counterpart funds to the URC, into an 
account opened for the program for the exclusive use of this loan, as it is a program 
cofinanced with Bank resources. 

6.5 Disbursements will be made based on a detailed financial plan. Its model has been 
agreed upon with officials from the Ministry of the Treasury and Public Finance and 
the Cabinet Leadership. 

 Accounting, information systems, and reporting 

6.6 The URC will use UEPEX as its financial management system. Cash-basis 
accounting will be used and International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) will 
be followed when applicable in accordance with established national criteria. The 
following financial reports will be required: (i) financial execution plan for up to 
180 days following a request for an advance of funds; (ii) audited annual financial 
statements as stipulated in Article 7.03 paragraph (a) of the General Conditions of 
the loan contract; and (iii) other reports required by the fiduciary specialists.  

 Internal control and internal audit 

6.7 The national internal control body is the Sindicatura General de la Nación [Office of 
the Comptroller General] (SIGEN). The internal audit of each executing agency is 
performed through the Internal Audit Unit. The unit, which reports directly to the 
minister, is in charge of conducting audits and making recommendations pursuant 
to the powers granted under Law 24,156 (Financial Administration Act).  

 External control: External financial audit and project reports 

6.8 In 2011, the Bank concluded a diagnostic on the government auditing practices of 
the AGN, the result of which was to validate the AGN as auditor of Bank projects. 

6.9 However, based on the track record of the promptness of audit submissions, in 
October 2014, it was agreed with Argentina to reduce the AGN’s portfolio to match 
its real compliance capacity. Programs 2853/OC-AR, 2740/OC-AR, 3255/OC-AR, 
and 2573/OC-AR are being audited by the AGN. 



Annex III 
Page 8 of 8 
 
 

6.10 For purposes of flexibility and to be able to adjust the loan portfolio to the capacity 
of the AGN to conduct timely audits, it is recommended that both the AGN and 
independent firms be contractually eligible to conduct program audits. 

6.11 Audits will be conducted based on the new terms of reference prepared by the Bank 
in 2014. 

 Financial supervision of the project5 

6.12 The initial financial supervision plan is based on risk and fiduciary capacity 
evaluations conducted on the basis of onsite and desk reviews of the program, and 
includes the scope of operational, financial, and accounting actions; compliance and 
legal considerations; frequency; and identification of responsible parties.  

6.13 In addition to the reports required for processing disbursements and the annual 
audit, another report that will be required for conducting financial supervision will be 
the financial plan.  

 Execution arrangements 

6.14 The details of program execution can be found in the draft Operating Regulations 
and the Proposal for Operation Development. 

 Other financial management agreements and requirements 

6.15 N/A. 

 

                                                
5  See Financial Management Policy for IDB-financed Project (OP-273-6) Annex I on application of the 

financial management principles and requirements, requirement 4 on financial oversight.  



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-___/16 
 
 
 

Argentina. Loan ____/OC-AR to the Argentine Republic. Provincial Agricultural Services 
Program - PROSAP IV. Third Individual Operation under the Conditional Credit Line 

for Investment Projects (CCLIP) AR-X1006 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Argentine Republic, as Borrower, for the purpose of granting it a 
financing aimed at cooperating in the execution of the Provincial Agricultural Services Program -
PROSAP IV, which constitutes the third individual operation under the Conditional Credit Line 
for Investment Projects (CCLIP) AR-X1006 approved on 16 January 2008 by Resolution 
DE-6/08. Such financing will be in the amount of up to US$100,000,000, from the resources of 
the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, and will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the 
Special Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on ___ ____________ 2016) 
 
 
 
LEG/SGO/CSC/IDBDOCS: 40712797 
Pipeline No.: AR-L1198 


















































Note to Executive Board representatives

Focal points:

Technical questions: Dispatch of documentation:

Glayson Ferrari dos Santos
Country Programme Manager
Tel.: +502 2384 3100
e-mail: g.ferraridossantos@ifad.org

Alessandra Zusi Bergés
Officer-in-Charge
Governing Bodies Office
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2092
e-mail: gb_office@ifad.org

For: Approval

Document: EB 2015/LOT/P.34

EDate: 12 November 2015Distribution: Public
Original: Spanish

President's report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
El Salvador for the National Programme of
Rural Economic Transformation for Living
Well - Rural Adelante



EB 2015/LOT/P.34

i

Contents

Abbreviations and acronyms ii
Map of the programme area iii
Financing summary iv
Recommendation for approval 1
I. Strategic context and rationale 1

A. Country and rural development and poverty context 1
B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-

COSOP 2
II. Programme description 2

A. Programme area and target group 2
B. Programme development objective 3
C. Components/outcomes 3

III. Programme implementation 4
A. Approach 4
B. Organizational framework 4
C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and

knowledge management 5
D. Financial management, procurement and governance 5
E. Supervision 5

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits 5
A. Programme costs 5
B. Programme financing 6
C. Summary benefit and economic analysis 6
D. Sustainability 6
E. Risk identification and mitigation 7

V. Corporate considerations 7
A. Compliance with IFAD policies 7
B. Harmonization and alignment 7
C. Innovation and scaling up 7
D. Policy engagement 8

VI. Legal instruments and authority 8
VII. Recommendation 8

Appendices

I. Negotiated financing agreement
II. Logical framework



EB 2015/LOT/P.34

ii

Abbreviations and acronyms

ASAP Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme
COSOP country strategic opportunities programme
DGDR Rural Development Directorate
IRR internal rate of return
NPV net present value
PMU programme management unit



iii

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.3

4

M
a
p

 o
f th

e
 p

ro
g

ra
m

m
e
 a

re
a



EB 2015/LOT/P.34

iv

Republic of El Salvador

National Programme of Rural Economic Transformation
for Living Well - Rural Adelante

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of El Salvador

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock

Total programme cost: US$18.69 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 10.85 million (equivalent to approximately
US$12.13 million)

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant: SDR 3.56 million (equivalent to approximately

US$5.0 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including agrace period of 3 years, with an interest rate per
annum equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference
interest rate

Contribution of the borrower: US$500,000

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.06 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.34

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation on the proposed
financing to the Republic of El Salvador for the National Programme of Rural Economic
Transformation for Living Well - Rural Adelante, as contained in paragraph 46.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of El Salvador
for the National Programme of Rural Economic
Transformation for Living Well - Rural Adelante

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. El Salvador has the highest population density in Latin America, with an area of

just 20,742 km² and a population of 6,279,783 (2014). Demographic growth was
0.5 per cent per annum during the period 2001-2013, the lowest rate in Central
America and one of the lowest in Latin America as a whole, owing to negative
migratory flows and a low gross birth rate.

2. El Salvador is a middle-income country. The economy has transitioned from an
agrarian model to a model based on services, consumption, and nontraditional
agricultural and industrial exports. Real GDP grew 1.9 per cent per annum and GNI
per capita 1.19 per cent per annum during the period 2001-2013. Inflation in 2013
stood at 0.76 per cent compared to a high of 7.26 per cent in 2008. Low growth
results in part from low levels of investment – leading in turn to insufficient
employment that is poor in quality and limited income growth for the population.
The low level of economic growth is directly related to poor productivity both
overall and by sector, in addition to insecurity and crime.

3. Poverty in El Salvador is associated with both historic internal issues – the civil
war, the economic and market model and natural disasters such as the earthquake
in 2011 – and, more recently, a series of external shocks such as falling coffee
prices, the global recession and higher oil prices, all of which have contributed to
low economic growth and slow progress on social indicators. Poverty affects in
particular vulnerable and traditionally excluded population groups such as
indigenous peoples, children, young people, women and seniors. Among rural
young people between the ages of 18 and 35, 38 per cent live in poverty and are
seriously impacted by crime and violence. Among rural women, many of whom are
subject to unemployment and family violence, 42 per cent are poor. Although there
are no exact figures on the number of indigenous people in El Salvador, Ministry of
Health estimates indicate that in the Eastern region alone there are 32,725
indigenous people (2014), the vast majority of whom are living in poverty. This
population group has historically been marginalized, until 2014 when the
Legislative Assembly issued official recognition.

4. During the period 2000-2013 poverty declined in the country. The percentage of
households living in poverty fell from 38.8 per cent to 29.6 per cent with the
reduction in rural poverty of 18 per cent. Urban poverty also posted a slight decline
from 29.9 per cent to 26.2 per cent.

5. Despite the reduction in poverty overall and the decline in rural poverty, growth in
the agriculture sector has stagnated, as a result of the crisis in the traditional
export agriculture model, low levels of domestic and foreign private investment and
increasing environmental vulnerability. High price volatility within the agriculture
sector, for both inputs and products, has increased uncertainty and reduced
incentives to invest in agriculture. The sector's contribution to GDP fell slightly



EB 2015/LOT/P.34

2

during the period 2001-2013, from 10.12 per cent of GDP in 2001 to 10 per cent in
2013.

6. Climate change and increasing climate volatility pose one of the greatest
challenges to agriculture given the magnitude and frequency of extreme events,
which have caused significant losses and economic damage in recent decades. El
Salvador is one of the most climate change-vulnerable countries in the world. The
country's exposure to intense rainfall in the North-east and recurring drought in the
Eastern region, within the dry corridor, results in losses – particularly for
smallholder farmers.

7. The Government of El Salvador launched the Five-year Development Plan 2014-
2019 to spur economic and social growth. This document sets out a roadmap to
achieve equitable and inclusive development that will translate into living well for
the population. The plan highlights three priorities: productive employment, under
a model of sustained economic growth; education with inclusion and social equity;
and effective citizen safety. The plan also recognizes that environmental policy and
risk mitigation are a social and economic imperative. These priorities are geared to
achieve, within five years, a human development index of 0.7, associated with
countries at a higher level of human development.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

8. National and sector policy priorities call for a number of actions to generate
opportunities for living well for the population as a whole, while recognizing the
different needs of various population groups. IFAD's priorities and interests in the
country are aligned with government policies: areas of complementarity include
economic development; developing human potential; inclusion and equity,
especially for young people, women and indigenous people; sustainable production
with adaptation to climate change; government consultation with society by
promoting dialogue and citizen participation; and promoting results-based
management.

9. In addition, the programme is fully consistent with IFAD's strategic objectives as
outlined in the new results-based country strategic opportunities programme (RB-
COSOP) for El Salvador, which are as follows: (i) improve family farmers’ access to
resources, technologies and information to enable them to develop more
sustainable agriculture and adapt better to climate change; (ii) promote economic
empowerment of youth, rural women and indigenous peoples; and (iii) contribute
to the Government’s efforts to make public spending and investments in rural
areas more efficient, effective and equitable.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
10. During the first stage, the programme area will include the four departments

comprising El Salvador's Eastern region – La Unión, Usulután, San Miguel and
Morazán – and the 87 municipalities that lie within them. In view of their condition
of poverty and climate change vulnerability, first priority will be given to the
municipalities located in the region's north and central areas, followed by those
located in the south, in accordance with national and sector priorities. The eastern
region forms part of the dry corridor and is subject to cyclical drought, which is one
of the main causes of social, environmental, productive and economic crisis and
catastrophe.

11. The target group includes rural people living in poverty in the eastern region who
have productive and associative potential. The programme will pursue three
strategies to reach the target population: (i) a value chains-based strategy; (ii) a
targeting strategy based on selection by participating organizations; and (iii) a
social targeting strategy based on selection of families and people in the most
excluded groups: women, youth and indigenous people.



EB 2015/LOT/P.34

3

12. Through their participation in organizations, and on an individual basis in the case
of young people and adults participating in the technical training programme, a
total of 8,300 families will benefit directly and an estimated 32,000 people will
benefit directly and indirectly. Direct beneficiaries will be mainly women or men
heads of household, young people and women, acting as representatives for
purposes of the programme. Indirect beneficiaries will be members of the direct
representatives' families, estimated at four people per family.

13. Women account for 40 per cent of all direct beneficiaries of Rural Adelante, young
people 20 per cent and indigenous people 5 per cent. In the case of young people,
equal numbers of men and women are included to continue encouraging egalitarian
participation by both groups and the creation of a more equitable new generation
ready to take over.

B. Programme development objective
14. The development objective of Rural Adelante is to sustainably increase the incomes

of poor rural families in the departments of San Miguel, Usulután, La Unión and
Morazán and facilitate their adaptation to climate change. The programme will have
achieved its objective when at least 8,300 families (33,200 beneficiaries) have
received services under the project, 5,900 families with business plans have
improved their incomes1 and 5,000 producers (20,000 beneficiaries) have been
provided with more climate change-resilient organizational business plans.

C. Components/outcomes
15. The programme is structured in four interrelated components:

(a) Capacity-building for sustainable production adapted to climate
change. The objective of this component is to improve research, extension,
education and training services to develop priority value chains under a
climate change adaptation approach. The component seeks to generate
knowledge by: (i) setting up a climate information service; (ii) conducting
technology research and innovation; (iii) developing climate change
adaptation plans; and (iv) strengthening human talent. The latter includes
two actions: (i) developing training for producers linked to value chains; and
(ii) designing and implementing a technical training programme for young
people and adults.

(b) Competitive, sustainable and inclusive value chain development. The
objective of this component is to promote sustainable market access by
target groups – smallholder farmers, women, youth and indigenous people –
as a way of raising the incomes of poor rural families. To this end, a
competitive, inclusive and sustainable value chains approach will be
promoted, based on market demand. The expected outcome is for
organizations to make the necessary improvements to sell high quality
products demanded by the market. The programme will encourage value
chain actors – input suppliers, technical assistance and training providers,
financial service providers, private and public collection and
commercialization centres and marketers – to achieve more efficient
coordination and enter into strategic partnerships to strengthen links and
support services.

(c) Strengthening the public policy framework for rural development. The
objective of this component is to strengthen the institutional and policy
framework for rural development. This will be based on policy analysis,
formulation and implementation in connection with selected value chains –
with policies on gender, rural youth and indigenous peoples, the environment
and climate change adaptation. To this end, support will be provided for the
functional capacities of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG), the
National Youth Institute (INJUVE), municipalities, and associations of

1 Measured by gross income increased by 100 per cent for one or more years, taking into account diversified income sources associated
with the programme.



EB 2015/LOT/P.34

4

producers, rural youth, women and indigenous peoples. The expected
outcome is strengthened capacities of women, rural youth and indigenous
peoples, to improve their participation in the rural development public policy
cycle.

(d) Programme management and M&E. This component covers programme
management and administration, and includes M&E.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
16. The programme approach is based on three pillars promoting sustainable action:

competitiveness, inclusion and sustainability. These provide the frame of reference
or approach guiding the strategic and operational decisions to be taken to achieve
the objectives and expected outcomes, i.e. they provide the elements that
determine whether a programme action can be included in accordance with these
three pillars.

17. Competitiveness refers to increased capacity on the part of organizations, families
and people to participate in markets for goods and services around selected value
chains with the required quality, quantity and frequency. Inclusion, besides
covering differences in gender, culture and economic sector of provenance, seeks
to create and defend a level playing field – equal conditions and opportunities for
all in accessing resources, opportunities, and participatory and decision-making
platforms under the programme. Sustainability calls for directing all programme
actions to respect and guarantee environmental quality, in order to avoid
environmental degradation, conserve and protect natural resources, promote the
generation and use of climate change adapted technologies, and employ mitigation
measures to address natural disasters and risk management, resulting in a
population with greater resilience to environmental risks.

B. Organizational framework
18. Responsibility for programme implementation will reside with Ministry of

Agriculture and Livestock. Setting up the programme management unit (PMU),
which will have functional autonomy but report to the Ministry of Agriculture and
Livestock, will be the responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock as
the implementing agency, through the Rural Development Directorate (DGDR). The
PMU will be headed up by programme management. Implementation will also
involve the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) as the agency
administering resources and specialized service providers, which will include among
its activities a capacity-building strategy for the Ministry of Agriculture and
Livestock in procurement.

19. The PMU will have a structure comprising a general manager, five advisory units
(administrative and financial; communication; capacity-building; inclusion, gender
and planning; and M&E and knowledge management). In addition, there will be
three specialists in thematic areas performing a coordination role: environment and
climate change adaptation, rural business and public policy. The PMU will have, as
part of financial administration, an administrator, an accountant, a procurement
specialist, an accounting assistant, a financial assistant responsible for the
integrated financial administration system (SAFI) and a logistics officer.

20. To implement the programme and its components, the PMU will enter into the
necessary agreements with local, national, public and private entities. To this end,
selection and accreditation processes will take place for service providers based on
value chain needs and strategies, organizational business plans and other
initiatives.



EB 2015/LOT/P.34

5

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

21. The programme will design and implement a planning and monitoring system to
serve as a management instrument to facilitate platforms for learning, exchange of
experiences, best practices and results dissemination, and generate updated
relevant information on programme performance, with an emphasis on results
measurement (outputs, outcomes and impact).

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
22. The DGDR of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, through the PMU

administrative and financial unit, will be responsible for the programme's financial
management – including the annual workplan, flow of funds, disbursements,
internal controls, accounting, financial reporting and audit. In addition, to improve
funds management, the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock will sign an
agreement with UNDP, which will support the programme in resource
administration and procurement. The programme will record accounting
transactions in SAFI.

23. Flow of funds. The borrower/recipient, through MAG, will open a designated
account exclusively for the loan proceeds and another designated account
exclusively for the ASAP grant proceeds at the Central Reserve Bank of El Salvador.

24. Procurement. Procurement of goods and contracting for works and consulting
services under the programme will be conducted in accordance with the guidelines
on the procurement of goods and contracting of works and services for IFAD
projects (IFAD guidelines).

25. UNDP will support the programme in procurement processes, and the agreement
between the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock and UNDP will cover capacity-
building activities to strengthen the procurement area within the Ministry of
Agriculture and Livestock.

26. Audit. The annual consolidated financial statements will be audited each year by
an independent auditor in accordance with IFAD guidelines on project audits. All
project accounts will be audited, including those designated for loan funds, grant
funds and national counterpart funds. The audit reports will be delivered to IFAD
six months after the end of each fiscal year.

D. Supervision
27. IFAD will provide direct supervision of the programme. Implementation support will

be provided from the outset of the programme to prepare properly for start-up.
IFAD and the borrower will perform a midterm review following year three.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
28. The programme will have a total cost of approximately US$18.69 million, including

contingencies. Component 1 will involve an expense of US$3.64 million, equivalent
to 19 per cent, and component 2 will cost US$10.46 million, representing 56 per
cent of total investment. Component 3 will involve an expense of approximately
US$1.22 million, representing 7 per cent of the total. Finally, component 4 will cost
approximately US$3.37 million, or 18 per cent.



EB 2015/LOT/P.34

6

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan ASAP grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

Counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Capacity-building for sustainable
production adapted to climate
change

3 642 100 3 642 19

2. Competitive, sustainable and
inclusive value chain development

8 195 78 1 203 12 1 062 10 10 460 56

3. Strengthening the public policy
framework for rural development

992 81 155 13 72 6 1 219 7

4. Programme management and
M&E

2 940 87 428 13 3 368 18

Total 12 127 65 5 000 27 1 062 5 500 3 18 689 100

B. Programme financing
29. The combined programme financing breaks down as follows by financier: the

borrower will contribute US$500,000 (3 per cent), the IFAD loan will provide
approximately US$12.13 million (65 per cent), the ASAP grant will provide US$5.00
million (27 per cent), and the beneficiaries will contribute approximately US$1.06
million (5 per cent) in cash and in kind.

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan ASAP grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Vehicles, equipment and materials 456 91 42 9% 498 3

2. Technical assistance/ institutional
agreements

497 1 2404 83 2 901 16

3. Technical assistance/ service
agreements

3 248 93% 155 4 72 2 3 475 19

4. Subsidies/ rural business 5 712 64 2 203 25 1 062 12 8 977 48

5. Salaries/ operating costs 2 214 78 238 8 386 14 2 838 15

Total 12 127 65 5 000 27 1 062 6 500 3 18 689 100

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The cost-benefit methodology was used for the economic analysis, based on a

calculation of the flow of net incremental annual benefits for the selected 10-year
period. The cost-benefit or profitability analysis was done using the internal rate of
return (IRR) and net present value (NPV). The IRR was calculated on the basis of
the economic flow of funds generated by Rural Adelante (economic IRR). Generally
a project is considered economically viable if the IRR exceeds the opportunity cost
of capital, 12 per cent in the case of this programme. In calculating the IRR,
economic benefits and costs for a 10-year period were taken into account.

31. The financial IRR for the programme overall is 20 per cent with an NPV of US$6.40
million, and US$22.20 million if the NPV is calculated for a 20-year period.

D. Sustainability
32. Since the Rural Adelante approach was put forward, plans have called for actions

and innovations to remain in place beyond the programme implementation period.
Specifically, sustainability is expected to be achieved once the target population is
able to replicate what is being proposed or implemented, and to go even further
upon achieving the capacity to continue developing innovations – i.e. the target
group has the potential to innovate by consciously making adjustments and
changes for their own benefit in the organizations and value chains in which they
participate. Equally, sustainability will have been achieved once the Ministry of



EB 2015/LOT/P.34

7

Agriculture and Livestock is replicating, improving upon and making adjustments to
innovations.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
33. The programme implementation risks identified have a low to medium probability

of occurring and little potential impact on achieving the objectives and expected
outcomes.

34. Among the main risks are: (i) natural and climate phenomena having a severe
impact on the eastern region; and (ii) an escalation of crime and violence in the
programme area.

35. Measures to mitigate these risks could include: (i) undertaking concrete risk
management actions to address natural and climate phenomena by Rural Adelante
and other IFAD projects operating in the region; and (ii) maintaining contingency
plans and clear safety regulations for programme staff and an ongoing dialogue
with the relevant authorities in the programme area.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
36. The programme proposal falls within the overarching goal of IFAD's Strategic

Framework 2011-2015 and contributes to achieving the strategic objectives to
improve access to services that contribute to poverty reduction and to promote
economic and natural assets that strengthen the resilience of disadvantaged rural
populations. In addition, the programme approach and implementation strategies
are aligned with IFAD's policies and strategies on policy dialogue, targeting rural
poor people, gender equality and women's empowerment, engagement with
indigenous peoples (including matters relating to free, prior and informed consent),
natural resource management and the environment, climate change, social,
environmental and climate evaluation procedures, rural finance and business
management risk, and knowledge management and innovation.

B. Harmonization and alignment
37. IFAD's priorities and interests in the country are aligned with the policies of the

Government of El Salvador. Areas of complementarity include economic
development; developing human potential; inclusion and equity, especially for
youth, women and indigenous people; sustainable production adapted to climate
change; government consultation with society by promoting dialogue and citizen
participation; and promoting results-based management.

38. Within the sector, IFAD is consistent with the priorities of promoting food
sovereignty and security; production development through value chains;
environmental sustainability and adaptation to climate change; developing family
farming; reactivating cooperatives and modernizing institutions.

39. In addition, the programme will directly address the strategic objectives of the RB-
COSOP 2015-2019.

C. Innovation and scaling up
40. For the Government of El Salvador and IFAD, this new operation offers an

opportunity to capitalize on the experiences of recent years around rural
development and rural poverty reduction in the eastern region. These experiences
include the Rural Development Project for the North-Eastern Region (PRODERNOR)
and the Rural Development and Modernization Project for the Eastern Region
(PRODEMORO) and, more recently, the Rural Territorial Competitiveness
Programme (Amanecer Rural) – in addition to participation in regional programmes
on, inter alia, gender, policy dialogue and remittances. IFAD's loans and grants
operations have generated significant human and social capital that is fundamental
to the qualitative leap the country intends to take in reactivating productive and
entrepreneurial capacity in rural areas by strengthening profitable economic
initiatives.



EB 2015/LOT/P.34

8

41. A new intervention in the eastern region is based on transforming the traditional
economic, social and environmental model, whereby the intention is to bring about
change with the following innovative elements: (i) targeting territory, organizations
and people coordinated under a single platform with a value chain orientation,
rather than on the isolated initiatives traditionally undertaken; (ii) competitiveness
and market demand driving value chains to generate income and permanent
quality employment and improve wellbeing; (iii) promoting collective participation
around a single chain in which various groups and actors come together as a
function of the market and strengthening business and financing criteria, such as
sustainability considerations; (iv) IFAD financing acting as a catalyst, distributed in
different proportions according to the expenditure category in the business plan
and the type of organization; (v) linking the target population with financial
services to reduce their dependence on nonreimbursable transfers, inculcating a
sustainable business rather than a welfare-based culture; (vi) developing value
chain businesses under an approach that protects natural resources, the
environment and adaptation to climate change; (vii) promoting inclusion and
equity in participation by young people, women and indigenous people as actors
that require support for their development.

D. Policy engagement
42. The programme will demonstrate experience with integrating public policy dialogue

around value chains at the regional level with other platforms for dialogue already
existing in the country, and with support for implementing public policies in support
of climate change adaptation and mainstreaming rural women, youth and
indigenous people.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
43. A financing agreement between the Republic of El Salvador and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/
beneficiary. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an
appendix.

44. The Republic of El Salvador is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD and the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) Trust
Fund, through IFAD in its capacity as Trustee of the ASAP Trust Fund.

45. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria for IFAD.

VII. Recommendation
46. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of El Salvador in an amount equivalent to ten million eight hundred
fifty thousand euros (EUR 10,850,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that, under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP), the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of El
Salvador in an amount equivalent to three million five hundred sixty thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 3,560,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.34

1

Negotiated financing agreement

"Programa Nacional de Transformación Económica Rural
para el Buen Vivir - Rural Adelante"

(Negociaciones concluidas el 9 de octubre 2015)

Número del Préstamo: [insertar número]

Número de la Donación ASAP: [insertar número]

Programa Nacional de Transformación Económica Rural para el Buen Vivir - Rural
Adelante (el “Programa”)

El Fondo Internacional de Desarrollo Agrícola (el “Fondo” o el “FIDA”)

y

La República de El Salvador (el “Prestatario/Receptor”)

(cada uno de ellos por separado la “Parte” y los dos colectivamente las “Partes”),
acuerdan lo siguiente:

Preámbulo

CONSIDERANDO que la Junta Ejecutiva del FIDA en su 105º período de sesiones aprobó
la propuesta de creación del Fondo Fiduciario del Programa de Adaptación para la
Agricultura en Pequeña Escala (ASAP) del FIDA con el fin de financiar, en forma de
donaciones, componentes de la cartera básica de programas y programas financiados por
el FIDA para aumentar la capacidad de resiliencia de los agricultores en pequeña escala
al cambio climático en las cinco esferas principales de efectos del ASAP;

CONSIDERANDO que el Fondo ha acordado conceder un Préstamo y una Donación ASAP
al Prestatario/Receptor en los términos y condiciones establecidos en este Convenio;

CONSIDERANDO que el Prestatario/Receptor acepta que las actividades del Programa
sean financiadas de conformidad con el presente Convenio;

Las Partes acuerdan además lo siguiente:

Sección A

1. Los siguientes documentos conforman colectivamente este Convenio: el presente
documento, la Descripción del Programa y disposiciones de ejecución (Anexo 1), el
Cuadro de asignaciones (Anexo 2), y las Condiciones Generales para la Financiación del
Desarrollo Agrícola de fecha 29 abril de 2009 (las “Condiciones Generales”).

2. Las Condiciones Generales en sus sucesivas versiones enmendadas y cualquiera de
las disposiciones en ellas contempladas serán aplicables al presente Convenio. A los
efectos del presente Convenio, los términos definidos en las Condiciones Generales
tendrán el significado en ellas indicado.

3. El Fondo proporcionará un Préstamo y una Donación ASAP al Prestatario/Receptor,
que el mismo utilizará para ejecutar el Programa de acuerdo con los términos y
condiciones establecidos en el presente Convenio.



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.34

2

Sección B

1. A. El monto del Préstamo es de EUR 10 850 000 (Diez millones ochocientos
cincuenta mil euros).

B. El monto de la Donación ASAP es de DEG 3 560 000 (Tres millones quinientos
sesenta mil derechos especiales de giro).

2. El Préstamo se concede en condiciones ordinarias con un plazo de reembolso de
dieciocho (18) años, incluido un período de gracia de tres (3) años a partir de la fecha en
que el Fondo haya determinado que se han cumplido todas las condiciones previas para
el retiro de fondos. La tasa de interés será el tipo de interés variable de referencia que
determine el FIDA para préstamos en euro, que actualmente está basado en el EURIBOR
a seis meses más un margen variable.

3. La Moneda de Pago del Servicio del Préstamo será el Euro (EUR).

4. El Ejercicio Financiero o Fiscal del Prestatario/Receptor aplicable será del 1º de
enero al 31 de diciembre.

5. Los pagos del capital y los intereses serán pagaderos cada 15 de abril y 15 de
octubre. El capital será pagadero en 30 plazos semestrales comenzando 3 años después
de la fecha de cumplimiento de las condiciones generales y adicionales previas para el
retiro de los fondos. En dicho momento el FIDA comunicará al Prestatario/Receptor el
calendario de amortización correspondiente.

6. El Prestatario/Receptor, a través del Organismo Responsable del Programa,
proporcionará financiación de contrapartida por un monto equivalente a quinientos mil
dólares de los Estados Unidos de América (USD 500 000) para la financiación de
actividades. Adicionalmente a dicho monto, el Prestatario cubrirá los cargos por concepto
de impuestos para los bienes y servicios adquiridos con cargo a la Financiación.

7. El Prestatario/Receptor, a través del Ministerio de Agricultura y Ganadería (MAG),
abrirá en el Banco Central de Reserva de El Salvador, una Cuenta Designada
exclusivamente para los recursos de Préstamo y otra Cuenta Designada exclusivamente
para los recursos de la Donación ASAP. Ambas serán denominadas en dólares de los
Estados Unidos de América.

Sección C

1. El Organismo Responsable del Programa será el Ministerio de Agricultura y
Ganadería (MAG) del Prestatario/Receptor.

2. La ejecución del Programa se llevará a cabo por el MAG a través de la UGP descrita
en el Anexo 1.

3. El MAG por sí mismo o a través de las instancias que determine y en acuerdo con el
Fondo, llevará a cabo la Revisión de Medio Término como se especifica en la Sección 8.03
b) y c) de las Condiciones Generales, pudiendo las partes acordar otra fecha para llevar a
cabo la Revisión de Medio Término de la ejecución del Programa.

4. La Fecha de Terminación del Programa será el quinto aniversario de la fecha de
entrada en vigor del presente Convenio.



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.34

3

Sección D

1. El Fondo gestionará la contabilidad interna de las cuentas del Préstamo y de la
Donación ASAP y los desembolsos de los mismos y supervisará directamente el
Programa.

Sección E

1. Se considera que es motivo adicional a los previstos en las Condiciones Generales,
para la suspensión del presente Convenio: que cualquiera de las disposiciones del Manual
de Operaciones del Programa hayan sido objeto de cesión, renuncia, suspensión,
revocación, enmienda u otra modificación sin el acuerdo previo del Fondo, y éste haya
determinado, previa consulta con el Prestatario/Receptor, que tal cesión, renuncia,
suspensión, revocación, enmienda o modificación ha tenido, o es probable que tenga,
consecuencias adversas sustanciales para el Programa.

2. Se considera que son condiciones generales adicionales previas para el retiro de
fondos que:

a) El/la Gerente y Administrador del Programa haya sido seleccionado y
nombrado de acuerdo a lo establecido en el Anexo 1, sección II de este
Convenio.

b) Se disponga de un borrador del Manual Operativo del Programa aceptable
para el Fondo.

c) El Prestatario/Receptor, a través del MAG, haya abierto las Cuentas
Designadas en el Banco Central de Reserva de El Salvador.

d) Se hayan asignado, cuando corresponda, los fondos de contrapartida que se
utilizarán para cada año durante la ejecución del Programa, en el presupuesto
general del Prestatario/Receptor.

e) Se haya firmado el acuerdo con el administrador de recursos conforme al
Anexo 1, sección II de este Convenio.

3. El Prestatario/Receptor designa al Ministro de Hacienda como su representante a
los efectos de la Sección 15.03 de las Condiciones Generales, salvo con respecto a
aquellos asuntos que se indican en el siguiente numeral.

4. Representante para la ejecución del Proyecto.  El Prestatario/receptor designa al
Ministro de Agricultura y Ganadería como su representante a los efectos de la Sección
15.03 de las Condiciones Generales con respecto a:

a) Los retiros de la Cuenta del Préstamo y de la Donación ASAP (Sección 4.02 a
4.04, inclusive, y 4.08 de las Condiciones Generales).

b) Todos los demás asuntos relacionados con la ejecución del Programa y la
presentación de informes (Sección C y E del presente Convenio y Artículos VII,
VIII ,IX y X de las Condiciones Generales).



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.34

4

5. Se indican a continuación los representantes designados:

Por el FIDA:

Kanayo F. Nwanze
Presidente
Fondo Internacional de Desarrollo
Agrícola

Por el Prestatario/Receptor:

Carlos Enrique Cáceres Chávez
Ministro de Hacienda

Orestes Fredesman Ortez Andrade
Ministro de Agricultura y Ganadería

6. El presente Convenio de Financiación está sujeto a aprobación legislativa del
Prestatario/Receptor para su entrada en vigor.

7. Se indican las direcciones que han de usarse para el intercambio de comunicaciones
(avisos, notificaciones, solicitudes, e informes, entre otros) relacionadas con el presente
Convenio:

Por el FIDA:

Fondo Internacional de Desarrollo
Agrícola
Via Paolo di Dono, 44
00142 Roma, Italia

Por el Prestatario/Receptor:

Ministerio de Hacienda
Boulevard de Los Héroes No. 1231, San
Salvador, República de
El Salvador

Con copia a:
Ministerio de Agricultura y Ganadería
Final 1ª Av. Norte, 13 Calle Oriente y Av.
Manuel Gallardo, Santa Tecla, La Libertad,
República de El Salvador



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.34

5

El presente Convenio, ha sido elaborado en idioma español en dos (2) ejemplares, uno
(1) de los cuales es para el FIDA y uno (1) para el Prestatario/Receptor.

REPÚBLICA DE EL SALVADOR

___________________________________
Representante Autorizado

FONDO INTERNACIONAL DE DESARROLLO AGRÍCOLA

_____________________
Kanayo F. Nwanze
Presidente



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.34

6

Anexo 1

Descripción del Programa y disposiciones de ejecución

I. Descripción del Programa

1. Población-objetivo. La población-objetivo del Programa incluye a la población rural
en condición de pobreza de la región Oriental, con potencial productivo y asociativo. El
Programa utilizará tres estrategias para alcanzar su población objetivo: i) una estrategia
basada en cadenas de valor, ii) una estrategia de focalización basada en la selección de
las organizaciones participantes y iii) una estrategia de focalización social basada en la
selección de familias y personas de los grupos más excluidos: mujeres, jóvenes e
indígenas.

2. Meta y área el Programa. La meta del programa es “contribuir a reducir la pobreza
rural en la Región Oriental de El Salvador”, que comprende los Departamentos de San
Miguel, Usulután, La Unión y Morazán. El área del Programa podrá modificarse de común
acuerdo entre las Partes siempre que se tenga en cuenta los criterios de selección
iniciales.

3. Objetivos. El objetivo de desarrollo del Programa es “incrementar de forma
sostenible los ingresos de familias rurales en condición de pobreza en los Departamentos
de San Miguel, Usulután, La Unión y Morazán y facilitar su adaptación al cambio
climático”.

4. Componentes. El Programa consta de tres (3) componentes:

Componente 1. Fortalecimiento de capacidades para la producción sustentable con
adaptación al cambio climático:

El objetivo de este componente es mejorar servicios de investigación, extensión,
educación y capacitación para el desarrollo de las cadenas priorizadas, bajo un
enfoque de adaptación al cambio climático.

Las acciones programadas bajo este componente incluyen entre otros:

i) El establecimiento de un servicio de información climática;

ii) La realización de investigaciones e innovaciones tecnológicas;

iii) El desarrollo de planes de adaptación al cambio climático;

iv) El fortalecimiento del talento humano.  Esta última incluye dos actividades:
a) el desarrollo de una oferta de capacitación para productores vinculados con
las cadenas y b) el diseño e implementación de un programa de formación
técnica para jóvenes y adultos.

Componente 2. Desarrollo de Cadenas de Valor Competitivas, Sustentables e
Inclusivas

El objetivo del componente es promover el acceso sostenible de la población
objetiva a mercados, como un mecanismo para el incremento de ingresos de
familias rurales en condición de pobreza. Para tal fin, se promoverá un enfoque de
cadenas de valor competitivas, inclusivas y sustentables, basado en la demanda del
mercado.



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.34

7

Las acciones programadas bajo este componente incluyen entre otros:

i) La promoción de alianzas estratégicas para fortalecer los eslabones y servicios
de apoyo a la cadena;

ii) El desarrollo de condiciones en las organizaciones para que puedan auto-
gestionar la planificación de su negocio a través del Plan de Negocio de la
Organización (PNO);

iii) El fortalecimiento de capacidades a todos los niveles de las organizaciones y
en todos los aspectos.

Componente 3. Fortalecimiento del marco de políticas públicas de desarrollo rural

El componente tiene como objetivo fortalecer el marco de políticas e institucional
para el desarrollo rural.  A través de este se apoyará en el análisis, formulación e
implementación de políticas relacionadas con cadenas de valor seleccionadas, con
las políticas de género, juventud rural y poblaciones indígenas y las de medio
ambiente y adaptación al cambio climático. Se espera fortalecer las capacidades de
mujeres, la juventud rural y población indígena, para mejorar su participación en el
ciclo de las políticas públicas de desarrollo rural.

Las acciones programadas bajo este componente incluyen entre otras:

i) El diálogo de políticas públicas conectado a las cadenas;

ii) El diseño/implementación de la estrategia sectorial de adaptación al cambio ;

iii) El fortalecimiento institucional del INJUVE;

iv) La asistencia en políticas al MAG/OPPS para aplicar políticas nacionales de
género, juventud y poblaciones indígenas, en el área rural;

v) La promoción y realización de asambleas nacionales de jóvenes rurales como
también de foros regionales para mujeres y poblaciones indígenas.

II. Disposiciones de ejecución

1. Organismo Responsable del Programa

1.1 Designación. El Prestatario/Receptor designa como Organismo Responsable del
Programa al Ministerio de Agricultura y Ganadería (MAG).

1.2 Responsabilidades. El MAG será el responsable de la ejecución general del
Programa. El MAG, a través de la Dirección General de Desarrollo Rural (DGDR),
será la encargada de conformar la Unidad de Gestión del Programa (UGP), que
contará con autonomía de funcionamiento para su ejecución, pero responderá al
MAG, como unidad ejecutora del financiamiento. En la práctica, el Programa será
implementado por la UGP.

2 La Unidad de Gestión del Programa

2.1 La UGP estará dirigida por la gerencia del Programa. La DGDR asistirá a la UGP
para gestionar, ejecutar, supervisar y evaluar el Programa.

2.2 La UGP contará con una estructura conformada por: un Gerente General; cinco
unidades a nivel asesor (uno para el área específica: Administrativa-financiera,
Comunicación, Desarrollo de capacidades, Inclusión y género y Planificación,
seguimiento, evaluación y gestión del conocimiento). El Manual de Operaciones



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.34

8

detallará la estructura de la UGP. Adicionalmente se contará con tres especialistas
de áreas temáticas los cuales tendrán una función de coordinación, estas son:
Ambiente y adaptación al cambio climático, Negocios rurales y Políticas públicas.

2.3 Todo el personal del Programa será contratado mediante procesos públicos,
transparentes y competitivos, que se llevarán a cabo a través del PNUD como
administrador de los recursos del Programa.

2.4 La UGP estará establecida en la ciudad de San Miguel y podrán establecerse sedes
regionales durante la ejecución, para responder a las necesidades de las cadenas.

Las principales funciones de la UGP serán:

a. Presentar al FIDA y al MAG los informes anuales, semestrales y especiales
de ejecución.

b. Presentar al Fondo las solicitudes de desembolsos, los informes financieros,
y los informes anuales de auditoria.

c. Verificar que el Programa se ejecute dentro de los plazos, las normas y las
condiciones contractuales acordadas con el FIDA.

d. Preparar los planes operativos anuales, de inversión y presentar las bases
al PNUD para las adquisiciones, así como los reportes de avance en
coordinación con los procedimientos establecidos por el FIDA.

e. Coordinar con los representantes del FIDA la supervisión y todos los
aspectos relacionados con la ejecución y asegurar la comunicación y
coordinación permanente entre los diferentes actores e instancias.

f. Realizar el seguimiento y evaluación de la ejecución de los (PN) Planes de
Negocios y el alcance de objetivos con todas las actividades ejecutadas.

g. Instalar un sistema electrónico de seguimiento y evaluación en
coordinación con técnicos del MAG.

h. Llevar registro de todas las actividades técnicas y financieras llevadas a
cabo bajo el financiamiento del Programa.

i. Preparar el Manual de Operaciones del Programa y llevar a cabo las
actualizaciones del documento cuando corresponda.

j. Abrir las cuentas del Programa.

3 Comités de evaluación/aprobación

3.1 El Programa contará con dos comités de evaluación/aprobación de propuestas de
planes de negocio (PNO):

Comité de Evaluación Técnica (CET). El Comité de Evaluación Técnica (CET) será
el encargado de garantizar la pertinencia, la viabilidad técnica productiva,
económica, financiera y ambiental de los PNO.

Comité de Aprobación de Propuestas (CAP). El Comité de Aprobación de
Propuestas (CAP) realizará la aprobación final de los PNO, mediante un acto
público.

3.2 También se contará con un Comité responsable de la selección de estudiantes y
otorgamiento de becas y pasantías, del Programa de Formación Técnica, que
incluirá la participación de jóvenes.



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.34

9

3.3 El financiamiento de los PNO a las organizaciones será no reembolsable. Las
organizaciones suscribirán convenios para la ejecución de los PNO y la
administración de las transferencias del Programa.

4 Acuerdo de administración de recursos

Se suscribirá un acuerdo entre el MAG y el Programa de Naciones Unidas para el
Desarrollo (PNUD), para la administración de recursos. El Prestatario/Receptor, a
través del MAG, firmará un convenio que normará las relaciones entre el MAG y el
PNUD, determinando claramente las condiciones de transferencia y administración
de los recursos financieros y servicios, tales como: procesos de adquisiciones y
contrataciones; y pagos de bienes o servicios. Todas las operaciones, compras,
licitaciones entre otras, se realizarán compatiblemente con las normas y
procedimientos del Fondo. La suscripción del convenio entre el MAG y el PNUD
estará sujeta a la previa no objeción del Fondo.

5 Manual Operativo del Programa

5.1 El Manual de Ejecución o Manual Operativo del Programa (MOP) tendrá como
propósito definir el marco conceptual, institucional, normativo y técnico del
Programa, así como los niveles de responsabilidad de las instancias e instituciones
involucradas en su implementación. Asimismo, se definen las responsabilidades,
los procedimientos operativos, administrativos y financieros, y acciones que son
necesarias para su implementación, bajo un esquema flexible sujeto a los ajustes
que se definirán entre las partes facultadas para ello. El MOP será de uso
obligatorio para todos los funcionarios, directivos, técnicos, personal de las
diferentes instituciones responsables del cumplimiento de los objetivos del
Programa; así como de las organizaciones e instituciones públicas participantes.
Deberá ser elaborado por la Unidad de Gestión del Programa (UGP) y aprobado
por el MAG, el cual tendrá la responsabilidad de trasladarlo al FIDA para su no
objeción final.

5.2 En los casos que se requiera incluir modificaciones al MOP, éstas deberán ser
igualmente aprobadas por el MAG y la UGP, previa recomendación del FIDA y
posterior no objeción.



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.34

10

Anexo 2
Cuadro de Asignaciones

1. Asignación de los recursos del Préstamo y de la Donación ASAP. a) En el cuadro
que figura a continuación se presentan las Categorías de Gastos Admisibles que se
financiarán con cargo al Préstamo y Donación ASAP y la asignación de los montos a cada
Categoría, así como los porcentajes de los gastos correspondientes a los rubros que se
financiarán en cada Categoría:

Categorías

Monto del
Préstamo
asignado

(expresado en
EUR)

Monto de la
Donación ASAP

asignado
(expresado en

DEG)

Porcentaje de
financiación

1. Vehículos, equipos y
materiales

370 000 100% sin impuestos

2. Asistencia
Técnica/consultorías
(Convenios institucionales)

400 000 1 540 000 100% sin impuestos

3. Asistencia
Técnica/consultorías
(contratos de servicios)

2 610 000 100 000 100% sin impuestos

4. Negocios Rurales
(donaciones y
subvenciones)

4 600 000 1 410 000 100% de gastos totales

5. Salarios y costos
operativos

1 780 000 150 000

100% de gastos totales
para los salarios y 100%
sin impuestos para los

costos operativos

Sin asignación 1 090 000 360 000

TOTAL 10 850 000 3 560 000

b) Algunos de los términos que se emplean en el cuadro de asignaciones se
definen a continuación:

i. Asistencia Técnica/consultorías (convenios institucionales): Esta categoría se
refiere a los convenios institucionales entre el Programa e instituciones para
actividades de adaptación al cambio climático y de apoyo al marco de políticas
públicas de desarrollo rural.

ii. Asistencia Técnica/consultorías (contratos de servicios): Esta categoría se refiere
a los contratos de servicios entre el Programa y proveedores de servicios para
actividades de fortalecimiento de las organizaciones beneficiarias en aspectos
organizacionales, productivos, agregado de valor y de acceso a mercados.

iii. Negocios Rurales (donaciones y subvenciones): Esta categoría se refiere a los
fondos transferidos por el Programa a las organizaciones de beneficiarios para la
implementación de los planes de negocios.

El detalle de estas definiciones se incluirá en el Manual de Operaciones del Programa.



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.34

11

2. Costos de puesta en marcha. El retiro de fondos de la cuenta del Préstamo respecto
de los costos de puesta en marcha realizados antes de satisfacer las condiciones previas
para el retiro no deberán exceder un monto total de USD 200 000 para la categoría 5
"Salarios y costos operativos", para financiar costos asociados con la contratación del
personal clave, la elaboración del MOP e la implementación del sistema contable.



1
2

Marco Lógico

Descripción resumida Indicadores básicos de resultados Medios de verificación Periodicidad/Responsable Hipótesis (H) / Riesgos (R)

Meta

Contribuir a reducir la pobreza rural en la
Región Oriental de El Salvador

Al finalizar el Programa:
 Reducción porcentual de la pobreza (3% en pobreza extrema)
 Los hogares,  en promedio,  incrementan los activos en un 10%, respecto a la

línea base (RIMS)
 % de reducción en la desnutrición infantil (RIMS)

 Línea de base
 Informes de pobreza
 Evaluaciones RIMS
 Evaluación final del

proyecto

 Año 5 del proyecto/MAG  Los objetivos, metas y
acciones priorizadas por el
Gobierno en las políticas
nacionales se mantienen

Objetivo de desarrollo del proyecto

Incrementar de forma sostenible los
ingresos de familias rurales en condición
de pobreza en los Departamentos de San
Miguel, Usulután, La Unión y Morazán y
facilitar su adaptación al cambio climático

Al finalizar el Programa:
 33.200 beneficiarios - 8300 familias (20% jóvenes, 40% mujeres, 5% indígenas)

reciben servicios del proyecto (RIMS 1.8.1)
 5900 familias con PN incrementan los ingresos a/
 20.000 beneficiarios - 5000 productores atendidos con PNO más resilientes al

cambio climático (RIMS 1.8.5) b/

 Línea de base sobre
ingresos

 Estudios  evaluativos
de ingresos

 Anualmente/MAG

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

 El compromiso político con
el sector  productivo
agrícola mantiene su
importancia como eje
dinamizador de bienestar
económico y social.

 Los fenómenos naturales y
climáticos en la región
Oriental se dan con poca
frecuencia y baja magnitud.

 La criminalidad y  violencia
en el país y la región se
mantiene en niveles
controlados.

Efecto directo 1/Componente 1
Instituciones públicas (MAG, CENTA, ENA,
MARN) cuentan con mayor capacidad
para transferir tecnologías de adaptación
al cambio climático (ACC), asociado a las
cadenas de valor

Al finalizar el Programa:
 100% de instituciones participantes han mejorado sus capacidades para transferir

tecnologías con ACC, respecto a la línea base c/
 5000 productores utilizan información climática para la toma de decisiones

 Línea de base
 Evaluaciones sobre

capacidades
institucionales

 Anualmente/MAG
 Año 3 y Año 5 del

proyecto/MAG

Efecto directo 2/Componente 1
Las organizaciones y los actores públicos y

privados regionales desarrollan
planes de gestión de riesgos
climáticos

Al finalizar el Programa:
 Al menos 60% de los planes de gestión de riesgo climático en funcionamiento

 Evaluación final
 Informes de

seguimiento

 Año 5 del proyecto/MAG
 Anualmente/MAG

Efecto directo 3/Componente 1

Personas (jóvenes, adultas)  preparadas
para el empleo en cadenas de valor con
ACC

Al finalizar el programa:
 Al menos un 40% de las personas formadas cuentan con empleo/autoempleo

(25% en organizaciones apoyadas) d/

 Registros de empleos
de las organizaciones

 Evaluación sobre
empleo

 Anualmente/MAG

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

 Existe interés  de la
población joven al trabajo
productivo ante opciones de
migración y remesas

Efecto directo 1/Componente 2

Actores regionales coordinan estrategias
para el desarrollo de las cadenas de valor

Al finalizar el Programa:
 Al menos 5 propuestas para mejorar el desempeño de las cadenas en la región

implementadas (según estrategias)
 100% de representantes de organizaciones con capacidades mejoradas para la

participación activa en las mesas  de las cadenas, respecto a la línea base

 Documentos de
alianzas establecidas

 Evaluación final

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

 Año 5 del proyecto/MAG

A
p
p
en

d
ix

II
E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.3

4



1
3

Descripción resumida Indicadores básicos de resultados Medios de verificación Periodicidad/Responsable Hipótesis (H) / Riesgos (R)

Efecto directo 2/Componente 2
Organizaciones cuentan con condiciones
para la planificación de negocios

Al finalizar el Programa
 100% de organizaciones (20% jóvenes, 40% mujeres, 5% indígenas) con

condiciones mejoradas para la planificación de negocios e/
 100% de organizaciones con habilidades para la identificación y gestión de

riesgos ambientales y climáticos (RIMS 2.6.5)
 5000 productores han adoptado tecnologías de adaptación al cambio climático
 Al menos 50% de organizaciones (tipos A,B) con acceso a servicios financieros f/
 Al menos 1 institución financiera (IF) con oferta de servicios adecuada, según el

grupo objetivo,  en implementación

 Estudio evaluativo
 Registros de

organizaciones/person
as con crédito

 Informes de
capacitación

 Ofertas de servicios de
IF

 Año 3 del proyecto/MAG
 Año 2, 3, 4 y 5 del

proyecto/MAG

 Anualmente/MAG

 Anualmente/MAG

 Factores (externos)
económicos que afecten la
producción y la
productividad agrícola, y/o
que desaceleren la
economía se mantienen
estables

Efecto directo 3/Componente 2
Organizaciones acceden mercados de
forma competitiva y sostenible

 60% de organizaciones con acceso a mercados mejorado g/
 Al menos 80% de organizaciones reportan mejora en la calidad de los productos
 Al menos 40% de organizaciones agregan valor a sus productos (prácticas BPM,

procesamiento básico)
 70% de locales de almacenamiento, comercialización y transformación en

funcionamiento (RIMS 2.4.3)

 Línea de base

 Evaluación final
 Informes de

infraestructura

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

 Año 5 del proyecto/MAG
 Anualmente/MAG

Efecto directo 1/Componente 3
Las organizaciones y los actores públicos y
privados fortalecen el diálogo de políticas
públicas en torno a las cadenas de valor

Al finalizar el Programa
 500 personas representantes de organizaciones (50% mujeres) y 50 funcionarios

de instituciones públicas cuentan con capacidades mejoradas para el diálogo de
políticas públicas, respecto a la línea  base

 100% de Instituciones del sector público participantes con capacidades
mejoradas para el diálogo de política sobre cadenas  de valor

 100% de propuestas de remoción de barreras  regulatorias identificadas por las
mesas insertadas en el dialogo de políticas nacionales

 Estudios evaluativos

 Informes de
seguimiento

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

 Anualmente/MAG

 Existe una coordinación
favorable por parte del
gobierno para el desarrollo
de las políticas a nivel
nacional y regional

Efecto directo 2/Componente 3
El sector público (MAG, MARN, INJUVE,
Municipalidades)  fortalecido en la
aplicación de políticas públicas para el
desarrollo rural y cambio climático

Al finalizar el Programa:
 Fomento de instrumentos de  políticas ambientales y de ACC  favorables a la

población rural pobre (RIMS 1.6.12)h/
 Fomento de políticas favorables a jóvenes, mujeres e indígenas (RIMS 2.61) i/
 MAG/OPPS, INJUVE y municipalidades con capacidades fortalecidas en

implementación de políticas públicas para el sector rural

 Informes de
seguimiento

 Documentos de
instrumentos
elaborados

 Anualmente/MAG

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

Efecto directo 3/ Componente 3
La juventud, mujeres e indígenas del área
rural fortalecen sus capacidades para
participar en el diálogo de políticas
públicas

 120 representantes de las organizaciones cuentan con capacidades mejoradas
para el diálogo de políticas.

 Línea de base

 Evaluación final

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

 Año 5 del proyecto/MAG

. *Datos según hombre, mujer, grupo etario, población indígena, Departamento, Municipio.
a/ Medido según ingresos (brutos) incrementados, en promedio, un 100% por un año o más, y considerando las fuentes de ingresos (diversificación) asociadas al Programa.
b/ Un productor aumenta su resiliencia al cambio climático si se cumple al menos dos de las siguientes condiciones i ) que utiliza información sobre el clima difundido por el proyecto, ii ) que implementa las actividades de
adaptación al cambio climático en el contexto de un plan de negocios cofinanciado por el proyecto , iii ) sus tierras o activos están cubiertos por un uno de los 10 riesgos climáticos y el plan de manejo de recursos naturales con el
apoyo del proyecto , iv ) que se encuentra en una de las 10 comunidades locales cuya planificación incluye el tema del cambio climático a través del apoyo del proyecto.
c/ Indicadores sustentadores (medidos antes y después) para cada institución participante, según variables (Ej. i) conocimientos/habilidades y destrezas, ii) aspectos operativos (equipamiento, software, materiales)
d/ Empleo: Cuando una persona al servicio de otra (patrono, empleador), mediante un contrato realiza su actividad profesional en forma continua a cambio de una remuneración o salario.
e/ Indicadores sustentadores: organizaciones identifican prioridades participativamente, formulan propuestas y gestionan alianzas con actores de la cadena
f/ Indicadores sustentadores: 50% organizaciones cuentan con créditos aprobados para la organización y/o para los asociados
g/ Indicadores sustentadores: Al menos 80% de organizaciones (familias) reportan incrementos en el valor de las ventas por  uno o más años, 40%  diversificado canales de comercialización
h/ Al menos un instrumento/proceso de política ambiental y de ACC elaborado con el apoyo del proyecto
i/ Al menos un instrumento de política para género, juventud, poblaciones indígenas elaborado

A
p
p
en

d
ix

II
E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.3

4



A
p
p
en

d
ix II

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.3

4

1
4

Logical framework

Narrative summary Performance indicators Means of verification Frequency/Responsible Assumptions (A) / Risks
(R)

Goal

Contribute to reducing rural poverty in the
Eastern Region of El Salvador

Upon programme completion:
 Percentage reduction in poverty (3% in extreme poverty)
 Households, on average, increase their assets by 10% over the baseline (RIMS)
 % reduction in child malnutrition (RIMS)

 Baseline
 Poverty reports
 RIMS evaluations
 Project completion

evaluation

 Year 5 of the project/MAG  Objectives, goals and
actions prioritized by
Government in national
policies are maintained

Project development objective

Sustainably increase the incomes of poor
rural families in the departments of San
Miguel, Usulután, La Unión and Morazán
and facilitate their adaptation to climate
change

Upon programme completion:
 33,200 beneficiaries – 8,300 families (20% youth, 40% women, 5% indígenous)

receive project services (RIMS 1.8.1)
 5,900 families with business plans increase their incomes a/
 20,000 beneficiaries – 5,000 producers provided with organizational business

plans more resilient to climate change (RIMS 1.8.5) b/

 Baseline income
 Income evaluation

studies

 Anually/MAG

 Year 3 and year 5 del
proyecto/MAG

 El compromiso político con
el sector  productivo
agrícola mantiene su
importancia como eje
dinamizador de bienestar
económico y social.

 Los fenómenos naturales y
climáticos en la región
Eastern se dan con poca
frecuencia y baja magnitud.

 La criminalidad y  violencia
en el país y la región se
mantiene en niveles
controlados.

Outcome 1/Component 1

Instituciones públicas (MAG, CENTA, ENA,
MARN) cuentan con mayor capacidad
para transferir tecnologías de adaptación
al cambio climático (ACC), asociado a las
cadenas de valor

Al finalizar el Programa:
 100% de instituciones participantes han mejorado sus capacidades para transferir

tecnologías con ACC, respecto a la línea base c/
 5000 productores utilizan información climática para la toma de decisiones

 Línea de base
 Evaluaciones sobre

capacidades
institucionales

 Anualmente/MAG
 Año 3 y Año 5 del

proyecto/MAG

Outcome 2/Component 1
Las organizaciones y los actores públicos y

privados regionales desarrollan
planes de gestión de riesgos
climáticos

Al finalizar el Programa:
 Al menos 60% de los planes de gestión de riesgo climático en funcionamiento

 Evaluación final
 Informes de

seguimiento

 Año 5 del proyecto/MAG
 Anualmente/MAG

Outcome 3/Component 1

Personas (jóvenes, adultas) preparadas
para el empleo en cadenas de valor con
ACC

Al finalizar el programa:
 Al menos un 40% de las personas formadas cuentan con empleo/autoempleo

(25% en organizaciones apoyadas) d/

 Registros de empleos
de las organizaciones

 Evaluación sobre
empleo

 Anualmente/MAG

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

 Existe interés de la
población joven al trabajo
productivo ante opciones de
migración y remesas

Outcome 1/Component 2

Actores regionales coordinan estrategias
para el desarrollo de las cadenas de valor

Al finalizar el Programa:
 Al menos 5 propuestas para mejorar el desempeño de las cadenas en la región

implementadas (según estrategias)
 100% de representantes de organizaciones con capacidades mejoradas para la

participación activa en las mesas de las cadenas, respecto a la línea base

 Documentos de
alianzas establecidas

 Evaluación final

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

 Año 5 del proyecto/MAG



A
p
p
en

d
ix II

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.3

4

1
5

Narrative summary Performance indicators Means of verification Frequency/Responsible Assumptions (A) / Risks
(R)

Outcome 2/Component 2
Organizaciones cuentan con condiciones
para la planificación de negocios

Al finalizar el Programa
 100% de organizaciones (20% jóvenes, 40% mujeres, 5% indígenas) con

condiciones mejoradas para la planificación de negocios e/
 100% de organizaciones con habilidades para la identificación y gestión de

riesgos ambientales y climáticos (RIMS 2.6.5)
 5000 productores han adoptado tecnologías de adaptación al cambio climático
 Al menos 50% de organizaciones (tipos A,B) con acceso a servicios financieros f/
 Al menos 1 institución financiera (IF) con oferta de servicios adecuada, según el

grupo objetivo, en implementación

 Estudio evaluativo
 Registros de

organizaciones/person
as con crédito

 Informes de
capacitación

 Ofertas de servicios de
IF

 Año 3 del proyecto/MAG
 Año 2, 3, 4 y 5 del

proyecto/MAG

 Anualmente/MAG

 Anualmente/MAG

 Factores (externos)
económicos que afecten la
producción y la
productividad agrícola, y/o
que desaceleren la
economía se mantienen
estables

Outcome 3/Component 2
Organizaciones acceden mercados de
forma competitiva y sostenible

 60% de organizaciones con acceso a mercados mejorado g/
 Al menos 80% de organizaciones reportan mejora en la calidad de los productos
 Al menos 40% de organizaciones agregan valor a sus productos (prácticas BPM,

procesamiento básico)
 70% de locales de almacenamiento, comercialización y transformación en

funcionamiento (RIMS 2.4.3)

 Línea de base

 Evaluación final
 Informes de

infraestructura

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

 Año 5 del proyecto/MAG
 Anualmente/MAG

Outcome 1/Component 3
Las organizaciones y los actores públicos y
privados fortalecen el diálogo de políticas
públicas en torno a las cadenas de valor

Al finalizar el Programa
 500 personas representantes de organizaciones (50% mujeres) y 50 funcionarios

de instituciones públicas cuentan con capacidades mejoradas para el diálogo de
políticas públicas, respecto a la línea base

 100% de Instituciones del sector público participantes con capacidades
mejoradas para el diálogo de política sobre cadenas de valor

 100% de propuestas de remoción de barreras regulatorias identificadas por las
mesas insertadas en el dialogo de políticas nacionales

 Estudios evaluativos

 Informes de
seguimiento

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

 Anualmente/MAG

 Existe una coordinación
favorable por parte del
gobierno para el desarrollo
de las políticas a nivel
nacional y regional

Outcome 2/Component 3
El sector público (MAG, MARN, INJUVE,
Municipalidades) fortalecido en la
aplicación de políticas públicas para el
desarrollo rural y cambio climático

Al finalizar el Programa:
 Fomento de instrumentos de políticas ambientales y de ACC favorables a la

población rural pobre (RIMS 1.6.12)h/
 Fomento de políticas favorables a jóvenes, mujeres e indígenas (RIMS 2.61) i/
 MAG/OPPS, INJUVE y municipalidades con capacidades fortalecidas en

implementación de políticas públicas para el sector rural

 Informes de
seguimiento

 Documentos de
instrumentos
elaborados

 Anualmente/MAG

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

Outcome 3/ Component 3
La juventud, mujeres e indígenas del área
rural fortalecen sus capacidades para
participar en el diálogo de políticas
públicas

 120 representantes de las organizaciones cuentan con capacidades mejoradas
para el diálogo de políticas.

 Línea de base

 Evaluación final

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

 Año 5 del proyecto/MAG

. *Datos según hombre, mujer, grupo etario, población indígena, Departamento, Municipio.
a/ Medido según ingresos (brutos) incrementados, en promedio, un 100% por un año o más, y considerando las fuentes de ingresos (diversificación) asociadas al Programa.
b/ Un productor aumenta su resiliencia al cambio climático si se cumple al menos dos de las siguientes condiciones i ) que utiliza información sobre el clima difundido por el proyecto, ii ) que implementa las actividades de
adaptación al cambio climático en el contexto de un plan de negocios cofinanciado por el proyecto , iii ) sus tierras o activos están cubiertos por un uno de los 10 riesgos climáticos y el plan de manejo de recursos naturales con el
apoyo del proyecto , iv ) que se encuentra en una de las 10 comunidades locales cuya planificación incluye el tema del cambio climático a través del apoyo del proyecto.
c/ Indicadores sustentadores (medidos antes y después) para cada institución participante, según variables (Ej. i) conocimientos/habilidades y destrezas, ii) aspectos operativos (equipamiento, software, materiales)
d/ Empleo: Cuando una persona al servicio de otra (patrono, empleador), mediante un contrato realiza su actividad profesional en forma continua a cambio de una remuneración o salario.
e/ Indicadores sustentadores: organizaciones identifican prioridades participativamente, formulan propuestas y gestionan alianzas con actores de la cadena
f/ Indicadores sustentadores: 50% organizaciones cuentan con créditos aprobados para la organización y/o para los asociados
g/ Indicadores sustentadores: Al menos 80% de organizaciones (familias) reportan incrementos en el valor de las ventas por uno o más años, 40% diversificado canales de comercialización
h/ Al menos un instrumento/proceso de política ambiental y de ACC elaborado con el apoyo del proyecto
i/ Al menos un instrumento de política para género, juventud, poblaciones indígenas elaborado
















































Note to Executive Board representatives

Focal points:

Technical questions: Dispatch of documentation:

Claus Reiner
Country Programme Manager
Latin America and the Caribbean Division
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2797
e-mail: c.reiner@ifad.org

William Skinner
Chief
Governing Bodies Office
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2974
e-mail: gb_office@ifad.org

For: Approval

Document: EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

EDate: 10 December 2016Distribution: Public
Original: English

President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Argentine Republic for the
Goat Value Chain Development Programme



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

i

Contents

Abbreviations and acronyms ii
Map of the programme area iii
Financing summary iv
Recommendation for approval 1
I. Strategic context and rationale 1

A. Country, rural development and poverty context 1
B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and

RB-COSOP 1
II. Programme description 1

A. Programme area and target group 1
B. Programme development objective 2
C. Components and outcomes 2

III. Programme implementation 2
Approach 2A.
Organizational framework 2B.
Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledgeC.
management 3
Financial management, procurement and governance 3D.
Supervision 4E.
Exception to IFAD’s General Conditions for AgriculturalF.
Development Financing and operational policies 4

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits 4
A. Programme costs 4
B. Programme financing 4
C. Benefit summary and economic analysis 5
D. Sustainability 5
E. Risk identification and mitigation 5

V. Corporate considerations 6
Compliance with IFAD policies 6A.
Alignment and harmonization 6B.
Innovations and scaling up 6C.
Policy engagement 6D.

VI. Legal instruments and authority 6
VII. Recommendation 6

Appendices
I. Negotiated financing agreement
II. Logical framework



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

ii

Abbreviations and acronyms

MAI Ministry of Agroindustry
PEA2 Federal and Participative Agri-food and Agribusiness Strategic Plan,

2010/2016
PRODECCA Goat Value Chain Development Programme
RIMS Results and Impact Management System
SSTC South-South and triangular cooperation
UCAR Unit for Rural Change



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

iii

Map of the programme area

Source: IFAD
The designations employed in this publication do not imply official endorsement, nor the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the
part of IFAD concerning the legal status of any territory, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

iv

Argentine Republic

Goat Value Chain Development Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Argentine Republic

Executing agency: Unit for Rural Change

Total programme cost: US$25.45 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$12.30 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$1.02 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of three years, with an interest rate per annum
equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of borrower: US$7.00 million

Contribution of provincial governments: US$2.97 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.16 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed loan
and grant to the Argentine Republic for the Goat Value Chain Development
Programme, as contained in paragraph 33.

Proposed loan and grant to the Argentine Republic for
the Goat Value Chain Development Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country, rural development and poverty context
1. Argentina is one of the largest economies in Latin America and one of the world's

major producers of agricultural commodities, especially soybeans, maize and beef.
In addition, there are some 251,000 family farms in the country. Many of these are
run by poor families, the majority of whom live in the greater north region. In
addition, Argentina is home to about 950,000 indigenous peoples. In 2010, 18 per
cent of the rural population and 22 per cent of rural dispersed households had
unmet basic needs. About 46,000 farms are raising goats, principally smallholders.

2. Poverty is especially severe in farming families, indigenous communities, rural
working families and large families without fixed incomes. Youth unemployment is a
serious problem in rural areas, and outmigration of young rural women is common.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

3. The Government of Argentina aims to reduce rural poverty through income
generation based on sustainable agricultural production. The Unit for Rural Change
(UCAR), of the Ministry of Agroindustry (MAI), has demonstrated the capacity to
improve the performance of IFAD's portfolio, which is implemented within its
country programme as an instrumental part of public policy to support family
farming. Specialized technical institutions cooperate with UCAR in this task.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
4. The programme leverages public policy priorities, lessons learned in the IFAD

country programme and opportunities within the country to reduce rural poverty by
integrating family farming into value chains. Its design is based on the insertion of
smallholder goat breeders into value chains, following participatory planning by
producers’ organizations within goat production basins. Value chains include:
(i) meat; (ii) fibre, especially mohair and cashmere; and (iii) milk products. The
chains are not very developed, with limitations faced by family farmers and
processing companies.

5. The programme area includes the five provinces of Chaco, Formosa, Neuquén,
Mendoza and Santiago del Estero, which include some 60 per cent of the total
number of goats in the country.

6. Beneficiaries will include men and women producers (including indigenous
communities) engaged in goat breeding and organized in producers’ organizations.
The programme will prioritize existing organizations and promote incorporation of
vulnerable groups, especially indigenous peoples, women and youth.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

2

B. Programme development objective
7. The programme’s development objective is to raise the incomes of goat-breeding

families through their sustainable integration into value chains. The six-year
programme aims to reach 8,000 families.

C. Components and outcomes
8. The programme has three components:

 Component 1: Development of markets and sectoral policies. This
component will strengthen development of emerging value chains by creating
a conducive commercial environment, including marketing, policy and
normative aspects. To develop markets for goat products, it will support
market analysis and promotion, exploration of foreign markets and technical
assistance to processing companies. It will also promote product
standardization conforming to official normative rules, and creation of a
natural-resource monitoring framework for sustainable goat management.
Moreover, it will develop human resources by supporting technical exchange
visits and basic financial education.

 Component 2: Productive, organizational and commercial
development. To improve the functioning of value chains, the programme
will provide the following territorial support to participating organizations:

(a) Goat basin identification, the creation of goat basin forums and
participatory planning and monitoring of market-based sectoral
development.

(b) In the pre-investment phase, it will support preparation of participatory
rapid appraisals of producers’ organizations, institutional strengthening
and eventually the formulation of business plans in the framework of
business alliances in accordance with goat basin plans.

(c) In the investment phase, it will finance implementation of approved
business plans – including physical assets, training, technical assistance
and working capital – through revolving funds for credit administered by
producers’ organizations. Additionally, the programme will finance
guarantee funds to facilitate operating capital loans from financial
institutions to the associated lead companies in the value chains.

 Component 3: Programme management. This component includes
programme management by UCAR and provincial management units. It will
include the adaptation of systems for planning, monitoring and evaluation,
and also for knowledge management, with a special focus on South-South and
triangular cooperation (SSTC).

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

9. The programme’s operational strategy will be based on: (i) sector-wide investments
in goat product markets and policies; (ii) participatory goat basin plans; and
(iii) business plans as the principal instruments of producers’ organizations’ for
training, investment, technical assistance and operating capital.

Organizational frameworkB.
10. MAI, through the UCAR, will be responsible for programme implementation and will

directly execute the activities in components 1 and 3. Provincial governments will
be responsible for implementing component 2 through provincial management
units, based on provincial financing agreements with MAI. Beneficiary organizations
will be responsible for developing and executing business plans through
participatory processes.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

3

11. Beneficiary participation is central to the programme. Producers’ organizations will
participate in goat basin forums to prepare and monitor basin plans. They will be
responsible for planning and implementing business plans, including procurement.
Finally, they will monitor and evaluate implementation of their business plans,
which will provide the programme’s system with data.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledgeC.
management

12. Planning will be based on defined goals and objectives. The programme’s annual
planning exercise will provide the flexibility needed for implementation, in
coordination with provincial authorities. Goat basin plans will be prepared with the
participation of provincial authorities, producers’ organizations, private enterprises
and public institutions.

13. For the programme’s data and knowledge system, UCAR will apply results-based
management methods using an organizational matrix to manage the development
of goat basin and business plans. The system will be integrated into UCAR’s existing
management system, allowing monitoring of physical progress based on data
entered at the provincial level. A tracking sheet will facilitate analysis of information
critical to measuring results. For impact evaluation, implementers will collect
information from beneficiary households using a family questionnaire that includes
IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) survey. Institutional
advancement will be tracked by monitoring the participating producers’
organizations. Thematic studies will be carried out to analyse experiences in
programme implementation.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
14. Financial management. MAI, through UCAR, will be responsible for financial

management of all programme resources, including flow of funds, disbursement,
internal controls, accounting, financial reporting and audit. UCAR has been the
implementing agency of IFAD programmes since its creation in 2009. It has
extensive experience and adequate systems and procedures. For programme
implementation, UCAR will use its existing accounting system, which is satisfactory
to IFAD. Funding for start-up costs may be used for early programme expenditures.

15. Flow of funds. IFAD loan and grant resources will be disbursed to a receiving
account in United States dollars in the Central Bank of Argentina. Funds will then be
transferred to the two designated accounts in United States dollars in the Banco de
la Nación Argentina, to two designated accounts in United States dollars in the
central bank of Argentina. The accounts will be used exclusively for the proceeds of
the loan and grant, respectively. From each designated account, funds will flow to
the respective operational account denominated in Argentine pesos, which will be
managed by UCAR. Provincial-level implementation units will open provincial
operational accounts in Argentine pesos.

16. Procurement. The programme will follow national procurement regulations to the
extent these are compatible with IFAD’s procurement guidelines. UCAR, the
provincial management units and producers’ organizations will carry out
procurement on the basis of agreed procurement plans. Procurement of works,
goods and services in the framework of business plans, and accounting for these
expenditures, will be the responsibility of producers’ organizations, in line with
IFAD’s community-based procurement directives, with support from provincial
units.

17. Audit. The programme’s consolidated financial statements will be audited annually
by the national auditor general in accordance with IFAD’s Guidelines on Project
Audits. All programme accounts will be audited, including all sources of funding.
The scope of the audit will include visits to producers’ organizations. Annual audit
reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months of the end of each fiscal year.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

4

SupervisionE.
18. The programme will be supervised directly by IFAD in accordance with the

methodology agreed by IFAD and UCAR. Initial supervision tasks include support for
rapid programme start-up and set-up of the accounting, planning, and monitoring
and evaluation systems.

Exception to IFAD’s General Conditions for AgriculturalF.
Development Financing and operational policies

19. With respect to retroactive financing, expenses related to goat basin forums and to
SSTC for activities begun as of the date of negotiations will be considered eligible
up to US$500,000 under the expense categories “Goods, services and inputs for
beneficiaries” and “Consultancies (technical assistance)” from both the loan and
grant accounts. Activities to be financed by retroactive financing and their source of
funding will require prior “no objection” from IFAD to be considered eligible. For
expenses for reimbursement to be recognized, the borrower/recipient must submit
them to IFAD once disbursement conditions have been met.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
20. The total cost for six years of implementation will be US$25.5 million, including

contingencies, of which: US$2.7 million relates to component 1; US$19.0 million to
component 2; and US$3.8 million to component 3. Management costs make up
15 per cent of programme costs. Costs include 6 per cent for contingencies with
respect to price escalation for goods, services and operating expenses, and
0.001 per cent for physical contingencies with respect to goods and services.

B. Programme financing
21. The programme will be financed by: (i) the central government, with a contribution

of US$7.0 million to cofinance business plans of producers’ organizations and
management costs; (ii) provincial governments, with a contribution of
US$3.0 million to cofinance business plans and provincial management costs;
(iii) IFAD, through a loan of US$12.3 million and a grant of US$1.0 million for
SSTC; and (iv) beneficiaries, with in-kind contributions of US$2.2 million to
cofinance business plans. Programme costs by component and expenditure
category are presented in tables 1 and 2.

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Central

government
Provincial

government Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Development of markets and
sectoral policies 1 796 67 882 33 - - - - - - 2 678 11

2. Productive, organizational
and commercial development 10 377 55 - - 5 807 31 643 3 2 160 11 18 987 75

3. Programme management 127 3 135 4 1 192 32 2 329 62 - - 3 783 15

Total programme costs 12 300 48 1 017 4 7 000 28 2 972 12 2 160 9 25 448 100



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

5

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Central

government
Provincial

government Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Grants (capitalization of
producers’ organizations) 9 390 52 - - 5 807 32 643 4 2 160 12 18 000 71

2. Goods, services and inputs 123 100 - - 10 3 338 97 - - 472 2
3. Consultancies (technical

assistance) 1 725 81 402 19 - - - - - - 2 126 8
4. Training 662 52 615 48 - - - - - - 1 277 5
5. Credit and guarantee funds 400 100 - - - - - - - - 400 2
6. Salaries and allowances - - - - 989 39 1 523 61 - - 2 512 10
7. Operating costs 0 - 0 - 193 29 467 71 - - 660 3

Total programme costs 12 300 48 1 017 4 7 000 28 2 972 12 2 160 9 25 448 100

C. Benefit summary and economic analysis
22. The programme will serve some 8,000 rural families (approximately 40,000

people), including 5,600 smallholder families and 2,400 indigenous families. Small-
scale producers, organized in approximately 160 producers’ organizations, including
48 indigenous communities, will generate the programme’s expected benefits.

23. The financial and economic evaluation indicates the activities’ viability at farm and
programme levels. The internal rate of return is 23.3 per cent, and the net present
value US$19.6 million.

D. Sustainability
24. The programme’s sustainability will be ensured by: (i) collaboration of producers’

organizations with processing companies in the goat basin forums; (ii) support to
beneficiary organizations that will continue operating after programme completion;
(iii) sector-wide support provided in component 1, including the vegetation
monitoring system and SSTC activities; (iv) environmental, climate change
adaptation and commercial support measures to be integrated into business plans;
and (v) linkage of participating companies to commercial financial institutions.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
25. The programme’s potential adverse impacts and risks of failing to achieve its

objectives are limited. The main risks include: (i) political and institutional risks,
which are low in view of the country’s stable poverty-reduction policy framework
and UCAR’s track record in implementing poverty reduction programmes;
(ii) possible delay in incorporating participating provinces into the programme,
which has been mitigated by their identification and participation in programme
design; (iii) companies’ difficulties in joining the programme, which will be reduced
by inviting them to participate in the goat basin forums, and by technical assistance
and loan guarantees; (iv) market risks, which are already low by virtue of observed
demand for goat products, will be further reduced by addressing supply and
marketing constraints; (v) technological and climatic risks, which will be mitigated
through local technical assistance and support to integration of climate-proofing
measures into business plans and participating companies’ operations; and
(vi) fiduciary risk: based on a 2015 Transparency International Corruption
Perceptions Index score of 32, and IFAD experience in the country, the
programme’s fiduciary risk has been rated as medium. However, the solid
experience and systems of UCAR, along with close implementation support from
IFAD, are considered sufficient to mitigate fiduciary risk.



EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

6

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

26. The programme approach and implementation modalities are consistent with IFAD
strategies and policies. They specifically support IFAD’s fiduciary compliance and
are aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025 and the policies on rural
finance, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management,
gender equality and women’s empowerment, and targeting.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
27. The programme is in line with government objectives and the Federal and

Participative Agri-food and Agribusiness Strategic Plan, 2010/2016 (PEA2). It is also
consistent with the recommendations of IFAD’s 2010 country programme
evaluation in seeking a programme approach, expanding the range of financial
services and introducing the use of grants to boost knowledge management.

Innovations and scaling upC.
28. The programme’s innovations include: (i) focusing on specific value chains with a

high incidence of poverty and sound commercial potential; (ii) bringing together
smallholder producers, companies and public administration in forums to plan the
development of goat value chains; (iii) integrating sector-support activities such as
market analysis and promotion and policy support; (iv) introducing systematic
natural resource monitoring; (v) widening the spectrum of rural financial services,
including financial education and loan guarantees for participating companies; and
(vi) SSTC to support market and policy development activities.

Policy engagementD.
29. The programme will support development of public policies to promote sustainable

smallholder goat breeding in Argentina and beyond by generating and
communicating evidence of the value chain development approach it applies. Best
practices will be learned and disseminated in the framework of the SSTC
programme.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
30. A financing agreement between the Argentine Republic and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

31. The Argentine Republic is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

32. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
33. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Argentine Republic in the amount of twelve million three hundred thousand
dollars (US$12,300,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Argentine
Republic in the amount of one million seventeen thousand dollars
(US$1,017,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



Appendix I EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

1

Negotiated financing agreement

Convenio de financiación negociado: “Programa de
Desarrollo de las Cadenas Caprinas (PRODECCA)”

(Negociaciones concluidas el 29 de noviembre de 20167)

Número del Préstamo:

Número de la Donación:

Programa de Desarrollo de las Cadenas Caprinas (PRODECCA) (“el Programa”)

La República Argentina (el “Prestatario/Receptor”)

y

El Fondo Internacional de Desarrollo Agrícola (el “Fondo” o el “FIDA”)

(cada uno de ellos por separado la “Parte” y los dos colectivamente las “Partes”)

acuerdan lo siguiente:

Sección A

1. Los siguientes documentos en su conjunto conforman colectivamente este
Convenio: las presentes estipulaciones, la Descripción y las Disposiciones de ejecución
del Programa (Anexo 1), el Cuadro de asignaciones (Anexo 2) y las Condiciones
Generales del Fondo para la Financiación del Desarrollo Agrícola de fecha 29 de abril de
2009 y modificadas en abril de 2014 (las “Condiciones Generales”), las cuales se
aplicarán al presente Convenio.

2. Las Condiciones Generales en sus sucesivas versiones enmendadas y cualquiera de
las disposiciones en ellas contempladas serán aplicables al presente Convenio, así como
la excepción establecida en el párrafo 2 del Anexo 2 de este Convenio. A los efectos del
presente Convenio, los términos definidos en las Condiciones Generales tendrán el
significado que se establezca en las mismas.

3. A los efectos del presente Convenio, las Partes acuerdan que cualquier
incumplimiento real o invocado contra el Prestatario/Receptor en relación con el pago de
sus deudas en general, así como cualquier acción iniciada al respecto, con anterioridad a
la fecha de entrada en vigor del presente Convenio o posteriormente siempre vinculada
con dicho incumplimiento, no constituirá incumplimiento por parte del
Prestatario/Receptor a los fines de la Sección 12.01 a) x) de las Condiciones Generales,
ni el Fondo podrá considerarlo motivo de suspensión en virtud de dicha Sección.

4 El Fondo proporcionará un Préstamo y una Donación al Prestatario/Receptor (el
“Financiamiento”), que el Prestatario/Receptor utilizará para ejecutar el Programa de
conformidad con los términos y condiciones del presente Convenio.



Appendix I EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

2

Sección B

1. El monto del Financiamiento está compuesto por:

A. El monto del Préstamo, que es de doce millones trescientos mil dólares de los
Estados Unidos de América (USD 12 300 000).

B. El monto de la Donación, que es de un millón diecisiete mil dólares de los
Estados Unidos de América (USD 1 017 000).

2. El Préstamo se concede en condiciones ordinarias, y pagará un tipo de interés
equivalente al cien por ciento (100%) del tipo de interés variable de referencia del FIDA.
El FIDA calcula la tasa de interés anual de referencia de cada semestre en el primer día
hábil de enero y en el primer día hábil de julio. La tasa de interés de referencia aplicable
a los préstamos en USD concedidos en condiciones ordinarias es el LIBOR a seis meses
más el margen del Banco Internacional de Reconstrucción y Fomento aplicable a los
préstamos denominados en USD que tienen el mismo plazo de vencimiento, u otro
método aprobado por la Junta Ejecutiva del FIDA.

3. El Préstamo tendrá un plazo de reembolso de dieciocho (18) años, incluido un
período de gracia de tres (3) años a partir de la fecha en que el Fondo haya determinado
que se han cumplido todas las condiciones generales previas para el retiro de fondos.

4. La Moneda de Pago del Servicio del Préstamo será el Dólar de los Estados Unidos de
América.

5. El Ejercicio Financiero o Fiscal del Prestatario/Receptor aplicable será del 1º de
enero al 31 de diciembre de cada año.

6. Los pagos del capital y los intereses del Préstamo serán pagaderos cada 1° de junio
y 1° de diciembre. El capital será pagadero en 30 cuotas, comenzando 3 años después de
la fecha de cumplimiento de las condiciones previas para el retiro de fondos. En dicho
momento el FIDA comunicará al Prestatario/Receptor el plan de amortización
correspondiente.

7. El Prestatario/Receptor mantendrá abierta una Cuenta Receptora en el Banco
Central de la República Argentina denominada en dólares de los Estados Unidos de
América (USD) para recibir los recursos del Préstamo y de la Donación. Dichos recursos
serán transferidos a las cuentas designadas abiertas en USD por la UCAR en el Banco de
la Nación Argentina que serán utilizadas exclusivamente para recibir los recursos del
Préstamo y de la Donación, respectivamente.

8. La UCAR abrirá y administrará en el Banco de la Nación Argentina dos cuentas
operativas en pesos argentinos (ARS).

9. Cada Unidad de Ejecución Provincial (UEP) abrirá una Cuenta Operativa Provincial
en ARS para recibir los fondos del Préstamo.

10. El Prestatario/Receptor proporcionará financiación de contrapartida para el
Programa por el monto de siete millones de dólares de los Estados Unidos de América
(USD 7 000 000).



Appendix I EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

3

Sección C

1. El Organismo Responsable del Programa será el Ministerio de Agroindustria del
Prestatario/Receptor que ejecutará el Programa a través de la Unidad para el Cambio
Rural (UCAR) o aquella que en el futuro la reemplace.

2. De conformidad con la definición de “Parte en el Programa” contenida en la Sección
2.01 de las Condiciones Generales, se designan Partes en el Programa adicionales a las
mencionadas en la Sección C.1, a los gobiernos provinciales, las Organizaciones de
Productores (OP) y cualquier entidad encargada de la ejecución de cualquier parte del
Programa.

3. Se llevará a cabo la Revisión de Medio Término como se especifica en la Sección
8.03 b) y c) de las Condiciones Generales, pudiendo las Partes acordar otra fecha para
llevar a cabo la Revisión de Medio Término de la ejecución del Programa.

4. La Fecha de Terminación del Programa será el sexto aniversario de la fecha de
entrada en vigor del presente Convenio.

Sección D

El Fondo supervisará directamente el Programa.

Sección E

1. Se considera que es motivo adicional a los previstos en las Condiciones Generales
para la suspensión del derecho del Prestatario/Receptor a solicitar desembolsos del
presente Convenio que cualquiera de las disposiciones del Reglamento Operativo del
Programa (ROP) haya sido objeto de cesión, renuncia, suspensión, revocación, enmienda
u otra modificación, sin el acuerdo previo de las Partes, y el FIDA haya determinado
fehacientemente, previa consulta y justificación del Prestatario/Receptor, que tal cesión,
renuncia, suspensión, revocación, enmienda o modificación ha tenido consecuencias
adversas sustanciales para el Programa.

2. Se considera que son condiciones generales adicionales a las previstas en las
Condiciones Generales previas para el retiro de fondos las siguientes:

a) Que la UCAR haya abierto las Cuentas Designadas del Programa y las cuentas
operativas respectivas.

b) Que se haya nombrado al Responsable Técnico del Programa.

c) Que el FIDA haya aprobado el Reglamento Operativo del Programa.

d) Que la UCAR confirme que se haya habilitado el sistema UEPEX para el
Programa.



Appendix I EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

4

3. El Prestatario/Receptor designa al Ministro de Hacienda y Finanzas Públicas como
su representante a los efectos de la Sección 15.03 de las Condiciones Generales.

4. Se indican a continuación los representantes designados y las direcciones que han
de utilizarse para cualquier intercambio de comunicaciones relacionadas con el presente
Convenio:

Por el Prestatario/Receptor:

Ministro de Hacienda y Finanzas Públicas
Ministerio de Hacienda y Finanzas Públicas
Hipólito Yrigoyen 250
C1086AAB Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires

Por el Fondo:

Presidente
Fondo Internacional de Desarrollo Agrícola
Via Paolo di Dono 44
00142 Roma, Italia

El presente Convenio, de fecha ___, se ha preparado en idioma español en dos (2) copias
originales, una (1) para el Fondo y la otra (1) para el Prestatario/Receptor.

REPÚBLICA ARGENTINA

___________________
Representante autorizado
(nombre y título)

FONDO INTERNACIONAL PARA EL
DESARROLLO AGRÍCOLA

_____________________
Kanayo F. Nwanze
Presidente



Appendix I EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

5

Anexo 1

Descripción del Programa y disposiciones de ejecución

34. Descripción del Programa

1. Población-objetivo y área del Programa. Si bien el Programa realizará acciones de
alcance nacional, tales como la promoción de mercados y el apoyo a las políticas del
sector, los recursos para inversiones productivas se invertirán en las provincias de Chaco,
Formosa y Santiago del Estero (zona Chaqueña), y Mendoza y Neuquén (zona Centro
Sur) (el “Área del Programa”). Serán beneficiarios del Programa los productores y
productoras caprinas pobres cuyo ingreso provenga principalmente de la actividad
caprina, con especial énfasis en la participación de mujeres, jóvenes y comunidades
indígenas.

Los beneficiarios directos del Programa deberán cumplir con los siguientes
criterios: i) familia de la agricultura familiar campesina o de comunidades de pueblos
originarios situada dentro de las cinco provincias citadas; ii) productor caprino, con
menos de 200 madres caprinas por familia en la zona Chaqueña y 320 madres caprinas
por familia en la zona Centro Sur; iii) estar situado en las cuencas caprinas identificadas
en el marco del Programa; y iv) formar parte de una organización de productores o
pertenecer a una comunidad de pueblos originarios.

2. Meta. La meta del Programa es contribuir a la reducción sostenible de la pobreza
de productores rurales caprinos.

3. Objetivos. El objetivo del Programa es mejorar los ingresos de las familias
productoras de cabras, a través de su inserción en las cadenas de valor caprinas en
condiciones beneficiosas y sostenibles.

4. Componentes. El Programa consta de tres (3) componentes:

4.1. Componente 1. Desarrollo de mercados y apoyo a las políticas del sector.
Este componente, de carácter sistémico o de amplio alcance, tiene como propósito
desarrollar los mercados de productos caprinos en el país y fortalecer las políticas
públicas del sector.

4.1.1. Subcomponente 1.1. Desarrollo de mercados. Las actividades previstas bajo este
subcomponente son: estudios de preferencias del consumidor; campañas
publicitarias; promoción del consumo local y el desarrollo de mercados locales;
intercambios para conocer mercados exteriores y otros para conocer programas
de compras públicas.

4.1.2. Subcomponente 1.2. Apoyo a las políticas y normativa del sector.  Las
actividades previstas bajo este subcomponente incluyen: realización de un
estudio sobre género y juventud en cadenas caprinas; adaptación de normativas
del Servicio Nacional de Sanidad Animal y Calidad Agroalimentaria (SENASA)
para agricultura familiar; y apoyo a la incorporación de productos caprinos al
Código Alimentario Argentino; promoción del manejo sostenible de recursos
naturales por eco-regiones; participación en foros provinciales y regionales;
intercambios con otros países del sur en forma de rutas de aprendizaje,
exploración de mercados e intercambios profesionales; educación financiera y
capacitación en manejo de fondos rotatorios.



Appendix I EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

6

4.2. Componente 2. Desarrollo productivo, organizativo y comercial. Este
componente tiene como propósito ejecutar actividades de carácter territorial, acotadas a
realidades específicas en las provincias seleccionadas. Por ello, el Programa requiere de
una estructura de coordinación a nivel provincial apoyada por la UCAR.

4.2.1. Subcomponente 2.1. Gestión de cuencas caprinas. Las actividades previstas bajo
este subcomponente incluyen: identificación y caracterización de cuencas
caprinas (CC) con sus actores (territorio ocupado por productores que hagan
confluir su producción a través de uno o varios entes que serán traccionadores
de la cadena, cuyas funciones y conformación serán definidas en el ROP);
conformación de mesas de cuencas caprinas (MC) por parte de las
organizaciones de productores, los entes mencionados y otros actores relevantes
con el objetivo de crear planes de cuenca (PC); apoyo a la gestión de mesas de
cuenca; preparación de planes de cuenca; y, monitoreo de la ejecución y
resultados de dichos planes.

4.2.2. Subcomponente 2.2. Preinversión. Las actividades previstas bajo este
subcomponente incluyen: realización de un Diagnóstico Rural Participativo de las
organizaciones de productores participantes; fortalecimiento de organizaciones
participantes a través de asistencia técnica; preparación de proyectos integrales
por parte de las organizaciones de productores, y su priorización y aprobación
por parte de los Comités de Aprobación y Seguimiento Territorial provinciales del
Programa.

4.2.3. Subcomponente 2.3. Ejecución de proyectos integrales. Los proyectos integrales
serán ejecutados por las organizaciones de productores. Los proyectos
financiarán inversiones prediales y comunitarias de las organizaciones
solicitantes con el fin de aumentar la producción y comercialización caprina
sostenible, incluyendo: infraestructura y bienes productivos; asistencia técnica
productiva (escuelas de campo, parcelas demostrativas), organizativa
(eventualmente incluyendo acciones de regularización fundiaria), comercial,
sobre aspectos de nutrición (incluyendo preparación de alimentos) y sanidad;
alianzas estratégicas, medidas de mitigación y adaptación al cambio climático,
uso eficiente de agua, así como.

4.2.4. Subcomponente 2.4. Fondo de garantía para financiamiento en cuencas. El
Programa preverá la posibilidad de facilitar el acceso al crédito comercial de los
entes participantes de las cadenas caprinas. Para ello se realizará una
experiencia piloto a través de una herramienta que garantice parcialmente los
préstamos que dichos actores pudieran tomar en entidades financieras.

4.3. Componente 3. Gestión del Programa.

Unidad Ejecutora Central (UEC). Para la coordinación y gestión del Programa a nivel
central, se contratarán o designarán: un Responsable Técnico del Programa y un equipo
del Programa en la Unidad para el Cambio Rural (UCAR) apoyados por los servicios
especializados de la UCAR.

Unidades de Ejecución Provincial (UEPs). Para la coordinación y gestión a nivel provincial,
el Programa operará a través de las UEP.

Planificación, monitoreo, evaluación y gestión de conocimientos (PMEGC). Un sistema
será desarrollado para permitir una gestión del Programa basada en resultados. Se
privilegiarán metodologías y herramientas de planificación y seguimiento participativas
tanto en su intervención a nivel de cuencas, de organizaciones de productores, de UEP,
así como en la gestión del Programa.



Appendix I EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

7

35. Disposiciones de ejecución

5. Organismo Responsable del Programa. Será el Ministerio de Agroindustria del
Prestatario/Receptor que ejecutará el Programa a través de la Unidad para el Cambio
Rural (UCAR), o aquella entidad que en el futuro la reemplace.

6. Coordinación del Programa. La implementación del Programa será realizada a
través de una Coordinación del Programa ubicada en el Área de Gestión de Programas y
Proyectos de la UCAR y de una UEP en cada provincia que se adhiera al Programa.
Dentro de las funciones de la Coordinación del Programa se incluye la preparación del
Plan de Adquisiciones y Contrataciones (PAC) como parte del Plan Operativo Anual (POA),
conjuntamente con el Área de Adquisiciones y Contrataciones de la UCAR.

7. Modalidades de ejecución. La ejecución del Programa se realizará bajo dos
modalidades: i) de ejecución provincial por medio de convenios de ejecución con los
gobiernos provinciales en cuyos territorios se ejecutará, y ii) en forma directa por parte
de la UCAR para las actividades del componente 1.

8. La Unidad para el Cambio Rural (UCAR). La implementación del Programa estará a
cargo de la Unidad de Desarrollo Productivo de la UCAR, dependiente del Área de Gestión
de Programas y Proyectos, también responsable por los otros programas financiados por
el FIDA. Dicha Área se apoyará en la capacidad instalada de la UCAR en diferentes
temas: gestión administrativa, jurídica, financiera y adquisiciones, programación y
presupuesto, y seguimiento y evaluación, lo que implica consultas y coordinación con las
diferentes Áreas respectivas.

La UCAR será responsable de llevar adelante los convenios de ejecución con los
Gobiernos provinciales, donde se constituirá una UEP.

Dentro de las funciones de la UCAR se encuentran: i) solicitar la inclusión, en el
presupuesto anual del Ministerio de Agroindustria de los requerimientos de recursos del
Programa y tramitar su aprobación ante el Ministerio de Hacienda y Finanzas Públicas
(MHyFP); ii) ejecutar el Programa de acuerdo a los términos de este Convenio, las
directrices del FIDA, las normas nacionales, el diseño del Programa y el ROP;
iii) supervisar la ejecución provincial del Programa por las UEP; iv) orientar los procesos
relativos a identificación y planificación de cuencas; v) las funciones de desembolso, que
incluyen conservar archivos, llevar registros del Programa y contratar auditores
aceptables para el FIDA, o coordinar con la Auditoria General de la Nación para auditar
las cuentas del Programa; y vi) procurar acciones de fortalecimiento institucional de las
UEP para sus funciones financieras. En relación a los componentes, la UCAR será
responsable directa por la ejecución de las actividades del componente 1.

9. Unidad Ejecutora Central (UEC). Para la coordinación y gestión del Programa a nivel
central, la UCAR contratará o designará: un/a Responsable Técnico del Programa; un/a
encargado/a de planificación, seguimiento y evaluación; un/a coordinador/a de
operaciones para la zona Chaqueña; un/a coordinador/a de operaciones para la zona
Centro Sur; un/a especialista en desarrollo rural participativo; un/a especialista en
desarrollo de mercados y políticas sectoriales; un/a especialista en ambiente y
ecosistemas naturales secos; y un/a especialista fiduciario para coordinar con las UEP las
rendiciones de cuentas de las organizaciones.

10. Unidad de Ejecución Provincial (UEP). Para la coordinación y gestión del Programa a
nivel provincial, el Programa operará a través de las UEP del Programa de Desarrollo
Rural Incluyente (PRODERI) en las provincias seleccionadas y una nueva UEP en la
Provincia de Formosa. Para fortalecer las capacidades técnicas de las UEP existentes, las
provincias incorporarán dos técnicos a cada una, cuyos perfiles profesionales y
experiencias serán en: planificación participativa con comunidades rurales; y gestión de
emprendimientos rurales con producción caprina. La UEP de Formosa estará integrada
por la cantidad de personal suficiente que garantice la ejecución del Programa,



Appendix I EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

8

incluyendo un Responsable Técnico Provincial del Programa y especialistas en temas de
producción caprina, comercialización, desarrollo organizacional y fiduciario.

Las UEPs serán responsables de identificar a las OP participantes y de apoyarlas
mediante la preparación participativa de Proyectos Integrales y el acompañamiento de
las OP en la ejecución de los mismos. Para ello, las UEPs brindarán asistencia técnica y
capacitación a las OPs.

11. Organizaciones de Productores (OP). Las organizaciones de productores
desempeñarán un papel fundamental en el Programa, ya que serán los actores claves en
la formulación y ejecución de los proyectos integrales, principal instrumento del
Programa para apoyar a los productores y promover su inserción beneficiosa en cadenas
de valor caprinas. Los procesos de gestión financiera de los proyectos integrales estarán
a cargo de las OP participantes, incluyendo la adquisición de equipos e insumos y las
rendiciones de cuenta de los recursos transferidos, con el apoyo y acompañamiento de la
UEP correspondiente.

12. Reglamento Operativo del Programa (ROP). La UCAR preparará el ROP y ejecutará
el Programa conforme al presente Convenio y al ROP. El ROP contemplará los
procedimientos y responsabilidades involucradas en la transferencia de fondos a las OP y
la correspondiente rendición de cuenta de los mismos. Del mismo modo, detallará a los
responsables de la capacitación de las UEP y OP en gestión administrativa, financiera y
de adquisiciones, con el apoyo del Área de Administración, Finanzas y Contabilidad y el
Área de Adquisiciones y Contrataciones. El ROP también establecerá los procedimientos
para las adquisiciones y contrataciones del PRODECCA. Si fuera necesario, el ROP podrá
ser modificado a propuesta del Organismo ejecutor o del FIDA. Las modificaciones serán
efectivas con la no objeción de la otra parte.

36. Fondos de contrapartida

13. La contrapartida del Prestatario/Receptor se aplicará al financiamiento del Programa
como se estima a continuación: el Prestatario/Receptor aportará un monto total de USD
7,00 millones, siendo sus aportes más importantes los siguientes: USD 5,81 millones en
la categoría de Capitalización de OP (donaciones), y aportará el 100% de los gastos
operativos y los salarios del personal necesario para la correcta gestión y ejecución de las
actividades para lo que asignará USD 1,18 millones. El resto del aporte se destinará a co-
financiar la categoría de Bienes, servicios e insumos para fortalecer a la UEC y a las
UEPs.



Appendix I EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

9

Anexo 2

Cuadro de asignaciones

1. Asignación de los recursos del Préstamo y la Donación. a) En el
cuadro que figura a continuación se presentan las Categorías de Gastos Admisibles que
se financiarán con cargo al Préstamo y la Donación y la asignación de los montos del
Préstamo y la Donación a cada Categoría, así como los porcentajes de los gastos
correspondientes a los rubros que se financiarán en cada Categoría:

Categoría

Monto del
Préstamo

(expresado en
USD)

Monto de la
Donación

(expresado en
USD)

Porcentaje de
financiación

1. Capitalización de
organizaciones de productores
(donaciones)

9 390 000
100% excluyendo los
impuestos

2. Bienes, servicios e insumos
para beneficiarios

123 000
100% excluyendo los
impuestos

3. Asistencia técnica
(consultorías) 1 725 000 402 000

100% excluyendo los
impuestos

4. Capacitación 662 000 615 000 100% excluyendo los
impuestos

5. Crédito y fondos de garantía 400 000
100% de gastos
totales

TOTAL 12 300 000 1 017 000

b) Los términos que se emplean en el cuadro supra se definen más abajo:

Por “Capitalización de organizaciones de productores (donaciones)” se entienden
los gastos elegibles para financiar los Proyectos Integrales, incluyendo la
capacitación y asistencia técnica para las OPs, los activos colectivos, el capital de
trabajo comercial, de riesgo y seguros, inversiones en activos intraprediales y la
asistencia técnica productiva.

Por “Bienes, servicios e insumos para beneficiarios” se entienden los gastos
elegibles para financiar los bienes, servicios e insumos comprados por una UEP
como aporte a la conformación y gestión de Mesas de Cuenca, incluyendo la
organización de eventos y la movilidad de miembros de mesas.

Por “Asistencia técnica (consultorías)” se entienden los gastos elegibles para
financiar la contratación de estudios y asistencia técnica para el desarrollo de
negocios rurales caprinos, las acciones de preinversión de las actividades de las
OPs, y la contratación de servicios para la evaluación, sistematización, promoción,
comunicación y difusión del Programa.



Appendix I EB 2016/LOT/P.18/Rev.1

10

Por “Capacitación” se entienden los gastos elegibles para financiar becas y
educación financiera para el grupo objetivo, y capacitación y viajes de aprendizaje
y promoción, tanto para representantes de las OPs participantes como para el
personal de las UEPs y la UCAR.

Por “Crédito y fondos de garantía” se entienden los gastos elegibles para financiar
garantías en fondos de garantía y para depósitos de aval en instituciones
financieras de segundo grado.

2. Financiación retroactiva. Como excepción a la Sección 4.08a)ii) de las Condiciones
Generales, los gastos hasta USD 500 000 incurridos a partir de la fecha de la negociación
del presente Convenio pero antes de la entrada en vigor del mismo para financiar
actividades iniciales de desarrollo de los foros caprinos y de la Cooperación Sur Sur y
Triangular con cargo a la categoría 2 “Bienes, servicios e insumos para beneficiarios” y la
categoría 3 “Asistencia técnica (consultorías)”, tanto del  préstamo como de la donación,
podrán ser considerados admisibles. Para ser elegibles, las actividades financiadas a
través de la financiación retroactiva y respectivas fuentes de financiación deberán contar
con el visto bueno del FIDA. El Prestatario/Receptor podrá solicitar el reembolso de
dichos gastos una vez que las condiciones previas de desembolso se hayan cumplido.

3. Costos de puesta en marcha. El retiro de fondos respecto de los costos de puesta
en marcha con cargo a las categorías de gastos “Bienes, servicios e insumos para
beneficiarios” y “Asistencia técnica (consultorías)” del Préstamo, realizados antes de
satisfacer las condiciones previas para el retiro no deberán exceder un monto total
equivalente a USD 300 000.



A
p
p
en

d
ix II

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.1

8
/R

ev.1

1
1

Logical framework

Jerarquía de
objetivos

Indicadores claves y metas al final del Programa Métodos de verificación
Supuestos y

riesgosIndicadores Valor dereferencia Valor Final Fuente Frecuencia Responsable

FIN: Contribuir a la
reducción sostenible
de la pobreza de
productores rurales
caprinos

Familias rurales que han incrementado sus
activos

0 5.600 (70% de
8.000) familias, de
los cuales 1.680
(30%) indígenas

Evaluación del
programa basada
en línea de base y
de terminación
(incluyendo
encuesta RIMS)

Sistema de SyE
del Programa

Ficha de
seguimiento

Al inicio y al final
del programa

Al inicio y al final
del programa

Anualmente

Unidad Central de
Ejecución (UEC),
con datos
relevados por las
Unidades de
Ejecución
Provinciales (UEPs)

Estabilidad
económica
Continuo enfoque en
la AF en la política
nacional

OBJETIVO DE
DESARROLLO

Mejorar los ingresos
de pequeños
productores pobres
caprinos, mediante su
inserción sostenible
en cadenas de valor

 Familias que incrementan sus ingresos por
actividad caprina en al menos 20% respecto
de la línea de base

 Calificación (sobre 6 puntos) para:
Sostenibilidad de los grupos de
comercialización formados (RIMS 2.4.4)
- % de OP participantes que continúan

funcionando después del 3er año de
ejecución de sus proyectos integrales

- hogares participantes que comercia-lizan
sus productos a través de las OP

0

n/a

0

0

5.600 familias, de
los cuales 1.680
indígenas

5

80%

6.400 hogares
(80%)

Componente 1. Desarrollo de mercados y apoyo al sector

Efecto 1.1:
Posicionamiento y
comercialización de
productos caprinos y
sus derivados
facilitados

 Calificación (sobre 6 p.) para: Eficacia:
Productores que se benefician de acceso a
mercados mejorados (RIMS 2.4.1)
- Familias con mejor acceso al mercado

(p.ej. a través de: compradores locales,
compras públicas, alianzas estratégicas,
ferias, exportaciones y transformadores)

n/a 5

5.600 familias Sistema de SyE
del Programa

MOU entre socios
de las alianzas
estratégicas

Anualmente

Semestralmente

Coordinación del
Programa

Unidades de
Ejecución
Provinciales

Área de Control de
Gestión UCAR

Evolución positiva
de los precios
Firma tempestiva de
los convenios de
ejecución con
Gobiernos
Provinciales

Producto 1.1:
Mercados mejor
adecuados para
productos caprinos

 Número de operaciones de transformación
(p.ej. faena) y comercia-lización (p.ej. ferias
y supermercados) de la Agricultura Familiar
activadas o intensificadas (RIMS 1.4.3)

0 6 operaciones

Efecto 1.2:
Condiciones propicias
para el desarrollo del
sector caprino

 OP que participan regularmente en foros
caprinos provinciales y regionales

 Personas que disponen de nuevas capa-
cidades gracias a eventos de intercambio

0

0

64 OP

600 personas

Actas de foros
caprinos
Informes de
intercambios y
rutas de
aprendizaje

Semestralmente

Semestralmente

Año 2 del
programa

Unidades de
Ejecución
Provinciales

Área de Control de
Gestión, UCAR

Se ofrece espacio de
decisión a los foros
de las cadenas de
valor priorizadas.

Producto 1.2:
Políticas fortalecidas
del sector

 Estudio realizado sobre normativas
sanitarias adecuadas a la actividad caprina y
a la agricultura familiar

0 1 estudio



A
p
p
en

d
ix II

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.1

8
/R

ev.1

1
2

Componente 2: Desarrollo Productivo, Organizativo y Comercial

Efecto 2.1:
Cadenas de valor
gestionadas de
forma sistémica y
participativa

 Número de mesas de cuenca que cuentan
con la participación de Entes traccionadores
por lo menos 2 veces por año

0 8 mesas de cuenca Actas de mesas
de cuenca

Actas de mesas
de cuenca

Semestralmente Unidades de
Ejecución
Provinciales

Área de Control de
Gestión UCAR

Mesas de Cuenca

Firma de los
convenios de
ejecución con los
Gobiernos
Provinciales en
tiempos adecuadosProducto 2.1:

Planes de Cuenca
funcionando

 OP participantes que reportan
semestralmente a la Mesa de Cuenca (MC) la
ejecución de los proyectos integrales y sus
logros comerciales

0 144 OP (90%)

Efecto 2.2:
Organizaciones
fortalecidas

 Calificación (sobre 6 puntos) para:
Probabilidad de Sostenibilidad de las
Empresas (RIMS 2.5.2)

- OP fortalecidas en términos
organizacionales que cuentan con un índice
en promedio de 2.0 sobre 3

- OP participantes que funcionan después del
3er año de financiamiento

n/a

0

0

5

128 OP (80%)

102 OP, de las
cuales 30% son
comunidades
indígenas

Línea de base
simple al inicio y
encuesta de
resultados  al final
del proyecto
integral

Semestralmente,
con datos del
diagnóstico rural
participativo y el
índice de
fortalecimiento
organizacional

SemestralmenteProducto 2.2:
Proyectos integrales
funcionando

 OP que han recibido fortalecimiento
antes de preparar un proyecto
integral

0 80 OP

Efecto 2.3:
Productividad,
calidad y
volúmenes de
producción de las
OP mejoradas

 Calificación (sobre 6 puntos) para:
Producción agrícola y ganadera mejorada
(RIMS 2.2.2)

- familias participantes que cuentan con
activos productivos mejorados

- reproductividad por cabra mejorada
- OP participantes que obtienen ingresos

netos incrementales al 3º año del inicio
del PI

n/a

0

1,5 cabritos/
madre/año
0

5

6.400 familias

2,0 cabritos/
madre/año

112 OP (70%)

Sistema de SyE
del Programa

Fichas familiares

Sistema de
monitoreo y
evaluación del
Programa (Esp.
Ambiental - UAS

Al inicio y al final
del Programa

Semestralmente

Coordinación del
Programa

Los procesos de
transferencia y
adaptación
tecnológicas son
apropiados a los
pequeños
productores.

La reproductividad
inicial (estimada a
1,5 cabritos por
madre) será
verificada por las
fichas familiares

Producto 2.3:
Inversiones
productivas
funcionando, y
asistencia técnica
provistos

 OP que ejecutan un proyecto integral (RIMS
1.4.6)

 OP que llevan adelante actividades de gestión
de los riesgos climáticos, gestión
sustentable de recursos naturales o
reducción de riesgos de desastre o
tratamiento de efluentes (RIMS 1.6.11)

160 OP

160 OP

Producto 2.4:
Financiamiento
reembolsable
disponible

 Entes traccionadores que participan en el
Programa acceden al fondo de garantía

8 entes
traccionadores

Sistema de SyE
del Programa

Semestralmente Coordinación del
Programa
















































Note to Executive Board representatives

Focal points:

Technical questions: Dispatch of documentation:

Ladislao Rubio
Country Programme Manager
Latin America and the Caribbean
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2575
e-mail: l.rubio@ifad.org

William Skinner
Chief
Governing Bodies Office
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2974
e-mail: gb_office@ifad.org

For: Approval

Document: EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

E
Date: 26 November 2016

Distribution: Public

Original: English

President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Cooperative Republic of Guyana for the
Hinterland Environmentally Sustainable
Agricultural Development Project



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

i

Contents

Abbreviations and acronyms ii
Map of project area iii
Financing summary iv
Recommendation for approval 1
I. Strategic context and rationale 1

A. Country and rural development and poverty context 1
B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and COSOP 2

II. Project description 3
A. Project area and target group 3
B. Project development objective 3
C. Components/outcomes 4

III. Project implementation 4
Approach 4A.

B. Organizational framework 4
C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and

knowledge management 5
D. Financial management, procurement and governance 5
E. Supervision 6

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits 6
A. Project costs 6
B. Project financing 6
C. Summary benefit and economic analysis 7
D. Sustainability 7
E. Risk identification and mitigation 7

V. Corporate considerations 8
Compliance with IFAD policies 8A.
Alignment and harmonization 9B.
Innovations and scaling up 9C.
Policy engagement 9D.

VI. Legal instruments and authority 10
VII. Recommendation 10

Appendices
I. Negotiated financing agreement
II. Logical framework



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

ii

Abbreviations and acronyms

ASDU Agriculture Sector Development Unit
CTP community training plan
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
IDB Inter-American Development Bank
M&E monitoring and evaluation
NSC national steering committee
P/CIP public/collective investment plan
UNDP United Nations Development Programme



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

iii

Map of project area

Cooperative Republic of Guyana
IFAD-funded operations



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

iv

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Cooperative Republic of Guyana

Hinterland Environmentally Sustainable Agricultural
Development Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Cooperative Republic of Guyana

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$11.15 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$7.96 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$0.5 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: Maturity period of 25 years, including a grace
period of five years, with a fixed interest rate of 1.25 per
cent per annum plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent
per annum.

Contribution of borrower: US$2.43 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$270,000

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to Cooperative Republic of Guyana for the Hinterland Environmentally
Sustainable Agricultural Development Project, as contained in paragraph 59.

Proposed loan and grant to the Cooperative Republic of
Guyana for the Hinterland Environmentally Sustainable
Agricultural Development Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Situated on the northern coast of South America, Guyana borders the Atlantic

Ocean, Brazil, Suriname and Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela; it belongs to the
Guiana Shield region, part of the Amazon Biome. Guyana hosts a vast expanse of
primary tropical forest, freshwater resources and a unique savannah ecosystem. It
covers an area of 215,000 km2 with a population of 747,883. Indigenous peoples
account for more than three quarters of the population in regions 8 and 9
(75.9 per cent and 89.2 per cent, respectively) and about two thirds of the
population in region 1 (62.2 per cent).

2. The World Bank estimates that Guyana’s GDP, based on the Atlas Method, was
US$3,763 in 2014. According to the Economist Intelligence Unit, economic growth
is expected to reach 3.2 per cent in 2016 and 3.7 per cent in 2017 as substantial
new gold mining projects are launched.

3. Agriculture and rural development. Agriculture is a significant contributor to the
country’s development. It is predominantly undertaken by small-scale farmers and
indigenous people farming less than 5 ha of land. Cultivated crops include rice
(90,000 ha), sugar (48,000 ha) and coconut (25,000 ha); non-traditional crops
occupy between 30,000 and 40,000 ha while 158,473 ha are used for livestock.
Agricultural products, excluding forest products, make up approximately
31 per cent of total exports; the main exported commodities are rice and sugar.

4. Poverty, nutrition and food security. According to the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP), since 1992, the proportion of households living
in moderate poverty (on US$2 per day) has declined from 43 per cent to
36.3 per cent, and extreme poverty has dropped from 28.7 per cent to
19.1 per cent. The outlook remains far less favourable for indigenous peoples,
77 per cent of whom are poor, and inhabitants of the hinterland, where three out of
four people are poor.

5. Studies show that household food security in hinterland region 9 is compromised;
the situation worsens during drought and flood seasons. A rising dependence on
remittances, driven by migration towards mining and logging areas, is negatively
affecting consumption patterns in indigenous areas. Changes in indigenous peoples’
diets (which include increased consumption of refined carbohydrates, processed
foods, sweetened and calorie-dense foods) are likely responsible for the rise in
chronic diseases in this region.

6. Main natural resource constraints for agriculture and rural people in
regions 1 and 9. Agriculture and rural livelihoods in regions 1 and 9 are affected
by increased variability in rainfall patterns. In region 9, severe floods and prolonged
dry spells, coupled with a lack of adequate water-management technologies and



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

2

low fertility of the savannah soil, are major challenges for agriculture and livestock.
In region 1, salt water intrusion is a major impact of climate change, which over
time will affect arable land and freshwater resources in coastal areas. Climate
change is affecting the sustainability of established production patterns in both
regions, and the transition to new production patterns needs to involve greater
adaptability to changing climatic and economic conditions. This will require access
to knowledge, investment and technologies for natural resource management,
which are currently lacking.

7. Economic constraints in regions 1 and 9. The remoteness of regions 1 and 9
remains a challenge for the generation of business and income-generation
opportunities. Poor transportation and telecommunication networks limit market
access and hinder these regions’ integration into the national economy. There is
also a lack of access to information, technology and energy needed to support
investments in productive activities, and promote adaptation to changing economic
and environmental conditions.

8. Main challenges. Persistent poverty and climate change are severely straining the
target group’s resilience and social cohesion. The capacity of hinterland
communities to respond to new economic and environmental challenges is further
limited by a lack of incentives for investments that reduce economic and climate
risks.

9. Opportunities to improve livelihoods of indigenous people and small
farmers in the project area. Despite these challenges, both regions offer
opportunities for improving the livelihoods of the target group and generating
income from agriculture and related activities.

10. In the long term, the Ministry of Agriculture intends to strengthen hinterland
agriculture by moving production away from traditional export products and from
coastal areas that are vulnerable to salinization. In the short term, consultations
and field visits in regions 1 and 9 have confirmed that these regions offer: (i) high
levels of human capital, including education, skills, motivation and entrepreneurial
attitude; (ii) widespread awareness of the need to improve livelihood strategies to
adapt to economic, environmental and climate challenges; (iii) appreciation of the
value of ecosystems and biodiversity; (iv) common land titles, strong community
governance and familiarity with participatory planning approaches; (v) local
markets and local public procurement, which provide opportunities for small and
medium-sized agricultural producers (with little competition from large businesses);
and (vi) producer groups (including women’s associations) that have established
partnerships with NGOs and local government agencies.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
COSOP

11. The favorable conditions highlighted above provide an opportunity for the project to
support rural households and communities in identifying and developing value
chains that generate new income opportunities and contribute to rural livelihood
diversification. Both regions offer viable opportunities to increase the
competitiveness, inclusiveness and sustainability of local value chains through
improvements in natural resources management, production, processing, storage,
quality-enhancing technologies and smallholder market access. Preliminary
consultations have identified the following value chains as possible targets for
development: cassava and its main by-products farine and cassava bread; peanuts,
fruit and livestock in region 9; and spices such as ginger, turmeric and black pepper
in region 1.

12. The project strategy will combine decentralized participatory community
development, natural resource management and value chain approaches to
strengthen livelihood resilience by increasing income-generating opportunities,



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

3

access to resilience-building assets and food and nutrition security. This strategy
will also support an inclusive participatory planning process that strengthens the
organizational capacities of communities and producer groups, and enhances
institutional coordination among national and local institutions.

13. The project is aligned with IFAD’s strategy for Guyana as defined in the country
strategy note. Previous IFAD projects in Guyana mainly operated in the coastal
region, focusing on strengthening producers’ capacity and expanding opportunities
to develop small-scale enterprises. The proposed project applies experience gained
in previous projects to remote hinterland areas largely populated by indigenous
peoples. Through this strategy, IFAD supports the Government of Guyana in its
efforts to bridge the coast-hinterland divide and reduce poverty in isolated rural
communities.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
14. The project will be carried out in all sub-regions of region 9 and in the Mabaruma

and Moruca sub-regions of region 1. Beneficiaries will be located in approximately
80 of the 128 communities in regions 1 and 9 (60 communities in region 9 and 20
communities in region 1). Considering the remoteness, vastness and low population
density of region 9, a phased implementation approach will be adopted for this
region. The project will initially focus on North Rupununi in order to capitalize on
government efforts to exploit this sub-region’s significant agricultural potential.
Lessons learned from project implementation in North Rupununi will later be applied
to Central and South Rupununi. The target group will include 6,000 poor
households, equivalent to 94 per cent of all poor households in the project area. At
least 15 per cent of these households (900) will be headed by women, reflecting
the overall proportion of women-headed households in the project area.

15. These 6,000 households represent approximately 30,000 direct and indirect
beneficiaries, comprising men and women of different age groups. At least
75 per cent of project beneficiaries will be from indigenous groups. At least
30 per cent will be between 15 and 44 years old, and at least 50 per cent will be
women. As a result of the project’s phased approach, figures for the target
population may be revised at the midterm review.

B. Project development objective
16. The development objective of the project, responding to the priorities identified in

the country strategy note, is improved livelihood resilience through income
generation, access to assets, improved nutrition and adaptation to climate
variability.

17. Livelihood resilience will be strengthened by the following activities:

(a) Increasing income-generating opportunities through the identification of
commodities drives the inclusion of small farmers in markets, increases local
demand for services and labour, and supports beneficiaries’ inclusive and
informed participation in market opportunities that improve household
income.

(b) Improving access to public goods, knowledge and technologies builds
community resilience and creates an enabling environment for production
through: technology, knowledge and information for better planning and
natural resource management; improved water availability for agriculture and
human consumption; better soil-management practices; diffusion of
information and communications technologies; adoption of renewable energy;
and valuation of agro-biodiversity.

(c) Enhancing food security and nutrition identifies and promotes
commodities, including crops, fish and forest products that sustainably



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

4

improve household diets and increase nutrition awareness through nutrition
education and behaviour change activities, including food-based dietary
guidelines.

C. Components/outcomes
18. Component 1. This component aims to support village and community councils

(in region 9), value chain roundtables (in region 1) and regional development
councils in planning and prioritizing investments in local value chains1 and resilient
communities. As a result, communities and producer groups will have strengthened
capacities to identify investment opportunities and manage economic and climate
change risks. The main instruments to be developed through this component are
community production development plans for region 9 and value chain action plans
for region 1. These medium-term plans will be the basis for developing three types
of investment plans to be implemented with project support: public/collective
investment plans (P/CIPs), community training plans (CTPs) and business plans.

19. Component 2. While component 1 will provide training, studies and
capacity-building needed to develop investment plans, component 2 will support
these plans’ implementation. Under component 2, an investment fund will be
established to finance public and common goods and services, through
non-reimbursable mechanisms, to be included in each type of investment plan.
They will comprise: (i) investments that reduce climate and investment risks
(included in P/CIPs); (ii) training, capacity-building and awareness-raising
activities, and related research that contributes to a reduction in climate, economic
and nutritional risks (included in CTPs); and (iii) technical assistance and services
to support the diffusion of knowledge, technologies and capacities that improve
livelihood resilience by reducing climate, economic and nutritional risks (included in
business plans).

20. Component 3. The third component will establish management and administrative
procedures, including accounting and auditing, monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms in accordance with IFAD and national guidelines. Evidence-based
knowledge products will be developed on the basis of project experience in order to
extract lessons and best practices, scale up innovative solutions and achieve better
outcomes and greater impact from development resources.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

21. The project strategy aims to improve the target group’s livelihood resilience by
addressing major risks arising from contextual challenges in the project area. Since
natural resources and local governance systems are threatened by these economic
and environmental risks, in order to strengthen the resilience of target
communities, the prioritization of opportunities and the planning of investments and
activities will be carried out through a participatory process, which will include local
actors and governing bodies.

B. Organizational framework
22. The lead agency for the implementation of the hinterland project will be the

Ministry of Agriculture through its Agriculture Sector Development Unit (ASDU). For
activities such as consultative village planning, agricultural technology transfer,
technical assistance, natural resource management and regional investment
planning, the Ministry of Agriculture will be assisted by the Ministries of Indigenous
People’s Affairs, Natural Resources, Communities and Business, other government
agencies, NGOs, community-based organizations, academia and individual service
providers.

1 In region 1, there is also significant potential for developing linkages to international markets; this is particularly true for
spices such as ginger and turmeric.



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

5

23. The project management unit will comprise an office at the Ministry of Agriculture in
Georgetown and regional offices in regions 1 and 9. A national steering committee
and regional management committees will be established to provide policy
direction, support implementation, advise on annual workplans and budgets, and
encourage collaboration among stakeholders.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

24. The project will provide support to strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of
Agriculture’s Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) Unit and ensure that project
monitoring is linked to the Ministry’s performance monitoring and Agriculture
Strategy indicators. M&E will be conducted using a participatory approach; data
collection will be kept simple and brief, focusing on the reliability and usefulness of
collected data. Evidence-based knowledge products will be developed to extract
lessons and best practices from project experiences, replicate innovative solutions,
maximize outcomes and impact from development resources, and disseminate
knowledge to support national, regional and local decision-making and policy
processes. A baseline study will be carried out immediately following the approval
of the financing agreement and before implementation.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
25. Financial management. Financial management and procurement for the project

will be undertaken by ASDU, which has adequate capacity, an appropriate
accounting system and extensive experience in implementing internationally funded
projects, including the IFAD-funded Rural Enterprise and Agricultural Development
Project. A qualified finance officer will be recruited through a competitive process as
a condition of disbursement for the loan and grant. Due to the remoteness of
project areas, an administrative/finance officer will be recruited at each regional
office through a competitive process and will be responsible for performing
administrative and basic accounting functions.

26. Flow of funds. The borrower will open a designated account in United States
dollars in the Central Bank of Guyana exclusively for the loan and grant, in which
advance funds will be deposited and from which funds will be transferred to the
project operational account in Guyanese dollars.

27. Retroactive financing. As an exception to section 4.08(a)(ii) of the General
Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, specific eligible expenditures
incurred from the date of approval by the Executive Board until the date of entry
into force of the financing agreement will be considered eligible up to the amount of
US$300,000 in accordance with and as specified in the financing agreement. These
eligible expenditures will consist of the costs related to: the detailed value chains
study for spices in region 1; a state of food and agriculture study in the Mabaruma
and Moruca sub-regions of region 1; and the hiring of personnel.

28. Procurement. Procurement of goods and services will be carried out by ASDU in
line with national regulations, IFAD’s Project Procurement Guidelines and the
provisions of the financing agreement. A procurement officer, exclusively assigned
to the hinterland project, will be hired by ASDU.

29. Audit. Annual consolidated financial statements for the project will be
independently audited pursuant to the agreed terms of reference and in accordance
with International Standards on Auditing and IFAD's guidelines on project audits. In
line with the 2004 Guyana Audit Act, the Auditor General shall be responsible for
conducting financial, compliance, performance and value-for-money audits of the
accounts of all projects funded by loans or grants from any foreign state or
organization. The Guyana Auditor General Audit Office will audit the project
financial statements. Annual audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six
months of the end of each fiscal year.



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

6

E. Supervision
30. IFAD will directly supervise the project, complemented by implementation-support

missions. One supervision mission will be planned each year. The first supervision
mission, undertaken approximately six months after project effectiveness, will
monitor progress against the timeframe defined in the implementation plan, and
will assess fiduciary aspects, expenditures, counterpart contributions of funds and
compliance with the financing agreement. Implementation-support missions will be
planned to cover the issues recommended by supervision missions.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
31. The total cost of the project is US$11.14 million over a period of six years. Of this

total, US$10.54 million (95 per cent) are baseline costs and US$610,000 (5 per cent)
are physical and price contingencies.
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Strengthening of
community's and
producer groups'
investment planning 2 142 71 247 8 637 21 3 025

2. Implementation of
investment plans 4 755 77 265 4 1 139 18 6 159

3. Project and
knowledge
management, and
coordination 1 055 54 253 13 650 33 1 959

Total 7 952 71 500 4 265 2 2 426 22 11 143

B. Project financing
32. The project will be financed by: (i) the Government, which will provide

US$2.43 million in cash and in-kind – equal to 22 per cent of the total cost;
(ii) IFAD in the amount of US$8.45 million (total performance-based allocation
system (PBAS) allocation 2016-2018), 76 per cent of the total cost, including a loan
of US$7.95 million and a grant of US$500,000; and (iii) beneficiaries, who will
contribute US$270,000 – 2 per cent of the total cost. Some of the categories of
expenditure indicated in table 2 below may be merged in the financing agreement.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Vehicles and equipment 188 84 36 16 224 2
2. Training 614 84 117 16 731 7
3. Consultancy services 2 904 66 500 11 982 22 4 385 39
4. Grants (for sub-projects) 3 202 78 265 6 660 16 4 128 37
5. Salaries 534 50 534 50 1 068 10
6. Operating expenses 510 84 97 16 607 5

Total 7 952 71 500 4 265 2 2 426 22 11 143 100



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

7

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
33. Financial analysis. To verify the financial viability of project activities, the flow of

annual incremental net benefits was calculated over a period of ten years, both for
rural households’ agricultural production and for producer groups’ enterprises. All
models confirmed increases in benefits, family net income, sales and labour.
Financial viability was positive in all models, with financial internal rates of return
between 23 per cent and 312 per cent.

34. Economic analysis. Economic viability indicators are positive, with an economic
internal rate of return of 21 per cent and an expected net present value of
US$6.97 million. Viability indicators are not highly sensitive to the reduction of
benefits and to delays in obtaining them; these indicators are moderately sensitive
to cost increases.

D. Sustainability
35. Political and institutional sustainability. The project is aligned with the national

policy framework, which: highlights the development of hinterland agriculture;
seeks to reduce the poverty and isolation of indigenous communities; and supports
the adoption of environmentally sustainable development. Coordination between
national government agencies and local authorities is already taking place in region
9, and the project will contribute to dialogue and coordination between government
agencies, indigenous communities, international donors and civil society
organizations operating in hinterland areas.

36. Sustainability, upscaling and replication. Previous IFAD projects in Guyana
mostly concentrated on coastal areas and communities. This project builds upon
and adapts IFAD’s approach to the unique conditions in the hinterland, and paves
the way for replication and scaling up in other remote areas of the country with
similar conditions. Of particular relevance is the phased implementation approach
adopted for region 1, where a state of food and agriculture study will be conducted
in the first year of the project. The knowledge and lessons learned in Mabaruma
and Moruca sub-regions can be used to replicate the project in other areas of
region 1. Using a participatory planning approach, the project will build upon the
planning capacity developed in villages that have already established community
development plans, and it will strengthen skills and capacities for climate- and
nutrition-sensitive planning.

37. Food security and nutritional quality. Awareness-raising activities and training
materials on nutritional quality will also be created through the project.

38. Environmental sustainability. The adoption of climate-resilient measures such as
the identification of drought-tolerant and climate-resilient crop varieties, and the
definition of climate-proof agricultural technologies will sustain productivity and
quality improvements. The state of food and agriculture study in region 1 will fill
the knowledge gap on environmental and socio-economic conditions in the region,
thus contributing to better planning.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The risks identified during the project design include economic risks,

climate-change risks, social risks and institutional risks.

40. Economic risks include excessive specialization and competition for labour from
other sectors. These risks will be mitigated through training and support activities
that build awareness of specialization risks and help communities and producers’
groups to integrate new income-generating activities into diversified livelihood
strategies. The project will promote the strengthening of local value chains and
increase access to information needed for target households’ equitable participation
in agricultural markets. It will also provide technical assistance and investment
incentives to maximize incomes and employment.



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

8

41. Climate-change risks will be addressed through support for investments in public
and collective goods included in P/CIPs and CTPs that increase access to
knowledge, technology and information for improved water and natural resource
management. The project will promote the adoption of good natural resource
management practices and measures for adapting to climate change within
business plans. Business plans will also include mitigation strategies to reduce the
negative effects of productive specialization on climate change resilience and
nutrition through the use of agro-biodiversity and the diversification of livelihoods.

42. Social risks will be reduced through the adoption of free, prior and informed
consent plans, and by strengthening participatory community planning. The
participation of vulnerable groups, including women and youth, will be promoted
through the targeting strategy, the inclusion of skills development and training for
youth and women in CTPs, and by prioritizing business plans that involve vulnerable
groups.

43. Risks to nutrition and food security will be addressed through training and technical
assistance that strengthens the links between income generation and nutrition
quality in order to: (i) help households to make more informed dietary choices;
(ii) increase the adoption of dietary recommendations; and (iii) increase the
richness, variety and nutritional quality of the local food system.

44. Institutional risks relate to limited regional coordination among stakeholders and to
the weak organizational capacities of communities and producer groups. The
project will strengthen national and regional coordination through its national
steering committee and regional management committee, facilitating linkages
among ministries, other government agencies and programmes, NGOs and other
projects.

45. Based on Guyana’s 2015 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 29 and public financial management assessments, the project’s fiduciary
risk has been rated as medium. The measures highlighted in section III.D of this
report are considered sufficient to mitigate any fiduciary risks.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

46. IFAD’s target group comprises rural people living in poverty and experiencing food
insecurity; IFAD proactively strives to reach extremely poor people (in line with
Sustainable Development Goal 1) with the potential to benefit from improved
access to agricultural production and rural income generation. In the case of
Guyana, poor people principally live in hinterland areas. Therefore, the geographical
focus of this project is in regions 1 and 9 – hinterland areas where indigenous
peoples constitute the majority of the population. Targeting will be monitored using
participatory monitoring and evaluation, and will be assessed at mid-term review.

47. To meet the requirements of IFAD’s demand–driven and consultative targeting
approach, participatory mapping of resource use and economic activities will be
carried out under component 1. IFAD will work with the Government and other
stakeholders to establish a shared understanding of the causes poverty and
exclusion in hinterland areas.

48. Compliance with IFAD policies for environment and natural resource
management. The project complies with IFAD’s Climate and Natural Resources
Management Policy, specifically principles 3 and 4, and will adopt an integrated
climate-smart approach. Local value chains will be identified through participatory
processes to ensure that their development contributes to increasing community-
and household-level resilience to climate change. Priority will be given to initiatives
that promote climate-related disaster risk reduction and management, and the
establishment of agroecological systems. The project will also provide technical



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

9

assistance for the incorporation of technologies and good practices for better
national resource management and climate-change adaptation into investment
plans.

49. Compliance with IFAD’s Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment. The hinterland project is aligned with IFAD’s Policy on Gender
Equality and Women’s Empowerment through a participatory approach designed to
ensure that the voices of different rural population segments are equally heard and
valued. Specific gender actions to ensure gender equity have been included in the
project design and budget. By working with entire households, the project will
leverage the complementary knowledge and skills of women and men (in line with
Strategic Objective 2).

50. Compliance with IFAD’s Nutrition Action Plan 2016-2018. The project is
nutrition sensitive as defined in the IFAD Nutrition Action Plan 2016-2018. It
contributes to families’ improved food and nutrition security by linking local food
production with the improved nutritional quality of diets.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
51. The project is aligned with the national policy framework, which highlights the

development of hinterland agriculture; reduction of poverty and isolation in
indigenous communities; and adoption of environmentally sustainable development
strategies to mitigate increased threats from climate change.

52. In region 9, the project will harness complementarities with the Inter-American
Development Bank (IDB) Sustainable Agricultural Development Project. This project
aims to increase the productivity of the agricultural sector while maintaining the
sustainable and climate-resilient use of natural resources in regions 5, 9 and 10.
IDB will support the Ministry of Agriculture in the preparation and implementation
of an extension strategy that includes incentives for small farmers to adopt
technologies for cassava, peanuts, livestock, orchards and pastures. To enhance
synergies and improve national and regional coordination, the two projects will use
the same national steering committee and regional management committee in
region 9. Collaboration will also be sought with IDB to utilize information and
communication technologies in rural areas.

53. The project will be harmonized with the IDB multilateral investment fund project
Leveraging Natural Capital in the Rupununi Region (region 9). This project aims to
create and strengthen environmentally sustainable local-level initiatives, and
enhance market access for community-based enterprises. It will be also
harmonized with Guyana’s Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest
Degradation Plus Investment Fund, which aims to invest in low-carbon approaches
identified in the Low Carbon Development Strategy. In addition, collaboration will
be sought with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
on the state of food and agriculture study in region 1, and to support
implementation of the Integrated Sustainable Agriculture Development Strategy for
region 9 2015-2020 (developed by the Ministry of Agriculture, FAO and
Conservation International).

Innovations and scaling upC.
54. Previous IFAD projects in Guyana were concentrated in coastal areas. This project

builds upon and adapts IFAD’s approach to the unique conditions in the hinterland,
and paves the way for replication and scaling up in other remote areas of the
country with similar conditions.

Policy engagementD.
55. The project, which will be mainly implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, is

aligned with government decentralization strategies involving local governments
and indigenous peoples’ institutions through the Ministries of Communities and



EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

10

Indigenous Peoples’ Affairs (in partnership with other government agencies,
international donors and international NGOs). Coordination between national
government agencies and local authorities is already taking place in region 9; closer
cooperation will be sought throughout the project to strengthen capacities within
the Government and civil society for natural resource management, nutrition- and
climate-sensitive planning.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
56. A project financing agreement between the Cooperative Republic of Guyana and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in
appendix I.

57. The Cooperative Republic of Guyana is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

58. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
59. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the
Cooperative Republic of Guyana in the amount of seven million nine hundred
and sixty thousand United States dollars (US$7,960,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Cooperative
Republic of Guyana in the amount of five hundred thousand United States
dollars (US$500,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



Appendix I EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

1

Negotiated financing agreement

Hinterland Environmentally Sustainable Agricultural
Development Project

(Negotiations concluded on 4 November 2016)

Loan Number: _________
Grant Number: ________

Project Title: Hinterland Environmentally Sustainable Agricultural Development Project
(the “Hinterland Project” or “the Project”)

The Cooperative Republic of Guyana (the “the Borrower/Recipient”)

and

The International Fund for Agricultural Development (the “Fund” or “IFAD”)

(each a “Party” and both of them collectively the “Parties”)

HEREBY agree as follows:

Section A

1. The following documents collectively form this Agreement: this document, the
Project Description and Implementation Arrangements (Schedule 1) and the Allocation
Table (Schedule 2).

2. The Fund’s General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing dated
29 April 2009, amended as of April 2014, and as may be amended hereafter from time to
time (the “General Conditions”) are annexed to this Agreement, and all provisions thereof
shall apply to this Agreement. For the purposes of this Agreement the terms defined in
the General Conditions shall have the meanings set forth therein.

3. The Fund shall provide a Loan and Grant to the Borrower/Recipient (the
“Financing”), which the Borrower/Recipient shall use to implement the Project in
accordance with the terms and conditions of this Agreement.

Section B

1. A. The amount of the Loan is seven million nine hundred sixty thousand
US dollars (USD 7.96 million).

B. The amount of the Grant is five hundred thousand US dollars
(USD 0.50 million).

2. The Loan is granted on blend terms, and shall be subject to interest on the principal
amount outstanding at a fixed rate of 1.25 per cent and in addition a service charge of
0.75 per cent per annum payable semiannually in the Loan Service Payment Currency
and shall have a maturity period of twenty five (25) years, including a grace period of
five (5) years, starting from the date of approval by the Executive Board.



Appendix I EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

2

3. The Loan Service Payment Currency shall be the US dollar.

4. The first day of the applicable Fiscal Year shall be 1 January.

5. Payments of principal, interest and service charge shall be payable on each 15 June
and 15 December.

6. There shall be a designated account denominated in US dollars opened by and held
in the name of the Borrower/Recipient in the Central Bank of Guyana. This designated
account shall be used exclusively for the deposit of Financing proceeds.

7. There shall be a Project Account opened by and held in the name of the
Borrower/Recipient in a bank selected by the Borrower/Recipient. It shall be in Guyanese
Dollars and this is where resources from the Designated Account and counterpart funds
shall be deposited.

8. The Borrower/Recipient shall provide counterpart financing for the Project in an
amount equivalent to two million four hundred and thirty thousand US dollars
(USD 2 430 000) in cash and in kind, including covering of taxes and duties in an amount
equivalent to one million four hundred and eighty USD dollars (USD 1 480 000).

Section C

1. The Lead Project Agency shall be the Ministry of Agriculture.

2. The Project Completion Date shall be the sixth anniversary of the date of entry into
force of this Agreement.

Section D

1. The Financing will be administered and the Project supervised by the Fund.

Section E

1. The following is designated as an additional ground for suspension of the right of
the Borrower/Recipient  to request withdrawals from the Loan and the Grant Accounts:

(a) the Project Implementation Manual (PIM) referred to in paragraph 10 of
Schedule 1 hereto, or any provision thereof, has been waived, suspended,
terminated, amended or otherwise modified without the prior consent of the
Fund, and the Fund has determined that such waiver, suspension,
termination, amendment or modification has had, or is likely to have, a
material adverse effect on the Project.

2. The following are designated as additional general conditions precedent to
withdrawal:

(a) The Project Management Unit (PMU) shall have been duly established and the
recruitment of key personnel such as the Project Coordinator, a Finance
Officer, Procurement Officer and M&E Officer shall have been completed;

(b) The Borrower/Recipient shall have prepared a draft PIM in form and substance
satisfactory to the Fund; and

(c) The Baseline study for Region 9 shall have been completed.



Appendix I EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

3

3. The following are designated as additional specific conditions precedent to
withdrawal for expenditures related to Component 2 in Region 1:

(a) The detailed value chains study for spices in Region 1 shall have been
completed;

(b) The SOFA study in Mabaruma and Moruca sub regions of Region 1 shall have
been completed;

(c) The Baseline study for Region 1 shall have been completed.

3. The following are the designated representatives and addresses to be used for any
communication related to this Agreement:

For the Borrower/Recipient:

Minister of Finance
Ministry of Finance
49 Main and Urquhart Streets
Georgetown, Guyana

For the Fund:

President
International Fund for Agricultural Development
Via Paolo di Dono 44
00142 Rome, Italy

This Agreement, dated _________, has been prepared in the English language in two (2)
original copies, one (1) for the Fund and one (1) for the the Borrower/Recipient.

COOPERATIVE REPUBLIC OF GUYANA

____________________
(Authorized Representative)
(name and title)

INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR
AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT

___________________
Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



Appendix I EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

4

Schedule 1

Project Description and Implementation Arrangements

I. Project Description

1. Project Area. The Project will operate in  Region 9 and in the Mabaruma and Moruca
sub-regions of Region 1. It will follow IFAD’s geographic targeting approach as it will
address the needs of the rural poor living in the Project area. The beneficiaries will come
from approximately 80 of the 128 existing villages and communities in Regions 1 and 9
(60 communities in Region 9 and 20 communities in Region 1). Phasing-in of
communities will be used to ensure there is sufficient time to assist villages,
communities, and producer groups with the implementation of their Investment and
Business Plans. Considering the remoteness, vastness and low population density of the
region, a phased implementation approach will be adopted for Region 9. The Project will
initially only focus on North Rupununi, so as to capitalize on current government efforts
to exploit the significant agricultural potential of this sub-region. Lessons learned from
Project implementation in North Rupununi will later be applied to Central and South
Rupununi.

2. Target Population. The target group includes poor indigenous and non-indigenous
rural households living in the Project area, whose livelihoods are threatened by economic
and environmental risks. The target group will include 6,000 poor households receiving
Project services, which is equivalent to 94 per cent of the existing poor households in the
Project area. At least 15 per cent of these (900 households) would be female-headed
households as this reflects the reality in the Project area. The 6,000 households
represent a total number of direct and indirect beneficiaries of approximately 30,000 men
and women of different age groups. The Project will ensure that the most vulnerable
groups have access to services and investment, empowering and facilitating the
participation of indigenous peoples, youth, and women. At least 75 per cent of the
Project beneficiaries would be from Amerindian tribes. At least 30 per cent would be from
the age group 15-44 years old and at least 50 per cent would be women. Due to the
adoption of a phased approach, figures for the target population may be revised at the
mid-term review.

3. Objective. The Development Objective of the Project is “Improved livelihood
resilience through income generation, access to assets, improved nutrition and
adaptation to climate variability”. Livelihood resilience will be strengthened by increasing
income-generating opportunities; improving access to public goods, knowledge and
technologies; and enhancing food security and nutrition.

4. Components. In order to achieve Project objectives and outcomes, the Project
includes two main components: (a) Strengthening of communities and producer groups’
investment planning; and (b) Implementation of investments plans. A third component
will be dedicated to Project and knowledge management and coordination.

4.1. Component 1: Strengthening of community and producer groups investment
planning. The objective of this component is to support Village and Community
Councils (in Region 9), value chain roundtables (in Region 1) and Regional
Development Councils in planning and prioritizing investments for the
development of local value chains2 and resilient communities and livelihoods. The
expected outcome is that communities and producer groups have strengthened
capacities to identify investment opportunities and manage economic and climate

2 In the case of Region 1 there is significant potential for the production and marketing of species where other local and
national market, there is a significant potential on international markets



Appendix I EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

5

change risks. The main instruments that will be developed by this component are
Community Production Development Plans (CPDP) for Region 9 and Value Chain
Action Plans (VCAP) for Region 1. These overall medium-term plans will be the
basis for the development of three types of concrete investment plans to be
implemented with the project support: Public/Collective Investment Plans (P/CIP),
Community Training Plans (CTP), and Business Plans (BP).

4.1.1. Through the IFAD grant, under Component 1 the Project will finance a SOFA study
for Region 1 that builds on the methodology and approach already adopted in
Region 9. Likewise, to obtain a better understanding of the spices value chains the
grant will also finance value chain studies. These studies will include an
identification of key constraints and opportunities for the development of the
value chains with the inclusion of Amerindian and small holder farmers including
constraints in production and transport costs, produce volume and quality
compared to market demands. In order to avoid delays in project implementation
for Region 1, resources for the SOFA and the value chain studies can be
anticipated by the GOG as soon as the loan agreement has been signed. Expenses
incurred for the SOFA study will be considered as retroactive expenses, and will
therefore be reimbursed once the conditions for the effectiveness and
disbursement of the Financing Agreement are fulfilled.

4.2. Component 2: Implementation of investment plans. While Component 1 will
provide training, studies and capacity building needed to develop investment
plans, Component 2 will support their actual implementation. Under Component 2
an Investment Fund will be established to finance, through non-reimbursable
mechanisms, public and common goods and services in the following categories of
investments that may be included in the different types of investment plans:
(a) investments in public and common goods and services that contribute to the
reduction of climate and investment risks, included in P/CIPs; (b) services for
training, capacity-building and awareness-raising activities, and related
background studies, that contribute to the reduction of climate, economic and
nutritional risks, included in CTPs; (c) technical assistance and services to favor
activities that have positive spillover effects on the hosting communities since
they contribute to the diffusion of models, knowledge, technologies and capacities
that improve livelihood resilience by reducing the climate, economic and
nutritional risks, included in BPs.

4.2.1. The administration and execution of the Investment Fund will be arranged through
an agreement signed between MOA and a Financial Institution(s) with presence in
the regions. The selection of the Financial Institution(s) will be through a
competitive bidding process. The PMU will be responsible for monitoring the
implementation of the Investment Fund and evaluating the performance of the
Financial Institution as well as the results achieved.

4.3. Component 3: Project and knowledge management and coordination. The purpose
of the third component is to establish management and administrative procedures
including accounting and auditing as well as setting up monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms in accordance with IFAD and national guidelines. Specific
evidence-based knowledge products will be developed on the basis of Project
experiences in order to extract lessons and best practices, up-scale innovative
solutions, and achieve better outcomes and greater impact from development
resources. Also, coordination and activities to link project and regional planning
will be supported.



Appendix I EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

6

II. Implementation Arrangements

5. The Lead Project Agency.

5.1. The Lead agency for the implementation of the Hinterland Project will be the Ministry
of Agriculture through its Agriculture’s Sector Development Unit (ASDU). For
activities such as consultative village planning processes, agricultural technologies
and technical assistance, natural resource management and regional investment
planning, the MOA would be assisted by the MIPA, MNE, MOC, MOB and other
government agencies, Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs), Community-Based
Organizations (CBOs) and local educational institutes.

5.2. The Project Management Unit (PMU) will comprise the office at the MOA in
Georgetown and regional offices in Regions 1 and 9. The PMU in Georgetown will
have a Project Coordinator, a Procurement Officer, a Finance Officer, and an M&E
Officer. The latter will be located at the M&E Unit of the MOA. In each regional
office, the Project will be supported by a Regional Project Officer (RPO) and Field
Facilitators. The office in Region 9 will also have a Social Inclusion and Gender
Specialist who will assist both Regional Project Officers in this particular area of
expertise.

5.3. Effective coordination with other line ministries, Regional Democratic Councils and
private sector initiatives in the regions is essential to create synergies and ensure
sustainability of Project results. To this end, a National Steering Committee (NSC)
and Regional Management Committees (RMC) will be established to provide policy
direction and support for implementation, advise on the Annual Workplan and
Budget, and encourage inter-organizational coordination and linkages.

5.4. The NSC is comprised of representatives from the: Ministry of Finance (MOF),
Ministry of Agriculture (MOA), Ministry of Indigenous People´s Affairs (MOIPA),
Ministry of Natural Resources (MNR), Ministry of Business (MOB), Ministry of Public
Health (MOPH), Ministry of Communities (MOC), Ministry of Social Protection (MSP),
Office of Climate Change at the Ministry of the Presidency, and two Representatives
from the beneficiaries (one from Region 1 and one from Region 9). The roles,
responsibilities and composition of the NSC shall be detailed in the PIM. The RMCs
will include, inter alia, the following representatives: (i) a regional chairman; (ii) a
regional representative of the Ministry of Indigenous People’s Affairs; (iii) a regional
representative of the MNR; (iv) a regional representative of each NAREI (National
Agricultural Research and Extension Institute) or GLDA (Guyana Livestock
Development Authority); and (v) a regional representative of the Program targeted
beneficiaries. The roles and responsibilities and composition of the RMC shall be
detailed in the PIM and shall include, inter alia to: (i) support the implementation of
the Program at the Regional level; (ii) support the ASDU in the implementation of
the Annual Workplan; and (iii) collaborate in coordinating with local and community
leaders.

5.5. The Project will provide support to strengthen the capacity of the MOA M&E Unit,
and ensure that Project implementation monitoring is linked to MOA performance
monitoring and feeds into existing Agriculture Strategy indicators. Monitoring and
evaluation will be conducted using a participatory approach; data collection will be
kept simple and not time-consuming, focusing on the reliability and usefulness of
collected data. Evidence-based knowledge products will be developed to extract
lessons and best practices from project experiences, replicate innovative solutions,
maximize outcomes and impact from development resources, and disseminate
generated knowledge to support national, regional and local decision making and
policy processes. The Baseline Study will be carried out immediately after the
approval of the Financing Agreement by IFAD’s Executive Board and before
implementation.



Appendix I EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

7

6. Financial management. Financial Management (FM) and Procurement of the Project
will be undertaken by the ASDU, which has adequate capacity, an appropriate accounting
system and an extensive experience in implementing internationally funded projects. A
qualified Finance Officer will be recruited through a competitive process as a condition of
disbursement from the loan and grant accounts.

7. Procurement. Project procurement of goods and services will be carried out by ASDU
in accordance to national regulation as long as it is compatible with IFAD Project
Procurement Guidelines and in accordance with the provisions of the financing agreement.
A procurement officer, exclusively assigned to the Hinterland Project will be hired by ASDU.

8. Audit.  The annual consolidated financial statements of the Project will be
independently audited, pursuant to the agreed terms of reference and in accordance with
the International Standards on Auditing and the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits. In line
with its mandate as per the Guyana Audit Act 2004, the Auditor General shall be
responsible for conducting financial, compliance,  performance and value-for-money audits
with respect to the accounts of all projects funded by the way of loans or grants by any
foreign state or organization. In this regard, the Guyana Auditor General Audit Office will
conduct the audit of the Project financial statements. Annual audit reports will be
submitted to IFAD within the six months of the end of the each fiscal year.

9. Supervision. IFAD will provide direct supervision for the Project, complemented by
implementation support missions. One supervision mission is generally planned for each
year. The first supervision mission, undertaken approximately six months after the date of
entry into force, will monitor progress in relation to the timeframe defined in the
implementation plan, and will assess advancements in fiduciary aspects, expenditures,
contribution of funds from the counterpart and compliance with the terms of the financing
agreement. Implementation support missions will be planned to cover the themes and
areas recommended by supervision missions.

10. Project Implementation Manual (PIM).  The PIM shall be prepared by the PMU and
approved by the Permanent Secretary, who will have the responsibility to send to IFAD for
its non-objection. The PIM may be amended or otherwise modified from time to time only
with the prior consent of the Fund. The PIM provides the basis for the implementation of
Hinterland Environmentally Sustainable Agriculture Development Project (Hinterland
Project). It will establish the Strategic and Institutional Framework and provide guidance
for the overall planning and implementation of activities. It will detail the collaborative
framework for project implementation, the institutional and management arrangements;
the administrative, fiduciary and contractual procedures; monitoring, evaluation and
reporting. The Manual will establish effective implementation procedures and mechanisms,
which will ensure the achievement of the overall objectives as outlines in the Project’s
design document and log-frame.



Appendix I EB 2016/LOT/P.12/Rev.1

8

Schedule 2

Allocation Table

1. Allocation of Proceeds. The Table below sets forth the Categories of Eligible
Expenditures to be financed by the Loan and Grant and the allocation of the
amounts of the Loan and Grant to each Category and the percentages of
expenditures for items to be financed in each Category:

Category IFAD Loan
Amount Allocated

(expressed
in USD)

IFAD Grant
Amount Allocated

(expressed
in USD)

Percentage

I. Vehicles and equipment 170 000 - 100% net of taxes

II. Training 550 000 - 100% net of taxes

III. Consultancy services 2 620 000 450 000 100% net of taxes

IV. Grants (for Sub-projects) 2 880 000 - 100% net of taxes

V. Salaries and operating
expenses

940 000 - 100% net of taxes

Unallocated 800 000 50 000

TOTAL 7 960 000 500 000

2. Retroactive Financing. As an exception to section 4.08(a)(ii) of the General
Conditions, specific eligible expenditures incurred from the date of approval by the
Executive Board until the date of entry into force of this Agreement shall be considered
eligible up to an amount equivalent to three hundred thousand US dollars (USD 300 000)
for activities relating to: (i) recruitment of key personnel, (ii) baseline study for Region 9
and Region 1, (iii) detailed value chains study for spices in Region 1, (iv) SOFA study in
Mabaruma and Moruca sub regions of Region 1. Activities to be financed by retroactive
financing and their respective category of expenditures and source of financing will
require prior no objection from IFAD to be considered eligible. These amounts may be
reimbursed after the general conditions precedent to withdrawal have been met

3. Start-up Costs. Withdrawals in respect of expenditures for start-up costs for the
same activities indicated in the previous paragraph can be made before the satisfaction
of the conditions precedent to withdrawal.  Start-up costs shall not exceed an aggregate
amount equivalent to three hundred thousand US dollars (USD 300 000). Activities to be
financed by start-up costs and their respective categories of expenditures and source of
financing will require prior no objection from IFAD to be considered eligible.



A
p
p
en

d
ix II

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.1

2
/R

ev.1

9

Logical framework

Results Hierarchy
Indicators Means of Verification Risks

Name Baseline End Target Source Frequency Responsibility
Development Objective:
Improved livelihood resilience
through income generation,
access to assets, improved
nutrition, and adaptation to
climate variability.

 80% of targeted households
have increased their score on
the resilience scorecard by at
least 2 points.

 Baseline
resilience
TBD

 4,800 hh
(15% female
headed hh)

Baseline studies
Impact study
Verification in the
field

Before
Effectiveness
Mid Term
Before Closing

PMU
MOA

Economic risks:
 Productive

specialization (vs
traditional
diversification
strategy):
vulnerability to
market shocks;
increased
seasonality effects
on income and
labour cycles
 Competition for

labour from other
sectors (e.g.,
mining)

Component 1: Strengthening of community and producer groups investment planning
Outcome 1
Communities and producer
groups have identified
investment opportunities
manage economic and climate
change risk.

 80% of households in targeted
communities participate in
development of public /
collective investments plans.

 0  4,500 hh
(15% female
headed hh)

Reports M&E
Supervision
reports
Progress reports

Semi-annually
Annually
Mid Term
Before Closing

PMU
MOA

 People in targeted communities
participating in producer groups
with approved business plans.

 0  2,500 people
(50%
women; 30%
youth)

Component 2: Implementation of investment plans Climate change
risks:
 Productive

transformation
without access to
adequate
technology and
information for
water and soil
management
 Shift to less

diversified farming
systems

Social risks:
 Weakening of

social capital and
organization
capacity at
community level

Outcome 2.1
Increased investments in
business plans that increase
agriculture and related
income-generating
opportunities and increase
market access.

 At least 80% of the households
that invested in business plans
have increased their income from
agriculture and related activities
by 50%.

 Private
assets
baseline
TBD

 2,000 hh
(15% female
headed hh)

Baseline studies
Impact study
Progress reports
Verification in the
field

Before
effectiveness
Annually
Mid Term
Before Closing

PMU
MOA

Outcome 2.2
Increased access to assets
that build community
resilience and create an
enabling productive
environment (water, energy,
ITC).

 Additional volume of water stored
in targeted communities.

 Baseline
TBD

 TBD

 Number of households in targeted
communities with access to
renewable energy sources.

 Baseline
TBD

 TBD

 Number of Internet Access Points
available to households in
targeted communities.

 Baseline
TBD

 TBD



A
p
p
en

d
ix II

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.1

2
/R

ev.1

1
0

 Number of households in target
communities that adopt
technologies for integrated soil
fertility management, integrated
pest management, and technology
for increasing efficient water use
that improved adaptability to
climate change

 Baseline
TBD

 TBD  Exclusion of
vulnerable groups
including women
and youth
 Risks for nutrition

and food security:
 Increased

complexity of
nutritional
problems (e.g.,
transition to
unhealthy diets)
 Decrease of food

security
 Loss of traditional

knowledge, food
culture and agro-
biodiversity

Institutional
risks:
 Limited inter-

institutional
coordination for
actions at the
regional level
 Incipient

managerial and
organizational
capacity to
implement
investments at the
local level
(communities and
producers’
organizations)

Outcome 2.3
Improved diet of adequate
quality and appropriate
quantity, referring to context-
appropriate food-based
dietary guidelines and drawing
insofar as possible on own-
production and local markets
in a context of effective
behaviour change and
nutrition education activities.

 60% of households have food
consumption patterns that
substantially reflect appropriate
“best option food basket”.

 Baseline
TBD

 3,600 hh
(15% female
headed hh)

 Number of reference “best option
food baskets,” reflecting
nutritionally adequate, low-cost
options, developed and
communicated (based on food-
based dietary guidelines and
giving preference to foods
available from local production).

 Baseline
TBD

TBD

Baseline studies
Impact study
Progress reports
Verification in the
field

Before
effectiveness
Annually
Mid Term
Before Closing

PMU
MOA

 Number of crops and animal
varieties and wild species used as
food or income generating source
at community level.

 Baseline
TBD

 Same or
more

Component 3: Project and Knowledge management and Coordination
Outcome 3
Efficient and adequate
management and
implementation of planned
activities and effective
coordination and planning
between institutions at the
national, regional and local
level.

 At least 90 per cent of the AWPB
is implemented each year.

 0  90 per cent
annual

AWPB
Supervision
reports
Progress reports Annually

Mid Term
Before Closing

PMU
MOA

 Number of evidence based
knowledge products developed
(written, video or oral/radio).

 0  At least four

 Number of MOUs signed with
public institutions to provide
services to the project.

 0  At least four

 The project’s global investment
plan and AWPBs are reflected in
the regional budgets and plans for
two regions.

 0  Two regions NSC and RM
Minutes
Progress reports



