


































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Liberia for the Rural Community Finance
Project



Republic of Liberia

Rural Community Finance Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Liberia

Executing agencies: Technical Assistance and Supervision Unit (TASU) and
Technical Assistance and Supervision Company
(TASC), and Central Bank of Liberia (CBL)

Total project cost: US$10.86 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 4.01 million (equivalent to approximately
US$5.5 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.38 million (equivalent to approximately
US$0.5 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per year

Contribution of borrower: US$0.54 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$4.39 million including US$3.2 million frombeneficiaries, US$1.1 million from RCFIs and US$0.09
million from CBL

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD




1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Liberia for the Rural Community Finance Project as
contained in paragraph 45.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Liberia for the
Rural Community Finance Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Despite significant improvements since the end of its civil war, Liberia remains a

fragile state with weak institutions, policies and governance. The outbreak of Ebola
virus disease has further constrained Liberia’s limited institutional capacity and
impacted its economy, threatening post-war gains. Liberia is classified as a Least
Developed Country and a Low-Income Food-Deficit Country,1 and relies heavily on
foreign assistance. The gross national income per capita was US$400 in 20142 and,
according to the 2014 Human Development Index, increased by 68.2 per cent
between 2000 and 2013. With a 2013 Human Development Index score of 0.412,
Liberia ranked 175 out of 187 countries in human development.

2. According to United Nations statistics, the population is estimated at 4.4 million
with an annual growth rate of 2.6 per cent. Liberia has a large youth population: in
2013, 42.9 per cent of the population was estimated to be less than 14 years old.
Poverty is widespread in Liberia, and is particularly acute in rural areas. An
estimated 51 per cent of the population lives in rural areas where poverty is heavily
concentrated, and a high percentage lack access to basic infrastructure and social
services, with poor road conditions leaving many areas inaccessible. Approximately
55 per cent of rural Liberian households are food insecure.3

3. The agricultural sector is the primary source of livelihood for 48.9 per cent of the
active population – mainly in smallholder and subsistence farming. There are also
cash-crop plantations including rubber, cocoa, coffee, palm oil and sugar cane.
Although agriculture is the largest contributor of GDP, small-scale farmers are
among the poorest in the country. Liberia has signed the Comprehensive Africa
Agricultural Development Programme (CAADP) Compact, committing to the Maputo
Protocol goal of 10 per cent national budget expenditure on agriculture by 2017
(the current level is 3 per cent of the national budget). As a result of low
agricultural production and productivity, Liberia imports between 50 per cent and
60 per cent of its staple food requirements, leaving the country vulnerable to price
fluctuations in global markets.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

4. IFAD’s results-based country strategic opportunities programme (RB-COSOP) for
Liberia for the period 2011-2015 is aligned with the CAADP and national policies,
especially the Liberia Agriculture Sector Investment Program. Three
IFAD-supported projects are currently contributing to the RB-COSOP: (i) the
Agriculture Sector Rehabilitation Project; (ii) the Smallholder Tree Crop

1 Low-Income Food-Deficit Countries list for 2014, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
2 World Bank World Development Indicators: gross national income per capita, Atlas Method (Current US$).
3 Liberia Comprehensive Food Security and Nutrition Survey, June 2013.



2

Revitalization and Support Project; and (iii) the support to the Farmers’ Union
Network.

5. As the Liberia RB-COSOP reached its midway point, its performance and relevance
were reviewed to identify the way forward for future IFAD support under the 2013-
2015 performance-based allocation system. The findings of the 2013 review
revealed that the strategic objectives under the RB-COSOP continue to be relevant,
with the provision that the transition from an emergency situation to a development
approach is realized. The needs and priorities of smallholder farmers and their
organizations are changing. Their growing interest in investing in agriculture and in
other microenterprises and small business is generating greater demand for credit
and will necessitate better access to rural finance. This demand has been
recognized in government efforts to promote growth in the local economy and
reduce poverty in the long term. The Government’s interest in building the rural
finance sector has been mirrored by the CBL. With the current RB-COSOP set to
end in 2015, the new RB-COSOP will require a stronger focus on rural finance.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. Project area. The project will facilitate the creation of new rural community

finance institutions (RCFIs) in selected areas throughout the country. RCFI locations
will be identified through feasibility studies and criteria including the degree of
commitment by host communities, absence of banking facilities and viability. CBL’s
strategic goals and objectives will also be taken into account. Priority will be given
to locations with significant business potential, including central towns with high
demand for financial services. The project area will also include all locations with
existing RCFIs.

7. Although the project will be nationwide in scope (excluding urban Montserrado
county), its coverage may initially be divided into implementation clusters. At the
district or county level, the following criteria will be used to identify suitable
communities: (i) social, poverty and demographic indicators for identifying
vulnerable communities with high potential; (ii) complementarities with ongoing
and planned initiatives; (iii) the potential for commercial activity, including the
production of cocoa and coffee, and value addition; (iv) the potential for poverty
reduction and employment creation; (v) the potential for mobilization of shares and
savings; and (vi) demand for financial services, particularly among low-income
groups.

8. Target group. The primary target group will be the economically active rural
population: petty traders, smallholder farmers, food processors, local transporters,
craftsmen, artisans and ex-combatants. Special attention will be given to reaching
women and youth, and small-scale entrepreneurs, especially women. As a project
designed to improve access to rural finance, targeting will be inclusive: by virtue of
the fact that the RCFIs will be community-owned, access to the financial services
will be open to the entire community. The project will directly target 24,000
shareholders, at least 50 per cent of them women, and 25 per cent of them young
men and women.

9. The proposed project will complement ongoing initiatives through partnerships to
maximize the impact on the target group. This includes partnerships with farmers’
organizations supported by existing projects that show interest in financial services.

B. Project development objective
10. The overall development goal of the project is to reduce rural poverty and

household food insecurity on a sustainable basis by facilitating access to finance for
at least 24,000 rural individuals and their families. The project’s development
objective is to improve access to rural financial services on a sustainable basis,



3

enabling the development of the rural sector. This project development objective
will be assessed through three indicators, namely that at least: (i) 20 per cent of
the adult rural population (over 16 years) in the project area uses the financial
services of RCFIs supported by the project; (ii) 50 per cent of RCFI shareholders
have received at least one loan; and (iii) 75 per cent of RCFIs supported by the
project achieve 100 per cent operational self-sufficiency (OSS) by the project end.

C. Components/outcomes
11. This five-year project will aim to enhance access to sustainable and affordable rural

financial services in Liberia. The three main outcomes of the project are that: (i)
RCFIs deliver demand-driven and efficient financial services to their clients; (ii)
professional and efficient technical support and supervision services are provided to
RCFIs by an apex body – the Technical Assistance and Supervision Unit/Technical
Assistance and Supervision Company (TASU/TASC)4 and; (iii) a more conducive
regulatory and supervisory environment promotes the rural financial sector. The
project will comprise three components: (i) Rural financial services; (ii) Enabling
environment for rural finance; and (iii) Project management and coordination.

12. Rural financial services. This component includes three subcomponents:
(i) direct support in the creation of 10 RCFIs and extended support to nine existing
RCFIs with support from CBL and a commercial bank; (ii) creation of a TASU/TASC
within CBL to implement the subcomponent 1.1 and support RCFIs; and (iii) a
country-specific grant to mitigate the impacts of the Ebola virus disease outbreak.
Given negative impacts of Ebola virus disease on household incomes, earning
capacity, financial and other reserves, and saving capacity, IFAD will support the
recovery of existing RCFIs and the establishment of new ones with US$0.5 million.

13. Enabling environment for rural finance. This component will provide technical
assistance to CBL for developing a sound regulatory framework for deposit-taking
and credit-only financial institutions. There will be a focus on rationalizing Liberia’s
the regulatory environment, including policies and reporting formats for RCFIs,
microfinance institutions (MFIs) and credit unions. This will be achieved in an open
manner that ensures stakeholder participation.

14. Project management and coordination. Component 3, comprising
project-related coordination, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), reporting, financial
management and procurement oversight, will be undertaken by the programme
implementation unit (PIU) operating under the supervision of the programme
management unit (PMU) within the Ministry of Agriculture. The PMU is responsible
for the coordination and harmonization of all donor-funded agricultural projects.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
15. The institutional design of the project is simple: the existence of a centralized PIU

for all Ministry of Agriculture projects supported by IFAD makes it possible to
coordinate the rural finance activities assigned to TASU/TASC and CBL. The main
institutional responsibilities comprise: (i) implementation of all grass-roots activities
under component 1 by TASU/TASC; (ii) implementation of component 2 activities,
which are related to CBL’s core mandate, by CBL; (iii) PIU implementation of all
activities related to its mandate (see paragraph 19); and (iv) guidance on major
issues, which will be provided by a project steering committee (PSC).

4 The TASU will be established within the Central Bank of Liberia and will develop over time until
deemed sufficiently strong for transformation into an independent company (TASC), providing services
to member institutions in exchange for a fee.




4

16. TASU/TASC and CBL will share responsibility for implementation. This complies with
the international consensus that central banks’ project interventions should be
limited to activities clearly related to their primary mandates. In this case,
regulation and supervision of financial institutions fall under the mandate of CBL.
Memorandums of agreement will be signed by the PIU, TASU/TASC and CBL.
Memorandums of agreement will also be signed by TASU/TASC and each affiliated
RCFI.

B. Organizational framework
17. The project will operate under the guidance of a PSC composed of representatives

from the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning,
and CBL. The PSC will provide project oversight, approve all manuals and revisions,
approve the annual workplan and budget before its submission to IFAD, receive
draft annual reports and decide on major issues. According to PIU implementation
guidelines, all sector-specific projects must have their own PSC with the necessary
technical requirements and expertise.

18. The PMU was established under the supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture and is
affiliated with that ministry’s Department of Planning and Development . The PMU is
a shared unit in charge of implementing all donor-funded projects in the agricultural
sector. The PMU is responsible for overall coordination of activities and information
exchange among partners, ministries and other stakeholders, and for ensuring
synergy among the project implementation units of the various donors.

19. Within the PMU, the IFAD PIU in Monrovia is responsible for the implementation of
all IFAD-funded projects in Liberia related to agriculture. The mandate of the PIU
comprises: project accounting, withdrawals, consolidating annual workplans and
budgets, preparing annual reports, corresponding with government authorities on
issues related to the financing agreement (excluding technical implementation),
documentation, procurement, submitting reports to IFAD and other agencies, M&E,
supervision of support and midterm review (MTR) missions, impact assessment and
end-of-project evaluation.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

20. A system to integrate planning, M&E, and knowledge management will be
developed at start-up to: (i) provide stakeholders with the data required to steer
implementation; (ii) provide the Ministry of Agriculture and other stakeholders with
information on progress in order to measure the project’s success in increasing
access to finance and other indicators; (iii) support coordination and synergies with
other development projects; (iv) monitor the project’s success in building
participatory processes that ensure the full involvement of rural poor people;
(v) provide participating communities and RCFIs with regular feedback and
analytics; and (vi) provide information on the achievement of RB-COSOP targets.
The PIU will manage this system in collaboration with partners.

B. Financial management, procurement and governance
21. Country context and risk rating. The inherent risk in Liberia is assessed as

medium. Liberia’s Corruption Perceptions Index score has decreased slightly from
41 in 2012 to 38 in 2013 and to 37 in 2014. According to the latest IMF Public
Expenditure and Financial Accountability Assessment conducted in 2012, Liberia’s
Government has made significant improvements since the 2007 assessment, but
the overall state of the public financial management remains somewhat weak. As
part of the project design, a financial management assessment of the PIU
responsible for implementing existing IFAD projects was undertaken. The
assessment found that the existing PIU’s financial management arrangements and
capacity are adequate to meet IFAD requirements. However, since the financial




5

management arrangements of the main implementing partner TASU/TASC are not
yet in place, the initial risk rating was determined to be medium.

22. Financial management. The main responsibility for the project’s financial
management will rest with the PIU. The PIU will maintain a full set of accounts
according to IFAD’s requirements and internationally accepted accounting
standards. The PIU will prepare periodic interim financial reports and annual project
financial statements according to accounting standards acceptable to IFAD. All
financial management arrangements will be detailed by the PIU in a financial
procedures manual or equivalent guideline to be approved by the Fund.

23. Flow of funds. There will be two designated bank accounts in United States dollars
held by CBL – one for the IFAD loan and one for the IFAD grant. In addition, two
operating accounts in United States dollars in a commercial bank acceptable to
IFAD will receive funds from the designated accounts. There will also be an
operating account to receive government counterpart funds. Once the IFAD
financing has entered into force, IFAD will make an initial deposit into the
designated accounts equal to the requirements of six months of implementation
(authorized allocation). IFAD financing will be disbursed following certified
withdrawal applications in accordance with IFAD disbursement procedures, which
will be specified in the letter to the borrower.

24. Procurement. Procurement for the project will be carried out according to national
procedures as long as they comply with IFAD guidelines. By default, the project will
utilize the procurement committee established within the Ministry of Agriculture’s
PIU.

25. Audit arrangements. The PIU will appoint independent auditors acceptable to
IFAD under terms of reference cleared by IFAD and in line with IFAD’s guidelines for
project audits. An audited annual consolidated financial statement for the entire
project together with a management letter on audit observations of internal
controls shall be submitted to the Fund within six months of each fiscal year end.

D. Supervision
26. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD. Annual supervision missions,

including follow-up missions whenever needed, will be organized with the
participation of the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Finance and Development
Planning, CBL, TASU/TASC, RCFIs and beneficiaries. Supervision will not be
conducted as general inspections, but as opportunities to assess achievements and
lessons learned, and to reflect on how to improve implementation and impact.
Missions will be an integral part of the knowledge management cycle, with mission
members supporting project and implementing agencies’ staff.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
27. The total investment and incremental recurrent costs, including price and physical

contingencies, are estimated at US$10,860,000; contingencies account for
3 per cent of these costs. The foreign exchange component is estimated at
US$3,006,000 (28 per cent). Taxes represent US$404,000. The total base cost is
US$10,426,000 while price and other contingencies account for US$434,000.
Significant contributions will be made by beneficiary communities (purchase of
shares), RCFIs (contributions to operating costs of RCFIs and TASU/TASC) and CBL
(staff time). The total costs by component and subcomponent are summarized by
financier in table 1 below.

28. The base cost of component 1 – Rural financial services – represents an investment
of US$9.7 million (93 per cent of the total base cost) while component 2 – Enabling
environment for rural finance, accounts for US$313,000 (3 per cent of the total





6

base cost). Project management and coordination under component 3 account for
4 per cent of the base cost, or US$417,000.

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component
Government IFAD IFAD grant RCFIs Liberia Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1.  Rural financial
services

i. RCFIs 239 3.3 2 693 36.8 - - 1 139 15.6 - - 3 240 44.3 7 310 72.2

ii. TASC 114 4.9 2 108 91.1 - - - - 92 4.0 - - 2 313 22.9
iii. Grant for

economic
recovery
after
Ebola virus
disease 8 1.7 - - 490 98.3 - - - - - - 498 4.9

Subtotal 361 3.6 4 800 47.4 490 4.8 1 139 11.3 92 0.9 3 240 32.0 10 121 93.2
2.  Enabling

environment for
rural finance
i  Technical

assistance
to CBL 5 1.8 277 98.2 - - - - - - - - 364 2.6

3.  Project
management
and coordination 31 6.7 426 93.3 - - - - - - - - 591 4.2

Total 400 3.7 5 500 50.6 490 4.5 1 139 10.5 92 0.8 3 240 29.8 10 860 100.0

B. Project financing
29. The project will be financed by the Government, IFAD, CBL, RCFIs and their clients.

IFAD will finance 55 per cent of the project costs through a loan on highly
concessional terms to the Government of US$5.5 million and a grant of
US$0.49 million. The RCFI contribution to operating costs is estimated at
US$1.1 million (11 per cent) and the shareholders’ contribution to share capital is
estimated at US$3.2 million (30 per cent). For the first 30 months, CBL will house
the TASU/TASC and provide a manager, with a total cost of US$0.09 million
(1 per cent). The Government’s contribution will be in the form of waived taxes and
duties on imported and local goods and services as per standard regulations for
IFAD funding (US$0.4 million, representing 4 per cent of the total cost). Total cost
financing arrangements by category of expenses are summarized in the table 2
below.




7

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

Government IFAD IFAD grant RCFIs Liberia Beneficiaries Total Foreign (Excl.
Duties

and
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % exch. taxes) taxes

I. Investment
costs

A. Consulting
services - - 467 95.3 23 4.7 - - - - - - 521 3.7 490 - -

B. Workshops
and training 129 6.8 1 667 87.6 108 5.7 - - - - - - 2 494 17.9 190 1 585 127

C. Works 39 5.6 667 94.4 - - - - - - - - 1 020 7.3 106 565 35
D. Vehicles

equipment
and material 112 14.2 611 77.5 66 8.4 - - - - - - 1 036 7.4 568 110 110

E. Grant - - - - 140 100 - - - - - - 140 1 - 140 -
F. RCFI

capitalization - - - - - - - - - - 3 240 100 4 210 30.1 - 3 240 -
G. Rural

finance
facility - - 111 100 - - - - - - - - 111 1.1 - 111 -

Subtotal I 280 3.8 3 522 47.7 336 4.6 - - - - 3 240 43.9 7 378 67.9 1 354 5 751 273
II. Recurrent

costs

A. Salaries - - 1 222 48.0 124 4.9 1 139 44.7 61 2.4 - - 2 546 23.4 1 273 1 273 -
B. Operating

costs 120 12.8 756 80.8 29 3.1 - - 31 3.3 - - 935 8.6 468 354 114

Subtotal II 120 3.5 1 978 56.8 153 4.4 1 139 32.7 92 2.6 - - 3 482 32.1 1 741 1 627 114

Total 400 3.7 5 500 50.6 490 4.5 1 139 10.7 92 0.8 3 240 29.8 10 860 100 3 095 7 379 387

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The project will generate a wide range of direct benefits for: (i) approximately

24,000 shareholders and users, and their household members; (ii) RCFIs; and
(iii) the economies of the communities where RCFIs will be located. At the macro
level, the project will bring informal financial transactions into the formal sector and
make decentralized rural financial institutions more viable. The Government will
benefit from additional tax revenues payable by the RCFIs. The entire country will
benefit from a strengthened network of financial institutions, through which
remittances and transfers can be made from within and outside the country. Finally,
the country will benefit from higher confidence in the financial sector, especially in
rural areas, as a result of the improved regulatory framework and supervisory
systems under the guidance of the CBL. Other macro-level benefits are not
quantifiable using classical methods of economic and financial analysis, such as
increased deposits in formal financial institutions, higher confidence in the formal
financial sector and a larger network for transfers and payments.

31. Total project benefits are expected to increase from US$50,050 in year 1, to
US$2.71 million in year 5, and will remain at approximately US$2.8 million during
years 7-15. The economic analysis shows that the project will generate an
economic rate of return (ERR) of 17 per cent over a 15-year period, with a net
present value of US$5.5 million. Given that many of its benefits are not
quantifiable, the actual ERR will likely be higher. Sensitivity analysis shows that in
the event of adverse factors, the ERR is relatively robust with regard to higher
costs, lower benefits and time lags.

32. The highest contribution to the ERR derives from investments made by borrowers
from RCFIs. The number of investments is constrained by the number of RCFIs
created. The number of RCFIs that can be created through the project is likewise





8

constrained by the funding available for financial and technical support. There is a
potential to increase the number of new RCFIs beyond the 10 for which funding is
available. If additional funds are provided, the ERR will be higher than the projected
17 per cent.

D. Sustainability
33. The project will support the creation of 10 new RCFIs and consolidate the nine

existing ones. The detailed projections, which are based on conservative
assumptions, show that the new RCFIs will break even in years 3 or 4 without
project support, and in years 1, 2 or 3 with project support. Two years are needed
to mobilize a sufficient number of shareholders and depositors, an adequate volume
of shares and deposits, and to disburse a sufficient number of loans with good
repayment performance. The learning curves for administrative procedures (in the
first three months) and loan management (in months six to twelve) are expected to
be steep. The sustainability of access to financial services will also improve as
RCFIs mature since they are likely to attract more customers over time. This will
create additional benefits for the economy.

34. The projections for this project compare well with the results of the Rural Finance
and Community Improvement Programme, a similar initiative in neighbouring
Sierra Leone that is also based on the Rural Community Finance Project concept.
Out of the 51 financial service associations created, 41 (or 80 per cent) had an OSS
of 100 per cent at project end. Out of 17 newly created community banks, 14 (82
per cent) had an OSS of 100 per cent at project end.

35. The projections for TASC show that this apex body of RCFIs will be able to generate
income from audit services and from fee-based support services. The resulting
income will cover related operating expenses in a progressive manner, from
0 per cent in year 1 to 26 per cent in year 5. This result will largely depend on the
quality of services, which in turn depends on the volume of shares and deposits,
and the number of RCFIs included in the TASC. If the number of RCFIs increases,
the sustainability of TASC will improve accordingly. However, this depends on the
availability of funding.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
36. The main risks related to project implementation include: (i) competition from

subsidized credit programmes; (ii) caps on interest rates; (iii) a lack of interest
from local communities; (iv) the reluctance of CBL to delegate supervision authority
to TASC; and (v) weak cooperation from the microfinance sector in efforts to
improve regulatory frameworks. Adequate risk mitigation measures have been
introduced, and the residual risk ratings after risk mitigation are rated as low or
moderate.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
37. The project design is aligned with IFAD’s: (i) Strategic Framework 2011-2015;

(ii) Policy on Targeting Policy (2006); (iii) Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment; (iv) Rural Finance Policy; (v) Private-Sector Strategy; (vi) Rural
Enterprise Policy; (vii) Policy on Supervision and Implementation Support;
(viii) Climate Change Strategy (2010); (ix) Environment and Natural Resource
Management Policy (2012); and (x) Environmental and Social Assessment
Procedures.

B. Alignment and harmonization
38. Strategy for financial inclusion. With its 2009 Liberian Strategy for Financial

Inclusion (2009-2013), the Government aims to create an inclusive financial
environment by enabling open access to financial services. The overall objective of
inclusive finance is to establish viable microfinance providers that facilitate




9

micro-entrepreneurs’ sustained access to a diverse range of financial services. In
order to enhance sustainability, efficiency, outreach and good governance, financial
service providers will receive assistance from various actors, including CBL. The
strategy for financial inclusion will work at three levels: (i) establishing sustainable
microfinance providers at the micro level; (ii) building a supportive infrastructure at
the intermediate level; and (iii) creating an enabling policy and regulatory
environment at the macro level.

39. CBL has recently begun drafting the new Liberian Strategy for Financial Inclusion
2014-2018. Its vision is to build a sustainable financial sector that provides access
to and enhances the use of a wide range of affordable financial services in Liberia.
Its objectives are to: deliver financial services; enhance access to finance,
particularly credit; integrate the informal sector into the formal economy; improve
the environment for small and medium-sized enterprises; enhance financial
literacy; and improve consumer protection. These objectives have been
consolidated in a plan of action, which places the responsibility for establishing
RCFIs with CBL, the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning, and one
commercial bank.

C. Innovations and scaling up
40. Several of the approaches adopted by this project are innovative: the creation of a

new type of financial institution in Liberia builds on the experience of several other
West African countries. Other innovations include the creation of an apex body to
support RCFIs, the biometric identification of shareholders in order to offer new
products at reduced costs, and the emulation of indigenous rural finance practices.
The project is in itself part of IFAD’s scaling-up process in West Africa following the
Rural Finance and Community Improvement Project in Sierra Leone. Upon the
successful trial of the implementation model, it will be possible to increase the
number of RCFIs beyond those created in Liberia through this project.

D. Policy engagement
41. Liberia’s microfinance sector does not have the clear regulations needed for its

development. One project component (under CBL supervision) is exclusively aimed
at developing a new legal framework for this sector and training actors on the new
regulations and reporting formats.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
42. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Liberia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix 1.

43. The Republic of Liberia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

44. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.




10

VII. Recommendation
45. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Liberia in an amount equivalent to four million ten thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 4,010,000), and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Liberia in an amount equivalent to three hundred fifty-eight thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 358,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed grant to the Republic of Burundi for
the Value Chain Development Programme –
Phase II (PRODEFI-II)


Republic of Burundi

Value Chain Development Programme – Phase II
(PRODEFI-II)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Republic of Burundi

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock

Total programme cost: US$44.8 million

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability
Framework (DSF) grant:

SDR 26.1 million (equivalent to approximately
US$36.6 million)

Amount of IFAD Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
grant:

SDR 3.51 million (equivalent to approximately
US$4.9 million)

Contribution of Government: US$3.1 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.3 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD


Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Republic of Burundi for the Value Chain Development Programme –
Phase II (PRODEFI-II), as contained in paragraph 64.

Proposed grant to the Republic of Burundi for the Value
Chain Development Programme – Phase II (PRODEFI II)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Rural development and poverty. Burundi is among the world’s poorest countries,

ranking 178th of 187 according to the Human Development Index. In 2013, despite a
growth rate of 4.5 per cent, GDP per capita (US$298) was lower than in 1990
(US$497). The incidence of poverty remains high, with 67 per cent of the population
living below the poverty line.

2. More than 90 per cent of people living in Burundi derive their livelihoods from
agriculture. Family farming, which provides 95 per cent of the food supply, does not
meet nutritional needs, and the rate of self-sufficiency in food production1 is
estimated at just over 42 per cent. Malnutrition affects 70 per cent of children in
poor households, mainly in rural areas.

3. Most rural poor people are smallholders – mainly women and orphan heads of
household – cultivating plots of less than one hectare and subsisting on the food
crops they grow. Their poverty is attributable mainly to low productivity as a result
of: (i) extremely small landholdings, hence the need to intensify production; (ii) poor
soil fertility in the absence of livestock and manure, and soil degradation from
erosion; (iii) a lack of equipment and technical and financial capital; (iv) a lack of
inputs such as seed and fertilizer owing to limited purchasing power; (v) a lack of
technical knowledge; (vi) prolonged dry periods in recent years and reduced periods
of rainfall; (vii) the lack of water management systems; (viii) poor processing and
marketing capacity countrywide; (ix) emerging farmers organizations that have not
yet developed profitable activities to ensure sustainability; and (x) poorly managed
markets.

4. Policy, governance and institutions, political and economic issues. Burundi’s
economy is characterized by structural weaknesses, in particular isolation, poor
diversification, uncompetitive agricultural products and high demographic growth.

5. The Government undertook, in its Vision 2025, to lower the rate of demographic
growth to 2 per cent and, in the National Agricultural Investment Plan (PNIA), to
boost growth in the agriculture sector to 6 per cent per annum. In 2013, the country
joined the Scaling Up Nutrition movement and the Multi-sector Food and Nutritional
Security Platform in order to achieve the first Millennium Development Goal.

6. The electoral process now under way risks slowing expected progress as a result of
putting in place policies and regulatory frameworks, both at the macro-economic
level and in implementing programmes and projects.

1 Source: PNIA, "The food deficit for the year 2010 is evaluated at 471,884 tonnes of grain equivalents (GEs), out of total
estimated needs of 817,000 tonnes of GEs nationally, representing an unmet basic needs rate of close to 58 per cent".



2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities
7. PRODEFI is the cornerstone of the country programme in that it encompasses

common implementation functions at the central and regional level, such as
procurement and financial management.

8. Needed action includes: (i) completing activities2 under PRODEFI and replicating
them on a larger scale to achieve sufficient production volume (milk and rice), to
facilitate structuring the value chains; and (ii) better supporting actors throughout
the value chain by linking activities under the rural youth employment component
with core programme activities.

9. In view of the agriculture sector’s vulnerability to climate change, IFAD proposes to
provide a complementary grant under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP).

10. Nutritional considerations will be introduced into PRODEFI-II to raise awareness
around adopting best practices in diet and hygiene.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
11. The PRODEFI-II programme area will be identical to that of the first phase, i.e. the

provinces of Bubanza, Cibitoke, Gitega, Karusi, Kayanza, Muramvya and Ngozi, as
well as the province of Muyinga. The programme interventions will be implemented
in communes adjacent to those covered by the Agricultural Intensification and Value-
enhancing Support Project (PAIVA-B).

12. This decision is fully aligned with the strategy adopted by IFAD on geographical
concentration around managed wetlands to enhance the visibility and scale of
impact.

13. Targeting will be simultaneously by activity, by province and by commune. The
priority target group of PRODEFI-II will be smallholders, crop and livestock farmers,
women and rural young people promoting economic initiatives upstream, within and
downstream of the rice and milk value chains and other secondary value chains such
as bean, maize, plantain and banana.

B. Programme development objectives
14. Overall objective. The overall objective of PRODEFI-II will be to promote increases

in incomes and improvements in food security for poor households in the programme
area.

15. Development objective. The specific PRODEFI-II objectives are as follows:
increase physical productive capital by building the resilience of production systems
to climate change; intensify crop and livestock farming to improve nutritional status
and, ultimately, structure the milk and rice value chains, inter alia, to promote youth
employment and strengthen capacity of the actors.

C. Components/outcomes
16. The programme is structured around three main components:

Component 1: Sustainable growth in productive capital and institutional
capacity-building for value chain actors

17. The activities implemented under subcomponent 1.1 – Hydro-agricultural
improvements and infrastructure – will be as follows: (i) development of 2,330 ha of
new wetlands on nine sites; (ii) rehabilitation of 147 km of tracks over nine sections
of access roads to open up access to the new wetland sites identified and one stretch
of track for a developed wetland straddling the provinces of Karusi and Ngozi; (iii)
development of 23,300 ha of watersheds around the new wetland sites identified and

2 This will also provide an opportunity to complete PAIVA-B activities in shared intervention areas.



implementation of the second phase of watershed development in 17 wetlands,
undertaken under IFAD projects (10 PRODEFI sites and seven PAIVA-B sites), of
which close to 10 per cent are financed under ASAP; and (iv) capacity-building for
four communal land registration offices to accelerate the issuance of 5,000 titles.

18. Subcomponent 1.2 – Adaptation to climate change – will be divided into three
sections: (i) integrated protection of investments against climate risk at the
watershed level, over 1,000 ha (Ruvubu watershed); (ii) adaptation of rural
engineering designs to climate variability by setting national technical standards;
and (iii) building the resilience of erosion control structures and crops to climate
change by intensifying forage and legume crops.

19. Activities under subcomponent 1.3 – Agricultural intensification – will be as follows:
(i) input supply (e.g. quality seed, fertilizer and manure, phytosanitary products);
(ii) strengthening the community livestock solidarity chain (3,000 cattle) by
promoting small livestock among young people; and (iii) building the capacities of
crop and livestock farmers with farmers field schools (FFS) (39, 112 and 100 FFS for
rice, food crops and livestock, respectively). A climate early warning system will be
developed using ASAP financing.

20. Activities under subcomponent 1.4 – Inclusive community organization and
institutional linkages – will be as follows: (i) capacity-building for Burundi public and
private institutions such as the community development committees (CDC) and
communal community development committees (CCDC); (ii) development of a
gender equality strategy for IFAD-funded projects in Burundi; and (iii) awareness-
raising around fundamental women’s rights, adult functional literacy, support for
organizing and financing solidarity groups, legal and psycho-social support for
victims and post-traumatic reconstruction, and reduction of women’s workload.

21. Subcomponent 1.5 – Combating chronic malnutrition – will include the following
activities: (i) training 2,000 people in the home nutritional learning (FAN) method for
preventing chronic malnutrition; (ii) setting up 350 FAN; (iii) awareness-raising for
community leaders, including 200 rural development actors; and (iv) implementation
of 350 microprojects in livestock (pigs, chickens, rabbits, goats) and market
gardening (kitchen gardens).

Component 2: Value-addition and strengthening of value chains

22. Support provided under subcomponent 2.1 – Organizational framework and value
chain financing – will cover the following activities: (i) development of financial
instruments adapted to the programme area to finance production cycles and
storage and processing cycles; and (ii) professionalization of dairy cooperatives, rice
growers cooperatives and the three cooperatives operating in the maize value chain,
to enable them to provide services to their members.

23. Subcomponent 2.2 – Support for priority value chains – will have two sections.

24. Dairy value chain. Support will be provided to: (i) complete the installation of
facilities to secure milk (refrigerated tanks and milk collection centres in areas where
dairy livestock is already kept; (ii) promote the installation of sales points with a
target of one or two per milk collection centre; (iii) install two mini-dairies in areas
with high dairy potential (Gitega and Ngozi); and (iv) establish partnerships with
private actors.

25. Rice value chain. Support will be provided to: (i) install drying infrastructure
(7,800 m² of new drying areas) and storage infrastructure (2,600 m² of new
warehouses); (ii) set up two improved husking units and two mini-rice mills for
quality rice marketing; and (iii) strengthen the consultative platform for value chain
actors.

26. Secondary value chains. Support will be provided to: (i) lift constraints on
segments of the major value chains (bean, maize, banana) in the event of



bottlenecks, such as the lack of healthy varieties of banana, the lack of bean
varieties tolerant of higher temperatures; and (ii) install storage infrastructure and
processing equipment.

27. Under component 2.3 – Improving sustainable and decent employment for rural
young people – the following activities will take place: (i) put in place an enabling
institutional environment for youth employment; (ii) strengthen specialized
proximity structures (research, innovation and training centres) to enable them to
provide employment-related services to young people; and (iii) create jobs for 150
young entrepreneurs, and income-generating activities for 1,500 rural young people.

Component 3: Organizational support, knowledge management and
facilitation.

28. This component calls for good coordination and sound and transparent management
of the programme.

29. Subcomponent 3.1 calls for: (i) providing the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock,
specifically the provincial departments of agriculture and livestock (DPAE), including
at the communal level, with monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and planning
assistance to contribute to participatory planning of programme activities,
monitoring of implementation and dissemination of results; and (ii) capacity-building
for regional coordination units.

30. Under subcomponent 3.2: (i) overall coordination and administrative, financial and
procurement functions will be centralized in Bujumbura; (ii) technical functions will
be decentralized to facilitate the implementation and close monitoring of activities by
regional coordination units; and (iii) the PRODEFI programme facilitation and
coordination unit (PFCU) will manage the programme at the national level and two
regional facilitation and coordination units will manage it at the regional levels, one
in the centre covering Gitega, Karusi and Muramvya and one in the north covering
Kayanza and Ngozi.

III. Programme execution
A. Approach
31. The intervention will be based on the following approach: (i) expansion of activities

in the PRODEFI area such that the technical package is implemented in its entirety;
(ii) development of new wetland sites; (iii) gradual implementation of nutritional
activities in areas where dairy, rice, legume and food production has increased under
PRODEFI; (iv) implementation of rural employment activities in areas where
PRODEFI has successfully set up milk collection centres and dehusking units; and (v)
implementation of activities to intensify and develop forage crops under an ASAP
grant in areas where PRODEFI was first active. The aim is to consolidate PRODEFI
activities and gradually expand the intervention area to the new wetlands identified.

B. Organizational framework
32. Programme oversight and steering. The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock will

continue to oversee PRODEFI-II. The strategic steering committee, which will provide
general steering and coordination, and the technical steering committee, which will
report to the Government on programme implementation and general
administration, will continue to be the supervisory bodies, one at the strategic level
and the other at a more technical level.

33. Organization and management. The regional coordination units will be set up by
redeploying the PRODEFI branch office heads, including two regional coordinators,
and the other branch office heads will be assigned to M&E or regional components.
Part of the PRODEFI technical staff will also be redeployed to regional coordination
units and additional staff will be recruited in the regions as needed.


C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

34. Monitoring and evaluation. The M&E manual used during the first phase of
PRODEFI will be updated to include a limited number of files. In addition, steps will
be taken to address the constraints encountered in the last phase, such as the lack
of centralized data, poor data analysis and insufficient capacity for information
systems management. The overall organization of M&E arrangements will be based
on the information provided by DPAE and communal technicians providing
government functions at the local level.

35. Learning, capitalization and knowledge management. The knowledge
generated by the M&E system, beneficiaries and exchanges of experience between
IFAD projects and those funded by other technical and financial partners will be
capitalized on. PRODEFI-II will draw on lessons learned during implementation of the
first phase of PRODEFI and of PAIVA-B, particularly in terms of organizing value
chains.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
36. Capacity-building will be provided for the PRODEFI financial management team to

ensure better use of the TOM2PRO software (multi-site model) on all financial
matters: accounting, commitments, financial statements, budgetary monitoring, etc.
The PFCU will be responsible and accountable to the Government and to IFAD for
using the programme resources in compliance with the financing agreement signed
with IFAD. The accounting system will be consistent with internationally accepted
accounting principles and standards set by the Government of Burundi. The PFCU
will draw up quarterly statements of the accounting and financial situation and
transmit them regularly to the Government and to IFAD. The unit will also prepare
consolidated financial statements each year on the programme operations, resources
and expenditures. The financial management risk for PRODEFI is deemed moderate.

37. Procurement. The works, goods and specialized or consulting services required to
implement the programme and funded under the financing agreement, as amended
where applicable, will be provided in accordance with the procurement code
prevailing in Burundi. A procurement plan based on the AWP/B and stipulating
procurement methods, estimated costs and timelines will be prepared each year at
the national and regional levels.

38. Governance. To apply the principles of good governance and transparency in
programme implementation, the decentralized territorial collectivities will take part
in the planning process and in the monitoring of results.

39. M&E tools in the form of feedback and participatory evaluation workshops will be
built into the planning and M&E system to ensure beneficiaries transparency and
opportunities for continual feedback and to ensure that their recommendations are
taken into account in implementation.

E. Supervision
40. The programme will be supervised jointly by IFAD and the Government of Burundi.

One or two supervision missions will take place each year, in addition to missions in
support of implementation as activities are carried out. In addition, four internal
management control mission (quarterly audits) will be held each year at the central
and regional levels. A midterm review will be conducted jointly by IFAD and the
Government at the end of year three.

IV. Programme cost, financing, benefits
A. Programme cost
41. PRODEFI-II is being financed by a DSF grant from IFAD in the amount of US$36.6

million and an ASAP grant in the amount of US$4.9 million, cofinancing from the


Government of Burundi in the amount of US$3.1 million and a contribution in cash
and in kind from beneficiaries in the amount of US$0.3 million. Investment
expenditures are US$40.9 million, or 91.5 per cent of total cost, and recurring
expenditures are US$3.8 million, or 8.5 per cent of total cost. This is attributable to
the fact that the PRODEFI team already in place will be responsible for implementing
the second phase.
Table 1
Programme cost by component and by financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD grant ASAP Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total
Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount

1. Sustainable
improvement in
productive capital
and capacity-
building for value
chain actors 26 578 4 926 - 2 584 34 087

2. Value-addition and
strengthening of
value chains 4 849 - 285 222 5 356

3. Organizational
support, knowledge
management and
facilitation 5 214 - - 334 5 548

Total 36 641 4 926 285 3 140 44 991

B. Programme financing
42. The DSF grant provided by IFAD represents 81.8 per cent of the total investment

and the ASAP grant 11 per cent. Cofinancing from the Government is estimated at
approximately 6.5 per cent of total investment, mainly in the form of tax waivers
and a contribution to the monitoring costs of the programme.

43. The beneficiaries will make a financial contribution to certain investments, including
those intended to add value to agricultural products. They will also contribute to
some development work such as levelling. The contribution of beneficiaries
represents 0.6 per cent of total additional costs.




Table 2
Programme cost by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category
IFAD grant ASAP Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Civil and rural

engineering 10 794 71 1 635 11 8 0.6 2 750 18 15 277
2. Transportation

equipment 4 588 95 73 1.5 156 3.2 4 816
3. Studies, training,

technical assistance
and service agreements 7 573 86 1 231 14 19 0.2 8 823

4. Support fund 9 886 82 2 060 17 114 1 12 060
5. Operating and

maintenance 761 76 216 .24 977
6. Salaries 3 039 100 3 039

Total 36 641 81.8 4 926 11 285 0.6 3 140 6.5 44 992

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
44. Benefits. Development of paddy production in wetlands. Crop intensity with

and without the programme is 0.7 and 1, respectively. Rice generates annual
revenues of US$169 per ha, or US$0.46 per day on average, with economic value
addition of labour equal to US$3.04 per day worked. In total, an average plot of 0.28
ha generates US$67.92 per ha per year without the programme compared to
US$88.3 in the scenario with the programme. Additional paddy production will be
about 10,000 tonnes annually.

45. Development of paddy transformation. Two improved huskers are to be
installed. The quantity of paddy that could be processed by the two huskers planned
is 8,000 tonnes per year, with a maximum of 15 per cent broken grains. The huskers
to be installed with the new financing will have a theoretical production capacity of
5,205 tonnes of superior quality rice per year (realistic scenario), reduced by 20 per
cent to come closer to reality in financial and economic analysis. This represents a
total increase in capacity for paddy transformation of 6,000 tonnes per year. The
husking units will generate net annual revenues of US$140,550, for an annual
increase of US$122,746.

46. Increase in milk production. The new financing will make it possible to purchase
and put to work 3,000 cattle by the end of the programme in 2021. Total milk
production will be about 4,000 tonnes per year – 40 per cent for self-consumption
and 60 per cent for sale.

47. Development of milk marketing. Four 1,000 litre capacity and two 500 litre
capacity milk collection centres will be created with the new financing. This new
financing will therefore make it possible to increase collection and storage capacity
by four tonnes per day, or 1,460 tonnes of fresh milk per year.

48. Employment benefits. Agricultural intensification will enable a high proportion of
small and medium-sized farmers to increase their incomes. Intensification will also
result in increased labour needs for these farms. The increase in work days will
initially reduce underemployment at the family level and then at the local level, as
wage workers are hired.

49. Improvements in employment and incomes for women and young people.
PRODEFI-II proposes to reach women and young people at the rate of at least 30
per cent for women, including women heads of household (widows), as a priority,
and 30 per cent young entrepreneurs/ farmers, including those who are landless, for
marketing activities and to take employment in marketing agricultural products or
providing services.



50. The programme will provide representatives of farmers organizations with training
and technical support, particularly in the organization and management of wetlands
and watersheds. Better structuring of farmers organizations will ensure sustainability
of the programme impact.

51. Economic and financial analysis (2016-2021). Based on the general
assumptions and financial models used, the financial internal rate of return (FIRR)
for this second phase is 18.5 per cent, which is high for an integrated agricultural
development programme implemented in marginal areas with land and infrastructure
protection problems. Based on the general assumptions and assumptions of pricing
and economic benefits, the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the second
phase is 17.3 per cent. Both the FIRR and the EIRR are highly satisfactory as all
financial and economic costs have been taken into consideration while some of the
benefits have not been quantified, such as those relating to ASAP-funded activities
that will bring results over the long term.

D. Sustainability
52. The community and participatory development approach is a guarantee that the

beneficiaries will take ownership of the programme initiatives and achievements.
They will set up management committees responsible for maintaining and properly
managing the investments under the supervision of local authorities, supported in
turn by the programme to enable them to monitor activities following programme
completion.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
53. The risks to PRODEFI-II during implementation include: (i) an uncertain political

situation; (ii) limited capacity of actors to implement the hydro-agricultural
improvements; (iii) structuring and professionalization of organizations, which could
take more time than the programme duration; (iv) the random nature of the quality
of administrative and financial management; (v) deficiencies in terms of financial
reporting; and (vi) the lack of an internal audit function. Risk mitigation measures
are as follows: (i) adoption of a programme approach to recycle programme teams
already familiar with IFAD financial procedures; (ii) strengthening of long-term
international technical assistance for high-cost activities (hydro-agricultural
improvements); (iii) continuity and complementarity between old and new financing
in the same provinces, to develop value chains and build capacity among
organizations; (iv) organized redeployment of the team between the central and
regional levels; (v) establishment of a culture of communicating financial information
to ensure monitoring of management processes, specifically disbursements (reports
generated by accounting software); and (vi) creation of an internal audit unit to be
shared by all IFAD projects in the country to ensure compliance with procedures.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
54. PRODEFI-II is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2011-2015, in particular with

the objectives of achieving “a natural resource and economic asset base for poor
rural women and men that is more resilient to climate change, environmental
degradation and market transformation” and “access for poor rural women and men
to services to reduce poverty, improve nutrition, raise incomes and build resilience in
a changing environment”.

55. In addition, PRODEFI-II is aligned with the objective of “poor rural women and men
and their organizations able to manage profitable, sustainable and resilient farm and
non-farm enterprises or take advantage of decent work opportunities”.

56. The programme is aligned with IFAD’s policy on rural finance in that it will promote
access by beneficiaries and cooperatives to financial instruments, and with the policy
on gender equality and women’s empowerment as women and young people will



benefit from the same services as men. It is also aligned with the policy to improve
access to land and land tenure security in providing support for communal land
registration offices to issue land titles.

B. Alignment and harmonization
57. This second phase will also gradually harmonize IFAD-funded project and

programme structures, such as PFCUs, and will take another step towards setting up
the five regional facilitation and coordination units following the first phase of
creating two regional coordination offices as part of implementing PNSADR-IM (one
in the west for the provinces of Bubanza and Cibitoke and one in the east for the
provinces of Cankuzo, Rutana and Ruyigi). PRODEFI-II will be the third programme,
after PAIVA-B (additional financing) and PNSADR-IM, to align itself with the IFAD
country programme approach.

C. Innovation and scaling up
58. Innovations introduced under PRODEFI warrant scaling up during this second phase

and beyond. Among them are integrating nutritional activities and linking them to
agricultural intensification, and integrating rural youth employment activities with
value chain development. These two innovations, as well as those under the Project
to Accelerate Achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (PROPA-O) relating
to nutrition, could be integrated systematically in future projects and programmes
and lay the groundwork for drafting national legislation.

D. Policy engagement
59. The main contribution by PRODEFI-II to policy engagement will be through

implementation of subcomponent 1.2, which calls for establishing design standards
for infrastructure (hydro-agricultural improvements, tracks and storage
warehouses).

60. Moreover, PRODEFI-II will contribute to operationalizing the national youth
employment strategy developed under the rural youth employment component and
adopted by Parliament.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
61. A financing agreement between the Republic of Burundi and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the beneficiary country. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an appendix.

62. The Republic of Burundi is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

63. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
64. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the Debt Sustainability
Framework to the Republic of Burundi in the amount of twenty-six million one
hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 26,100,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the Adaptation
for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) to the Republic of Burundi in an
amount equivalent to three million five hundred ten thousand special drawing
rights (SDR 3,510,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of Madagascar
for the Project to Support Development in the
Menabe and Melaky Regions – Phase II
(AD2M-II)


Republic of Madagascar

Project to Support Development in the Menabe and
Melaky Regions – Phase II (AD2M-II)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: Ministry of Agriculture

Borrower: Republic of Madagascar

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$56.7 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 24.5 million (equivalent to approximately
US$34.4 million)

Amount of IFAD Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
(ASAP) Trust Fund grant:

SDR 4.2 million (equivalent to approximately
US$6.0 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: 40 years, including a grace
period of 10 years, with a service charge of 0.75 per
cent per annum

Cofinancier(s): OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID)

Amount of cofinancing: US$7.5 million

Terms of cofinancing: 100 per cent loan

Contribution of borrower: US$7.7 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.2 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/115/R.8

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of Madagascar for the Project to Support Development in the
Menabe and Melaky Regions – Phase II (AD2M-II), as contained in paragraph 45.

Proposed loan to the to the Republic of Madagascar for
the Project to Support Development in the Menabe and
Melaky Regions – Phase II (AD2M-II)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The agricultural sector is the backbone of Madagascar’s national economy,

accounting for 30 per cent of GDP (2009),1 generating 30 to 40 per cent of exports,
and employing 80 per cent of Malagasy families on approximately 2.5 million family
farms. The three subsectors – agriculture, livestock and fisheries – are key to
reducing poverty and enhancing food security; they support 75 per cent of the
country’s population, accounting for 86 per cent of all jobs and 60 per cent of youth
employment. Rice production is the leading economic activity, generating the
income of approximately 10 million inhabitants. Rice is grown by 86 per cent of
households, covering 40 per cent of cropland in use and accounting for 37 per cent
of agricultural cash income.

2. With an annual average growth rate of 1.5 per cent, sector performance remains
weak and is among the major causes of rural poverty. Other causes include
fragmented production, low productivity, rural insecurity, overuse of natural
resources, vulnerability to natural hazards such as cyclones, droughts and floods,
and limited access to economic and commercial opportunities due to isolation,
aging infrastructure and difficulty accessing agricultural markets and rural finance.

3. The 2009-2013 crisis had negative socioeconomic impacts, resulting in increased
poverty and, in particular, extreme poverty. The effects of the crisis were
exacerbated by the suspension of foreign aid, which represented half of the
country's overall budget. Five years of transition and political instability led to a
decline in agricultural productivity, further aggravated in 2012 and 2013 by the
locust infestation, which destroyed as much as 50 per cent of food crops, and
severe drought, which impacted negatively on agricultural production in most
regions. In 2012, the national poverty line2 was, at US$0.67 per person per day,
significantly below the international threshold of US$2. According to the 2015-2019
United Nations Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF), the poverty rate
remains high, with 71.5 per cent of people living below the poverty line in 2012.

4. In 2010, 35 per cent of Malagasy households were food insecure, against 25 per
cent in 2005. Acute malnutrition affects 8.6 per cent of children under 5 years of
age, of whom 1.4 per cent are affected severely. Madagascar is among the four
countries in the world with the highest prevalence of chronic malnutrition (47.3
per cent) and ranks fifteenth in terms of the number of children affected (2 million).

1 Source: Economist Intelligence Unit, Country report, December 2009.
2 According to the National Institute for Statistics (INSTAT 2013).



EB 2015/115/R.8

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with Government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. The proposed second phase of the Project to Support Development in the Menabe
and Melaky Regions (AD2M) is justified on three grounds: (i) macroeconomic
considerations; (ii) sector-specific considerations; and (iii) as a tool for achieving
development goals.

6. With regard to the performance of AD2M, agro-economic opportunities and
potential, as yet undeveloped. Key actions include: (i) scaling up good practices;
and (ii) consolidating project benefits through financial allocations under the
2013-2015 performance-based allocation system (PBAS) cycle. Phase II satisfies all
of the criteria required to receive financing from IFAD.

7. Given the risks posed by unpredictable rainfall patterns to the production systems
and populations of Menabe and Melaky, the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP) Trust Fund will support AD2M Phase II (AD2M-II) by
implementing a strategy focused on the governance of climate risks, and provide
added value to the resilience and adaptation activities to be developed during the
second phase.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. AD2M-II will target the same geographical area as the first phase of the project,

namely the Menabe and Melaky regions, due to: (i) the existence of significant
agro-economic potential yet to be developed; (ii) the weak coverage of communes3
in these regions during the first phase of the project; and (iii) the desired
economies of scale in terms of approach and project costs. The scope of the project
will be broadened, from 19 to 44 communes, in 7 districts (see appendix II).

9. The target group will be as follows: (i) 35,000 new direct beneficiary households
belonging to one of the three categories of family farm; and (ii) 22,000 households
that already benefited from the first phase and will benefit further from cross-
cutting consolidation activities. A total of 57,000 households will benefit from the
activities to be implemented under the project, comprising small agricultural
producers and rural promoters of economic initiatives operating within the
production poles and the communes linked to them. The number of beneficiaries is
estimated at 342,000, or 58 per cent of the total population (approximately
586,000 people) living in the 44 project area communes.

B. Project development objectives
10. The objectives of AD2M-II are consistent with those of the 2015-2019 country

strategic opportunities programme (COSOP). The overall objective is to sustainably
improve incomes and food security in the productive areas of Menabe and Melaky.
Its specific objectives are to: (i) scale up effective and climate change resilient
family farm production systems; and (ii) enhance producers’ access to
remunerative markets in priority value chains.

C. Components/outcomes
11. The updated technical components of the project comprise: (i) the promotion of

effective and climate change resilient production systems; and (ii) support for
access to markets and economic opportunities.

12. The major outcomes expected are improved water management and water balance
on plots through the redevelopment of 9,120 hectares of hydro-agricultural
schemes and the development of 6,470 hectares of new land, which will result, in
the 44 communes of the project area, in accelerated uptake of various improved
and resilient practices and significant increase in yields and production.

3 Phase I of AD2M covered 19 out of the 88 communes in the two regions.



EB 2015/115/R.8

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

13. In terms of land tenure security, the expected results are the establishment of
long-term land tenure administrative authorities and structures at the commune or
inter-communal level (20 land offices, a land tenure information and resource
centre, etc.) and safeguards for the land rights of small agricultural producers, so
as to increase investment and improve production methods, yields and incomes.

14. Expected outcomes in terms of input supply and small agricultural equipment
include the production of 250 tons of seed by new seed multiplier famers through
viable businesses integrated into regional and national seed networks, as well as
the provision of effective inputs and equipment to meet the needs of family farms.

15. In terms of marketing, 48 producers’ groups will be organized in order to negotiate
and fulfill production contracts, and 30 per cent of production will be sold on the
basis of written or oral contracts.

16. In terms of rural finance, eight new operational credit unions will be established
and 8,800 people will benefit from credits, including at least 1,000 from credit with
training, 3,200 for shared village granaries, and 4,000 for productive credit.

17. Farmers’ organizations will be operational and provide members with services they
could not obtain individually, especially in collective input supply.

18. Nutrition education sites and family vegetable gardens will be established, helping
at least 1,000 vulnerable farming families with children under 5 years of age to
access a more balanced diet.

19. Four hundred microprojects targeting the most vulnerable households involved in
the management of natural resources and communal village land will be
implemented, scaling collective actions to combat deforestation and environmental
degradation to the village community level so as to foster participatory natural
resource management.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

20. The adoption of the so-called “production poles” approach, in widespread use since
the AD2M midterm review, is fully justified in the project area. These should evolve
into “agricultural development poles”, which will form the centrepiece of the second
phase. This approach will comprise the concentration4 of productive investments,
support to agricultural services and efforts to enhance market access focused in
priority areas. It is in line with the project rationale as fine-tuned during the first
phase, incorporating the development of productive infrastructure and the
expansion of arable land, promoting more effective and market-oriented
smallholder farming as well as the organization of producers. Efforts to build the
resilience of cropping systems to climate change must be strengthened in the
second phase. The approach will remain participatory and inclusive.

21. The ASAP grant financing will be used to consolidate the agricultural resilience
benefits of AD2M and to provide the missing link in all poles by securing long-term
investments. The ASAP financing will support in particular production- and
productivity-building activities that are most likely to withstand the impacts of
climate change over the long term while generating immediate socio-economic
benefits.

B. Organizational framework
22. The project will remain under the authority of the Ministry of Agriculture as the lead

implementing agency. The bodies responsible for the coordination and guidance of
the project will remain the same: (i) the National Steering Committee (NSC), which
will ensure project alignment with national strategies; and (ii) the regional
orientation and monitoring committees, which will ensure in particular the

4 This in the context of a large and isolated project area with high potential, taking into account limited financial resources.



EB 2015/115/R.8

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

alignment of annual work plans and budgets (AWPBs) with the regional priorities in
Menabe and Melaky. The existing Project Management Unit (PMU) will continue
coordination and management, and its staff will be strengthened to take account of
the constraints of expansion into new communes (isolation, poles, etc.). The
performance of both project staff and staff of locally-based partner NGOs will be
evaluated annually against the functions and objectives as set out in the AWPB.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

23. The PMU will consolidate AWPBs, prepared in accordance with established standards
and on time. It will be responsible for project implementation and for organizing
and administering the meetings of the regional orientation and monitoring
committees and the NSC. The AWPB will be approved by the NSC and transmitted
to IFAD for approval before the first disbursements are made from the ASAP grant
and IFAD loan.

24. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will comprise: i) continuous
systematic internal monitoring, not only to track the implementation of activities
planned in the AWPB but primarily to ensure the attainment of various outcomes
contained in the new project logical framework. A climate change adaptation
specialist with expertise in geographic information system (GIS) and participatory
farmers’ field schools will be recruited (with ASAP financing) to serve as a key
resource throughout the project. Participatory mapping activities involving farmers’
field schools will provide system inputs. The baseline survey for the second phase
of the project will also serve as the impact survey for the evaluation of the first
phase.

25. An M&E plan will be developed to improve the coordination and implementation of
activities. The project M&E manual will be revised to reflect the new provisions and
various improvements to be made to M&E. Monitoring will be participatory so as to
facilitate the transfer and building of development self-management capacities
among the population.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
26. The manual of administrative, financial and accounting procedures developed

during the first phase will be reviewed and updated. Existing procedures will remain
in place, to be supplemented where necessary. The financial management and
accounting of the project will respect the existing rules and practices applicable to
all IFAD-financed project in Madagascar. The existing accounting software will be
updated and accounting staff will undergo training. Aspects relating to financial
management and flow of funds are detailed in appendix 7 of the project design
report, “Financial management and disbursement systems”.

27. During the second phase, the procurement procedures will be identical to those
already used by AD2M, respecting the applicable rules and general provisions in
this area in Madagascar and IFAD.

E. Supervision
28. The East and Southern Africa Division of IFAD will directly supervise the project.

IFAD and the Government of Madagascar will jointly conduct a midterm review at
the end of the third year. The supervision plan is provided in appendix 6 of the
project design report.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
29. The total project cost, including material and financial contingencies, for the

2016-2022 period is estimated at US$56.7 million.

30. Component 1: Promotion of effective and climate change resilient production
systems, will cost approximately US$40.8 million (72 per cent of the total project



EB 2015/115/R.8

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

cost); component 2: Support for access to markets and economic opportunities, will
cost US$7.0 million (12 per cent); and the coordination, management and
monitoring and evaluation system will cost US$8.9 million (16 per cent).

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Millions of United States dollars)

IFAD loan ASAP grant OFID Beneficiaries Government Total
Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount
1. Promotion of effective and climate change

resilient production systems 20.2 5.8 7.5 1.2 6.1 40.8
2. Support for access to markets and

economic opportunities 6.1 1.0 7.0
3. Project management and monitoring and

evaluation 8.1 0.2 0.5 8.9
Total 34.4 6.0 7.5 1.2 7.6 56.7

B. Project financing
31. The project will be financed by: (i) an IFAD loan of US$34.4 million (60.7 per cent);

(ii) an ASAP grant of US$6 million (10.6 per cent); (iii) OFID cofinancing of
US$7.5 million (13.2 per cent); (iv) a Government of Madagascar contribution of
US$7.7 million (13.5 per cent); and (v) a beneficiary contribution of US$1.2 million
(2 per cent).

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Millions of United States dollars)

Expenditure category
IFAD loan ASAP grant OFID Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Consultations 9.9 87.7 0.7 6.6 - - - - 0.7 5.8 11.3
2. Construction 11.3 42.0 7.7 6.5 7.5 27.9 1.2 4.3 5.2 19.3 26.9
3. Equipment and

materials 5.2 62.6 1.7 20.3 - - - 1.4 17.1 8.3
4. Training 2.6 60.5 1.7 39.5 - - - 0 4.3
5. Salaries/allowances 4.0 95.7 0.1 3.3 - - - - 0.04 0.9 4.2
6. Operating costs 1.4 80.0 - - - - - 0.30 20.0 1.7

Total 34.4 60.7 6.0 10.6 7.5 13.2 1.2 2.0 7.7 13.5 56.7

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
32. Based on projections, the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the project will

be 14.75 per cent. This EIRR, which is well above the opportunity cost of capital
(8.2 per cent), is satisfactory given that some additional benefits have not been
taken into account, including those generated by support activities (construction,
equipment, training) and those deriving from technical assistance, training,
information and awareness-raising support. Furthermore, the benefits of improving
land tenure security have not been fully reflected since they are difficult to
quantify; these include investments linked to local land tenure plans, socio-land
tenure analysis, land tenure mediation for the allocation of new plots;
strengthening land offices, partner capacities and training on offer; reducing
transaction costs by improving access to financial services and technology; and
improving living standards, hygiene and nutrition among the project target group.

33. In conclusion, the EIRR is robust with respect to changes in costs or benefits, and
remains satisfactory given that it does not take a number of direct and indirect
benefits into account. The sensitivity analysis, calculated over an extended
economic lifecycle of 20 years, assesses the risks that may constrain AD2M-II
implementation as a result of adverse changes in economic or financial conditions,
including increased prices. Under conditions favourable to the project, such as
increased benefits or reduced costs, the EIRR would further exceed the base rate of
14.75 per cent.



EB 2015/115/R.8

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

D. Sustainability
34. From the outset of AD2M-II, the PMU will develop an exit strategy, which it will

implement, transferring responsibilities to project-supported structures, including
communes and farmers’ organizations. The sustainability of the strategy depends
on the assumption of responsibility by producers. The sustainability of land tenure
security will be guaranteed by its inclusion in a proactive national policy and by the
institutionalization, at all territorial levels, of decentralized structures and specific
implementation modalities. It will remain, nonetheless, dependent on the
sustainability of such structures, especially land offices. The sustainability of
hydro-agricultural developments will depend primarily on the management and
maintenance of irrigation networks. The simple gravity model chosen for irrigation
networks takes into account the weak technical capacity of the management
structure, which relies primarily on users through water users’ associations; such
associations should be involved in the project from the outset, strengthened,
supported and ultimately transferred responsibility for managing irrigation
schemes.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
35. The major risks relate to governance, the severity of the climate, the destructive

effects of climate change on social and production capital of small producers, locust
infestation and physical insecurity, especially cattle rustling. Administrative and
financial management risks are considered low, relating primarily to the lack of an
operational internal audit system for IFAD projects in Madagascar. A detailed table
of risks and mitigation measures is presented in chapter III, F and in appendix 4 of
the project design report.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

36. AD2M-II project design is aligned with IFAD’s mandate and Strategic Framework
2011-2015. Project activities are aligned with IFAD’s Madagascar COSOP
2015-2019, in particular strategic objective 1: the widespread adoption of effective
and climate change resilient production systems.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
37. The AD2M-II objectives are aligned with: (i) the General Government Policy,

adopted in May 2014; (ii) the 2015-2019 National Development Plan; (iii) the
2015-2025 Agriculture, Livestock and Fishery Sectoral Programme, based on the
priorities and commitments agreed upon by the main sector stakeholders under the
National Pact, which marked Madagascar’s official accession to the Comprehensive
Africa Agriculture Development Programme; and (iv) the National Policy to Combat
Climate Change. The AD2M-II objectives are consistent with the 2015-2019 UNDAF
objectives, since the project will contribute substantively to the five pillars of
economic and social development.

Innovations and scaling upC.
38. The first phase of the project resulted in the adoption of numerous innovations in

the project area. The results have been satisfactory and the following innovations
will be scaled up during the second phase: i) farmers’ field schools; ii)
agro-ecological techniques recently introduced and popularized by the project
through farmers’ field schools; iii) off-season growing for vulnerable smallholders
with no irrigated land; and iv) the taxation, identification and certification combined
operation approach in project-supported land offices.

39. The learning process will continue, in particular by capitalizing on experiences and
instituting systematic exchanges with other rural development stakeholders,
especially projects financed by IFAD and other technical and financial partners
(such as the Japan International Cooperation Agency Central Highlands Rice
Productivity Improvement Project and the World Bank Emergency Food Security



EB 2015/115/R.8

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and Social Protection Project). The project will benefit from knowledge built in
similar areas by other successful projects in the country: i) access to markets and
marketing (the Rural Income Promotion Programme and the Support Porgramme
for Rural Microenterprises and Regional Economies); and ii) agricultural advisory
services and the strengthening of professional organizations.

40. Climate change adaptation is also among the key themes. The ASAP financing will
help strengthen activities aimed at building farmers’ resilience to the effects of
climate change: hydro-agricultural development, including spate-irrigated areas,
reforestation, agro-ecology and natural resource management approaches in
general. Project implementation will thus provide the knowledge base and solid
expertise to replicate and expand the application of alternative activities to build
resilience to climate change.

Policy engagementD.
41. AD2M-II is anchored in the economy and the institutional environment at the

communal and regional levels. It promotes decentralization and the organization of
stakeholders at the local level so as to ensure the sustainability of investments. The
project incorporates activities relating to policy consultation, capacity-building,
farmers’ organizations, land tenure security, rural finance and knowledge
management.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
42. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Madagascar and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix 1.
session.

43. The Republic of Madagascar is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

44. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
45. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
Republic of Madagascar in an amount equivalent to twenty-four million five
hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 24,500,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

FURTHER RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Madagascar through the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme in
an amount equivalent to four million two hundred thousand special drawing
rights (SDR 4,200,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


























































President’s Report

Proposed Loan and Grant under the Debt
Sustainability Framework to the Togolese
Republic for the Shared-risk Agricultural
Financing Incentive Mechanism Support
Project


Togolese Republic

Shared-risk Agricultural Financing Incentive Mechanism
Support Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Togolese Republic

Executing agency: Ministry of Economy and Finance

Total project cost: US$35.07 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 3.3 million (US$3.75 million)

Amount of IFAD grant (under the Debt
Sustainability Framework):

EUR 3.3 million (US$3.75 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional terms, interest-free but coupled
with a service fee of 0.75 per cent per year, and a
repayment period of 40 years (unless a shorter period is
requested by the borrower), including a grace period of
10 years. Amortization of the loan principal shall be at
the rate of 4.5 per cent for the first 20 years (11 to 30),
followed by 1 per cent for the subsequent years
(31 to 40)

Cofinancier: Private sector (financial institutions)

Cofinancing amount: US$6.31 million

Contribution of borrower/recipient: US$3.80 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.80 million

Financing gap: US$15.66 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for proposed
financing to the Togolese Republic for the Shared-risk Agricultural Financing
Incentive Mechanism Support Project (ProMIFA), as set forth in paragraph 55.

Proposed Loan and Grant under the Debt Sustainability
Framework to the Togolese Republic for the Shared-risk
Agricultural Financing Incentive Mechanism Support
Project (ProMIFA)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The West African country of Togo had approximately 7.6 million inhabitants in

2016, 77 per cent of them living below the poverty line and 75 per cent aged under
35. The country's economy is highly dependent on exports of phosphates and
agricultural products. The agriculture sector provides 60 per cent of employment
and contributes 41 per cent of GDP. Agriculture consists essentially of subsistence
family farms – with an average size of four hectares per household – with low levels
of producer integration into value chains and the market economy.

2. Although agriculture is the main sector of employment for thousands of young
people and women, financial sector operators hesitate to lend to them because of
perceived high risk. Investments and promotion of initiatives in the sector are
therefore limited. Just 0.2 per cent of financial sector resources go to agriculture,
and only 32 per cent of rural people have access to financial services. Use of
banking and financial services is very limited, with only 18 per cent of the country’s
population nationwide having a bank account. In 2017, the International Monetary
Fund indicated that the banking system lacked liquidity to provide financing to
private lenders, since the latter were funding public deficits.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
results-based country strategic opportunities programme

3. The Government of Togo has just adopted a new Five-year National Development
Plan (PND) for the 2018-2022 period, with the objective of achieving strong,
sustainable and resilient growth that will provide decent livelihoods and generate
social progress and well-being. The PND also aims to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals, in particular SDG1 (no poverty), SDG2 (no hunger),
SDG8 (good jobs and economic growth) and SDG17 (partnerships for the goals).

4. Development of the agriculture sector has a central role within the PND, and the
Government has adopted specific sectoral strategies and policies, based on a
sustainable increase in productivity of organized agropastoral value chains, the
organization and professionalizing of value chain stakeholders, and facilitating
access to financial and non-financial services tailored to the needs of the small
producers and small and medium-sized enterprises in the value chains. To that end,
the Government introduced the Agricultural Financing Incentive Mechanism (MIFA)
and requested technical and financial support for it from IFAD.

5. Lessons learned. Togo is classified among the countries experiencing conditions of
fragility, particularly with regard to issues of governance, accountability and
institutional organization. The Shared-risk Agricultural Financing Incentive
Mechanism Support Project (ProMIFA) will capitalize on lessons learned from other
rural development projects in Togo and the subregion, in particular with regard to



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

2

the implementation of projects in countries with fragile situations. Performance of
the IFAD portfolio in Togo – and in particular its fiduciary aspects – have posed
challenges due to the weak capacities for implementation and results-based
management on the part of the participating parties. Greater attention to the
fiduciary aspects will be ensured, in particular through sustained capacity-building
and close monitoring through project oversight and the IFAD country team in Accra.

II. Project description
A. Objectives, project area and target group
6. The overall objective of ProMIFA is to contribute to poverty reduction, sustainable

and inclusive rural economic growth, and the creation of sustainable and decent
employment in rural areas, through organized and well-functioning value chains in
Togo.

7. Its development objective is to facilitate sustainable access to financial and non-
financial services tailored to stakeholders in organized, successful value chains.

8. Project area. ProMIFA will be aligned with the nationwide coverage adopted by the
Government’s incentive mechanism for agricultural financing (MIFA). Nevertheless,
its roll out in each region will be undertaken on a differentiated basis depending on
demand. For greater impact on the target group, namely women and youth,
ProMIFA will first support a limited number of key agropastoral value chains
(rice, market gardening, maize and poultry raising), which will be selected taking
into account: (i) their contribution to improving food and nutritional security of the
rural communities; (ii) the existence of demand for grains, vegetables and poultry
products from urban markets; (iii) the outlook for financial and economic cost-
effectiveness; and (iv) their potential for job creation – particularly for youth and
women – and for income generation.

9. Target group. ProMIFA will target: (i) smallholder farmers and their organizations
(cooperatives, unions and federations); (ii) vulnerable farm households; (iii) rural
small businesses and microenterprises and other actors upstream and downstream
involved in the production and distribution of inputs, marketing, processing,
handicrafts, the setting up and maintenance of farm equipment, and the provision
of other services.

10. ProMIFA seeks to reach at least 300,000 direct beneficiaries, or around 50,000 rural
households, especially rural young people (18 to 40 years of age), employed or
unemployed; and women who are producers or are active in the other segments of
the targeted value chains. Targeting and gender equality strategies will ensure that
young people of both sexes represent at least 40 per cent of the beneficiaries, and
adult women at least 30 per cent. Thus girls and adult women will account for
nearly half of ProMIFA beneficiaries.

B. Components/outcomes
11. ProMIFA’s activities will be organized into three components, namely:

Component 1: Technical support for value chain development and market
access

a) Technical support to the producers and other actors in the agropastoral value
chains: (i) overview of the selected value chains and inventory of service
providers; (ii) building of the technical/technological capacities of producers
and their organizations and of other value chain actors; and (iii) capacity-
building in financial literacy and business development services.

b) Support to the structuring of the value chains and market access:
(i) partnership strengthening within the links in the value chains; (ii) support
to interprofessional organizations; and (iii) support to the quality approach to
market access.



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

3

Component 2: Support for the development of financial products and
services

12. In order to meet the demand generated by the ongoing support under component
1, ProMIFA will help facilitate access to financial services for rural communities by
increasing loans to smallholder farmers – individually or in groups – and to small
and medium-sized rural enterprises; and by improving the quality of the
agricultural credit portfolio of ProMIFA’s partner financial institutions and the
operational and financial sustainability of these institutions.

13. These results will be achieved through the following measures: (i) technical
assistance to support establishment of a financing and risk mitigation mechanism,
and the development of new products; (ii) improvement in the quality of financial
services through capacity-building of the financial institutions and development of
tailored products; and (iii) effective establishment of the financing and risk
mitigation arrangements.

Component 3: Institutional support to MIFA; coordination and
management of ProMIFA

a) Institutional support to MIFA, with a view to its consolidation: the project will
finance the support needed (technical assistance, training programmes, study
tours, learning routes, monitoring and evaluation, etc.) for the
operationalization and consolidation of MIFA and its strategic planning within
the agricultural finance environment;

b) Coordination and management of ProMIFA will be undertaken by a simplified
project coordination and management unit (PCMU) working alongside MIFA –
and closely linked to it and to the MIFA Board of Directors (BoD).

Strategy for project implementation and phasing

14. ProMIFA will be implemented in two phases, following a staggered implementation
plan. Phase 1, with a duration of two years, is the preliminary phase of preparation
for implementation and phase 2, with a four-year duration, constitutes the
implementation and consolidation phase. The midterm review will make it possible
to review progress made, as a condition for passing from phase 1 to phase 2, which
will be launched subject to confirmation of the following six performance indicators:
(i) four key need and market studies finalized; (ii) at least two financial products
pre-identified in the studies, ready to be implemented; (iii) at least five financial
institutions having signed a partnership agreement with MIFA looking to finance the
actors in the selected value chains, with a multiplier effect; (iv) at least one
cofinancier committed to joining the Government and IFAD in support of MIFA;
(v) MIFA’s decision-making bodies in place and operational, in accordance with
Presidential Decree No. 2018-090 dated 25 April 2018 or any subsequent
amendments to it, the members of the BoD have been identified, the Director
General has been named and the key personnel have been put in place and trained;
and (vi) the financial management system is in place and MIFA’s capacity is in line
with the parameters defined by IFAD.

15. Confirmation of these indicators will occur at the time of the midterm review, which
is foreseen from the end of the second year. Unless all of the above-mentioned
performance indicators are confirmed, the project may not move forward to the
next phase, and suspension or even early closure of the project and withdrawal of
support to MIFA could be envisaged by IFAD.

C. Theory of change
16. The change envisaged by ProMIFA will make it possible to solve two major

problems for agricultural and rural development in Togo: (i) suboptimal value
chains with bottlenecks, poorly structured producers’ organizations and other issues
that discourage risk-taking by the financial sector; and (ii) very poor access on the



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

4

part of the rural population and micro-, small and medium-sized agricultural
enterprises to the financing needed for the development of their economic
activities.

17. The project rationale lies in strengthening the resilience and productivity of family
farms. The holistic and inclusive approach adopted – that of enabling family farms
to perform better and increase resilience and become true market-oriented
enterprises – will generate economic growth. Indeed, all categories of relevant
public and private stakeholders will participate in the project. ProMIFA’s activities
will address all links in the value chain, from production to marketing, while
integrating measures for sustainable natural resource management and climate
change adaptation.

D. Alignment, ownership and partnership
18. Alignment. ProMIFA is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025, which

encourages inclusive and sustainable rural transformation and with the strategic
commitments of the Eleventh Replenishment of IFAD’s Resources (IFAD11), while
taking into account the priority themes of nutrition, gender equality, youth and
climate change. ProMIFA is also aligned with IFAD engagement in Togo, as
described in the country strategy note 2018-2019, which focuses on two strategic
objectives, to: (i) facilitate access to employment and improve incomes for rural
youth and women through their greater inclusion in agropastoral value chains
within the structured framework of “agro-hubs”; and (ii) improve sustainable
access for the rural population (young people and women) to financial services
tailored to the development of agropastoral value chains and rural small businesses
and microenterprises.

19. Ownership. The Government is fully committed to MIFA; the latter is in fact a
central mechanism for implementation of its economic development strategy. There
is high demand for financial and in-kind support among producers, their
organizations and rural small businesses and microenterprises, which explains their
readiness to contribute payment for such services. The financial institutions are also
committed to MIFA, since it will contribute to mitigation of the risks associated with
financing the value chains.

20. Partnerships. By promoting the financial literacy of small producers and of other
actors in the agropastoral value chains and their access to short-term seasonal
loans, ProMIFA will encourage partnership-building between their organizations and
private sector actors operating upstream and downstream of production. ProMIFA
will focus on the capacity-building of the various parties involved (MIFA, the
financial institutions, the private banks and other institutions), assisting
beneficiaries in drafting business plans, and supporting financial institutions in
providing financial products that meet the needs of agropastoral value chain
stakeholders, thus enabling their access to financing over the medium term.

21. ProMIFA will also collaborate with the other initiatives under way in support of the
agricultural sector, within the framework of the National Plan for Agricultural
Investment and Food and Nutritional Security and entrepreneurship for women and
young people. A special partnership will be instituted with the National Programme
for the Promotion of Rural Entrepreneurship (PNPER), cofinanced by IFAD, which
targets young rural entrepreneurs. Other partners will also be sought, notably in
the private sector.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
22. ProMIFA’s will follow a “faire-faire” and “faire-avec” approach which places the

beneficiaries at the centre of activities and gives them responsibility, particularly for
forming financial relationships with the financial institutions. Once the business plan



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

5

is drawn up and completed, with the support of the service provider, ProMIFA will
leave the project sponsor with responsibility for submitting and justifying the
project with the financial institutions. Once the funds have been obtained, ProMIFA
will provide the project sponsor with support to mobilize consultancy services for
project management within a contractual framework with the support provider,
based on a memorandum of understanding with ProMIFA.

23. To ensure that stakeholders have access to quality agricultural consultancy support,
business management services will be promoted by creating a network of skilled
rural young people interested in investing in business consultancy activities,
including keeping accounts and producing financial statements.

24. A key part of the project exit strategy will be the establishment of interprofessional
frameworks for dialogue and a mechanism to build organizational and institutional
capacity to provide quality services to members.

B. Organizational framework
25. ProMIFA will be implemented by a PCMU, which will be set up on the premises of

MIFA and will be linked to its BoD. This unit will have administrative and financial
management autonomy; it will be composed of a coordinator, an administrative and
financial manager and bookkeeper, a procurement specialist, a manager for
targeting/women/youth issues, a monitoring and evaluation specialist, a secretary
and two drivers.

26. Eventually the PCMU should close, with its functions absorbed within MIFA. The
midterm review, to be held towards the end of the second year of ProMIFA
implementation, will make it possible to assess the situation and propose a plan for
the transfer of functions to MIFA, based on: (i) MIFA’s charter and composition;
(ii) its level of organizational and operational maturity; (iii) its performance in
implementation of its workplan and the level of achievement of the expected
outcomes; and (iv) its management capacity, in particular in relation to fiduciary
management, and the quality of the human resources and management
instruments (manual of administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual
and integrated management system).

C. Planning, monitoring/evaluation, learning and knowledge
management

27. Planning. The preparation of the annual workplan and budget (AWP/B) will be
carried out with the MIFA team on the basis of a critical review of the previous year
and of the progress made. All stakeholders, in particular those in the Presidential
Delivery Unit (CPES), will participate in the preparation, thereby translating it into
coherent activities that are allocated the needed resources and linked to the
objectives of the logical framework and its performance measurement framework.
The AWP/B will be approved by the Board of Directors of MIFA not later than
30 November of each year, before being submitted to IFAD for its no objection
before 31 December. The project’s progress over the course of the year will be
assessed based on the rate of progress, outputs achieved and the disbursement
rate of the activities set out in the AWP/B.

28. Monitoring/evaluation. The system will draw on internal monitoring and on
periodic internal and external evaluations, which will be carried out with the
participation of the stakeholders. Information will be collected and analysed on:
(i) progress towards the expected outcomes, as described in the project’s logical
framework, and in the performance of all the actors involved in implementing the
activities set out in the AWP/B; (ii) assessment of the relevance of implementation
approaches and strategies and specific mechanisms for coordination and monitoring
of the various components and activities; (iii) assessment of the participation of the
beneficiaries at the various stages of implementation; (iv) the relevance and
effectiveness of the targeting and the attention given to cross-cutting aspects



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

6

(nutrition, gender, youth and climate change); and (v) annual surveys to assess
impact on the beneficiaries since the midterm review. A baseline survey will be
carried out at project inception and an impact assessment is planned at completion.

29. The PCMU of ProMIFA will work closely with the MIFA monitoring/evaluation unit
and the CPES in support of periodic analyses and documentation of the dashboard
indicators, which will serve as learning and decision support tools. The teams will
benefit from IFAD’s training programmes (AVANTI and Prime).

30. Learning and knowledge management. Knowledge management is an essential
function in the continuous improvement of performance and results; it aims to
capitalize on the knowledge and lessons derived from implementation experience,
so as to generate corrective measures in planning and implementation. It will be
based on (i) identification, documentation, building on and dissemination of
knowledge and (ii) networking among the practitioners, knowledge holders and
other participating parties. The monitoring and evaluation database, activity reports
and self-assessment sessions will all provide opportunities to pool the innovations
and good practices and disseminate them. Knowledge exchanges relating to
FIDAFRIQUE, recently given a new boost, will be actively promoted.

D. Administrative and financial management
31. ProMIFA’s financial management risk is deemed high prior to the establishment of

mitigation measures. The project will focus on the competitive recruitment of
qualified staff to set up an organizational, accounting and financial management
framework, accompanied by a control process and tools for transparent operational
management of the funds. In functional terms, the PMCU will have administrative
and financial autonomy, and the fact that it will initially be separate from MIFA, will
make it possible to hold it increasingly accountable, in line with the governance
principles agreed.

32. The management system described in the procedures manual will specify the
reporting and functional relationships between the officials on the administrative
and financial team. At project inception, an operational management tool will be
put in place in line with: (i) the regulatory accounting rules of the revised
SYSCOHADA accounting system; (ii) IFAD procedures with regard to project
management; and (iii) the national procedures in relation to awarding of contracts
and to personnel management. The manual will contain the management support
needed for implementation.

33. Flow of funds. A designated account will be opened to receive the loan and grant
resources. Three operational accounts will be opened respectively for the
expenditures of the PCMU, the agricultural development financing facility and the
risk mitigation fund.

34. An annual external audit of the financial statements will be carried out, in
accordance with international auditing standards and in observance of the IFAD
guidelines. The audited financial statements will be made public on the official IFAD
site.

35. Although the closing date has passed, the advances provided to the Support to
Agricultural Development Project still need to be accounted for or reimbursed to
IFAD. Definitive resolution of this issue will constitute a prerequisite for
disbursement of ProMIFA funding.

E. Procurement
36. Procurement. Procurement will respect national procedures, and will comply with

standards acceptable to IFAD.



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

7

F. Supervision
37. IFAD and the Government will undertake joint supervision of the project and will

organize at least one mission per year, plus thematic monitoring missions as
needed, so as to formulate recommendations for effective project implementation.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
38. The total cost of ProMIFA over a six-year period, including provisions for price rises,

comes to US$35.07 million. Its base cost is US$34.032 million. The provisions for
physical and financial contingencies come to US$1.037 million.

39. Project costs by component are as follows: (i) component 1: technical support for
value chain development and market access, US$13.4 million, or 38.3 per cent;
(ii) component 2: support for the development of financial products and services,
US$15.2 million or 43.4 per cent; and (iii) component 3; institutional support to
MIFA; coordination and management of ProMIFA, US$6.4 million or 18.2 per cent.



E
B
 2

0
1
8
/LO

T
/P.2

5

8

Table 1
Project costs by funding source and component
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Financing gap Beneficiaries Government Private sector Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Technical support for value chain development and market access
1.1: Technical support to the producers
and other agropastoral value chain
actors 2 745 22.1 2 745 22.1 4 141 33.4 550 4.4 2 235 18.0 - - 12 416 35.4
1.2: Support for the structuring of the
agricultural value chains and market
access 36 3.5 36 3.5 713 69.5 - - 185 18.0 56 5.5 1 027 2.9
Subtotal 2 781 20.7 2 781 20.7 4 854 36.1 550 4.1 2 420 18.0 56 0.4 13 443 38.3

2. Support for the development of financial products and services
2.1: Technical assistance in support to
development and establishment of the
mechanisms for financing, risk coverage
and new products 110 28.0 110 28.0 102 25.9 - - 71 18.0 - - 392 1.1
2.2: Improvement in the quality of
financial services 13 1.0 13 1.0 1 071 80.1 - - 241 18.0 - - 1 337 3.8
2.3: Mechanisms for financing and risk
mitigation - - - - 6 000 44.4 1 250 9.3 - - 6 250 46.3 13 500 38.5
Subtotal 123 0.8 123 0.8 7 172 47.1 1 250 8.2 311 2.0 6 250 41.0 15 230 43.4

3. Institutional support to MIFA; coordination and management of ProMIFA
3.1: Institutional support to MIFA 438 13.0 438 13.0 1.770 52.5 - - 727 21.5 - - 3 373 9.6
3.2: Coordination and management 407 13.5 407 13.5 1 869 61.8 - - 341 11.3 - - 3 024 8.6
Subtotal 846 13.2 846 13.2 3 638 56.9 - - 1 068 16.7 - - 6 397 18.2

Total 3 750 10.7 3 750 10.7 15 665 44.7 1 800 5.1 3 799 10.8 6 306 18.0 35 070 100



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

9

B. Project financing
40. IFAD will provide EUR 6.6 million (US$7.5 million), or 21.5 per cent of the total

cost, apportioned between a loan (50 per cent) and a grant (50 per cent); the
Government (including through duties) will contribute US$3.8 million (10.8 per cent
of the total cost); the beneficiaries, US$1.8 million (5.1 per cent of the total cost);
and the private sector, US$6.2 million (18 per cent of the total cost). The financing
gap, amounting to US$15.6 million or 44.7 per cent of the total cost, will be
covered by other sources of financing, or by the next IFAD resource allocation cycle
for Togo, over the period 2019 to 2021 (IFAD11).



E
B
 2

0
1
8
/LO

T
/P.2

5

1
0

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financing source
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Financing gap Beneficiaries Government Private sector Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

Capital expenditure
1. Goods, services, vehicles and
equipment 173 33.2 173 33.2 81 15.6 - - 94 18.0 - - 521 1.5
2. Technical assistance and
studies 1 333 18.6 1 333 18.6 3 168 44.1 - - 1 293 18.0 56 0.8 7 183 20.5
3. Training 1 999 16.7 1 999 16.7 5 119 42.9 550 4.6 2 268 19.0 - - 11 934 34.0
4. Loans - - - - 6 000 44.4 1 250 9.3 - - 6 250 46.3 13 500 38.5

Total capital expenditure 3 505 10.6 3 505 10.6 14 368 43.4 1 800 5.4 3 655 11.0 6 306 19.0 33 138 94.5

Current expenditure
1. Salaries and allowances 152 12.3 152 12.3 935 75.5 - - - - - - 1 239 3.5
2. Operating expenses 93 13.5 93 13.5 362 52.3 - - 144 20.8 - - 692 2.0

Total current expenditure 245 12.7 245 12.7 1 297 67.1 - - 144 7.5 - - 1 932 5.5

Total 3 750 10.7 3 750 10.7 15 665 44.7 1 800 5.1 3 799 10.8 6 306 18.0 35 070 100



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

11

C. Summary of the benefits and economic analysis
41. The economic analysis. Calculation of the financial return from the different

models shows that all of the models chosen (mixed market gardening, upland rice,
lowland rice and free range chickens) show a very attractive financial return. The
financial internal rate of return is positive for all of the models, with indicators of
between 17 per cent and 139 per cent. The net present value is also very positive,
between CFAF 119,000 and CFAF 8.7 million. The project’s internal economic rate of
return stands at 20.3 per cent and the net present value (at the economic
opportunity cost of capital of 6.5 per cent) comes to US$32.26 million. This result is
very satisfactory. The sensitivity analysis indicates that the results obtained are
robust. Even in the event of a decline in revenue of 30 per cent, a rise in costs of
30 per cent or a two-year delay in the appearance of profits, the rate of return
remains greater than the opportunity cost of capital (6.5 per cent), and the
minimum net present value is greater than US$17.4 million.

D. Sustainability
42. Project sustainability will be promoted first by the decision to empower actors in the

agropastoral value chains to be accountable for project activities. The second
measure to guarantee sustainability is the phasing approach that will
simultaneously make ProMIFA a tool to operationalize, consolidate and maintain
MIFA beyond project completion.

43. Among the effective mechanisms developed by ProMIFA are: making beneficiaries
accountable for the activities in which they are involved through their systematic
participation in decisions on the technical support needed to implement their action
plans. This will be realized through a tripartite partnership agreement established
between ProMIFA, the support provider and the beneficiary.

44. The cost-sharing system between the project and the beneficiaries will enable the
producers to contribute to the direct financing of their economically viable activities.
Similarly, with respect to the agricultural development financing facility, a
mechanism will make it possible to provide liquidity to MIFA’s partner financial
institutions for the financing of beneficiaries’ projects. This process will involve the
participation of the three sets of stakeholders: the farmers, ProMIFA and the
partner financial institutions.

45. The differentiated and calibrated support to the producers’ cooperatives and
organizations – by means of action plans that they themselves have designed – will
strengthen their institutional and economic capacity. The establishment of a
commercial relationship between the cooperatives and the market operators, along
with financial intermediation on the part of ProMIFA, will provide the producers with
autonomy. The specific and multifaceted support envisaged for building the
economic capacity of women and youth will contribute to the emergence of strong,
credible and economically promising entreprises led by women and young people.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
46. The project’s main risks are inherent to activities in the agricultural sector and rural

finance, and to markets, climate change and the country’s social and political
situation, in particular: (i) weak technical and management capacity of the
beneficiaries for ensuring the productivity and economic return of their activities;
(ii) low participation of women, due to cultural barriers and to men’s
monopolization of the most profitable links in the value chain; (iii) fluctuation in
prices of staples and the distortion caused by the parallel markets; (iv) disruption
of the markets by government policies to subsidize inputs and foodstuffs; (v) poor
quality of records, entailing drawn-out loan provision processes; (vi) delays in
establishing financing mechanisms, mitigating risks and conducting surveys;
(vii) fiduciary risks; and (viii) climate events that may place a strain on production
and repayment capacities. The project is classified as having moderate climate risk.



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

12

However, it will have many positive effects and is thus classified in environmental
category B.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
47. ProMIFA is in line with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025, which aims to

promote inclusive and sustainable rural transformation, and with IFAD’s rural
finance policy. ProMIFA will implement activities aimed at achieving IFAD’s three
strategic objectives: (i) improving the productive capacity of poor rural people in a
sustainable and resilient manner; (ii) adding to the benefits that these communities
draw from their inclusion/participation in the market; and (iii) strengthening
environmental sustainability and increasing the climate resilience of their economic
activities. It is also strongly aligned with IFAD’s planned country engagement as set
forth in the country strategy note for 2018-2019. ProMIFA is also in line with IFAD’s
rural finance policy, which calls for providing financial institutions with capital and
developing financial products tailored to the rural poor, including risk management
mechanisms, without creating distortion within the financial market.

B. Alignment and harmonization
48. ProMIFA will support the implementation of MIFA, a key instrument of the new five-

year PND (2018-2022), which will make it possible to facilitate the funding needed
for rural activities, so as to address the weak performance of agropastoral value
chains and poverty.

C. Innovations and scaling up
49. ProMIFA represents an innovative approach for mitigating risks linked to agricultural

financing, which is based on the scaling up of successful experiences from other
regions within the framework of a South-South partnership with Nigeria. MIFA is a
priority initiative of the President and plays a major role in the country’s
development strategy. It will be the gateway for the private sector, donors and
other partners. Since the beginning of the pilot phase of MIFA, IFAD, by supporting
ProMIFA, has been the only partner that has committed itself alongside the
Government and will benefit from a high level of visibility. IFAD’s direct
participation by providing a grant to strengthen the CPES – a service mechanism of
the Office of the President of the Republic of which MIFA is a priority project – is
also a major innovation whose results are eagerly awaited.

50. ProMIFA will build on and harness the experiences of projects with similar activities,
such as PEA Youth in Cameroon, NIRSAL in Nigeria, the Agribusiness Initiative Trust
in Uganda and the Private Agricultural Support Services Trust in the United Republic
of Tanzania.

D. Policy engagement
51. Since MIFA is a key implementation instrument for the Government’s development

strategy, ProMIFA – in support of MIFA – will contribute to strategic planning on the
key topics of: agropastoral value chains, professionalization of stakeholders and
rural finance. This contribution will be undertaken through mobilization of
specialized technical assistance, the financing of thematic studies, learning from
monitoring and evaluation, and building on and sharing good practices.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
52. The financing agreement between the Togolese Republic and IFAD constitutes the

legal instrument whereby the proposed financing will be granted to the
borrower/beneficiary. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

53. The Togolese Republic is empowered under its laws to receive funding from IFAD.



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

13

54. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
55. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan to the Togolese Republic on
highly concessional terms in the amount of three million three hundred
thousand euros (EUR 3,300,000), upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

FURTHER RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Togolese
Republic under the Debt Sustainability Framework in the amount of
three million three hundred thousand euros (EUR 3,300,000), upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President




















































President’s Report

Proposed Loan and Debt Sustainability
Framework Grant to the Republic of
Sierra Leone for the Agricultural Value
Chain Development Project



Republic of Sierra Leone

Agricultural Value Chain Development Project (AVDP)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Sierra Leone

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Food Security

Total project cost: US$60.3 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$5.9 million

Amount of IFAD DSF grant: US$5.9 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional, 40 years, including a grace period
of 10 years, with a service charge of three fourths of
one per cent (0.75 per cent) per annum

Financing gap: US$28.5 million

Cofinancier(s):

Amount of cofinancing:

Terms of cofinancing:

Adaptation Fund, subject to approval

Adaptation Fund: US$9.2 million

Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$8.1million (of which US$1.9 million will be provided
to match IFAD financing of US$11.8 million presented
in the financing agreement)

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.4 million

Contribution of private sector US$1.4 million

Appraising institution: International Fund for Agricultural Development



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Sierra Leone for the Agriculture Value Chain
Development Project (AVDP), as contained in paragraph 45.

Proposed Loan and Debt Sustainability Framework Grant
to the Republic of Sierra Leone for the Agriculture Value
Chain Development Project (AVDP)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Republic of Sierra Leone economy has grown substantially since the end of the

civil war in 2002, but it suffered two major shocks in 2014/2015 – the Ebola
epidemic and the collapse of iron ore prices, with GDP shrinking 21 per cent in
2015. However, economic growth resumed following new investments in mining,
agriculture and fisheries, registering GDP growth of 6.3 per cent in 2016 and
5.7 per cent in 2017. Agriculture, the largest sector in the economy, accounted for
59 per cent of GDP in 2016, 62 per cent of the labour force, and 22 per cent of
export earnings. Cash crops produced for export include cocoa and coffee, while
palm oil is produced for domestic consumption and some export.

2. Sierra Leone’s population is around 7.4 million (40 per cent youth) and growing at
2.2 per cent annually. Poverty is widespread but is particularly acute and
concentrated in rural areas, where 59 per cent of the population lives. The rural
poverty headcount of over 66 per cent is double that of urban areas. Women and
youth are particularly vulnerable due to challenges associated with access to land,
skills and capital, as well as customs. About 59.7 per cent of rural households in
Sierra Leone are food insecure, compared with 25.1 per cent in urban areas.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

3. Agricultural development remains key to Sierra Leone’s economic development and
rural poverty reduction, and there is considerable untapped potential for increasing
the production and productivity of both staple and cash crops. The project will
focus on three crops: rice, cocoa and palm oil, though the largest share of the
budget will be devoted to rice production in inland valley swamps, consistent with
the Government of Sierra Leone priorities. The AVDP will promote crop
diversification to provide flexibility and choice to beneficiaries and support
improved nutrition.

4. The AVDP is aligned with the National Agricultural Transformation 2023
Programme, which is currently in development. The AVDP addresses two of the
three priority intervention areas, which are rice self-sufficiency and crop
diversification, notably for palm oil and cocoa. The project aligns with five of the
seven new strategic priorities: (priority 2) Increasing investment in rice production,
processing and marketing, (priority 3) Make youth and women catalysts for
agribusiness development and growth, (priority 4) Invest in catalytic technologies
such as agricultural mechanization, irrigation and water management,
(priority 6) Strengthen sustainable biodiversity management and conservation,
including forest and tree crops, (priority 7) Increase the production of other crops,
such as vegetables, to ensure diversification.



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

2

5. The selection of value chains is consistent with government priorities and pro-poor
approaches to value chain development. The crop mixture addresses increased
availability of the dietary staple (rice), improved nutritional balance (vegetables)
and increased income from all crops.

6. The project development objective and approach are aligned with the two strategic
objectives of the Country Strategy Note 2017-2018, namely (i) improved
smallholder farmers’ access to technical skills and markets; and (ii) improved
access to finance for rural communities.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
7. Due to widespread poverty, the AVDP will in principle be nationwide, though the

concentration and intensity of project interventions will depend on climatic and
agroecological conditions in each of the 16 districts of Sierra Leone.1 While rice and
palm oil are produced throughout the country, cocoa production is localized in
specific districts.

8. The socio-economic profile of the target group will be similar to that of the groups
targeted under the Smallholder Commercialization Program - Global Agriculture
and Food Security Program (SCP-GAFSP), although primarily in other areas of the
country. The majority of the beneficiaries (62.3 per cent) have no education. Only
37.7 per cent of beneficiaries have some formal education, mostly primary or
secondary but very little post-secondary/tertiary. More female beneficiaries
(69.1 per cent) than their male counterparts (40.5 per cent) have no education.
The average monthly income of beneficiaries is at 468,795 leones. Radio and
mobile phones are popular assets that beneficiaries own, as indicated by
49.8 per cent and 41.8 per cent of respondents, respectively. Ownership of other
assets is insignificant. Fully 91 per cent of households experienced hunger in the
12 months prior to the survey, during which they had difficulty providing sufficient
food to feed all members.

9. The project is estimated to target 204,000 direct beneficiaries, equivalent to
34,000 households, over a period of six years, providing assistance to the target
groups and support for greater participation in targeted value chains. The project
aims at reaching at least 40 per cent of both women and youth.

B. Project development objective
10. The project's development objective is to increase the income of smallholder

farmers through the promotion of agriculture as a business.

C. Components/outcomes
11. The project has three components: (i) Climate-resilient and smart agricultural

production; (ii) Agricultural market development; (iii) Project coordination and
management.

12. Component 1: Climate-resilient and smart-agricultural production. The expected
outcome of component 1 is that the volume and value of production is increased
and production systems are made more climate resilient. Component 1 will have
two subcomponents, as follows:

(a) Subcomponent 1.1. Support for smallholder rice production and productivity.
This will support a total of 10,000 rice farmers by providing technical
assistance through farmer field schools and financial support for the
development of inland valley swamps for double or triple cropping of rice and
improved access to quality inputs and mechanized farming services.

1 The project will pursue a strategy of territorial concentration of interventions to facilitate implementation, which in
practice may mean that not all districts are targeted.



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

3

(b) Subcomponent 1.2. Support for tree crop production and productivity. This
will involve work with 13,000 farmers (5,000 cocoa and 8,000 palm oil
producers) receiving technical assistance and support for the establishment of
one-hectare plots on fallow or abandoned agricultural land. No deforestation
is permitted to clear land for the smallholder plantations. No large plantations
will be supported.

13. Component 2: Agricultural market development. The expected outcome of this
component is improved performance and organization of the selected value chains
for increased smallholder production and productivity. The component is composed
of two subcomponents:

(a) Subcomponent 2.1. Market access. This subcomponent will focus on:
strengthening the business skills of Agri-Business Centres, farmers’
organizations; farmer field schools; facilitating value chain organizations; and
deal making through the establishment of provincial multi-stakeholder
platforms.

(b) Subcomponent 2.2. Climate-resilient rural infrastructure. Partly financed
through the Adaptation Fund, this will involve the rehabilitation of
warehouses to improve product drying and storage capacity, provide potable
water and latrines and rehabilitate feeder roads and farm tracks.

14. Component 3: Project coordination and management. This component is divided
into two subcomponents:

(a) Subcomponent 3.1. Project coordination and management.

(b) Subcomponent 3.2. Financing mechanisms for target groups.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

15. The overall AVDP approach will be market-centred and demand-driven. The main
thrust will be on establishing win-win partnerships between producers and their
organizations, private-sector agribusinesses and rural finance institutions. This will
be achieved through a series of activities, including the provision of technical
assistance by the farmer field schools, as well as the strengthening of farmers’
organizations to better plan production and the purchase of inputs. The availability
of certified seeds will be enhanced through the set-up of seed multiplication plots
that will be linked to private-sector processors. The project will provide matching
grants to facilitate beneficiary investment in production infrastructure to boost
productivity. The matching grants scheme will also increase financial inclusion, as
most producers’ groups will need credit for their investments. Multi-stakeholder
platforms will better integrate the value chains by bringing the different
stakeholders – including representatives of the smallholder farmers – to the table
to find solutions to current obstacles, build trust and facilitate business deals.
Rehabilitated feeder roads will further facilitate market linkages. Additionally, the
project will seek to climate proof the productive investments and ensure relevant
capacity-building.

B. Organizational framework
16. The National Programme Coordination Unit (NPCU) will be responsible for project

planning, financial management, contracting implementing partners for specific
activities and tasks, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), communication and
knowledge management, supervision of project activities at the district level and
facilitating linkage with the Government, private-sector and development
institutions and integrating project experience into policy dialogue.



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

4

17. The NPCU will have approximately 25 technical and support staff at its
headquarters, supplemented with a robust presence at the provincial level with the
out-posting of 4 tree crop officers, 4 inland valley swamp officers, 2 agribusiness
specialists and 4 Community Mobilizers/Targeting Specialists. A matching grant
evaluation committee will be set up to approve grant applications. Staff
implementing AVDP will have an opportunity for training to improve their
performance. At the district level, the district agricultural officer of Ministry of
Agriculture, Forestry and Food Security (MAFFS) will be responsible for
coordinating the implementation of project activities.

18. AVDP will be placed under the technical supervision of the MAFFS. The MAFFS and
the National Steering Committee will provide oversight, direction and advice for
project implementation, and in particular, approve the project’s Annual Work Plan
and Budget (AWPB), as well as its periodic progress reports.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation and learning and
knowledge management

19. The project will prepare an AWPB for approval by the National Steering Committee
and subsequent presentation to IFAD for no objection. The AWPB will serve as the
basis for any work that the project undertakes. The AWPB will be prepared in
consultation with beneficiaries and other stakeholders and build on the project’s
progress.

20. The project’s logical framework will be the main document for supporting results-
based and objective-oriented implementation. The AVDP monitoring and evaluation
system will build on the system developed in the SCP-GAFSP, including its M&E
manual. The M&E system will be in line with the Government of Sierra Leone
requirements, as well as IFAD’s Operational Results Management System and will
generate gender- and age-disaggregated data on project outputs, outcomes and
impacts.

21. AVDP monitoring will be integrated into the existing SCP-GAFSP monitoring and
evaluation framework. The project M&E Unit will include and regularly assess a
number of gender, youth and other group-specific indicators in the programme’s
M&E system at the output, outcome and impact level-in particular, capturing the
improvement of access to outputs, their use by the target groups and these
groups’ satisfaction with them.

22. Knowledge management and learning are key to meeting project objectives, as
reliable information is the basis of results-based management. Priority will be given
to areas where AVDP interventions are recognized as exemplary and expected to
have the greatest impact, though failures are also an important basis for learning.
Best practices and proven concepts will be fed into the MAFFS and regional
knowledge management systems. Lessons learned will also be fed into the
continuous improvement of manuals, concepts and strategies and disseminated to
the various target groups, including the public, using appropriate communication
media.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
23. The inherent risk is assessed as high. As a result, the project will largely follow the

financial management arrangements already established under the ongoing IFAD
projects, which will lower the risk to medium. The financial management
arrangements will include the following: (i) a qualified financial controller and an
accountant will be appointed; (ii) all programme transactions will be recorded in
customized accounting software, in accordance with the International Public Sector
Accounting Standards (IPSAS) cash-basis of accounting, (iii) a designated account
in United States dollars for IFAD financing will be maintained at a commercial bank,
and IFAD funds will not be mingled with other funds, (iv) IFAD financing will be
disbursed in accordance with IFAD disbursement procedures and (v) the NPCU will



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

5

prepare quarterly financial reports in formats agreed upon with IFAD. Furthermore,
the consolidated financial statements will be audited annually by the Audit Service
of Sierra Leone – Office of the Auditor General, in accordance with International
Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions/International Standards of Supreme
Audit Institutions (INTOSAI/ISSAI) standards and IFAD audit requirements. The
audit report, together with the management letter, will be submitted to IFAD within
six months of the end of the fiscal year. The day-to-day financial operations will be
specified further in the relevant section of the project implementation manual.

24. IFAD’s has a zero-tolerance policy toward fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive
actions in all projects financed through its loans and grants. IFAD's anticorruption
policy and whistleblowing procedures will be mainstreamed in the project
implementation manual.

25. A procurement assessment was undertaken as part of the design mission.
According to the assessment, the legal and regulatory framework for public
procurement in Sierra Leone will be used for all AVDP procurement activities, with
the exception of international competitive bidding, for which the World Bank
guidelines and framework will apply. In addition, the procurement plan to be used
by AVDP will be based on the version presented as part of the IFAD Project
Procurement Handbook.

E. Supervision
26. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD. Supervision will be conducted as an

opportunity to assess achievements and lessons jointly and reflect on ways to
improve implementation and impact. Furthermore, a financial management
specialist will participate in missions at least annually to supervise and provide
implementation support to the project and monitor the fiduciary risk at various
levels.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
27. The financing gap of US$28.5 million may be sourced by subsequent performance-

based allocation system (PBAS) cycles (under financing terms to be determined
and subject to internal procedures and subsequent Executive Board approval) or by
cofinancing identified during implementation.

A. Project costs
28. The total combined AVDP investment and incremental recurrent costs, including

physical and price contingencies, are estimated at US$60.3 million, disaggregated
by component as follows: component 1, climate-resilient and smart-agricultural
production, is the main investment component, representing US$37.9 million of the
total project costs (63 per cent of total costs); while component 2, agricultural
market development, accounts for US$13.4 million (22 per cent of total costs); and
US$9 million for the project coordination and management component 3,
(15 per cent of total project costs).



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

6

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component
IFAD loan

IFAD DSF
grant Financing gap

Adaptation
fund Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Private sector Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Climate-resilient
and smart agricultural
production
1.1 Support for
smallholder rice
production and
productivity 2 370 10.5 2 370 10.5 11 676 51.7 2 246 10.0 522 2.3 3 385 15 - - 22 569
1.2 Support for tree
crop production and
productivity 447 2.9 447 2.9 7 107 46.2 4 235 27.6 828 5.4 2 305 15 - - 15 369
Subtotal 2 818 7.4 2 818 7.4 18 782 49.5 6 480 17.1 1 350 3.6 5 691 15 - - 37 938
2. Agricultural market
development
2.1 Market access 809 17.0 809 17.0 1 562 32.8 - - - - 694 14.6 881 18.5 4 755
2.2 Climate-resilient
rural infrastructure
and information
systems - - - - 4 456 51.8 2 367 27.5 - - 1 232 14.3 543 6.3 8 598
Subtotal 809 6.1 809 6.1 6 018 45.1 2 367 17.7 - - 1 926 14.4 1 424 10.7 13 353
3. Project
coordination and
management 2 268 25.2 2 268 25.2 3 700 41.1 308 3.4 - - 467 5.2 - - 9 012

Total 5 895 9.8 5 895 9.8 28 500 47.3 9 156 15.2 1 350 2.2 8 084 13.4 1 424 2.4 60 302

B. Project financing
29. The financing plan covers: (i) IFAD financing of US$11.8 million under the

Tenth Replenishment of IFAD's Resources (IFAD10); (ii) a financing gap of
US$28.5 million, which may be sourced by subsequent PBAS cycles, as outlined in
paragraph 27; (iii) an Adaptation Fund grant of US$9.2 million, subject to
approval; (iv) a contribution from the Government of US$8.1 million, which will be
used to finance project duties and VAT, of which US$1.9 million will be provided to
match IFAD financing of US$11.8 million approved under IFAD10; (v) estimated
beneficiary contributions (in-kind and cash) of US$1.4 million; and (vi) a private-
sector contribution of US$1.4 million.

30. Additionally, the AVDP is expected to benefit from an estimated US$10 million in
parallel value chain investments under the World Bank-financed Smallholder
Commercialization and Agribusiness Development Project and an estimated
US$12 million for the rice-seed value chain under the World Bank’s West Africa
Agricultural Transformation Project.



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

7

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan
IFAD DSF

grant Financing gap
Adaptation

fund
Private
sector Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
I. Investment
costs
A. Civil works 509 5.4 509 5.4 4 178 44.3 2 338 24.8 488 5.2 - - 1 416 15.0 9 438 15.7
B. Goods,
equipment and
vehicles 324 42.5 324 42.5 - - - - - - - - 114 15.0 762 1.3
C. Technical
assistance 1 042 10.1 1 042 10.1 3 237 31.4 2 582 25.0 936 9.1 - - 1 470 14.3 10 310 17.1
D. Grants and
subsidies 2 308 7.1 2 308 7.1 17 662 53.9 4 235 12.9 - - 1 350 4.1 4 917 15.0 32 781 54.4
Total
investment
costs 4 183 7.9 4 183 7.9 25 077 47.1 9 156 17.2 1 424 2.7 1 350 2.5 7 917 14.9 53 290 88.4
II. Recurrent
costs
A. Salaries and
allowances 1 437 25.0 1 437 25.0 2 874 50.0 - - - - - - - - 5 748 9.5
B. Operating
costs 274 21.7 274 21.7 548 43.4 - - - - - - 167 13.2 1 264 2.1
Total recurrent
costs 1 711 24.4 1 711 24.4 3 422 48.8 - - - - - - 167 2.4 7 012 11.6
Total Project
Costs 5 895 9.8 5 895 9.8 28 500 47.3 9 156 15.2 1 424 2.4 1 350 2.2 8 084 13.4 60 302 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
31. The economic analysis shows that the project has the capacity to generate an

economic rate of return (ERR) of 32 per cent over a 20-year period, with a net
present value of Sierra Leonean leone 203 billion (approximately US$23.5 million).
Given the many unquantifiable benefits, the actual ERR will likely be higher.

32. In order to test the robustness of the above results, sensitivity analysis was carried
out, and the results are presented below. The sensitivity analysis investigates the
effect of fluctuations in project costs, benefits and implementation delays on the
net present value and ERR. The results show that the ERR drops to 22 per cent
with a 20 per cent increase in costs, and to 20 per cent with a 50 per cent increase
in costs, still making the project economically viable.

D. Sustainability
33. The project aims at strengthening farmers’ organizations to the extent that they

are able to collectively plan sustainable production, purchase inputs and sell their
produce through stable private-sector engagement. In coordination with the Rural
Finance and Community Improvement Programme, the project also seeks to
ensure that farmer-based organizations are sustainably accessing rural finance for
inputs. Furthermore, productive investments will be climate proofed through the
financing from the Adaptation Fund. Finally, through policy engagement planned as
part of component 3, the project will help keep the Government's focus on the
rural poor and facilitate Government support to the target group after project
completion.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
34. Since governance issues could compromise the expected impact on communities

and increase project costs, the risk is classified as high. Elite capture of outputs,
especially physical assets, which are intended for well-defined target groups, is
another problem associated with poor governance. These governance risks will be
mitigated by complementing the Government’s initiatives with: (i) increased
transparency and publicity about the distribution of outputs; (ii) training for



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

8

implementers at all levels in financial management, procurement, M&E and
reporting procedures; (iii) the implementation of a clear targeting strategy; and
(iv) continued improvement of the grievance mechanism for beneficiaries. The
Good Governance Framework developed for the SCP-GAFSP will be applied during
the implementation of AVDP.

35. Institutional capacity for implementation and sustainability risks are considered
moderate. Failure in project coordination is a risk, especially among and within
non-state actors and private agribusiness. Private stakeholders consistently
indicate that institutions that provide critical support services to private-sector
investors remain weak and coordination among them is fragmented. The project
will mitigate this risk by ensuring that the project implementation unit has clear
mechanisms for effective coordination during project implementation.

36. The AVDP is not expected to have overall negative environmental impacts.
However, since small commercial agricultural activities may produce unexpected
cumulative impacts, careful design of an appropriate monitoring system is critical.
The major concerns are associated with the increased use of fertilizers and
pesticides that might result from wider distribution of these products and their
impact on biodiversity and human health. Training on proper use and disposal,
adoption of the principles of the International Code of Conduct on the Distribution
and Use of Pesticides of the Food and Agricultural Organization of the United
Nations, as well as the design of an environmental monitoring system in
partnership with the Sierra Leone Environmental Protection Agency are considered
sufficient mitigation measures. Based on the above information, the project has
been classified as category B according to IFAD classification standards.

37. The promotion of palm oil is considered to entail limited risks, as only smallholder
oil palm plantations of a maximum of one hectare will be established under the
project. Large-scale plantations will not be supported. Furthermore, new
smallholder plantations will be established only on fallow or abandoned agricultural
land, and no deforestation will be accepted. Moreover, oil palm (Elaeis guineensis)
is endemic to West Africa and is therefore a natural part of the vegetation in
Sierra Leone. The palm oil produced will largely be used for cooking and sold on
the domestic market. Appendix II presents answers to key questions on how the
project will support palm oil production.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

38. The project is aligned with the IFAD11 priorities on a range of parameters. First, it
addresses gender, youth, nutrition and climate change and therefore supports the
IFAD11 mainstreaming agenda. Second, the project has managed to attract
cofinancing from the Adaptation Fund and will therefore contribute to the corporate
cofinancing targets. Third, the project is designed to have a relatively frontloaded
disbursement profile underpinned by substantial investments in equipment and
irrigation systems, as well as road rehabilitation and maintenance in the initial
years, all of which will contribute to an increasing corporate disbursement ratio.
Fourth, the project covers two PBAS cycles and is therefore aligned with the notion
of delivering bigger, better and smarter.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
39. The AVDP is wholly consistent with the Government’s National Agricultural

Transformation 2023 Programme, which is currently in development. The AVDP
addresses two of the three priority intervention areas, which are rice self-
sufficiency and crop diversification, notably for palm oil and cocoa. The selection of
value chains will allow the AVDP to build on and strengthen the results that have
been achieved in Sierra Leone through past and ongoing IFAD-financed projects
operating in the same value chains.



EB 2018/LOT/P.19/Rev.1

9

Innovations and scaling upC.
40. The project scales up and refines the intervention model developed under the

ongoing SCP-GAFSP, but with a range of innovations, including: (i) the
establishment of multi-stakeholder platforms to strengthen integration of the
selected sustainable value chains; and (ii) an increased focus on nutrition and food
security through the promotion of intercropping with food/tree crops and the
creation of vegetable gardens.

Policy engagementD.
41. Policy engagement in the interest of smallholder farmers and the rural poor will be

undertaken through: (i) the organization of periodic stakeholder discussions around
specific policy issues, with the participation of public and private value chain
stakeholders; (ii) the use of provincial commodity platforms as a nexus for
discussing and sharing policy-related concerns with the Government, in line with
national priorities; (iii) support for relevant analytical work related to agricultural
policies and strategies; and (iv) support for capacity-building in selected
government agencies involved in policy-making for agricultural development
(e.g., MAFFS, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Planning and Economic Development
and Ministry of Trade and Industry).

VI. Legal instruments and authority
42. A financing agreement between the Republic of Sierra Leone and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

43. The Republic of Sierra Leone is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

44. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
45. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Sierra Leone in an amount of five million nine hundred
thousand United States dollars (US$5,900,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a DSF grant to the
Republic of Sierra Leone in an amount of five million nine hundred thousand
United States dollars (US$5,900,000) and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President




















































President’s Report

Proposed Loan and Grant to the Republic of
Liberia for the Tree Crops Extension Project II



Republic of Liberia

Tree Crops Extension Project II (TCEP II)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Liberia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total Project cost: US$47.6 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$11.9 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$11.9 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: 40 years, including a grace period of
10 years, with a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Financing gap: US$16.2 million

Contribution of borrower: US$2.5 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.8 million

Contribution of private sector US$3.4 million

Appraising institution: IFAD



EB 2018/LOT/P.16

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Liberia for the Tree Crops Extension Project II (TCEP II)
as contained in paragraph 44.

Proposed Loan and Grant to the Republic of Liberia for the
Tree Crops Extension Project II (TCEP II)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Despite positive socioeconomic developments since the end of the civil war in 2003,

Liberia remains a low-income, food-deficit country with an undiversified economy. The
country saw initial post-war economic growth in real GDP of 8.9 per cent in 2012; this
fell slightly to 8.1 per cent in 2013. In 2014 and 2015, the Ebola virus disease crisis
crippled economic growth and the GDP growth rate fell drastically, only starting to
recover in 2017 with 2.5 per cent growth. The growth forecast for 2018 is 3 per cent.1

2. As of 2016, Liberia's population was estimated at 4.6 million with an annual growth rate
of 2.6 per cent. In 2015, the United Nations Development Programme ranked Liberia
177th out of 188 countries on the Human Development Index with a score of 0.427. In
2016, approximately 54 per cent of the population lived below the poverty line
(46 per cent live in rural areas). Liberia has an extremely young population:
approximately 90 per cent of its people are under 35 years.

3. A 2015 emergency food security assessment by the World Food Programme (WFP)2
found that food insecurity affects 16 per cent of households, including 2 per cent that
are severely food insecure. Food insecurity is not distributed evenly across the country.
In Lofa County, where the project will be implemented, 11.3 per cent of households
reported moderate to severe food insecurity.

4. Agriculture is the primary livelihood source for more than 60 per cent of Liberia’s
population. Traditionally, tree crops have constituted one of the country’s largest
sources of employment and an integral part of its social fabric and economy. However
during the country’s civil wars, the tree crop sector was devastated and many farmers
were displaced. Abandoned farms and plantations degenerated into forests and their
associated support structures were damaged or destroyed. Market linkages vanished
while exports dropped to near zero. In recent years, there has been increased
investment in rehabilitating smallholder cocoa farms and strengthening
cooperatives. Cocoa production is still small scale, undertaken by approximately 38,000
farmers in the country, of which 30 per cent are in Lofa County with cocoa farm sizes
averaging 1 to 3 ha.3 The sector is expected to grow as farmers continue to reclaim and
rehabilitate farms, and youth are attracted to the cocoa sub-sector with the emergence
of cocoa as a profitable cash crop.

1 http://country.eiu.com/liberia (2018).
2 WFP, Emergency Food Security Assessment: Liberia (2015).
3 Platform for Agricultural Risk Management, Agricultural Risk Assessment Report: Liberia (2017).



EB 2018/LOT/P.16

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. The project is aligned with the Government’s Pro-Poor Agenda for Prosperity and
Development (PAPD), which has prioritized the agricultural sector for diversifying the
economy, and has identified seven priority value chains, including cocoa. The PAPD
outlines the need to strengthen policy coordination, agricultural research and the
extension system in order to support smallholders and out-grower farmers; these are
the areas to be addressed by TCEP II.

6. The current country strategy note for Liberia (2017-2019) has two strategic objectives:
(i) smallholder farmers’ access to finance, inputs, skills and markets is improved; and
(ii) smallholders’ organizational capacities and access to Ministry of Agriculture
extension services are improved. The project is aligned with the country strategy note
since it aims to support smallholder farmers’ access to inputs, capacity building,
markets and extension services.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
7. While TCEP II will target Lofa County, it will be closely connected with activities in

Nimba County given the: (i) importance of cocoa farming there; (ii) project’s
complementarity with others implemented in Nimba County, including its sister TCEP I
project; and (iii) potential gains from road and track improvement. Other areas may be
targeted during implementation if productive potential is demonstrated and targeting
criteria are met.

8. The project will benefit both producers and other players within the cocoa value chain
such as input suppliers and farm-to-market operators (FMOs).4 It aims to benefit
10,000 cocoa smallholder producers using a self-targeting approach complemented by
tools to ensure that beneficiaries meet project targeting criteria. These beneficiaries will
include members of kuu groups (traditional community-based labour groups), youth
and women. TCEP II will also target cooperatives strengthened through the recently
completed IFAD-financed STCRSP, other cocoa producer groups and potential FMOs.

B. Project development objective
9. The goal of TCEP II will be to increase incomes and improve the livelihoods of poor rural

smallholder cocoa farming households in Lofa County. The project’s development
objective is to improve the incomes and climate resilience of smallholder cocoa
producers in Lofa County.

C. Components
10. The project will have the following components:

11. Component 1: Revitalization of cocoa plantations. The expected outcome of
component 1 will be increased quantity and quality of cocoa sold by smallholders. This
component comprises five subcomponents: 1.1 – Basic rehabilitation and new cocoa
plantations; 1.2 – Improving post-harvest handling and quality;
1.3 – Germplasm garden support; 1.4 – Alternative livelihood activities (crop
diversification through intercropping on existing plantations for food and nutrition
security, shade management and income generation, and on new plantations before
newly planted cocoa trees mature); and 1.5 – Transformation of cocoa waste as an
alternative income source.

12. Component 2: Rehabilitation and maintenance of roads. The expected outcome of
component 2 will be improved and climate-proof access to markets. It contains two
subcomponents: 2.1 – Road construction, rehabilitation and climate proofing; and
2.2 – Maintenance of roads.

4 FMOs are value chain actors who buy products from producers and take them to market or for value addition through processing,
sorting, grading and bagging. They include buying agents, cooperatives and companies.



EB 2018/LOT/P.16

3

13. Component 3: Service provision for value chain development. The outcome of
component 3 will be improved value chain organization and performance. This will be
achieved through a set of concurrent activities in subcomponents: 3.1 – Support to
farmer organizations (including the establishment of business platforms for value chain
players); 3.2 – Improved market linkages through the construction of humidity-
controlled warehouses to store cocoa beans during the wet season when roads are not
passable; 3.3 – Support to extension service development and outreach; 3.4 – Dry
storage; and 3.5 – Implementation support to the Government’s strategy on reducing
emissions from deforestation and forest degradation, and foster conservation,
sustainable management of forests, and enhancement of forest carbon stocks.

14. Component 4: Project coordination, management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E),
and policy. Using the country programme approach, TCEP II will adopt a similar
strategy to that of TCEP I. This will ensure efficient and effective planning,
implementation, M&E and knowledge management while considering environmental and
climate change resilience. In addition, component 4 will involve policy engagement and
will drive gender and social inclusion activities along with dialogue for establishing a
functional road maintenance fund.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

15. Similar to TCEP I, the Ministry of Agriculture will be responsible for implementing TCEP
II. The same national steering committee will orient the project strategy, oversee
planning, review progress and ensure linkages among stakeholders. Under the
supervision of the project management unit within the ministry, which was established
to coordinate donor-funded projects, the implementation, management and M&E of
TCEP II will be the delegated responsibility of the project implementation unit (PIU).
Staffing requirements for TCEP II will be harmonized with those of TCEP I using the
country programme approach. A county-level PIU will be established in Lofa County
with similar functions to that of STCRSP, but with increased human and physical
resources to coordinate the mobilization of kuu groups, farmer field schools and other
farmer groups, and facilitate the participation of community members and FMOs.
Through the efforts of a value chain specialist and a multi-stakeholder platform,
memoranda of agreement will be signed with private-sector entities and cooperatives in
order to ensure access to markets and services. The Central Agricultural Research
Institute (CARI) will be responsible for increasing the supply of improved planting
material.

Organizational framework.B.
16. A project steering committee will be established to drive the project’s strategy, oversee

planning, measure progress and assess impact. It will also facilitate linkages with
related projects, government services and value chain stakeholders. The Monrovia-
based project management unit will be the secretariat of the project steering
committee, with administration and overall management responsibilities. The
appropriately staffed and equipped country-level PIU at the Ministry of Agriculture office
in Voinjama will facilitate local linkages, provide technical and monitoring support, and
liaise with TCEP I counterparts in Nimba County.

17. The Monrovia-based PIU will coordinate activities in Lofa County with those in
Nimba County so that both can access similar services and jointly acquire seeds,
equipment and other inputs, creating economies of scale through bulk buying or
staggering buying arrangements in order to avoid over-burdening suppliers.

18. TCEP II is aligned with the Government’s PAPD, in which the Government recognizes
the agricultural sector’s potential for job creation and sustainable livelihoods,
particularly though value chain development.



EB 2018/LOT/P.16

4

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledgeC.
management

19. M&E will be undertaken by a team of qualified officers and implemented in line with
guidance developed for TCEP I. The targets included in the logical framework will guide
the project’s pace of implementation.

20. The preparation of the annual workplan and budget (AWP/B) will be a participatory
exercise involving the county-level PIU along with colleagues from the central PIU in
Monrovia, the decentralized local government, other stakeholders and implementing
partners. The central PIU will play a key role in consolidating the AWP/B and will ensure
that project indicators are properly integrated with clear targets.

21. TCEP II will establish a knowledge management plan, including a communication
strategy and plan, which will determine the types of knowledge management products
to be developed based on the intended audience. The knowledge management focus of
TCEP II will be on learning lessons and accumulating best practices through the
collection, sharing and dissemination of information on targeted cocoa value chains,
organizational development and cocoa commercialization.

22. These knowledge services will be tailored to the needs of beneficiaries. The content will
be aimed at women and youth, and all services will target these users. To this end, the
project’s learning and knowledge management strategy will capture and disseminate
knowledge at various levels focused on: (i) generating trust and fostering linkages
between partners; (ii) managing and sharing information, knowledge and experiences;
(iii) improving the private sector’s effectiveness and efficiency in adding value and
innovating; (iv) conducting analyses that can provide an evidence base for policy
dialogue; and (v) creating conditions for replication, scaling up and sustainability.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
23. The inherent risk is assessed as high. As a result, the project will largely follow the

same stand-alone financial management arrangements established for ongoing IFAD
projects, which will reduce the risk to medium. The financial management
arrangements will include: (i) the appointment of a qualified financial controller and
accountant; (ii) the tracking of all programme transactions using customized accounting
software in line with the International Public Sector Accounting Standards cash basis of
accounting; (iii) a designated account in United States dollars for IFAD financing in the
central bank of Liberia (IFAD funds will not be mingled with other funds); (iv) the
disbursement of IFAD financing against duly certified withdrawal applications in
accordance with IFAD disbursement procedures; and (v) periodic financial reports
prepared by the PIU in formats agreed upon with IFAD. In addition, consolidated
financial statements will be audited annually by an independent auditor in accordance
with the International Standards on Auditing and IFAD audit requirements. The audit
report, together with a management letter, will be submitted to IFAD within six months
of the end of each fiscal year. Daily financial operations will be detailed in the relevant
section of the programme implementation manual.

24. IFAD applies a zero-tolerance policy towards fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive
actions in all projects financed through its loans and grants. IFAD’s anticorruption policy
and whistleblowing procedures will be included in the project implementation manual.

SupervisionE.
25. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD. Supervision will not be conducted as a

general inspection or evaluation, but as an opportunity to assess achievements and
lessons jointly with the implementation team, and reflect on ways to improve
implementation and impact. A financial management specialist will participate in
supervision missions at least once per year, to providing implementation support and
monitoring fiduciary risks.



EB 2018/LOT/P.16

5

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
26. The project is composed of four components, including project coordination and

management, totalling US$42.6 million in base costs and US$47.6 million including
contingencies and taxes over a six-year period. Component 2 (rehabilitation and
maintenance of roads) has the highest budget (at US$22.3 million), representing
47 per cent of total costs, followed by component 1 (revitalization of cocoa plantations)
at a cost of US$14.4 million (30 per cent of total costs). Service provision for value
chain development (component 3) has the lowest budget at US$2.6 million. Project
coordination, management, M&E and policy are estimated at US$8.4 million,
representing 18 per cent of total costs.

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component
IFAD loan IFAD grant Private sector Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart

Financing gap,
including
climate Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Revitalization
of cocoa
plantations 3 558 24.7 3 558 24.7 3 252 22.6 1 660 11.5 741 5.1 1 628 11.3 14 396 30.2
2. Rehabilitation
and maintenance
of roads 4 206 18.9 4 206 18.9 - - 123 0.6 1 333 6.0 12 395 55.7 22 263 46.7
3. Service
provision for
value chain
development 140 5.4 140 5.4 129 5.0 - - 21 0.8 2 144 83.2 2 575 5.4
4. Project
coordination,
management,
M&E and policy 4 009 47.7 4 009 47.7 - - - - 392 4.7 - - 8 410 17.7

Total 11 913 25.0 11 913 25.0 3 381 7.1 1 783 3.7 2 487 5.2 16 167 33.9 47 644 100

B. Project financing
27. TCEP II will be financed by IFAD, the Government of Liberia, private-sector partners,

participating farmers and cofinanciers. As the main financier, IFAD will contribute
US$23.8 million, covering 50 per cent of the total costs of all components. Private-
sector partners will contribute approximately US$3.4 million. The Government will
finance taxes and duties on imported goods, and value-added tax for a total of
US$2.5 million (5.2 per cent of the total cost). Beneficiary contributions are estimated
at 1.8 million (3.8 per cent of the total cost). The financing gap of US$16.2 million
includes US$7 million for climate adaptation and mitigation. It should be noted that
TCEP II will absorb the entire US$ 23.8 million allocation for Liberia in IFAD10 through
the performance-based allocation system (PBAS) as a 50 per cent grant and 50 per cent
highly concessional loan. Cofinancing opportunities will be explored in order to fill the
US$16.2 million financing gap. In the event that cofinancing to cover this gap is not
secured, funding will be provided through the country’s next PBAS allocation.



EB 2018/LOT/P.16

6

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category
IFAD loan IFAD grant

Financing gap,
including
climate Private sector Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
I. Investment cost
A. Works 4 206 19.2 4 206 19.2 12 020 54.9 - - 123 0.6 1 333 6.1 21 888
B. Equipment and

material 416 46.5 416 46.5 - - - - - - 63 7.0 895
C. Consultancies 582 46.5 582 46.5 - - - - - - 88 7.0 1 252
D. Training 1 680 18.0 1 680 18.0 2 750 29.3 1 146 12.2 1 660 17.7 454 4.8 9 370
E. Workshops 1 422 31.9 1 422 31.9 1 397 31.4 - - - - 214 4.8 4 455
F. Services 1 235 25.2 1 235 25.2 - - 2 235 45.5 - - 202 4.1 4 907
TOTAL INVESTMENT
COSTS 9 541 22.3 9 541 22.3 16 167 21.4 3 381 7.9 1 783 4.2 2 354 5.5 42 767
II. Recurrent costs
Salaries and allowances 1 490 50.0 1 490 50.0 - - - - - - - - 2 980
Operational costs 882 46.5 882 46.5 - - - - - - 133 7.0 1 897
TOTAL RECURRENT
COSTS 2 372 48.7 2 372 48.7 - - - - - - 133 2.7 4 877

Total 11 913 25.0 11 913 25.0 16 167 33.9 3 381 7.1 1 783 3.7 2 487 5.2 47 644

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
28. TCEP II will benefit 10,000 smallholder cocoa farmers and 5,000 other beneficiaries

through improved roads and value chain services. Considering the average household
size of 4.289 in the project area, this totals 64,200 household members. An additional
5,000 people will benefit from better roads, stronger cooperatives and market linkages,
the availability of improved planting material and better input-supply systems.

29. Component 1 is expected to lead to an increase in cocoa production, marketing and
exports as a result of: (i) the revitalization of abandoned plantations; (ii) replanting of
new trees; (iii) higher yields for smallholder farmers; (iv) higher farm-gate prices; and
(e) higher-quality cocoa as a result of improved post-harvest handling and marketing.

30. Benefits from component 2 (rehabilitation and maintenance of roads) will include
greater access to markets, reduced time and cost of reaching local markets, and limited
post-harvest losses due to poor transportation conditions. Component 3 (service
provision for value chain development) will enhance the delivery of quality services to
cocoa farmers and guarantee sustainability through improved extension services and
greater access to inputs and markets.

31. The economic results of the project are positive and significant, with an economic
internal rate of return of 17 per cent and a net present value of additional benefits
totalling US$15.2 million over 20 years against a social discount rate of 10 per cent.
The sensitivity analysis indicates that the results are robust to a reduction in the rate of
adoption, but sensitive to an overall reduction in benefits, increased costs and delays in
implementation.

D. Sustainability
32. In view of the project’s targeting of existing and new plantations, rehabilitation of

existing roads, safeguards against indirect deforestation, measures to mitigate
environmental risks posed by the application of agrochemicals and careful monitoring of
negative social impacts, it has been proposed to classify this project as category B –
posing moderate socio-environmental risks. A Social, Environmental and Climate
Assessment Procedures note has been prepared classifying the climate risk as
moderate.



EB 2018/LOT/P.16

7

E. Risk identification and mitigation
33. The project’s main risks include start-up delays, weak governance and institutional

capacities, and vulnerability cocoa price variations. With a 14-month delay between
signature and ratification of the financing agreement for TCEP I under the previous
administration, continuous and results-driven dialogue with the Government on all
critical dimensions of the project will be undertaken to accelerate the start up. In
addition, start-up funds of US$200,000 have been included in the financing agreement.
To mitigate the risk of weak governance and capacities, TCEP II will competitively
recruit staff, harmonize staffing with the country programme staffing arrangements,
use IFAD procurement guidelines and strengthen training and control systems related to
financial management. To mitigate the risk of price variations, the project will support
investments in other food crops for food security, climate resilience and smooth cash
flow.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

34. The design of TCEP II complies with IFAD’s Strategic Framework (2016-2025), with a
clear focus on enabling poor rural women and men to overcome poverty. Specifically,
TCEP II is aligned with Strategic Objective 1: Increase poor rural people’s productive
capacities; Strategic Objective 2: Increase poor rural people’s benefits from market
participation; and Strategic Objective 3: Strengthen the environmental sustainability
and climate resilience of poor rural people’s economic activities.

35. In addition, the project is aligned with the IFAD Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment by promoting economic empowerment that provides rural women with
equal opportunities to participate in – and benefit from – profitable economic activities
in the cocoa value chain.

36. TCEP II is compliant with IFAD’s Private Sector Development and Partnership Strategy
through promoting public-sector facilitation of mutually beneficial 4P involving
smallholder farmers and private market operators in response to clear market
opportunities.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
37. The proposed project is in line with the new administration’s five-year PAPD, which

recognizes the importance of: (i) inclusive and sustainable economic diversification to
achieve structural transformation and growth; (ii) enabling the private sector to play a
leadership role; and (iii) agriculture as an engine of growth. In order to diversify the
economy, the Government has prioritized the agricultural sector and has identified
seven priority value chains for support through the PAPD (2018-2022). These include,
rice, oil palm, horticulture, cocoa, rubber, cassava, and poultry and pig husbandry.

Innovations and scaling upC.
38. TCEP II scales up the recently completed STCRSP and is complementary to TCEP I.

There are additional opportunities for scaling up within the cocoa belt and the proposed
project is closely aligned with government priorities and the interventions of other
donors such as the World Bank. Prospects for scaling up this project include the use of
kuu groups and farmer field schools, youth engagement, tree crop revitalization and
capacity building of partner cooperatives. The benefits of a strengthened cocoa value
chain could be transferred to other commodity value chains.

39. Key innovations in TCEP II as compared to past projects include: (i) the integration of
climate change resilience and institutional capacity building into the approach; (ii) a
focus on the supply chain for new cocoa genetic resources along with post-harvest
activities and cocoa quality; (iii) an emphasis on service delivery by cooperatives to
their members; (iv) the combination of plantation revitalization with the replanting of
cocoa; (v) specific measures to include women and promote their access to benefits;



EB 2018/LOT/P.16

8

and (vi) the use of a long-term capacity-building strategy for cooperatives along with
systematic institutional capacity building and institutional auditing.

Policy engagementD.
40. The proposed project is aligned with government policies including the: (i) PAPD (2018-

2023); (ii) Revised Draft National Aid Policy of Liberia; (iii) National Cocoa Export
Strategy (2014-2018); (iv) Land Rights Act; (v) Agriculture Commodity Regulatory
Authority Act; and (vi) National Adaptation Programme of Action for Climate Change
Resilience. Through its M&E system, the project will provide important feedback to the
Government on project implementation and lessons learned, informing policies for the
sector.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
41. A Project financing agreement between the Republic of Liberia and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement will be tabled at the session.

42. The Republic of Liberia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

43. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement Establishing
IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
44. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of the

following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to the
Republic of Liberia in an amount of eleven million nine hundred and thirteen
thousand United States dollars (US$11,913,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a Debt Sustainability Framework
grant to the Republic of Liberia in an amount of eleven million nine hundred and
thirteen thousand United States dollars (US$11,913,000) and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President
























































President’s Report 
 

 

Proposed Loan and Debt Sustainability 
Framework Grant to the Republic of the Niger 
for the Family Farming Development 
Programme in the Diffa Region  


 
Republic of the Niger 

Family Farming Development Programme in the Diffa 
Region  

Financing summary 

Initiating institution: IFAD 

Borrower/recipient: Republic of the Niger 

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture 

Total programme cost: EUR 16.06 million 

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 5.37 million  

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability 
Grant: 

EUR 5.37 million  

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years, 
including a grace period of 10 years, interest-free with a 
service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum.  

Cofinancier: Norwegian Development Cooperation Agency 
(NORAD) 

Amount of cofinancing: EUR 3.09 million  

Contribution of borrower/ 
recipient: 

EUR 2.12 million  

Contribution of beneficiaries: EUR 0.12 million  

 



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

1 

Recommendation for approval 

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed 

financing to the Republic of the Niger for the Family Farming Development 

Programme in the Diffa Region (ProDAF-Diffa), as contained in paragraph 59. 

Proposed loan and Debt Sustainability Framework Grant 
to the Republic of the Niger for the Family Farming 
Development Programme in the Diffa Region  

I. Strategic context and rationale 

A. Country and rural development and poverty context 

1. Poverty and security situation. With a poverty rate of 48.9 per cent, a gross 

national product of US$430 per capita and a very low human development index 

(HDI) of 0.348 in 2015 and 2016, Niger is one of the poorest countries in the 

world, ranking 187
th
 out of 188 countries on the HDI. Attacks by Boko Haram 

terrorists around Lake Chad have exacerbated the poverty of the area’s population, 

whose security is seriously affected. According to government statistics, there were 

252,305 refugees or displaced persons in the Diffa region in October 2017. 

2. Agricultural potential. The Diffa region has real potential for the production of 

irrigated and flood recession crops, having an arable area of 265,000 hectares, 

69 per cent of it in the Lake Chad lakebed, 28 per cent along the Komadougou 

Yobé River et 3 per cent in the oasis basins of Mainé-Soroa and Goudoumaria. 

Rainfed crop development in the agriculture subsector is limited due to low rainfall, 

coupled with low dune-soil fertility and parasite pressure. The main constraints to 

irrigated crop production are the limited financial capacity of farmers to embrace 

irrigated farming, the absence of credit tailored to their needs and the lack of 

effective systems to provide them with inputs and market their produce. 

3. In terms of livestock production, in 2016 the livestock population in the Diffa 

region (all species) was estimated at over 3,750,000 head, corresponding to 

1,637,000 tropical livestock units, or 9.9 per cent of the nation’s stock. Some 

95 per cent of the population engages in livestock production, which accounts for 

55 per cent of the region’s annual gross product, making it the leading activity in 

terms of total export earnings from agro-sylvo-pastoral products. Notwithstanding, 

the livestock subsector in the Diffa region suffers from chronic forage shortages 

(in 10 out of 12 years), poor networking of water points, hindering rational use of 

grazing lands, and poor farmer organization in terms of marketing the animals and 

their subproducts. 

4. Market access. Market transactions in the Diffa region are dominated by the sale 

of livestock and peppers and controlled by Nigerians, who are positioned 

downstream in the value chains as the main buyers but upstream as well, in the 

case of peppers, as the main providers of inputs through crop loans. This model, 

however, has been seriously disrupted by the Boko Haram attacks, which have 

caused most rural markets to shut down and led to the development of informal 

channels of trade. A large portion of the profit margin, therefore, accrues to 

merchants and their intermediaries, while farmers sell around 70 per cent of their 

production at harvest, when prices are at their lowest.  

5. Situation of women and young adults. Limited access to production factors, 

among them land, financing and technical and economic advisory services, exclude 

women from agricultural production activities, leaving them to work in the artisanal 

processing of farm products (small-scale food services, oil, dairy products and flour 



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

2 

and by-products). In rainfed crop production, women’s participation is observed in 

cowpea harvesting, and in irrigated crop production, in pepper harvesting. In 

recent years, women have shown a keen interest in irrigated market garden crops 

in oasis basins. The banning of motorcycle use due to security issues has seriously 

affected the employment of young men who once provided motorized transport for 

people and merchandize. Agriculture, especially market gardening, could offer 

them an opportunity to re-enter the workforce. 

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and 
RB-COSOP  

6. The Diffa Regional Development Plan (2016-2020) emphasizes: (i) the 

preservation, growth and diversification of agro-sylvo-pastoral and fish production; 

and (ii) the strengthening of community resilience to climate change, crises and 

natural disasters.  

7. The national policy orientations for 2020
1
 include the goal of tripling the 

contribution of irrigated crops to the national grain balance sheet. This strategic 

orientation also applies to the Diffa region, thanks to a greater supply of production 

factors (water-capture works, drainage systems), technical and economic 

agricultural advisory services and the creation of warehousing and processing 

facilities and mechanisms for securing market access for the products supplied by 

the agro-sylvo-pastoral and fish value chains. 

8. The Nigerien authorities’ determination and efforts to fight rural poverty by 

targeting support to young adults and women through agricultural development as 

the primary source of rural employment, strengthening the population’s resilience 

through upstream and downstream production assistance and helping households 

hurt by the security crisis to rapidly recover are the motives behind the preparation 

of this programme.  

9. Concerning refugee populations, the Government is committed to establishing 

mechanisms to support local communities, accommodating displaced persons 

through the development of sustainable agropastoral activities and ensuring the 

social and economic integration of displaced persons in the receiving areas and 

preparing them to return to their country and village of origin once the security 

threats are under control. This vision is supported by the findings of partners 

operating in the area, who state that after years of humanitarian assistance, the 

target groups’ current needs are related more to the demand for economic projects 

that empower them and guarantee their dignity. This demand is consistent with 

IFAD’s intervention framework, grounded in the promotion of family farming to 

eradicate poverty and hunger in rural areas.  

10. Thus, based on the conclusions and measures agreed upon by Niger and IFAD in 

the COSOP 2013-2018 midterm review, the Government has requested IFAD’s 

agreement to finance and extend the Family Farming Development Programme 

(ProDAF) to the Diffa region to capitalize on the achievements of previous and 

current projects in this region. 

II. Programme description 

A. Programme area and target group 

11. The programme will operate in oasis basins, the western and central areas of the 

Komadougou Yobé river valley, the central agropastoral area and the north-

western pastoral area of the region. This area covers the entire communes of 

Goudoumaria, Mainé-Soroa, Chétimari, Diffa, Gueskérou, Foulatariet and N’Guel 

Beyli and the southern part of the N’gourti commune, connecting the Gueskérou 

                                           
1
 (i) The Sustainable Development and Inclusive Growth Strategy 2035 (SDDCI – Niger 2035); (ii) the Economic and 

Social Development Plan 2017-2021; (iii) the Action Plan 2016-2020 of the 3N Initiative "Nigeriens Nourishing Nigeriens"; 
and (iv) the Small-scale Irrigation Strategy in Niger. 



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

3 

and N’Guel Beyli communes. Operations will be concentrated around five economic 

development poles (EDP): Goudoumaria (including Boudti), Mainé-Soroa, N'Guel 

Beyli/Foulatari, Chétimari and Diffa (including Gueskérou). The N'Guel Beyli EDP 

will focus on agropastoral activities and products, and the other EDPs on activities 

and the products of irrigated and rainfed agriculture and sedentary livestock 

production. 

12. Four criteria were used in selecting the intervention areas: (i) security conditions 

(subject to variation); (ii) the geographical concentration of activities in an EDP 

approach; (iii) potential partnerships and synergies with other actors; and (iv) the 

presence of different types of target groups, addressed through a holistic approach. 

13. The targeting of beneficiaries will take place at two levels: (i) socio-economic 

targeting of vulnerable local or refugee households; and (ii) demographic targeting 

of women and young adults. More particularly, ProDAF-Diffa will target 20,000 

households, or roughly 140,000 people, representing some 16 per cent of the 

population in the Diffa region, 30 per cent of them refugees. Furthermore, at least 

30 per cent of the beneficiaries will be women and 30 per cent young adults, as 

stipulated in the ProDAF strategy for equitable development and empowerment of 

women and youth.  

B. Programme development objective 

14. The programme’s general objective is adapted from the objective of the ProDAF 

programme in the Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder regions, of which this programme is 

an extension. Its purpose is to sustainably ensure food and nutrition security and 

the resilience capacities of rural households in the Diffa region. 

15. The development objective is to sustainably increase the income, adaptation to 

climate change and market access of family farms and promote the social and 

economic integration of refugee or displaced populations into the receiving 

communities. 

16. ProDAF-Diffa operations will be part of the following key actions in the five selected 

EDPs: (i) the development of a wholesale market; (ii) small-scale irrigated farming 

in intermediate areas located near national Route 1; (iii) higher productivity in 

rainfed and irrigated crop production; (iv) protection of intervention basins through 

sand-dune stabilization; (v) the upgrading of pastoral trails and water points; and 

(vi) the social and economic integration of refugee groups. 

17. The expected result is expressed in two outcomes: 

(i) The emergence of sustainable family farms enables 20,000 rural households, 

30 per cent made up of refugees, 30 per cent women and 30 per cent young 

adults, to diversify their production (crops and livestock) and boost their 

yields (30 per cent) and resilience to external shocks, notably those that are 

climate-related. 

(ii) Thirty per cent of the 20,000 rural farmers, 30 per cent of them refugees, 

30 per cent women and 30 per cent young adults, obtain higher income from 

their surplus agro-sylvo-pastoral production thanks to higher sales in the 

markets that supply national consumer centres and cross-border markets. 

C. Components/outcomes 

Component 1: Strengthening of sustainable family farming 

18. The objective of this component is to sustainably boost the productivity of family 

farms. It has three sub-components: (i) structured and productive climate-resilient 

farms; (ii) strengthening of the technical and economic capacity of family farms; 

and (iii) resilience of vulnerable populations.  

19. Component 1 consists of: (i)(a) the development of sub-watersheds 

(3,000 hectares) and promotion of the pastoral water subsector through water and 



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

4 

soil conservation works and soil protection and restoration, the rehabilitation of 

pastoral corridors and water points and (i)(b) the development of areas for 

irrigated crop production (360 hectares); (ii) the strengthening of agricultural 

technical capacity to enable family farms to diversify their production and increase 

crop yields by 30 per cent, and the improvement of sedentary livestock production 

to boost herd productivity and reduce conflicts over the use of natural resources; 

and (iii) activities preparatory to action on behalf of refugees and the promotion of 

women’s leadership and nutrition security. 

Component 2: Market access 

20. This component has three sub-components: (i) the structural development of 

sustainable market access; (ii) the promotion of rural microenterprises and youth 

employment; and (iii) market access and regional trade integration. 

21. Component 2 consists of: (i) the rehabilitation or building of economic 

infrastructure to improve trade flows in existing markets in the five EDPs; (ii) the 

sustainable management of economic infrastructure through specific social 

engineering; (iii) the promotion of rural microenterprises to benefit local and 

refugee populations; (iv) financing for the vocational training and equipping of 

young adults (30 per cent of them young women) for work in farming-related 

agricultural activities or non-agricultural activities; and (v) actions aimed at 

strengthening the policy dialogue on increasing EDP connectivity through wholesale 

markets and sales platforms in subregional transport corridors. 

Component 3: Programme management and coordination, monitoring and 

evaluation and knowledge management  

22. This component includes the administrative and financial operations, management 

and monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of the programme. 

III. Programme implementation 

A. Approach 

23. ProDAF-Diffa’s implementation will follow the ProDAF principles applied in the 

Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder regions while considering the specific context of Diffa, 

marked by the presence of refugee populations among the beneficiaries.  

24. The programme approach is based on the following intervention principles: 

 The improvement of food and nutrition security, considering the dimensions 

of food availability, accessibility and use through stable mechanisms; 

 Geographical continuity of the interventions through the EDPs, which includes 

the wholesale market connected by rural feeder roads to satellite collection 

points in the production areas, themselves surrounded by watersheds; and  

 The scaling up of ProDAF to benefit the Diffa region. 

B. Organizational framework 

25. The Ministry of Agriculture will be responsible for project oversight and 

implementation. The national steering committee will be responsible for the 

strategic orientation of the programme, ensure compliance with the financing 

agreements and the programme’s alignment with national strategies and approve 

the annual work plans and budgets (AWP/B). It will be presided over by the 

General Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and consist of representatives of 

government agencies and the beneficiaries. 

26. Programme coordination and management, overseen by the Ministry of Agriculture, 

will be handled by a regional programme management unit (RPMU) based in Diffa 

with technical, administrative and financial autonomy. 



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

5 

27. ProDAF’s national technical assistance unit, based in Niamey and Maradi, will 

provide ad hoc technical assistance for programme implementation, as needed, 

particularly in the areas of fiduciary, administrative and technical management.  

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation and learning and 
knowledge management  

28. Planning. The RPMU will be responsible for consolidating the AWP/Bs prepared by 

the technical partners in keeping with the regulations and timetables and based on 

targeted discussions at the local level. It will be co-responsible for organizing and 

serving as the secretariat for the national steering committee’s sessions with the 

other RPMUs. The AWP/B will be validated by the national steering committee and 

submitted for IFAD's prior approval. 

29. Monitoring and evaluation. The purpose of the M&E system will be to furnish 
reliable current data on the programme’s implementation and facilitate 
decision-making. It will be linked to ProDAF’s comprehensive M&E system. The 
RPMU in Diffa will take the data collected from forms completed in the field by 

implementation operatives/partners and enter it in ProDAF’s consolidated 

harmonized database. IFAD and the Government will conduct a joint midterm 

review in year three of the programme.  

30. Learning and knowledge management. The purpose of knowledge management 
in ProDAF-Diffa will be: (i) to encourage personnel involved in the implementation 
of programme activities to regularly describe and document the knowledge gained 

during implementation (capitalization); and (ii) to systematically store (either 

manually or electronically) the documentary output (reports, studies, terms of 

reference, notes, etc.) of the various programme actors and facilitate its use 

(as part of knowledge sharing). 

D. Financial management, procurement and governance 

31. The programme’s administrative and financial management, as well as its fiduciary 

aspects, will be based on ProDAF’s existing configuration and mechanisms. 

ProDAF’s financial management risk is considered “moderate.” 

32. Programme funds will be managed according to the terms of the financial 

agreements. The administrative and financial management procedures will be 

detailed in the letter to the borrower and the manual of internal administrative, 

financial, accounting and monitoring procedures. The manual will take the 

distinctive features of the programme into account, specifically the multiple sources 

of financing and the number of intervention regions, as well as the particular risks 

of the Diffa region.  

33. Flow of funds. A dedicated account in CFA francs for the deposit of the respective 

loan and grant funds and an operational account in CFA francs will be opened in the 

name of the programme at a reputable commercial bank. Disbursements from 

these accounts will require two signatures.  

34. The programme coordination unit will prepare quarterly financial and accounting 

statements, which it will transmit to the Government and IFAD, along with the 

financial statements for programme operations, which will be subject to an annual 

external audit.  

35. Pursuant to IFAD guidelines, an external audit of the financial statements will be 

performed annually. It will adhere to the International Standards on Auditing and 

comply with IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits. The audited financial statements 

will be published on IFAD’s official website.  

  



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

6 

36. Procurement. Procurement is governed by: (i) Law No. 2011/037 of 28 October 

2011, containing the general principles, controls and regulations governing public 

contracts and the outsourcing of public services; (ii) Decree No. 2014-070/PRN/MF 

of 12 February 2014 on a priori supervision of procurement procedures, which is 

exercised by the Directorate for Public Procurement and Financial Covenants; and 

(iii) Decree No. 2016-641/PRN/PM of 1 December 2016 on the code for 

procurement and the outsourcing of public services. 

E. Supervision 

37. Programme supervision will be carried out directly by IFAD and the Government, 

represented by the Ministry of Agriculture, in collaboration with the other 

departments involved, the programme coordination unit and relevant partners, 

notably NORAD. In addition, IFAD will organize implementation support missions, 

as needed.  

IV. Programme costs, financing and benefits 

A. Programme costs 

38. The total programme cost over a six-year period, including provisions for physical 

contingencies and price increases, is estimated at EUR 16.06 million. This cost 

includes an estimated base cost of EUR 14.82 million and provisions for physical 

and financial contingencies in the amount of EUR 1.24 million, or 8 per cent of the 

total programme cost. 

39. The estimated total programme cost by component is as follows: (i) component 1: 

strengthening of sustainable family farming, in the amount of EUR 8.86 million, or 

55.2 per cent; (ii) component 2: market access, in the amount of EUR 3.93 million, 

or 24.5 per cent; and (iii) component 3: programme management and 

coordination, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge management, in the 

amount of EUR 3.27 million, or 20.3 per cent. In terms of total financing, current 

expenditures are established at EUR 1.92 million, or 11.9 per cent. The table below 

shows the breakdown of programme costs by component and sub-component.  



 

 

 

E
B
 2

0
1
8
/
L
O

T
/
P
.1

5
 

7
 

 
Table 1 
Programme costs by component and financier 
(Thousands of euros) 

 

IFAD loan IFAD grant NORAD  Beneficiaries Government Total 

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % 

1. Strengthening of sustainable 
family farming 

            

1.1. Structured and productive climate-
resilient farms  

1 542.8 27.3 1 542.8 27.3 1 676.5 29.7 89.6 1.6 792.7 14.0 5 644.3 35.1 

1.2. Strengthening of the technical and 
economic capacity of family farms 

751.3 29.1 751.3 29.1 761.2 29.5 - - 313.8 12.2 2 577.7 16.1 

1.3. Resilience of vulnerable populations  149.1 23.5 149.1 23.5 257.2 40.5 - - 80.0 12.6 635.4 4.0 

Subtotal 2 443.2 27.6 2 443.2 27.6 2 694.9 30.4 89.6 1.0 1 186.4 13.4 8 857.4 55.2 

2. Market access             

2.1. Structural development of 
sustainable market access  

1 008.1 43.7 1 008.1 43.7 - - - - 291.0 12.6 2 307.3 14.4 

2.2. Promotion of rural microenterprises 
and youth employment  

508.5 44.9 508.5 44.9 - - 33.1 2.9 82.9 7.3 1 133.0 7.1 

2.3. Regional trade integration  225.1 45.7 225.1 45.7 - - - - 42.7 8.7 493.0 3.1 

Subtotal 1 741.8 44.3 1 741.8 44.3 - - 33.1 0.8 416.6 10.6 3 933.2 24.5 

3. Programme management and 
coordination, monitoring and 
evaluation and knowledge 
management 

            

3.1. Monitoring and evaluation and 
knowledge management  

445.8 42.6 445.8 42.6 - - - - 154.2 14.7 1 045.8 6.5 

3.2. Coordination and management 730.3 32.9 730.3 32.9 396.6 17.8 - - 364.9 16.4 2 222.1 13.8 

Subtotal 1 176.1 36.0 1 176.1 36.0 396.6 12.1 - - 519.1 15.9 3 267.9 20.3 

   Total 5 361.1 33.4 5 361.1 33.4 3 091.5 19.3 122.6 0.8 2 122.1 13.2 16 058.5 100.0 

 



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

8 

B. Programme financing 

40. The programme will receive financing in the amount of EUR 16.06 million, as 

follows: (i) an IFAD Debt Sustainability Framework grant in the amount of 

EUR 5.37 million, or 33.4 per cent; (ii) an IFAD loan of EUR 5.37 million, or 

33.4 per cent; (iii) a grant from Norway for an estimated EUR 3.09 million, or 

19.3 per cent; (iv) a contribution from the Government in the amount of 

EUR 2.12 million, or 13.2 per cent; and (v) a contribution from the beneficiaries 

in the amount of EUR 0.12 million, or 0.8 per cent. The table below shows the 

breakdown of programme costs by expenditure category and financier. 



 

 

 

E
B
 2

0
1
8
/
L
O

T
/
P
.1

5
 

9
 

Table 2 
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier 
(Thousands of euros)  

Expenditure category 

IFAD loan IFAD grant NORAD Beneficiaries Government Total 

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % 

Investment expenditures             

1. Works 1 208.5 31.5 1 208.5 31.5 823.4 21.5 - - 590.8 15.4 3 831.2 23.9 

2. Vehicles 74.8 29.1 74.8 29.1 40.7 15.8 - - 66.8 26.0 257.1 1.6 

3. Equipment and materials 92.7 35.4 92.7 35.4 8.7 3.3 - - 68.2 26.0 262.4 1.6 

4. Training 715.4 45.7 715.4 45.7 - - - - 135.7 8.7 1 566.5 9.8 

5. Consultancies 452.5 22.6 452.5 22.6 776.1 38.7 - - 325.2 16.2 2 006.3 12.5 

6. Goods, services and 
supplies 

1 669.5 33.0 1 669.5 33.0 1 095.4 21.6 89.6 1.8 538.1 10.6 5 062.1 31.5 

7. Grants and subsidies 409.2 43.6 409.2 43.6 - - 33.1 3.5 86.7 9.2 938.2 5.8 

8. Unallocated - - - - 214.4 100.0 - - - - 214.4 1.3 

Total investment 
expenditures 

4 622.6 32.7 4 622.6 32.7 2 958.7 20.9 122.6 0.9 1 811.6 12.8 14 138.1 88.0 

Current expenditures             

1. Salaries and allowances 593.3 38.6 593.3 38.6 101.9 6.6 -  248.4 16.2 1 537.0 9.6 

2. Operating costs 145.2 37.9 145.2 37.9 30.9 8.1 -  62.1 16.2 383.4 2.4 

Total current expenditures 738.5 38.5 738.5 38.5 132.8 6.9 - - 310.5 16.2 1 920.4 12.0 

   Total 5 361.1 33.4 5 361.1 33.4 3 091.5 19.3 122.6 0.8 2 122.1 13.2 16 058.5 100.0 



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

10 

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis  

41. The analysis of the financial return of the activities shows that for rainfed crops, 

the respective internal rates of return (IRR), net present values (NPV) and cost-

benefit ratios are on the order of: (i) for millet, IRR of 21.20 per cent, NPV of 

FCFA 15,135 and cost-benefit ratio of 1:7; (ii) for sorghum, IRR of 16.3 per cent, 

NPV of FCFA 7,206 and cost-benefit ratio of 1:3; and (iii) for groundnut, IRR of 

23.40 per cent, NPV FCFA 37,772 and cost-benefit ratio of 1:2. 

42. The additional margins for irrigated crops are FCFA 661,697 and FCFA 739,000 for 

peppers and rice, respectively. The IRR for onions is 62.8 per cent, with an NPV of 

FCFA 11 million and a cost-benefit ratio of 2:2. These results show that a farmer 

can handle the additional costs of adopting improved production techniques to clear 

additional income.  

43. Goat raising in these groups is also a profitable venture, with an IRR of 

43.7 per cent, an NPV de FCFA 642,219 and a cost-benefit ratio of 1:3. 

44. The financial analysis of the operating accounts of the various market stakeholders 

(farmers, collectors, warehousers, merchants/wholesalers, communities/ 

municipalities, market management groups) shows a satisfactory return for the 

different types of market investments, with IRRs ranging from 14.2 to 48 per cent.  

45. The programme’s overall economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is 21.6 per cent, 

and the NPV of the net economic cash flow will be US$13 million. This preliminary 

result is satisfactory. With a 10 per cent increase in sales prices, the EIRR is 

around 23.6 per cent. A 15, 20 and 30 per cent drop in the yield of rainfed crops 

reduces the EIRRs to 18.9 per cent, 17.3 per cent and 14.0 per cent, respectively, 

while a 10 per cent increase in costs yields an EIRR of 19.6 per cent.  

D. Sustainability 

46. ProDAF-Diffa employs an approach based on increasing resilience that applies the 

lessons learned in neighbouring regions while tackling the challenges stemming 

from population movements triggered by the security situation. The programme’s 

primary goal is therefore to increase the sustainability of the proposed practices 

and the installations introduced by the programme. The sustainability of the 

interventions will be guaranteed by choosing practices and activities that have 

proven effective over decades, with a high rate of adoption by rural populations. 

47. From a technical standpoint, the activities under components 1 and 2 are based on 

social engineering that links each intervention, from the lowland parcel to the 

subwatershed, to its users through commune management and association 

committees with recognized competencies.  

48. From a social standpoint, the programme approach will be inclusive, and support 

will be provided to all target groups without discrimination. To this end, instead of 

setting up specific organizations for refugee groups, the programme will encourage 

populations to participate in existing or newly created village associations. This 

approach will better integrate the communities to implement the activities and 

capitalize on the opportunities offered. 

49. From an economic standpoint, the increased volume and value of farm production, 

together with greater market opportunities, will be the incentives for beneficiary 

engagement. 

E. Risk identification and mitigation 

50. ProDAF-Diffa’s implementation will face risks associated with the climate and 

security situation in the region, the security risk remaining unpredictable and high. 

The environmental and social risks make it a “Category B” project. Since the region 

is Sahelian, the project is classified as having a “high climate risk” due to the risks 

associated with climate change. The risk assessment was taken into account in the 



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

11 

Environmental and Social Management Plan. The anticipated mechanisms and 

interventions will mitigate the adverse effects of the risks on the activities. Since 

ProDAF-Diffa is an extension of ProDAF, numerous risks are substantially mitigated 

by the very fact of its institutional integration and the recognized experience of 

ProDAF. Nevertheless, in order to lower ProDAF-Diffa’s risk in the implementation 

phase from “high” to “moderate,” as in the case of ProDAF, the new structure 

includes an internal risk auditor to better control the risks. The main risks and 

mitigation measures put the overall programme risk at the “moderate” level.  

V. Corporate considerations 

A. Compliance with IFAD policies 

51. ProDAF-Diffa is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025, centred on 

inclusive and sustainable transformation of the rural world. ProDAF-Diffa will 

contribute to meeting IFAD’s three strategic objectives, namely: (i) increase poor 

rural people’s productive capacities; (ii) increase poor rural people’s benefits from 

market participation; and (iii) strengthen the environmental sustainability and 

climate resilience of poor rural people’s economic activities.  

52. The activities implemented under ProDAF-Diffa (development of water points, 

pastoral areas, stabilization of dunes surrounding water points, support for 

agricultural inputs) will have a limited, reversible, and easily mitigated 

environmental and social impact. Moreover, they will take place in small areas and 

be on the scale of the activities implemented under ProDAF in the neighbouring 

regions, where the adverse social and environmental impacts were considered 

minimal and very localized. It is therefore proposed that ProDAF-Diffa be classified 

as an environmental and social category “B” programme. 

B. Alignment and harmonization 

53. The programme’s targeting strategy is aligned with IFAD’s targeting policy. 

ProDAF-Diffa is aligned with the Government’s recommendations in favour of the 

interventions in the Diffa context, considering the refugee, displaced and returning 

populations in the country who wish to engage in family farming. The programme 

will also ensure that this aspect will be taken into account in the monitoring of 

programme results and the impact assessment (with data disaggregated by sex, 

age and origin). ProDAF-Diffa is aligned with Niger’s Small-scale Irrigation 

Strategy.  

C. Innovations and scaling up 

54. ProDAF-Diffa is the product of a scaling up of ProDAF’s achievements and approach 

in the neighbouring regions. In particular, it has the following features:  

 The economic development pole (EDP) approach. The EDP approach, 

which consists of concentrating a coherent and complementary group of 

support activities in a production area to amplify their impact, was 

successfully implemented in 2012-2013 in the Project to Support Food 

Security in the Maradi Region (PASADEM) and the Ruwanmu Small-scale 

Irrigation Project (PPI Ruwanmu). It has been employed in current ProDAF 

activities in the Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder regions and is now used as a 

model in the intervention strategies of the government and certain partners. 

This approach will be replicated in this programme.  

 Farmer field schools and water user associations. These tools will be 

promoted by the programme based on the current ProDAF experience. 

 Assisted natural tree regeneration. This simple and inexpensive technical 

innovation for managing the natural regeneration of trees has had a very 

positive impact in projects promoted by IFAD since the 1980s.  



EB 2018/LOT/P.15 

12 

D. Policy engagement  

55. ProDAF-Diffa interventions are aligned with the lines of action in the Plan of Action 

2016-2020 of the 3N Initiative "Nigeriens Nourishing Nigeriens," especially: 

(i) water management for agro-sylvo-pastoral and fish production; (ii) the 

promotion of agro-sylvo-pastoral and fish value chains; and (iii) integrated and 

sustainable natural resource management and environmental protection. These 

lines of action are also part of the Diffa Regional Development Plan (2016-2020) 

and IFAD’s country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) 2013-2021. 

By focusing its efforts on the problem of assisting refugees, the programme is also 

aligned with the Facility for Refugees, Migrants, Forced Displacement and Rural 

Stability (FARMS), developed by IFAD and its partners to help displaced persons 

become more independent and strengthen the resilience of receiving communities. 

Therefore, the programme will generally support Niger’s Sustainable Development 

and Inclusive Growth Strategy 2035 (SDDCI – Niger 2035). 

VI. Legal instruments and authority 
56. The financing agreement between the Republic of the Niger and IFAD will 

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the 

borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in 

appendix I. 

57. The Republic of the Niger is empowered under its laws to receive financing from 

IFAD. 

58. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement 

Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing. 

VII. Recommendation 
59. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of 

the following resolution: 

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to 

the Republic of the Niger in the amount of five million three hundred seventy 

thousand euros (EUR 5,370,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall 

be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented 

herein. 

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a Debt Sustainability 

Framework grant to the Republic of the Niger in the amount of five million 

three hundred seventy thousand euros (EUR 5,370,000) and upon such terms 

and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and 

conditions presented herein. 

 

Gilbert F. Houngbo  

President 

 












































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Benin for the
Agricultural Development and
Market Access Support Project

Republic of Benin
Agricultural Development and Market Access Support Project
Detailed design report

The designations employed and the presentation of the material in this map do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the
part of IFAD concerning the delimitation of the frontiers or boundaries, or the authorities thereof.
Source: IFAD, 2018

IFAD



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

iv

Republic of Benin

Agricultural Development and Market Access Support
Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/beneficiary: Republic of Benin

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries

Total project cost: EUR 89.5 million

Amount of IFAD loan:
(Performance-based allocation
system [PBAS]–2016-2018 cycle)

EUR 13.3 million

Amount of IFAD grant (under the Debt
Sustainability Framework):

EUR 13.3 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a
service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum.

Cofinancier(s): OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID),
private sector, financial institutions

Amount of cofinancing: OFID: EUR 8.6 million
Private sector: EUR 4.8 million
Financial institutions: EUR 1.1 million

Terms of cofinancing: OFID: Loan
Private sector: Loan
Financial institutions: Loan

Contribution of borrower/beneficiary: EUR 8.4 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: EUR 2.8 million

Financing gap: EUR 37.2 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Benin for the Agricultural Development and Market
Access Support Project, as contained in paragraph 56.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Benin for the
Agricultural Development and Market Access Support
Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. As a result of the economic and institutional reforms introduced under the

Government Action Programme (PAG) “Revealing Benin”, the Beninese economy
has entered a new era of growth. In 2017, the country reported 5.5 per cent
growth in its GDP, compared with 4 per cent in 2016. Nevertheless, it still faces
significant challenges, with a poverty rate of more than 40 per cent; persistent
social and occupational inequalities to the detriment of women; food insecurity,
which affects 15 per cent of rural populations and 21 per cent of farm households;
and persistent unemployment (2.7 per cent) on top of a high level of
underemployment (72 per cent), largely among young adults. Added to these
constraints are the effects of climate change, which sap the resilience of
populations, especially in rural areas.

2. Agriculture is a strategic sector of the Beninese economy, contributing an average
of 23 per cent of GDP and 75 per cent of export revenues and generating around 70
per cent of the jobs. The National Investment Plan for Agriculture, Food and
Nutrition Security 2017-2021 five-year breakdown, prepared within the framework
of the Strategic Plan for Agricultural Development (PSDSA 2017-2025), is aimed at
maintaining annual GDP growth of at least 6 per cent during the period and
increasing the average annual income of rural households by 7.5 per cent.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
results-based COSOP

3. PADAAM was chosen to implement the country strategic opportunities programme
(COSOP) for Benin 2018-2022 and is entirely under the agricultural component of
the PAG 2016-2021. It has two strategic objectives: (i) the productive capacity,
resilience to climate change and food and nutrition security of vulnerable rural
populations are sustainably improved; and (ii) access to agricultural output markets
is improved.

4. The national value-chain promotion strategy focuses on three conventional value
chains – rice, maize and cassava – with a view to improving food security and
increasing the income of rural populations. PADAAM will thus support the three
value chains stipulated in the PAG in order to: (i) bridge the food gap in terms of
the domestic demand for rice, only 56 per cent of which was met in 2017, thus
reducing the country’s dependence on mass imports of rice from the Asian market;
and (ii) maintain and increase the value added of maize and cassava in association
with the private sector, while developing trade with the subregional market.

5. In the conventional value-chain niche, PADAAM will support government efforts to
promote the value chains, ensuring household food security and creating value
added. It will be devoted entirely to supporting the implementation of national
development programmes in the value chains in question.



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

2

II. Project description
A. Intervention area and target group
6. In the current strategic context, characterized by the promotion of value chains and

“agro-clusters,” PADAAM will intervene in four agricultural development poles
(ADPs) with the potential for production and economic partnership development,
namely: (i) the south of pole 4, covering the department of Collines; (ii) pole 5,
covering the departments of Zou and Couffo; (iii) pole 6, confined to the
department of Plateau; and (iv) pole 7, which stretches to the departments of
Ouémé, Atlantique and Mono.1 The priority production areas in the ADPs will be
selected on the basis of a detailed study conducted prior to project start-up.

7. PADAAM’s target group will consist of the following categories: (i) smallholder
farmers and small rural entrepreneurs engaged in production or processing
activities in the three value chains (rice, maize and cassava); (ii) young adults from
family farms and/or young adults who have graduated and/or have some education
who wish to work in the value chains as first-time entrepreneurs, as well as young
entrepreneurs who are already active in the value chains or wish to take advantage
of the business opportunities they offer; (iii) agroentrepreneurs and downstream
actors in the value chains – for example, processors, merchants and individuals
involved in service activities and organized into small or medium-sized enterprises
or cooperatives; (iv) agricultural professional organizations (APOs) with different
degrees of organization and geographic positioning: grassroots farmers’
organizations, unions, federations, regional collaboration platforms and national
mixed groups of professionals.

8. PADAAM will reach 51,000 households and approximately 255,000 rural people,2
including smallholder farmers, farm youth, agroentrepreneurs and actors
downstream in the value chains, as well as professional organizations. This
approach is designed to target and favour women and young adults (aged 15-35),
who represent 40 per cent and 30 per cent of the beneficiaries, respectively.

B. Project development objective
9. PADAAM’s general objective is to reduce rural poverty in the project intervention

area by including stakeholders, both women and men, in diversified and profitable
value chains.

10. The project’s development objective is to sustainably increase the food and
nutrition security, as well as the income, of smallholder farmers, particularly
women and young adults.

11. Attainment of this objective will be measured by the following indicators:
(i) 204,000 low-income rural people benefitting from upward economic mobility, 40
per cent of them women and 30 per cent of them young adults; (ii) an increase in
the yield per hectare of maize, rice and cassava; (iii) at least a 30 per cent increase
in the income of 80 per cent of the beneficiaries; (iv) more than 400 production
partnerships, bringing together some 1,600 organizations, and close to
50,000 smallholder farmers developed; (v) 80 per cent of supported rural
businesses reporting higher profits; and (vi) 1,100 young adults engaged in
business initiatives in the three targeted value chains.

C. Components/outcomes
12. PADAAM will be implemented over a six-year period (2019-2024) and will have

three investment components: (i) strengthening partnerships and creating value
added (EUR 39.4 million, or 44 per cent of the total cost); (ii) improving agricultural

1 The department of Littoral, included in ADP 7, is not part of the PADAAM intervention area.
2 Average size of households (five individuals) based on the average size of rural households in the
seven departments targeted by the intervention. Source: Cahier des villages et quartiers de ville, INSAE,
August 2016.



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

3

productivity and production (EUR 40.1 million, or 44.8 per cent of the total cost);
and (iii) coordination and management under the IFAD Rural Intervention
Framework Programme in Benin (ProCar) (EUR 10 million, or 11.2 per cent of the
total cost).

13. Component 1: Strengthening partnerships and creating value added. This
component should result in: (i) the formalization of sustainable economic
relationships between smallholder farmers and the private sector; (ii) an increase in
the volume of raw materials processed in the three value chains and sold on the
domestic and international market; (iii) a significant increase in the income of
smallholder farmers; and (iv) strengthening of the institutional and governance
base of professional organizations.

14. Component 2: Improving agricultural productivity and production. This
component is aimed at increasing the average yield per hectare by around 44 per
cent, with production in the three targeted value chains reaching the volumes
specified in the PSDSA for 2021. Under this component, PADAAM will also
participate in increasing the availability and quality of infrastructure for production
and implementation support, with the following as the main indicators:
2,500 hectares of wetlands improved, 91 storage facilities rehabilitated or built and
250 km of feeder roads built.

15. Component 3: Coordination and management under ProCar (Coordination,
monitoring and evaluation and knowledge management). Implementation of
this component will be based on the programme approach used in the creation of
ProCar and the reforms to the territorialization of agricultural development adopted
by the Government. This framework programme governs the administrative and
fiduciary management of all projects in IFAD’s portfolio in Benin, and supports the
shared functions of monitoring and evaluation, knowledge management,
communication, targeting and youth support.

III. Project execution
A. Approach
16. Geographic approach. Benin has chosen the geographic approach for agricultural

development, and PADAAM will endorse it. This new approach will be implemented
through the ADPs under the new institutional architecture that gives the territorial
agricultural development agencies (ATDA) technical coordination functions that
cover the ADPs and the promotion of value chains, making the departmental
bureaus of agriculture, livestock and fisheries responsible for the regulation of the
interventions and geographic monitoring and evaluation at the territorial level.

17. Value-chain approach. PADAAM supports a change in paradigm centred on the
sustainable creation of value added through the promotion of inclusive economic
partnerships that link smallholder farmers and their organizations with the private
sector and the market in the three priority value chains.

18. Outsourcing approach. The project will employ an inclusive outsourcing approach
to implementing the activities related to partnerships, employing a mechanism
involving different consulting and facilitation firms whose services will be
coordinated by international technical assistance in direct support of project
coordination. This approach will also help to bring young adults into the workforce
through on-the-job training provided by experienced training centres selected for a
customized partnership.

B. Organizational framework
19. PADAAM will be overseen by the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries and

be part of ProCar’s organic framework. ProCar’s National Steering Committee (CNP)
will be expanded to PADAAM with the participation of new stakeholders and/or focal



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

4

points. Four participatory territorial planning committees will be created in the four
ADPs in question – the south of pole 4, pole 5 and poles 6 and 7).

20. PADAAM’s execution will involve an array of complementary functions divided into
two categories: (i) the country programme functions already established in ProCar
(financial administration and management, procurement, monitoring and
evaluation, communication and knowledge management, gender, young adults and
targeting, etc.); and (ii) specific technical functions, which will be buttressed by
technical assistance.

21. In the ADPs, PADAAM will be implemented by the ATDAs, which will be supported
with technical assistance under a mandate governed by a clear and assured exit
strategy with a three-year horizon, capacity building and the acquisition of
competencies by the ATDAs. ProCar programme functions in the four ADPs will be
guaranteed by two regional support units.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledge
management

22. The planning and budgeting of PADAAM activities will be built on the work
programmes and annual budgets, prepared using a bottom-up approach. The
participatory territorial planning committees will meet in the ADPs each year to
validate the work programmes and annual budget, which will ultimately be
submitted to ProCar for approval during the annual sessions of the CNP.

23. The PADAAM monitoring and evaluation system will be anchored in the ProCar
system and implement a results-based management system, using the programme
approach adopted in 2016 and the monitoring and coordination mechanism of the
National Value-chain Development Programmes fostered by the ATDAs responsible
for their coordination. The system will be buttressed by: (i) monitoring and
evaluation assistants assigned to the regional support units, (ii) the creation of a
data-gathering mechanism and tools to ensure optimal and regular information
about the PADAAM’s chain of results, and (iii) the ProCar database, along with
those of the ATDAs in the ADPs.

24. Learning, knowledge management and communication. PADAAM will base its
learning and knowledge management system on ProCar’s monitoring and
evaluation mechanism. A management plan will be prepared at project start-up to
specify the different communication products and tools that should be developed,
the most suitable formats and support for the different types of users and the
frequency with which these products and tools should be developed.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
25. Financial management. This will be based on the ProCar mechanisms and

procedures for the execution of portfolio operations. Resource management will
follow country and IFAD procedures. ProCar will prepare the financial statements,
which it will regularly transmit to the Government and IFAD.

26. Procurement. The works and supplies, as well as the consulting and advisory
services necessary for the project, will be delivered in accordance with the current
Benin procurement code, insofar as they are aligned with IFAD’s procurement
mechanisms. Within the framework of productive partnerships and rural
microenterprise promotion, the beneficiaries – farmers’ organizations and young
promoters of rural enterprises – will participate in procurement through the specific
modalities defined in the manuals.

27. Governance. PADAAM will apply the principles of good governance: (i) to the
national orientation and monitoring committee’s mobilization and participation
mechanism through Benin’s civil society stakeholders’ platform; (ii) thanks to the
territorial decentralization groups’ involvement in creating facilitating infrastructure
for the implementation of productive partnerships; (iii) through beneficiary



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

5

participation in the planning and evaluation of investments; and (iv) by overseeing
the implementation of partnership business plans by farmers’ organizations.

E. Supervision
28. PADAAM supervision will consist of two supervision missions per year, organized

and conducted jointly by IFAD, the Government and the principal stakeholders,
notably the members of the CNP and the ADP participatory territorial planning
committees. Supervision will be conducted using the new online Operational Results
Management System, which will facilitate the updating of data and information on
the project’s status. The first supervision mission will essentially support project
start-up by establishing the implementation mechanism at all levels, finalizing the
mandates, and issuing the tender documents for the baseline studies and other
priority activities. The supervision missions will particularly emphasize
implementation monitoring, achievement of the results, outcomes and impacts and
the effectiveness of institutional and technical outcomes intended for consolidation
and replication on a large scale. Specific implementation support missions can also
be organized as needed.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
29. The total cost of PADAAM, including provisions for physical contingencies and price

increases, is EUR 89.5 million. The base cost is EUR 84.1 million. The amount for
physical and financial contingencies is EUR 5.4 million. Taxes, which are included,
come to EUR 8.4 million.

30. Project costs can be broken down into the following components: (i) strengthening
of partnerships and creation of value added: evaluated at EUR 39.4 million, or
44 per cent of the total project cost; (ii) improvement of agricultural productivity
and production: EUR 40.1 million, or 44.8 per cent of the total project cost; and
(iii) coordination, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge management:
EUR 10 million, or 11.2 per cent of the total project cost.



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

6

Table 1
Project costs, by component and financier
(Thousands of euros)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Financing gap OFID Private sector Banks/SFD
Beninese
Government Beneficiaries Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

A. Strengthening of partnerships and creation of value added
Partnership
development

4 390 14.6 4 390 14.6 11 971 39.7 4 807 15.9 628 2.1 1 850 6.1 2 131 7.1 30 167 33.7

Capacity-
building

1 778 19.4 1 778 19.4 5 229 56.9 301 3.3 106 1.2 9 193 10.3

Subtotal 6 168 15.7 6 168 15.7 17 200 43.7 4 807 12.2 628 1.6 2 151 5.5 2 237 5.7 39 360 44
B. Improvement of agricultural productivity and production

Access to inputs,
services, cross-
cutting support

1 936 18.8 1 936 18.8 4 946 48 466 4.5 410 4 600 5.8 10 295 11.5

Infrastructure
development

3 122 10.5 3 122 10.5 9 784 32.8 8 561 28.7 5 243 17.6 29 832 33.3

Subtotal 5 059 12.6 5 059 12.6 14 730 36.7 8 561 21.3 466 1.2 5 653 14.1 600 1.5 40 126 44.8
C. Coordination, monitoring and evaluation and knowledge management

Coordination
and
management

1 514 21.4 1 514 21.4 3 607 50.9 444 6.3 7 080 7.9

Monitoring and
evaluation and
knowledge
management

573 19.4 573 19.4 1 687 57 128 4.3 2 961 3.3

Subtotal 2 087 20.8 2 087 20.8 5 295 52.7 573 5.7 10 041 11.2
Total 13 313 14.9 13 313 14.9 37 224 41.6 8 561 9.6 4 807 5.4 1 094 1.2 8 377 9.4 2 837 3.2 89 527 100

B. Project financing
31. The project financing plan is as follows:

(i) IFAD, for a total of EUR 26.6 million, or 29.8 per cent of the total project cost
(50 per cent in the form of a loan granted under highly concessional terms
and 50 per cent in the form of a grant through the Debt Sustainability
Framework), under the PBAS 2016-2018 cycle;

(ii) OFID, for EUR 8.6 million, or 9.6 per cent of the total project cost;

(iii) The private sector, for EUR 4.8 million, or 5.4 per cent of the total project
cost;

(iv) Financial institutions, for EUR 1.1 million, or 1.2 per cent of the total project
cost;

(v) Beninese Government, for EUR 8.4 million, or 9.4 per cent of the total project
cost; and

(vi) Beneficiaries, for EUR 2.8 million, or 3.2 per cent of the total project cost.

32. This yields a financing gap of EUR 37.2 million, or 41.6 per cent of the total project
cost, which can be filled by future allocations from IFAD (through financing
modalities to be determined, based on internal procedures and approval by the
Executive Board), or any other source of financing to be determined in the course
of project implementation. The financing from the Beninese Government consists
solely of the exemption of duties and taxes on project acquisitions.



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

7

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category/financier
(Thousands of euros)

IFAD loan
IFAD

grant
Finaning

gap OFID
Private

sector
Banks/SF

D

Beninese
gover
nment

Beneficiar
ies Total

Categories Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

Works 2 549 10.3 2 549 10.3 8 148 32.8 7 094 28.6 4 465 18 24 803 27.7
Equipment and
matérial a

1 380 18.9 1 380 18.9 2 862 39.0 22 0.3 1 685 23 7 328 8.2

Goods, services
and inputs

1 436 19.7 1 436 19.7 4 030 55.2 12 0.2 365 5 21 0.3 7 301 8.2

Consultancies b 2 056 15.9 2 056 15.9 5 732 44.3 1 330 10.3 1 755 13.6 12 929 14.4
Training c 2 327 20 2 327 20 6 537 56.2 104 0.9 346 3 11 640 13.0
Grants and
subsidies

2 875 12.9 2 875 12.9 8 232 36.8 4 807 21.5 1 094 4.9 2 470 11.1 22 353 25

Operating costs 109 18.5 109 18.5 266 45.1 106 18 591 0.7
Salaries and
allowances

581 22.5 581 22.5 1 420 55 2 582 2.9

Total 13 313 14.9 13 313 14.9 37 224 41.6 8 561 9.6 4 807 5.4 1 094 1.2 8 377 9.4 2 837 3.2 89 527 100
a Including vehicles.
b Studies, including domestic and international technical assistance.
c Including workshops.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
33. Financial analysis. PADAAM’s financial analysis examined: (i) smallholder maize

and cassava farmers; (ii) small wetlands operations; and (iii) different types of
partnership initiatives between farmers and the private sector in the form of simple
partnerships, public-private-producer partnerships (4P) and co-enterprises. The
analysis was aimed at determining the feasibility of the activities in terms of the
return on investment throughout the project and ensuring that the funds invested
came from the farmer, the project or a credit institution. It consisted, on the one
hand, of evaluating farmers’ capacity to generate net positive results, and on the
other, of analysing their financial situation to ensure that financial equilibrium was
maintained for the continuity of the activity, bearing in mind the conditions of
access to credit in the project area and the cofinancing rules established for the
project. The results, summarized in the table below, indicate that all the models
included have a satisfactory financial return.



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

8

Table 3
PADAAM economic model summary

Models Cost-benefit Ratio
Financial Internal

Rate of
Return

NPV (8.5%)

FCFA USD
EUR

1. Agricultural production models
Maize/cassava model 2.9 104% 3 881 463 7 255 6 223
Wetlands management type 1 1.2 13% 9 355 186 17 486 14 999
Wetlands management type 2 1.1 13% 11 990 007 22 411 19 224
Wetlands management type 3 1.4 19% 38 169 833 71 345 61 198

2. Models for increasing value added
Creation of ESOPa-Rice 1.2 32% 388 379 283 725 943 622 699
Strengthening of ESOP-Rice 1.3 46% 433 770 696 810 786 695 476
Creation of ESOP-Cassava 1.1 29% 242 930 261 454 075 389 496
4P PIVERTB/ESSORc -Maize 1.1 17% 44 129 563 82 485 70 754
4P PIVERT/ESSOR-Cassava 1.2 26% 103 466 044 193 394 165 890
4P Agribusiness-Maize 1.5 33% 45 872 520 85 743 73 549
Simple contracting–Cassava 1.1 24% 14 007 311 26 182 22 458
Simple contracting-Maize 1.2 22% 19 152 330 35 799 30 708
Simple contracting-Rice 1.3 54% 114 071 931 213 219 182 895

a Producer services and organization enterprise.
b Green innovation, rural energy and transformation pole.
c Solidarity Enterprise for Services to Rural People.

34. Economic results and sensitivity analysis. Given the wide range of activities
foreseen, PADAAM will have many economic benefits, the totality of which cannot
be addressed in calculating the economic return indicators, such as the economic
internal rate of return (EIRR) and the net present value (NPV). Nevertheless, the
analysis covers the project’s main benefits and the resulting support for production
(rice, maize and cassava), support for the creation and strengthening of
stakeholder partnerships (simple contracting, 4Ps, co-enterprises) and the
rehabilitation of rural feeder roads.

35. The project’s EIRR is established at 18.9 per cent, and the NPV, with an economic
opportunity cost of capital of 6 per cent, at EUR 54.2 million. This is a very
satisfactory result, all the more so because certain benefits could not be included in
the calculations due to insufficient data for their evaluation – for example, the
effects of capacity building and the construction of storage facilities, which have
improved food security. Overall, the project will have a positive impact on the
entire economy and especially on women and young adults, who are its priority
target groups.

36. The sensitivity analysis yields very robust results. Even in the case of a 30 per cent
drop in income, a 50 per cent increase in costs or a two-year lag in profits, the
economic rate of return remains largely above the opportunity cost of capital (6 per
cent), and the NPV, at more than EUR 20.6 million. Calculation of the switching
values shows that, all things being equal, the project’s economic return will be nil
only if its profits fall by 56 per cent or its costs increase by 125 per cent.

D. Sustainability
37. PADAAM will develop and/or improve the sustainability of the investments made at

different levels of the ADPs, thanks to its approach aimed at guaranteeing their
ownership by the beneficiaries and furthering beneficiary empowerment, thereby
limiting backsliding after project completion. The dynamics of the programme
approach in place since the advent of ProCar will consolidate the synergy of the
interventions and strengthen the sustainability of the achievements.

38. PADAAM’s actions will contribute to: (i) the institutional sustainability of farmers’
organizations and mixed groups of professionals in the targeted value chains, and
the strengthening of ATDAs through institutional support; (ii) the economic and
financial viability of the actors involved in the partnerships and business initiatives
developed by farmers’ organizations or young rural entrepreneurs; (iii) on the one



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

9

hand, the sustainability of the infrastructure that will be built in collaboration with
the decentralized territorial groups during implementation of their communal
development plans, and on the other, the involvement of the beneficiaries, who will
be organized to ensure the sustainable maintenance and management of the
infrastructure and facilities; and (iv) environmental sustainability and the promotion
of measures to increase target groups’ resilience to climate change. In addition, the
results of the sensitivity test performed as part of the economic and financial
analysis show the robustness of the project in the face of risks.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The main risks for PADAAM are associated with: (i) the innovative nature of the

value-chain approach in the ADPs: (ii) the recent advent of the ATDAs as overseers
of the execution of the national value-chain promotion strategy; (iii) the weak
structure of the value chains’ APOs, and (iv) external factors, such as climate
change. These risks have been clearly identified and mitigation measures put in
place, among them: (i) the strengthening of ATDA technical functions and the
gradual transfer of project supervision; (ii) support for the establishment of APOs
and the improvement of their governance; (iii) the dissemination of drought-
resistant varieties, cultivation systems and conservation practices in agriculture;
and (iv) agricultural insurance. The project’s environmental and social risks put it in
Category “B.” The risks associated with climate change are considered moderate.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies

40. IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025. PADAAM is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic
Framework 2016-2025, which fosters inclusive and sustainable transformation of
the rural world. PADAAM will engage in activities aimed at the attainment of IFAD’s
three strategic objectives, which are to: (i) increase poor rural people’s productive
capacity; (ii) increase poor rural people’s benefits from market participation; and
(iii) strengthen the environmental sustainability and climate resilience of poor rural
people’s economic activities.

41. COSOP 2018-2022. PADAAM is included in IFAD’s strategy note for Benin, which
pursues the following strategic objectives: (i) Productive capacity, resilience to
climate change, and food and nutrition security of vulnerable rural populations are
sustainably improved; and (ii) access to agricultural output markets is improved.

42. IFAD strategy on climate change. The project is aligned with the IFAD strategy
on climate change, especially the following objectives: (i) support innovative
approaches to make smallholder farmers, both women and men, more resilient to
climate change; (ii) help smallholder farmers take advantage of the available
measures and financing to mitigate its effects; and (iii) establish a more coherent
dialogue on climate change, rural development, agriculture and food security.

43. Natural resource and environmental management. PADAAM is aligned with
IFAD’s Environment and Natural Resource Management Policy (2011) and is based
on the following guiding principles: (i) engagement in value chains to drive green
growth (principle 5); and (ii) promote climate-smart approaches to rural
development (principle 3).

44. IFAD targeting strategy. The project’s targeting strategy espouses IFAD’s policy,
which is based on targeting that is geographic, direct and self-targeting. PADAAM
engages with poor rural people, women and young adults, the priority beneficiaries
at the heart of IFAD interventions. The different profiles of the target groups have
been considered in the project support, notably through an analysis by sex and
age, as well as wherewithal (degree of wealth). PADAAM also integrates the issues
of gender and youth in its targeting and throughout the project’s life cycle. The
development of gender and youth targeting strategies and mechanisms was



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

10

introduced during the project design phase. These strategies also sought to devise
measures to promote empowerment, facilitation, and execution during its
implementation. The project will also ensure that these elements are well-
integrated during results monitoring and impact assessment.

45. Integration of smallholder farmers and the private sector in agricultural
value chains. PADAAM’s development approach is focused on value chains and
based on an overall analysis of the entire value chain (for each of the three value
chains – rice, maize and cassava). The value-chain approach adopted considers all
stakeholders in each of them (in addition to poor rural people, young adults, and
women, who are IFAD’s main target group) and their interactions. The market is
considered a driving force, and the activities are based on an assessment of the
demand and the capacity of markets to absorb additional production. PADAAM
encourages private-sector engagement to promote the forging of 4P partnerships
that facilitate access to markets.

46. Social, environmental and climate evaluation procedures. Aligned.

B. Alignment and harmonization
47. PADAAM is aligned with the PAG and the PSDSA 2025, whose implementation it

supports by concentrating on the strategy to promote the three conventional value
chains. Project execution will respect the principles of coordination by value chain
established at the sector level and will support implementation of the national
development plans for these value chains overseen by the ATDAs.

48. In addition to the usual services, ProCar aims at fostering greater complementarity
between PADAAM and IFAD-funded operations, in alignment with the Adapted Rural
Financing Services Promotion Project and the Market Gardening Development
Support Project.

49. PADAAM’s targeting will consider the presence of the other bilateral and multilateral
partners operating in the project areas and the need for complementarity. In order
to ensure good coordination in the value chains, prior to start-up a study will be
conducted to update the intervention plan with the support of other technical and
financial partners such as the French Development Agency, German cooperation,
Belgian cooperation, Swiss cooperation, Netherlands cooperation, Canadian
cooperation, the European Union, the African Development Bank, the World Food
Programme, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the World
Bank, etc.

C. Innovation and scaling up
50. PADAAM is one of the first development projects formulated under the PAG. It will

support the national strategy to promote ADPs, innovatively combining the
geographic and value-chain approaches.

51. PADAAM will replicate IFAD’s strategy to further the social and economic inclusion
of poor rural people and scale up successful integrated and innovative approaches
to agricultural value-chain development in order to promote intensified use of
innovative production and processing technologies, efficient agricultural and
agro-industrial contracting practices and appropriate financing and risk
management mechanisms in the agricultural production system. While employing a
diachronic approach, the PADAAM design values the achievements of the recently
sunsetted IFAD interventions – that is, the Rural Development Support Programme
and the Rural Economic Growth Support Project.

D. Policy engagement
52. The project is aimed at grassroots capacity building, especially through

consolidation of the technical, economic, organizational, and operational
competencies of APOs (unions and federations) and mixed groups of professionals.



EB 2018/124/R.23/Rev.1

11

The goal is to endow their structures for representation with greater legitimacy and
enable them to actively participate in policy-making.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
53. A financing agreement between the Republic of Benin and IFAD is the legal

instrument under whose terms the proposed financing will be granted to the
borrower/beneficiary. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

54. The Republic of Benin is authorized under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

55. I hereby certify that the proposed financing is consistent with the stipulations of the
Agreement Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
56. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing by adopting

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan to the Republic of Benin under
highly concessional terms in an amount of thirteen million three hundred
twenty thousand euros (EUR 13,320,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Benin under the Debt Sustainability Framework in an amount of
thirteen million three hundred twenty thousand euros (EUR 13,320,000) and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President


















































President’s report

Proposal for a grant to the
Central African Republic for the
Project to Revitalize Crop and Livestock
Production in the Savannah


Central African Republic

Project to Revitalize Crop and Livestock Production in the
Savannah

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Central African Republic

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Ministry of Livestock and Animal Health

Total project cost: US$29.04 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$12.4 million

Terms of IFAD grant: Grant under the Debt Sustainability Framework

Financing gap: US$12.6 million

Contribution of recipient: US$0.966 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.077 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Central African Republic for the Project to Revitalize Crop and Livestock
Production in the Savannah, as contained in paragraph 39.

Proposal for a grant to the Central African Republic for
the Project to Revitalize Crop and Livestock Production in
the Savannah

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Central African Republic (CAR) is classified as a country with a fragile situation.

The recent humanitarian and security crisis in 2013-2015 devastated the economy
and caused a quarter of the population to flee their homes. GDP fell 37 per cent in
2013, stabilizing at a growth rate on the order of 5 per cent between 2014 and
2016. Some 74 per cent of the population depend on the agropastoral sector, which
accounts for 52 per cent of GDP. With a Human Development Index (HDI) of 0.352
in 2016, CAR ranks 188th of 188 countries,1 reflecting the poverty that affects an
estimated 67 per cent of the population as a whole and 72 per cent of rural people.
Life expectancy is 51.5 years. CAR’s population density is among the lowest in the
world with five million people and an area of 623,000 km2. About 60 per cent of
the country’s people live in rural areas and the population is very young, with 60
per cent under 25.

2. The causes of poverty include poor availability and management of agropastoral
production factors, destruction of the economic fabric and limited road access; a
lack of infrastructure and of efficient public services in rural areas; and scarce
economic opportunities, especially for young people. The conflicts continue to have
an adverse impact on food security. Ten armed groups are still operative in the
areas bordering Cameroon and Chad, and in the country’s central and eastern
regions. Many farmers have fled their land, while others have had no access to
agricultural inputs or agropastoral markets. Livestock keepers have lost their herds
or migrated to Cameroon. Nevertheless, the potential for agricultural development
is extraordinary with close to 15 million hectares of arable land and 20 million
hectares of permanent pasture, as well as a favourable climate. The vulnerability
profile, however, presents extreme hazards such as torrential rains, flooding and
drought.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

3. The Central African Government and IFAD, based on lessons learned from the
Project for Reviving Food Crops and Small Livestock Production in the Savannah
(PREVES), which was completed on 31 December 2017, have designed the Project
to Revitalize Crop and Livestock Production in the Savannah (PREPAS) to
consolidate and scale up gains under PREVES. PREPAS is in line with the National
Recovery and Peacebuilding Plan (PNRCP) 2017-2021, which sets forth the
Government’s priorities and was the subject of the donors conference held in
Brussels in December 2016. The PNRCP has three pillars: (i) support for peace,
security and reconciliation; (ii) renewal of the social contract between the
Government and the people; and (iii) economic recovery and reactivation of

1 United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), Human Development Report 2017.



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

2

productive sectors. PREPAS will contribute to the food security and productive
sector recovery objectives set under pillar 3.

4. In terms of IFAD, the alignment documents are IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-
2025 and the country strategy note 2018-2019 under which PREPAS is the only
investment planned.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project area covers the subprefectures of Bouar, Baoro, Bossemptélé and

Yaloké, with a possible expansion to Bozoum following the midterm review.

6. PREPAS will target some 30,000 beneficiaries and their households, or some
240,000 people potentially reached by the project. The beneficiaries are essentially
poor smallholder crop and livestock farmers and agricultural producers, at least 50
per cent of them women, 30 per cent young people and 10 per cent heads of highly
vulnerable families. Given the marked vulnerability of women in the Central African
Republic, a gender equity strategy will be developed to promote their economic
empowerment. The project will support the integration of young people into
existing groups, establishment of youth groups and promotion of youth
entrepreneurship in specific activities such as market gardening, small livestock
raising or upstream and downstream production activities, particularly related to
marketing and processing, the seed subsector, farm mechanization and borehole
maintenance.

7. The 355 groups under PREVES will be supported in achieving a higher stage of
professionalization, while 445 new grass-roots groups will be structured with
training and start-up support, taking the total number of groups to 800, or 20,000
beneficiary households. In addition, 10,000 more households will benefit from
activities around nutrition, access to drinking water, animal hygiene and
vaccination, and structuring activities.

B. Project development objectives
8. The overall objective of PREPAS is to contribute to reducing poverty and sustainably

improving food and nutritional security in the subprefectures of Bouar, Baoro,
Bossemptélé and Yaloké. The development objective is to strengthen the socio-
economic development framework and reactivate crop and livestock production
using approaches adapted to climate change.

C. Components/outcomes
9. Component 1: Promotion of community development. Expected outcome 1 is

improved community organization, nutrition and access to drinking water.

10. Subcomponent 1.1: Strengthening of organizational capacities. The aim is to
create an enabling environment for sustainable project implementation, by focusing
on sensitizing and mobilizing populations, encouraging dialogue between crop and
livestock farmers, organizing producers into groups and providing functional literacy
training. The main outcomes expected under subcomponent 1 are: (i) 800 groups
organized through community facilitation; (ii) 1,600 technical delegates of these
groups having received organizational training; (iii) 3,200 people having received
literacy training; (iv) 5,000 group members participating in savings and credit
activities.

11. Subcomponent 1.2: Promotion of nutrition and access to drinking water.
Nutritional education designed to improve the beneficiaries’ dietary behaviours will
be accompanied with other nutrition-related activities to put in place a healthy and
balanced diet. This objective will be achieved with the increased availability of foods
with high nutritional value and their processing. In addition, the project will
strengthen institutional capacities in nutrition. The project is also intended to
rehabilitate or build 135 boreholes in the project area and to continue to guarantee



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

3

the operation of the 65 boreholes installed by PREVES. The boreholes will be
combined with the construction of latrines following the models and approaches
disseminated by the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF). The main expected
outcomes under this subcomponent are: (i) 10,000 people having received
capacity-building in nutritional practices; (ii) 2,500 home gardens set up; (iii) 135
drinking water points constructed and 65 water points set up under PREVES
maintained; (iv) two spare parts warehouses installed; (v) 20 repairers trained.

12. Component 2: Productive investments. Expected outcome 2 will be producers
strengthened and recapitalized with more efficient production, processing and
marketing methods that are adapted to climate change. The products targeted will
be: (a) for crops: maize, cassava, groundnut, and red bean; and (b) for livestock:
poultry and smallstock – goats, sheep and pigs.

13. Subcomponent 2.1: Strengthening of the supply of services to producers.
The aim is to improve the supply of extension services for farmers as follows: (i) an
effective system of outreach and advisory assistance, and better technical and
logistical capacities among public services; (ii) professionalization of the seed
subsector to recover the productivity of the targeted value chains; and (iii) a
livestock vaccination campaign. The expected outcomes are: (i) thematic materials
and toolkits developed for outreach; (ii) 28 master trainers trained; (iii) 1,600
technical delegates having received technical training; (iv) 800 groups having
received extension services; (v) the Central African Agricultural Research Institute
station in Bolée better equipped; and (vi) the National Livestock School in Bouar
rehabilitated.

14. Subcomponent 2.2: Support for production, processing and marketing. To
ensure efficient implementation on a large scale throughout the PREPAS area,
various support modules will be used – network of seed producers, crop production,
livestock farming and market gardening – for the 800 groups. In addition, PREPAS
will support 150 modules benefiting 450 young people in areas such as:
(i) agricultural processing; (ii) transportation and marketing; (iii) input stores; and
(iv) mechanization. As part of the inclusion module for highly vulnerable
households, PREPAS will provide the most capable with start-up equipment
consisting of small-scale supplies and inputs to undertake farming, while
beneficiaries lacking labourers will receive small ruminants or poultry. They may
subsequently set up an agricultural or agropastoral group. The expected outcomes
under this subcomponent are as follows: (i) 800 agricultural, agropastoral and
market gardening groups, representing 20,000 households, having benefited from
crop, livestock and market gardening production modules; (ii) 8 ha of land
developed for market gardening and equipped with innovative irrigation devices,
mainly solar; (iii) 12 storage warehouses and eight input storehouses constructed;
and (iv) 450 young people supported and engaged in processing, marketing or
services upstream and downstream of the value chain.

15. Component 3: Coordination, management, monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) and policy dialogue. The expected outcome of subcomponent 3.1 is better
coordination and M&E of rural sector interventions and knowledge management
that stimulates fruitful consultations and enhances the sector environment in favour
of sustainable agropastoral development.

16. Subcomponent 3.1: Knowledge management and policy dialogue. The aim is
to set up a rural sector coordination group (RSCG) linked to the PNRCP institutional
guidance and steering arrangements. In addition to this strengthening and the
creation of a consultative framework, the RSCG will specifically support the
development of a rural sector M&E system with the participation and alignment of
technical and financial partners. Data from the M&E system will be used in annual
rural sector reviews and consultation themes, which may lead to the formulation of
policies such as the National Agricultural Outreach Policy (PNVA).



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

4

17. Subcomponent 3.2: Coordination, management and M&E. The objective of
this subcomponent is to coordinate project interventions, provide effective and
transparent financial management of resources, promote ongoing improvements in
tools, approaches and methods of the actors, and coordinate the results-based M&E
process.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
18. The government services participating in project implementation are, at the

regional, prefectural and subprefectural level, the Central African Agency for
Agricultural Development (ACDA), National Agency for Livestock Development
(ANDE), Central African Institute of Agricultural Research (ICRA), the Regional
Directorates for Rural Development 1 and 2, the West Regional Directorates and
the Livestock Centre and the prefectural services of the Interministerial Unit for
Rural Roads Planning and Coordination (CIPC-PR). At the national level, the actors
concerned will be the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MADR)
Directorate General for Monitoring and Evaluation and the Directorates General of
ICRA, ACDA and ANDE.

19. At the national level, the project management and coordination unit (PMCU) will
sign agreements and performance contracts with government and non-government
partners in the different areas of project implementation. The technical agencies
AGDR, ANDE and ICRA will be accountable for the implementation of project
activities in crop and livestock agriculture under agreements and protocols for
collaboration concluded with the PCMU. Certain specific activities will be
implemented by operators and service providers and through national and
international technical assistance to be selected by competitive bidding and linked
to the project under performance contracts.

B. Organizational framework
20. PREPAS will be placed under the joint oversight of MADR and the Ministry of

Livestock and Animal Health (MESA). The two ministries will jointly provide
supervision and direct interaction with other sector ministries and technical and
financial partners, and will coordinate M&E activities in relation to recovery and
peacebuilding in the Central African Republic. The Ministry of Finance and Economy,
as recipient, will manage all funds and will be responsible for making counterpart
funding available in an effective and timely fashion.

21. National consultations will take place through a national steering committee to be
created by a joint decree of the Ministers of Agriculture and Livestock. The national
steering committee will bring together representatives of the sector ministries
involved in PREPAS implementation and representatives of producers’
organizations. Decentralized consultations will take place at the subprefectural
level, within consultative committees created by joint decree of the Ministers of
Agriculture and Livestock. Secretariat services will be provided by the PREPAS
bureau chief.

22. Project management will be provided by the PMCU based in Bangui, which will have
administrative and financial autonomy. The two subprefectural branches will be
located in Yaloké and Bouar. In alignment with IFAD guidelines for implementation
of projects in fragile situations, PREPAS will promote partnership-building and
technical assistance mobilization (UNICEF, the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations, the United Nations Office for Project Services, the International
Institute of Tropical Agriculture, and the International Centre for Agricultural
Research for Development). This will allow for the scaling up of activities in year 3,
particularly in relation to drinking water access, training and production.



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

5

C. Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
23. Planning and budgeting for PREPAS activities will take place by means of annual

workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs). Beginning in year two, the draft AWP/B will
include a summary of results obtained and constraints encountered during the
preceding year. A flexible approach will be adopted to enable the AWP/B to be
revised in the course of the fiscal year as needed. The planning process will begin in
early September of each year so that the Government may transmit the AWP/B to
IFAD on 30 November at the latest. Since the M&E system was virtually nonexistent
during PREVES start-up, the project will develop an M&E system to steer
implementation of sector M&E, which will produce data for policy dialogue purposes.
The PREPAS M&E system will measure progress made on project implementation
and the results and impact on target groups, including core indicators from the
Operational Results Management System (ORMS). An M&E manual will be
developed. An automated database will be developed specifically for the project,
which will also be equipped with geographical information system (GIS) software
for intervention mapping. A knowledge management strategy will be developed at
project start-up and supported by the M&E system.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
24. Budgets will be prepared and approved in accordance with the management

manual. The budgets are to be specified and entered using accounting software.
The imprest accounts procedure will be used for disbursements. Prior conditions will
be met before the first disbursement. The management manual will outline all
control activities in detail. The PREPAS accounts will be kept on an accruals basis in
accordance with international accounting standards and the Organization for the
Harmonization of Business Law in Africa accounting system (SYSCOHADA). An
internal auditor will be hired and will report to the national steering committee or to
an audit committee. The external audit of the project will be done by a private audit
firm in accordance with IFAD guidelines.

25. Procurement will take place in accordance with IFAD guidelines and the public
procurement code of the Central African Republic. To the extent possible, contracts
will be grouped in such a way as to appeal to bidders, encourage competition and
obtain the bet offers. At project start-up, the PCMU will update the procurement
plan for the first 18 months and submit it to IFAD for approval. The procurement
plan will specify, inter alia, the procurement method for each contract and the
thresholds and preferences applicable within the project. Procurement plans for
subsequent years will be included in AWP/Bs and submitted for approval by the
steering committee and non objection of IFAD. Each procurement plan will stipulate
the procedures to be followed by bidders to ensure compliance with IFAD
procurement guidelines.

E. Supervision
26. PREPAS supervision and financial administration will be done directly by IFAD, with

participation by representatives of MADR and MESA, with two supervision missions
per year. The first of these will be dedicated to supporting project start-up with
preparation of the first AWP/B, the procurement plan for the first 18 months, and
terms of reference for baseline studies and tender documents. In light of the fragile
context, significant resources will be allocated to the country office to ensure
continuous supervision and strong implementation support.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
27. PREPAS will be implemented over a period of six years. The project duration will be

reassessed at the midterm review given the fragile situations in the country. The
total project cost, including contingencies, is US$29.04 million (CFAF 15.9 billion).
Base cost is US$25.5 million (CFAF 14.0 billion). The project’s investment costs and
current expenses are, respectively, US$23.5 million (CFAF 12.9 billion) or 92 per



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

6

cent of base cost, and US$1.9 million (CFAF 1.1 billion) or 8 per cent of base cost.
Contingencies are US$3.5 million (CFAF 1.9 billion) of which US$0.8 million (CFAF
0.4 billion) for technical contingencies and US$2.7 million (CFAF 1.5 billion) for
financial contingencies.

Table 1
Project cost by source of financing and component
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Components
IFAD PBAS
2016-2018 Financing gap Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Promotion of community
development
1.1 Organizational capacity-
building 632 34 1 242.90 66 - - 0 - 1 874.90 6.5

1.2. Promoting nutrition and
access to drinking water 2 440.80 67 763.7 21 - - 431.4 11.9 3 636.00 12.5

Subtotal 3 072.80 56 2 006.60 36 - - 431.4 7.8 5 510.90 19

2. Productive investments

2.1 Strengthening the supply
of services to producers

3 460.40 63 1 678.00 30 - - 376.8 6.8 5 515.20 19

2.2 Support for production,
processing and marketing 3 645.50 27 6 902.80 51 3 077.10 22.5 56.5 0.4 13 681.80 47.1

Subtotal 7 105.80 37 8 580.80 45 3 077.10 16 433.3 2.3 19 197.00 66.1
3. Coordination, management,
M&E and consultation

3.1 Knowledge management and
consultation 103.6 41 150.1 59 - - 0 - 253.7 0.9

3.2 Coordination, management
and M&E

2 117.80 52 1 862.50 46 - - 101.5 2.5 4 081.80 14.1

Subtotal 2 221.40 51 2 012.60 46 - - 101.5 2.3 4 335.50 14.9

Total project cost 12 400.00 43 12 600.00 43 3 077.10 10.6 966.3 3.3 29 043.40 100

B. Project financing
28. The financing sources for the project are as follows: (i) IFAD will provide

US$25.0 million, or 86 per cent of total project cost, assigned over two allocation
cycles of the performance-based allocation system (PBAS) – US$12.4 million under
the 2016-2018 cycle and US$12.6 million to cover the financing gap under a further
cycle; (ii) module beneficiaries will contribute US$3.1 million, or 11 per cent of total
cost, in the form of contributions in kind; and (iii) the Central African Government
will contribute US$0.97 million in the form of exemptions from taxes and tariffs on
goods and services to be acquired under the project, or 3 per cent of total cost. The
financing gap of US$12.6 million could be financed under subsequent PBAS cycles,
on terms to be determined and subject to internal procedures and Executive Board
approval, or by cofinancing to be identified during implementation.



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

7

Table 2
Project cost by category of expenditure and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Category of expenditure
IFAD PBAS

2016 - 2018 Financing gap Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

I. Investment expenses

A. Rural engineering/works 2 411.1 81.0 - - - - 565.6 19.0 2 976.6 10.2

B. Vehicles 525.4 69.1 14.6 1.9 - - 220.6 29.0 760.6 2.6

C. Equipment and supplies 388.1 62.5 53.0 8.5 - - 180.2 29.0 621.3 2.1

D. Training, workshops and
seminars

1 368.7 41.2 1 950.4 58.8 - - 0.0 - 3 319.1 11.4

E. Consulting services 2 450.0 58.9 1 706.6 41.1 - - 0.0 - 4 156.6 14.3

F. Goods, inputs and services 266.5 40.8 387.4 59.2 - - 0.0 - 653.9 2.3

G. Subsidies and grants 3 800.2 26.5 7 453.9 52.0 3 077.1 21.5 -0.0 - 14 331.2 49.3

Total investment expenses 11 209.9 41.8 11 565.9 43.1 3 077.1 11.5 966.3 3.6 26 819.2 92.3

II. Current expenses

A. Salaries and benefits 1 072.4 55.9 846.5 44.1 - - - - 1 918.9 6.6

B. Operating expenses 117.7 38.6 187.6 61.4 - - 0.0 - 305.3 1.1

Total current expenses 1 190.1 53.5 1 034.1 46.5 - - 0.0 - 2 224.2 7.7

Total project expenses 12 400.0 42.7 12 600.0 43.4 3 077.1 10.6 966.3 3.3 29 043.4 100

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
29. Financial analysis shows that the net benefits generated by operations and

enterprises are positive and that the activities promoted by the project are
profitable. The economic internal rate of return is 19.6 per cent. Net present value
is an estimated US$19.3 million, or CFAF 10,590 million, for a discount rate of 6 per
cent.

D. Sustainability
30. PREPAS is not expected to involve any adverse environmental and social impact

and has therefore been classified as a category B operation, among projects with
moderate climate risk. The probability of maintaining gains over the long term and
creating the desired conditions to develop crop and livestock farming in the project
area is good. Boreholes and water points will be managed by management
committees to make drinking water widely available, thus reducing the workload
and waterborne illnesses, and will meet the needs of multiple uses. In addition,
repairers will be trained to do maintenance. The approach for inclusion of the most
vulnerable people – through literacy and project support modules designed to
facilitate access to production factors – is structured so as to endow households
with the needed capital and to create production and management capacity over
the medium term to guarantee food and nutritional security.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The main risks identified, in addition to fiduciary risks, are as follows: (i) worsening

of the country’s political and security crisis, and its possible spread to the PREPAS
area; (ii) poor technical and administrative capacities among project team
members; (iii) limited capacities of implementation partners; (iv) a lack of
coordination among interventions by technical and financial partners; and
(v) extreme climate events. Mitigation measures have been proposed for each risk.



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

8

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
32. PREPAS is aligned with IFAD policies, including: (i) IFAD’s Strategic Framework

2016-2025; (ii) Disaster Early Recovery Guidelines; (iii) Country Strategy
Note 2017-2018; (iv) climate change strategy; (v) environment and natural
resource management policy; (vi) targeting policy to mainstream smallholder
farmers and vulnerable groups into agricultural value chains; and (viii) policy on
gender equality and women’s empowerment.

B. Alignment and harmonization
33. PREPAS is aligned with the PNRCP 2017-2021, and will contribute to achieving the

objectives of food security and productive sector recovery included in pillar 3.
Within IFAD, the alignment documents are IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025
and Country Strategy Note 2018-2019, in which PREPAS is the only investment
planned. PREPAS will respond to IFAD’s strategic objectives 1, increasing the
productive capacity of poor rural people; and 3, strengthening the environmental
sustainability and climate resilience of their economic activities. PREPAS will also
contribute to achieving the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), in particular
SDG 1 (no poverty), SDG2 (zero hunger), SDG 6 (clean water and sanitation) and
SDG 15 (life on land).

C. Innovations and scaling up
34. IFAD considers innovation to be a process that adds value and solves a problem in

new ways. Based on this definition and to ensure the possibility of efficient
implementation on a large scale throughout the PREPAS area, the project will make
available standardized modules for production, processing, marketing and
production support services, taking into account the innovations that are best
adapted to withstand the effects of climate change, in particular involving manure –
e.g. training in integrated soil fertility management and EcoSan. PREPAS will also
consolidate and expand PREVES by gradually adding new villages and groups, and
with the inclusion of the Bossemptélé subprefecture.

D. Policy engagement
35. PREPAS calls for providing, based on pilot tests, factual data to guide policy

formulation favouring public and private investment and putting in place an
attractive regulatory and legislative framework. Through PREPAS, IFAD will support
the development and implementation of a seed policy, possibly in partnership with
FAO and/or the International Centre for Agronomic Research for Development. The
Central African Republic does not currently have a national policy on agricultural
extension. PREPAS will continue to pursue the extension approach used under
PREVES, adapting it to the local and national context. The data gathered will be
used to design such a policy over the longer term.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
36. A financing agreement between the Central African Republic and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

37. The Central African Republic is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

38. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
39. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:



EB 2018/LOT/P.9

9

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Central African Republic
under the Debt Sustainability Framework in an amount of twelve million four
hundred thousand United States dollars (US$12,400,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President

























































President’s report

Proposal for a loan to the Republic of Gabon
for the Agricultural and Rural Development
Project – Phase II

Republic of Gabon

Agricultural and Rural Development Project – Phase II

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Gabon

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, responsible
for the Graine national agriculture programme

Total project cost: EUR 20.93 million

Amount of IFAD loan:
(Performance-based allocation
system 2016-2018)

EUR 5.43 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Repayment term of 15 to 18 years,
including a grace period of three years, with an
annual rate of interest equivalent to 100 per cent
of the variable reference rate determined semi-
annually by the Executive Board

Financing gap: EUR 4.91 million

Contribution of the borrower: EUR 10.26 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: EUR 0.32 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of Gabon for the Agricultural and Rural Development Project –
Phase II, as contained in paragraph 48.

Proposal for a loan to the Republic of Gabon for the
Agricultural and Rural Development Project – Phase II

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Gabon is an upper middle-income country with a predominantly young population

estimated at 1.7 million. According to the Human Investment Strategy of 2014, the
poverty rate has dropped from 33 per cent in 2005 to 30 per cent in 2013. Poverty
is more prevalent in rural areas, where 45 per cent of households are economically
vulnerable compared to 20 per cent in urban areas.

2. The agriculture sector currently employs around 40 per cent of Gabon’s rural
population, yet contributes just 5 per cent of GDP. Agricultural production is
insufficient to make the country self-sufficient in food. To make up the resulting 60
per cent deficit in staple products, particularly cereals and meat, large volumes of
food are imported, estimated at more than US$650 million per year. The
prevalence of chronic malnutrition is higher in rural areas than in urban centres at
29 per cent and 14 per cent respectively.

3. This situation, the result of an organizational, political and institutional framework
that is weakly organized to stimulate agricultural development, is caused by
several factors: (i) uncontrolled and unsecured land tenure; (ii) small size of farms;
(iii) low yields for staple products; (iv) unattractive investment conditions and
insufficient tax incentives; (v) limited access to financing, seed, agricultural inputs
and outreach services; (vi) weak capacities among public, private and community
institutions operating in the sector; (vii) insufficient investment in production,
processing and marketing infrastructure; (viii) limited interconnectivity among
different value chain stakeholders; (ix) insufficient local workforce; and (x)
obsolete training infrastructure and platforms.

B. Justification and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. To reduce the country’s dependence on oil revenues and diversify the economy,
the Government launched the Emerging Gabon Strategic Plan (PSGE) setting forth
the main development priorities through 2025. In application of the PSGE, the
Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, responsible for the Graine programme
(MALGP) developed the Strategy for Economic Recovery of the Agriculture Sector
for the period 2016-2023, built around three major priorities: (i) guarantee food
security and reduce food imports by 80 per cent; (ii) create at least 150,000 new
formal jobs in cooperatives; and (iii) boost agricultural exports to US$1 billion per
year.

5. The country still faces rural poverty, inequalities and other challenges such as
limited institutional capacities and weak support structures and mechanisms for
agricultural policy and strategy. Although policies have been launched in the past,
the lack of full implementation has limited their impact on rural poverty, food crop
productivity, nutrition and food security.



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

2

6. Achieving the current national ambitions for agriculture will therefore mean
overcoming these challenges, starting with the creation of enabling conditions for
mobilizing and settling rural people generally, and the young workforce in
particular. This challenge, in addition to the need to strengthen productive capital,
is to reform institutional support systems, improve access to rural areas and
guarantee an adequate supply of inputs and technologies to support production
processing and market integration. Essentially, a fact-based decision-making
process on strategy and policy is crucial to spark excitement and engagement
among farmers, and interest among the private sector and market actors, in order
to sustainably reactivate agricultural development in Gabon.

7. Against this backdrop, a contextualized approach to IFAD’s engagement in Gabon,
based in part on support for agricultural policy and in part on structuring
productive investments, is suggested to accompany the Government’s efforts to
meet the challenges described. IFAD assistance in policy dialogue, innovation,
knowledge management and partnership, including South-South cooperation, will
make it possible to build local and national institutional capacities, stimulate sound
governance and promote an enabling environment for national and private
investment.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. PDAR II will be implemented in three of the country’s nine provinces: Woleu-Ntem,

where PDAR was implemented, Ngounié and l’Ogooué-Ivindo. Within these
provinces, the project will focus on 16 production areas covering 43 cantons and
171 villages or groups of villages.

9. PDAR II is intended to reach more than 16,000 beneficiaries. It will target actors in
the value chains, including those operating upstream and downstream of
production, in related services and occupations, in particular agricultural service
provision, input distribution, and equipment installation and maintenance. The
priority target group comprises poor rural people, particularly: (i) smallholder
producers; (ii) rural youth; (iii) women; and (iv) indigenous people.

10. The other beneficiaries will be the public bodies involved in agricultural policy
formulation, implementation and evaluation, decentralized crop and livestock
services, producers’ organizations and the private sector. They will receive
capacity-building to ensure that goods and services provided are adapted to the
needs of the priority target group.

B. Project development objectives
11. The project development objective is to sustainably improve incomes, food security

and nutrition for smallholder producers – women, youth and indigenous people – in
three provinces in Gabon. More specifically, this means:

- Improving the agricultural policy environment to promote increased public
and private investment thanks to an effective and sustainable system that
allows for implementation and monitoring of subsector policies and
strategies;

- Promoting economic activities and entrepreneurship in key agropastoral value
chains to improve incomes, food security and nutrition.

C. Components/results
Component 1: Policy support

12. The goal of this component is to improve the institutional, policy and regulatory
framework for the agriculture sector to increase public and private investment in
the rural sector and improve sector governance.



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

3

13. The component will be implemented in three subcomponents.

Subcomponent 1.1: Agriculture policy dialogue
14. The aim of this subcomponent is to achieve participation by all stakeholders in the

process of sector policy development, implementation and monitoring – the private
sector, producers’ organizations, NGOs, youth and women’s representatives, and
so on – while ensuring that poor rural people and their organizations have a space
to express their concerns.

15. To this end, a national platform and three provincial platforms will be set up to
serve as a framework for dialogue on agriculture policy and bottlenecks impeding
agricultural development, subsector competitiveness and actors’ performance.
Working groups will be set up around the priority themes identified. Specialized
resource persons will be tapped to conduct studies documenting the discussions
and informing debates by presenting facts and sound evidence. To optimize
participation by producers’ organizations, their apex organization will be
restructured and will benefit from specific capacity-building.

Subcomponent 1.2: Support for evidence-based agriculture policy
formulation and implementation

16. Depending on the bottlenecks identified by platform participants, the project will
support the production and use of factual data to document the development or
revision of policies on priority themes and their implementation, to improve
governance and enable an effective rural transformation to take place.

17. Activities will relate to: (i) the conduct of prospective and thematic studies in
preparation for the development or revision and validation of priority policies;
(ii) preparation and validation of three provincial land use management and
allocation plans; (iii) mobilization of international technical assistance specializing
in agriculture policy during the first three years of implementation, through a
specialized institution.

Subcomponent 1.3: Strengthening national capacities for policy
implementation and monitoring

18. The aim of this subcomponent is to strengthen national capacities with training on
policy analysis, evaluation of different agricultural strategy options, production of
factual data to guide policy and decision-making. To support this strategic,
institutional and operational shift, PDAR II will support the following five actions:

- Conduct of an institutional and organizational diagnostic assessment by the
MALGP, to develop a restructuring proposal adapted to the mandates of the
central directorates, decentralized services and agencies;

- Entry into service of the Agriculture Development Agency, which was recently
created to implement agricultural policies and strategies;

- Operational capacity-building for three provincial directorates, the regional
directorate for the North and 18 agriculture divisions to improve their
effectiveness in monitoring and supervising interventions by PDAR II;

- Entry into service of the sector M&E system prepared by the Government with
technical support from the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO), and the establishment of a framework for consultation and
coordination of rural sector technical and financial partners; and

- Strengthening of the PDAR II steering, monitoring and knowledge
capitalization function.

Component 2: Value chain development and agropastoral
entrepreneurship promotion

19. This component is intended to intensify production systems and improve
productivity and competitiveness of produce by supporting the development of



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

4

local economic initiatives and entrepreneurship in the crop and livestock
subsectors. This objective will be achieved within the framework of four
subcomponents.

Subcomponent 2.1 – Support for consultation among local actors and
market access

20. The aim is to set up multi-actor innovation platforms in the 16 production areas to
improve consultation among actors and create local collective dynamics that will
enable market access. Each innovation platform will conduct a diagnostic
assessment for use in developing and implementing action plans.

Subcomponent 2.2 – Access to inputs and crop and livestock services
21. The intervention strategy will be based on setting up private local service

providers, particularly young people, by financing cross-cutting actions that are key
to promoting the targeted value chains. These actions will relate to multiplication
and distribution of plant material, supply of small-scale breeding livestock, setting
up agricultural machinery service providers and installing input stores in
partnership with producers’ organizations or private providers.

Subcomponent 2.3 – Support for agropastoral investment and
entrepreneurship

22. The aim is to cofinance actions plans, i.e. collective and individual investments
planned for production areas by innovation platform participants to improve
production, storage, processing and marketing, and raise the incomes of the target
groups. To this end, a PDAR II investment cofinancing mechanism will be set up at
project start-up following the model in the PDAR manual. This will define the
overall activity planning framework, cofinancing code, procedures and management
tools.

Subcomponent 2.4 – Capacity-building and dissemination of innovations
23. This subcomponent will cover testing and disseminating innovative techniques that

can lift the constraints on smallholder rural producers and improve the productivity
of production systems. In addition, it will allow for testing and disseminating
technologies to manage conflicts with wildlife generally, and with elephants in
particular, to enable the producers concerned to better manage their farms. Finally,
the subcomponent will promote South-South cooperation to seek solutions to
urgent challenges facing agricultural development in Gabon.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
24. The national platform for policy dialogue and the innovation platforms in production

areas will be coordinated respectively by a MALGP central or general directorate
and by provincial directorates. Participation by actors representing all economic
interests and target groups will be assured, to engage in dialogue, communication
and interaction to mobilize collective knowledge about the territories and prioritize
problems and possible solutions and take them to the Government. This approach
will improve the ownership and effectiveness of policies and strategies.

25. Policy and strategy development will be steered by the central directorate in charge
of planning and policy. International technical assistance will be used to carry out
agriculture policy support activities, including capacity-building for actors.

26. Setting up and coordinating innovation platforms will be a key activity under
component 2, to be launched at project start-up, as the success of productive
investments will depend upon them functioning properly. Supported activities will
be identified in the diagnostic assessments and consultations conducted in the
platforms, and will be included in their action plans. The action plans will define the
different individual and collective value chain subprojects to be submitted for
funding purposes.



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

5

27. Cofinancing for subprojects will be obtained via demand together with a feasibility
study or business plan. Business plans will be developed by the beneficiary with
support from the production area facilitator, and by ad hoc experts as needed. A
simplified procedure will be put in place to review the applications.

B. Organizational framework
28. The project will be placed under the oversight of the Ministry of Agriculture as the

executing agency. A national project steering and monitoring committee will be set
up to provide strategic direction. Consultation at the decentralized level will be
through a provincial technical coordination committee that will validate provincial
activity planning and supervise implementation to ensure harmonization and
consistency with sector strategies and interventions by other partners. Project
coordination and management will be done by a national project coordination and
management unit (PCU) based in Libreville with administrative and financial
autonomy. The PCU will comprise a national coordination unit and three provincial
branches located in Ngounié, Ogoué Ivindo and Woleu Ntem.

C. Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
29. Planning involves the preparation of annual workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs).

Planning and budgeting activities under component 1 will be steered by the PCU in
close collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture central and general directorates
concerned. Planning and budgeting activities under component 2 will be based on
diagnostic assessments and consultations at the production area level, estimates of
potential demand in subprojects for the following year and recommendations from
annual participatory M&E workshops held at the provincial level, and will give rise
to preparation by each branch of an annual workplan for discussion at meetings of
provincial technical coordination committees, then transmitted to the PCU for
decision.

30. The M&E system will serve as a tool for steering at both the project and oversight
level. The information provided by the system will be used to help achieve project
results and to improve the strategy and policy framework. A management
information system and a subproject management and monitoring system will be
put in place to provide input for a spatial database on all project interventions.

31. Knowledge management will be linked to the project M&E through a global system
for collection and dissemination of information of use to the different actors, and
for gathering information on the activities and methods implemented. Products
generated will include training manuals, good practice guidelines, technical
specifications, posters, videos and rural radio broadcasts, as well as exchanges of
experience and knowledge.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
32. PDAR II financial management will be provided by the PCU, acting with

administrative and financial autonomy. The PCU will be responsible and
accountable to the Government and IFAD for the use of the project’s financial
resources in accordance with the financing agreement. The PCU will prepare
quarterly financial and accounting statements for transmission to the Government
and IFAD, as well as financial statements on project operations for submission to
an annual external audit. The administrative and financial management of PDAR II
and all fiduciary matters will be in compliance with the provisions and procedures
set forth in the letter to the borrower and in the administrative, financial and
management procedures manual.



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

6

33. Procurement will take place in accordance with the relevant IFAD guidelines1 and
the Gabonese Procurement Code. To the extent possible, contracts will be grouped
in such a way as to attract bidders, encourage competition and obtain better offers.
At start-up, the procurement plan for the first 18 months of implementation will be
updated by the PCU and submitted to IFAD for non-objection.

E. Supervision
34. PDAR II will be supervised jointly by IFAD and the Government, through

representatives of the project’s national steering and monitoring committee, with
two supervision missions each year.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
35. The total cost of the project, including contingencies, is EUR 20.93 million (CFAF

13.73 billion) over a period of six years. Base costs are EUR 19.6 million, and cost
escalation and physical contingencies are EUR 1.32 million (CFAF 868 million), or 6
per cent of base costs. Taxes account for 8 per cent of total cost, in the amount of
EUR 1.72 million (CFAF 1.1 billion).

Table 1
Project cost by source of financing and component
(Thousands of euros)

Components

IFAD (PBAS)*
2016-2018 Financing gap Government Beneficiaries

Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Policy support and institutional
capacity-building

1.1 Agriculture policy dialogue 554 90.1 - - 61 9.9 - - 615 2.9

1.2 Support for evidence-based agriculture
policy formulation and implementation

196 14.9 - - 1 124 85.1 - - 1 320
6.3

1.3 Strengthening national capacities for policy
implementation and monitoring

1 289 40.7 726 22.9 1 150 36.3 - - 3 164 15.1

Subtotal 2 039 40.0 726 14.2 2 334 45.8 - - 5 100 24.4

2. Value chain development and
agropastoral entrepreneurship promotion

2.1 Support for consultation among local
actors and market access

1 487 39.8 805 21.5 1 447 38.7 - - 3 739 17.9

2.2 Access to inputs and crop and
livestock services

308 19.8 466 29.9 782 50.3 - - 1 557 7.4

2.3 Support for investment and
agropastoral entrepreneurship

370 13.1 1 775 63.0 350 12.4 322 11.4 2 817 13.5

2.4 Capacity-building and dissemination
of innovations

354 11.0 734 22.8 2 137 66.3 - - 3 225 15.4

Subtotal 2 520 22.2 3 780 33.3 4 716 41.6 322 2.8 11 338 54.2

3. Project coordination and
management 872 19.4 407 9.1 3 210 71.5 - - 4 488 21.4

Total cost 5 431 26.0 4 913 23.5 10 260 49.0 322 1.5 20 926 100.0

* Performance-based allocation system.

B. Project financing
36. PDAR II will be financed by IFAD, the beneficiaries and the Government of Gabon.

The project financing will be provided by the different sources as follows: (i) an
IFAD loan under the 2016-2018 AWP/B in the amount of EUR 5.43 million,
equivalent to US$6.3 million2 (26 per cent of total cost); (ii) a financing gap of EUR

1 These guidelines set forth the principles of economy, efficiency and social equity, and call for various methods ranging
from international competitive bidding to direct contracting depending on the contract type and amount.
2 At the rate of US$1.16 to EUR 1.



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

7

4.91 million, equivalent to US$5.7 million (23.5 per cent of total cost); (iii) a
government contribution of about CFAF 6.73 billion or EUR 10.26 million (49 per
cent of total cost), of which EUR 1.72 million corresponds to taxes and tariffs on
goods and services purchased by the project and a contribution in cash of EUR 8.54
million; and (iv) a contribution by beneficiaries to cofinancing for subprojects
estimated at EUR 0.32 million (1.5 per cent of total cost).3 The financing gap of
EUR 4.91 million could be covered under subsequent cycles of the PBAS – subject
to financing terms to be determined, compliance with internal procedures and
Executive Board approval – or by cofinancing mobilized during implementation.

Table 2
Project cost by category of expenditure and source of financing
(Thousands of euros)

Category of expenditure

IFAD (PBAS)
2016-2018 Financing gap Government Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

I. Investment costs

Works 1 410 56.1 422 16.8 681 27.1 - - 2 512 12.0

Equipment and supplies 136 23.6 - - 438 76.4 - - 574 2.7

Transportation equipment 25 4.9 - - 483 95.1 - - 508 2.4

II. Consulting services

National consultants 616 21.7 823 29.0 1 400 49.3 - - 2 839 13.6

International consultants 1 589 42.5 762 20.4 1 391 37.2 - - 3 741 17.9

Subtotal 2 205 33.5 1 585 24.1 2 790 42.4 - - 6 580 31.4

Training and workshops 900 42.9 350 16.7 845 40.3 - - 2 096 10.0

Subsidies and grants 514 13.3 2 149 55.7 874 22.7 322 8.3 3 859 18.4

Total investment costs 5 190 32.2 4 506 27.9 6 112 37.9 322 2.0 16 130 77.1

III. Recurring costs

Salaries and benefits 242 6.6 407 11.2 3 002 82.2 - - 3 651 17.4

Operating and maintenance - - - - 1 146 100.0 - - 1 146 5.5

Total recurring costs 242 5.0 407 8.5 4 148 86.5 - - 4 797 22.9

Total project costs 5 431 26.0 4 913 23.5 10 260 49.0 322 1.5 20 926 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
37. The quantifiable benefits of PDAR II are derived from the investments to be made.

The economic internal rate of return is an estimated 13.22 per cent, well above the
opportunity cost of capital (7 per cent); net present value is CFAF 6.92 billion
(US$12.23 million).

D. Sustainability
38. Three kinds of major adverse environmental and social impact potentially related to

project implementation have been identified: (i) conflicts between humans and
wildlife; (ii) accelerated deforestation as a result of supporting unsustainable
farming practices; and (iii) marginalization of indigenous peoples. For each of the
risks identified, alternative measures or safeguards have been proposed to
minimize the project’s adverse environmental and social impact and optimize
benefits for target populations.

3 Counterpart contributions from beneficiaries will represent at least 10 per cent of the total cost of the subprojects,
including contributions in cash and in kind. The counterpart ratios for public and common goods may, following
consultation with beneficiaries, exceed this percentage.



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

8

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. Several risks have been identified: (i) insufficient or tardy mobilization of

counterpart funds; (ii) weak national capacities in coordination and
implementation; and (iii) weak national capacities in financial management and
procurement. Mitigation measures have been proposed for each of these risks,
including mobilizing international technical assistance.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
40. PDAR II is aligned with IFAD policies and major guidelines, such as: (i) IFAD’s

Strategic Framework 2016-2025; (ii) country strategy note 2017-2018;4
(iii) climate change strategy; (iv) natural resources and environmental
management policy; (v) rural finance policy; (vi) targeting strategy, in connection
with targeting vulnerable people and mainstreaming smallholder producers and the
private sector into agricultural value chains; and (vii) respect for gender parity and
social inclusion of young people.

41. A Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures of IFAD (SECAP) note
has been prepared. PDAR II is not expected to involve any significant adverse
social, environmental or climate impact. It is therefore proposed that it be
classified as a category B operation.

B. Alignment and harmonization
42. The project’s lines of action are in line with the priorities set forth in the PSGE, and

more specifically with the strategic guidelines of the Green Gabon Plan. They are
also fully aligned with the Strategy for Economic Recovery of the Agriculture Sector
for the period 2016-2023, and consistent with IFAD’s country strategy note
outlining the framework for cooperation during the 2016-2018 financing cycle.

C. Innovations and scaling up
43. Based on IFAD’s definition of innovation as a process that creates value added or

solves a problem in an original way using new solutions, PDAR II has selected the
following areas for innovation: (i) mitigating human-elephant conflict; (ii) inclusion
of indigenous peoples; (iii) South-South cooperation; and (iv) testing innovations
in a farming environment. Phase 1 of the project arose as a model for sustainable
socio-economic development in rural Gabon. Scaling up earlier achievements by
IFAD in the framework of public investment will inspire this model, and will be
realized using three main instruments: project financing, policy and strategy
consultations, and knowledge management.

D. Policy engagement
44. One component is entirely dedicated to policy development. The objective is to

improve the agriculture policy environment to encourage increased public and
private investment by setting up an effective and sustainable system to develop,
implement and monitor subsector policies and strategies.

4 Preliminary version presented in May 2017. In view of IFAD’s comparative advantage and lessons learned from
experience, the strategy consists of scaling up PDAR gains to intensify sector investment while enabling full
participation by rural smallholder producers in the agriculture sector recovery and diversification of the economy,
following an entrepreneurial approach. Overall, the aim of the strategy is to achieve a sustainable increase in incomes
and food and nutritional security for poor rural people, particularly women and young people. This overall objective
translates into three strategic objectives: (i) sustainably increase smallholder farmers’ productivity; (ii) improve
smallholders’ access to markets; and (iii) strengthen the capacities of all actors.



EB 2018/LOT/P.8

9

VI. Legal instruments and authority
45. A financing agreement between the Republic of Gabon and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower. A copy of
the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

46. The Republic of Gabon is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

47. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
48. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Gabon in an amount equivalent to five million four hundred and
thirty-one thousand euros (EUR 5,431,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President



























































 

 

 

 

 

 

President’s report 
 

Proposal for a loan and grant to the Republic 
of Senegal for the Support to Agricultural 
Development and Rural Entrepreneurship 
Programme ‒ Phase II  
 

Republic of Senegal  

Support to Agricultural Development and Rural 
Entrepreneurship Programme ‒ Phase II  

Financing summary 

Initiating institution: IFAD 

Borrower: Ministry of Economy and Finance  

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Infrastructure  

Total programme cost: US$72.4 million 

Amount of IFAD loan: 
(Performance-based allocation system 
[PBAS] 2016-2018): 

EUR 40.5 million (equivalent to US$46.3 million) 

Amount of IFAD grant:  
(PBAS 2016-2018): 

EUR 0.4 million (equivalent to US$0.5 million) 

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: maturity of 40 years, including a 
grace period of 10 years, with a service charge of  
0.75 per cent per annum  

Cofinanciers: OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID), local 
communities  

Amount of cofinancing: OFID: US$10 million 
Local communities: US$0.2 million 

Terms of cofinancing: OFID: grant 

Contribution of the borrower: US$9.5 million 

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$5.9 million 

Appraising institution: IFAD 

Cooperating institution: IFAD 

 

 



EB 2018/123/R.12/Rev.1 

1 

Recommendation for approval 

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed 

financing to the Republic of Senegal for the Support to Agricultural Development 

and Rural Entrepreneurship Programme ‒ Phase II, as contained in paragraph 44. 

Proposal for a loan and grant to the Republic of Senegal 
for the Support to Agricultural Development and Rural 
Entrepreneurship Programme ‒ Phase II  

I. Strategic context and rationale  

A. Country and rural development and poverty context  

1. Senegal had a population of 15.26 million in 2017, 50.2 per cent women and  

49.8 per cent men. Demographic growth is 2.6 per cent per year. The Senegalese 

population is relatively young, with 62 per cent under 35 years of age. 

Unemployment is primarily young as well: nearly six of 10 unemployed people 

(60.6 per cent) were between 15 and 34 years of age in 2017, according to the 

National Agency of Statistics and Demography (2016). 

2. Growth in 2016, driven by agriculture and the secondary sector, was 6.5 per cent. 

Nevertheless, the endemic poverty rate remains unchanged at an estimated  

46 per cent of households, placing Senegal among the world’s 25 poorest 

countries.  

3. The country’s economy is based essentially on the primary sector – agriculture, 

fishing, mining and tourism – in addition to the secondary and tertiary sectors with 

new information and communication technologies. Agriculture employs 50 per cent 

of the population and accounts for 15.83 per cent of GDP (World Bank, 2016). 

Farming is mainly rainfed and seasonal, focusing on both cash crops – groundnut, 

cotton, horticulture – and staple foods such as millet, sorghum, maize, cowpea and 

rice. The groundnut subsector, long the mainstay of the economy, is undergoing a 

serious crisis. Current agricultural performance does not allow for improving living 

standards or reducing poverty among people living in rural areas.  

4. The food and nutritional status of Senegal’s population is cause for concern. Since 

2012, Senegal has faced a persistent nutritional crisis, with high rates of acute 

malnutrition in five regions – Matam, Tambacounda, Louga, Saint-Louis and 

Diourbel. Nutritional surveys conducted at end-2017 show a significant drop in the 

prevalence of acute malnutrition in these five regions, but the situation remains 

precarious despite this positive development. Some 120,000 children will need 

nutritional care, including more than 23,000 suffering from severe acute 

malnutrition and close to 92,000 with moderate acute malnutrition. Around 25,000 

expectant and nursing mothers will also need nutritional support (United Nations, 

2018). 

5. The United Nations Development Programme’s sustainable human development 

index ranked Senegal in 165
th
 place worldwide in 2016, with 46.7 per cent of the 

population living below the poverty line (World Bank, 2016). Poverty is 

multidimensional in Senegal and very pronounced in rural areas where farming is 

the main economic activity: in 2015 more than two thirds of households  

(69 per cent) were considered poor, 53.2 per cent of them very poor (National 

Agency of Statistics and Demography, 2015). 

6. The agriculture sector is extremely fragile in the face of climate hazards. Poor 

management of natural resources such as soil and water raise the vulnerability of 



EB 2018/123/R.12/Rev.1 

2 

poor people, whose incomes and food security are dependent on agriculture. 

Recent climate changes in Senegal include a 30 per cent drop in rainfall, an 

increase in temperature on the order of 0.9°C, growing aridification in the country’s 

north, a strong trend towards aridity in the central regions and a more or less 

strong trend towards semi-aridity in the southern regions. Should these trends 

continue, the resulting impact on water resources, agriculture, fishing, coastal 

areas and health could be significant. 

7. The supply of financial services in rural areas is insufficient to meet the financing 

needs expressed by the populations concerned. High transaction costs, limited 

institutional capacities of endogenous rural service providers, specific risks inherent 

to farming activity, a lack of assets that can be put up as collateral by people and 

inadequate financial resources given the specificities of savings that are often in 

kind – livestock, poultry, agricultural produce, etc. – act as obstacles to financial 

inclusion of rural populations in Senegal. 

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and  
RB- COSOP  

8. The Support to Agriculture Development and Rural Entrepreneurship Programme – 

Phase II (PADAER-II) will be carried out within a country context characterized by 

high levels of poverty and malnutrition, poor agricultural productivity, low access 

by agricultural value chain actors to external financing, very high youth 

unemployment and production systems that are highly exposed to climate 

phenomena. Accordingly, it will adopt an inclusive value chains approach that 

builds on and scales up the results achieved by IFAD in Senegal under the first 

phase of PADAER and elsewhere in the subregion. PADAER-II is fully aligned with 

national policies on rural development, in particular the Programme to Accelerate 

Agricultural Growth, the agricultural component of the Emerging Senegal Plan, the 

Livestock Development Programme, the National Food Security Plan and the 

National Action Plan on Climate Change Adaptation. The programme is aligned with 

the IFAD country strategy note, and takes into account experiences by the World 

Food Programme (WFP), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 

Nations (FAO) and the Global Environment Fund (GEF). 

9. The lessons learned from the first phase of PADAER showed that access to quality 

production factors for women and young people, together with a system of 

agricultural advisory assistance based on mobilizing endogenous resource persons 

from producers’ organizations (POs) supported by rural advisory assistance 

structures, can make a strong contribution to raising farm productivity. It is crucial 

to take climate variability into account by making sustainable hydro-agricultural 

improvements available to value chain actors, facilitating access to climate 

information and developing a farm insurance programme to build the resilience of 

vulnerable households. Previous experiences in Senegal also showed that giving 

producers access to secure and more profitable markets is a determining factor in 

achieving food security and combating poverty. 

II. Programme description  

A. Programme area and target group  

10. PADAER-II will operate in the regions of Matam, Tambacounda, Kédougou and 

Kolda. The programme area covers about 50 per cent of the country’s area and  

15 per cent of its population. PADAER-II will target 43,700 households directly, 

comprising about 437,000 people. The programme beneficiaries are essentially 

poor smallholder crop and livestock farmers, of whom at least 40 per cent will be 

women and 50 per cent young people, both girls and boys. 

11. PADAER will operate in the following value chains: rice, maize, fonio, small 

ruminants and improved village poultry breeding. The programme will support the 

market gardening subsector. In addition to these major value chains, it will support 



EB 2018/123/R.12/Rev.1 

3 

complementary value chains such as millet and sorghum, non-timber forest 

products and banana. Value chains to be prioritized will be those in which poor 

households, women and young people are most represented or could easily join.  

B. Programme development objective 

12. The goal of PADAER-II is to contribute to reducing poverty for women, young 

people and men living in the programme area by integrating them with profitable, 

diversified value chains that are resilient to climate change. The development 

objective is to sustainably improve the food security and incomes of smallholder 

crop and livestock farmers and to create permanent, well-paying jobs for rural 

people, particularly women and young people.  

C. Components/outcomes 

13. The programme is structured in three components.  

14. Component 1: Improving the supply of agricultural products. The expected 

outcome of this component is for smallholder crop and livestock farmers to 

sustainably increase their production and productivity. To this end, the programme 

will build: (i) hydro-agricultural improvements; (ii) pastoral infrastructure; and 

(iii) marketing infrastructure. It will facilitate access to production factors and 

advisory assistance on crop and livestock farming. The nutritional education 

subcomponent will strengthen knowledge and attitudes among rural people. To 

build smallholder resilience, the programme will consolidate the index-based 

insurance programme developed during phase one.  

15. Component 2: Developing value chains and financing actors. The expected 

outcome is professionalized and empowered agricultural value chain actors, 

particularly crop and livestock producers’ organizations. To this end, the 

programme will facilitate the development of rural entrepreneurship; capacity-

building for POs to enable them to provide sustainable services to their members; 

and collaborative governance of crop and livestock value chains to consolidate 

existing value chain inter-professional frameworks. The programme will also 

facilitate access by producers to credit and strengthen their knowledge of financial 

matters. 

16. Component 3: Coordination, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and 

knowledge management. Under this component, the programme will finance: 

(i) the programme coordination unit (PCU); (ii) the operation of three branches 

located in Matam, Kédougou and Kolda; (iii) steering and technical activities; and 

(iv) strengthening of M&E capacities within the agriculture sector. 

III. Programme implementation 

A. Approach 

17. The PADAER–II intervention logic is to scale up the gains achieved under the first 

phase of the programme, as well as the positive results of innovations developed in 

Senegal, to promote rural youth employment, rural women’s empowerment and 

the climate change resilience of agricultural value chains. As in phase one, the 

programme will adopt an inclusive value chains approach driven by demand from 

agricultural value chain actors.  

18. The programme will outsource the implementation of activities with support from 

deconcentrated government services, national directorates and agencies, 

experienced national and international operators, civil society, and PO and private 

sector platforms.  

B. Organizational framework 

19. The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Infrastructure (MAER) will provide oversight 

of PADAER-II. MAER will set up a steering committee based on the same 

committee as in phase one, expanded to take responsibility for new activities under 



EB 2018/123/R.12/Rev.1 

4 

PADAER-II. The Ministry of Livestock and Animal Production will serve as  

vice-chairperson of the committee. The technical committee, composed of the 

various national and regional actors in rural development, will review relevant 

matters as needed prior to meetings of the steering committee.  

20. PADAER-II will have a PCU that will be responsible for procurement and M&E and 

will coordination consultations among the partners to ensure sustainable 

agricultural value chain development. The PCU will be based in Tambacounda and 

will have three light branches located in Matam, Kédougou and Kolda. 

21. The PCU, directed by a coordinator, will comprise an administrative and financial 

officer, an infrastructure specialist, an M&E specialist, a specialist in gender issues 

and POs, a specialist in livestock value chains, a specialist in crop value chains, a 

specialist in rural entrepreneurship, an accountant, an M&E assistant and support 

staff. The branches will be very light units directed by a regional branch manager, 

with a secretary and a driver. They will provide representation and close 

monitoring of activities. The management staff of the PADAER-II PCU will be 

recruited on a competitive basis according to IFAD-approved procedures. 

C. Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management  

22. Planning. The programme will be implemented on the basis of annual workplans 

and budgets (AWP/Bs). The AWP/Bs will be driven by the needs of agricultural 

value chain actors, with support from inter-professional value chain frameworks. 

Needs expressed at the regional level will be covered by a regional technical 

programme. The different regional technical programmes will be validated by the 

technical committee, then assembled by the PCU team into a national AWP/B, 

which will then be transmitted for comments to the Ministry of Agriculture and 

approved by the steering committee before being sent to IFAD for non-objection. 

To ensure consistency and complementarity of actions with partners operating in 

the programme area and investments in roads to connect production areas and 

hydro-agricultural improvements, the programme will ensure that such activities 

are in fact included in the community investment plans.  

23. M&E system. The M&E system will be used as a decision-making tool at various 

levels of programme implementation. M&E for PADAER-II will be established by 

drawing on lessons learned during phase one. A limited number of indicators will be 

gathered, disaggregated by sex and age as relevant. The system will be aligned 

with the national indicators used by MAER and the Ministry of Livestock and Animal 

Production. The programme will set up the system to monitor the agriculture 

subsector and will support the Ministry of Livestock’s research and planning unit in 

implementing the livestock sector monitoring system.  

24. Knowledge management. The knowledge management strategy for PADAER-II 

will link the M&E, results obtained and lessons learned. The programme will 

support the collection and dissemination of useful information for value chain 

actors at the local, regional and national levels, as well as the capitalization of 

activities and methods applied by IFAD projects.  

D. Financial management, procurement and governance 

25. Financial management. An evaluation of the proposed financial management 

system was done during programme design. The programme risk is considered 

moderate. The programme funds will be managed in accordance with the financing 

agreement. The administrative and financial management procedures will be set 

forth in the letter to the borrower and in the programme manual of administrative, 

accounting, financial and internal control procedures. 

26. The administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual will take into 

account the specificities of the programme, in particular the use of multiple 

financing sources and the number of intervention regions. The accounting 



EB 2018/123/R.12/Rev.1 

5 

procedures used will be those applicable to programmes and projects in the IFAD 

portfolio. 

27. Flow of funds. For disbursements, a principal designated account will be opened 

in the programme name by the Directorate for Cooperation and External Financing 

at a credible commercial bank to deposit the loan proceeds. A separate account will 

be opened for grant resources. An operations account, receiving funds from the 

designated accounts, will also be opened in Tambacounda, and movements will be 

subject to the double signature principle.  

28. Audit. In accordance with the new IFAD procedures approved in December 2017, 

an overall programme audit will be performed each year by an audit firm selected 

by competitive bidding. The project support unit of the Ministry of Economy, 

Finance and Planning will direct the audit firm selection process and the monitoring 

of implementation of audit recommendations. The internal control arrangements 

for the country programme will ensure that internal control for the programme 

takes place on the basis of an annual plan approved by the Ministry of Finance and 

IFAD. In addition to the annual audit, the project will prepare quarterly financial 

and accounting reports for transmission to the Government and IFAD. The audited 

financial statements will be published on the IFAD official website. 

29. Procurement. Contracts for goods, works and services will be awarded in 

accordance with recipient government provisions, provided they are compatible 

with IFAD procurement guidelines. The community procurement method may also 

be used to ensure participation by POs and local authorities. For infrastructure, the 

procurement specialists of regional development agencies will provide oversight of 

the quality of tender documents prepared by local authorities and implementing 

agencies.  

E. Supervision 

30. Programme supervision and administration of financing will be provided directly by 

IFAD.  

IV. Programme cost, financing, benefits  

A. Programme cost 

31. The total cost of the programme, for a duration of six years, is US$72.4 million, of 

which US$3.4 million for physical and financial contingencies, distributed as 

follows: US$56.0 million for component 1 (77.3 per cent), US$5.8 million for 

component 2 (8 per cent) and US$10.6 million for component 3 (14.7 per cent).  



EB 2018/123/R.12/Rev.1 

6 

Table 1 
Programme cost by source of financing and component 
(Thousands of United States dollars) 

 

IFAD loan IFAD grant OFID Beneficiaries 
Local 

communities 
Borrower/ 

counterpart Total 

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % 

1. Improving the 
supply of 
agricultural 
products  32 352 57.8 - - 10 000 17.9 5 318 9.5 242 0.4 8 092 14.1 56 003 77.3 

2. Developing 
value chains and 
financing actors  4 194 72.4 500 8.6 - - 621  10.7 - - 478 8.3 5 793 8.0 

3.Coordination, 
M&E, knowledge 
management  9 747 91.6 - - - - - - - - 892 8.4 10 639 14.7 

Total 46 293 63.9 500 0.7 10 000 13.8 5 939 8.2 242 0.3 9 462 13.1 72 435 100 

 

B. Programme financing 

32. Financing for PADAER II breaks down as follows: a grant in the amount of  

US$0.5 million (0.7 per cent) and a loan from IFAD under the current performance-

based allocation system (PBAS) cycle in the amount of US$46.3 million  

(63.9 per cent); a loan from OFID in the amount of US$10 million (17.7 per cent); 

a contribution from the Government of US$9.5 million (13.1 per cent) 

corresponding to taxes and tariffs estimated at US$7.9 million, and a direct 

contribution in kind of US$1.5 million; a contribution from beneficiaries in the 

amount of US$5.9 million (8.2 per cent); and a contribution from communities for 

US$0.2 million (0.3 per cent). 

Table 2 
Programme cost by category of expenditure and source of financing  
(Thousands of United States dollars)  

Category of 
expenditure 

IFAD loan IFAD grant OFID Beneficiaries 
Local 

communities Government Total 

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % 

Investment expenses    

1. Civil and rural 
engineering 20 852 54.7 - - 9 430 24.8 231 0.6 242 0.6 7 342 19.3 38 096 52.6 

2. Equipment and 
vehicles 541 84.7 - - - - - - - - 98 15.3 639 0.9 

3. Fund for 
subprojects  9 916 67.7 - - - - 4 724 32.3 - - - - 14 639 20.2 

4. Support for 
subprojects  895 63.1 - - - - 305 21.6 - - 217 15.3 1 417 2.0 

5. Research, 
training, information 
and technical 
assistance formation  7 123 73.3 500 5.1 570 5.9 59 0.6 - - 1 464 15.1 9 717 13.4 

6. Service provision 1 479 64.6 - - - - 620 27.0 - - 193 8.4 2 291 3.2 

Total investment 
expenses 40 806 61.1 500 0.7 10 000 15.0 5 939 8.9 242 0.4 9 313 13.9 66 800 92.2 

Recurrent expenses    

1. Salaries and 
benefits 4 666 100.0 - - - - - - - - - - 4 666 6.4 

2. Operating 
expenses 821 84.7 - - - - - - - - 148 15.3 969 1.3 

Total recurrent 
expenses 5 487 97.4 - - - - - - - - 148 2.6 5 635 7.8 

 Total 46 293 63.9 500 0.7 10 000 13.8 5 939 8.2 242 0.3 9 462 13.1 72 435 100 

 



EB 2018/123/R.12/Rev.1 

7 

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis 

33. Financial analysis shows that the net benefits generated by operations and 

enterprises are positive and that the activities promoted by the programme are 

profitable. The economic internal rate of return for the programme is  

16.92 per cent. Net present value is estimated at US$41.2 million, or  

CFAF 24.3 billion, at a discount rate of 6 per cent. The sensitivity analysis confirms 

that the positive economic results and impact of the programme are robust to the 

risks identified.  

D. Sustainability 

34. The sustainability of the investments under PADAER-II will be ensured by: 

(i) systematically giving accountability from the outset to existing permanent 

structures set up and reinforced by previous projects and programmes – 

deconcentrated technical services closest to beneficiaries, grass-roots and apex 

professional organizations, and agricultural and rural advisory assistance and 

private sector organizations – to provide accessible socio-economic services of 

quality; (ii) giving accountability and providing institutional and economic 

strengthening to POs at all levels; (iii) setting up management and maintenance 

committees based on previous experience for infrastructure built or rehabilitated in 

each case; (iv) strengthening inter-profession capacities to provide collaborative 

value chain governance; (v) guaranteeing the creditworthiness of market operators 

and compliance with contracts between POs and market operators; and 

(vi) promoting production models that are resilient to climate change.  

E. Risk identification and mitigation 

35. Overall, the level of risk of PADAER-II is considered moderate. The most probable 

risks relate to climate hazards, in particular rising temperatures and declining 

rainfall, and to access by vulnerable households to financial institutions. These risks 

will be mitigated by means of an effective partnership between the programme and 

the financial institutions and other funds set up by the Government, and by 

developing climate-smart production models. In addition to the risks mentioned 

above, the additional workload to be taken on by the current team could have an 

adverse impact on internal control. This risk could be mitigated by realistic 

planning of activities and a good distribution of the workload. 

V. Corporate considerations  

A. Compliance with IFAD policies 

36. The programme is compliant with IFAD strategies, principles and instruments, and 

is aligned with IFAD’s climate change strategy.  

37. PADAER-II is classified in environmental category B. The programme activities will 

have moderate social and environmental impact owing to the intensification of 

agricultural and livestock production through the use of appropriate technologies as 

well as the processing and marketing of products. The programme calls for a set of 

approaches and technologies to avoid greenhouse gas emissions and to capture. 

B. Alignment and harmonization 

38. The programme is fully aligned with the Emerging Senegal Plan, in particular the 

agriculture component, and with the Programme to Accelerate Agricultural Growth. 

In the case of livestock activities, it is aligned with the National Livestock 

Development Programme and the livestock component of the Emerging Senegal 

Plan. Concerning nutrition, the programme is consistent with the Strategic Plan on 

Nutrition.  

C. Innovations and scaling up  

39. A number of innovations and good practices developed during phase one and 

during the implementation of other projects under the country programme will be 



EB 2018/123/R.12/Rev.1 

8 

scaled up: (i) commercial contracting between POs and market operators to 

facilitate access by smallholders to more profitable markets; (ii) the consolidation 

and establishment of value chain inter-professional frameworks to facilitate 

collaborative governance of activities and effective smallholder participation in 

consultations; (iii) capacity-building for smallholder producers in good practices in 

crop and livestock farming; and (iv) quality and management of infrastructure in 

crop and livestock value chains.  

D. Policy engagement  

40. PADAER-II will support the establishment of a national monitoring system for the 

agriculture subsector. For the livestock subsector, the programme will support the 

implementation of the system in place. Support for national M&E systems will 

significantly improve the quality of sector reports and the preparation of crop and 

livestock policies. At the institutional level, the programme support will facilitate 

good coordination of interventions and complementarity among the technical and 

financial partners.  

VI. Legal instruments and authority  
41. A financing agreement between the Republic of Senegal and IFAD will constitute 

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower. A copy 

of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I. 

42. The Republic of Senegal is empowered under its laws to receive financing from 

IFAD. 

43. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement 

Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria. 

VII. Recommendation 
44. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of 

the following resolutions: 

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to 

the Republic of Senegal in the amount of forty million five hundred thousand 

euros (EUR 40,500,000), equivalent to forty-six million three hundred 

thousand United States dollars (US$46,300,000), and upon such terms and 

conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and 

conditions presented herein. 

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of 

Senegal in an amount of four hundred and forty thousand euros  

(EUR 440,000), equivalent to five hundred thousand United States dollars 

(US$500,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially 

in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein. 

 

Gilbert F. Houngbo 

President 

 























































President’s report

Proposed grant to the State of Eritrea for the
Fisheries Resources Management Programme


The State of Eritrea

Fisheries Resources Management Programme (FReMP)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: The State of Eritrea

Executing agency: Ministry of Marine Resources

Total programme cost: US$32.12 million

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability
Framework grant:

SDR 10.75 million (equivalent to approximately
US$15 million)

Cofinanciers: Federal Republic of Germany

Global Environment Facility (GEF)

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

Amount of cofinancing: Germany: US$5.97 million

GEF: US$7.89 million

FAO: US$500,000

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of recipient: US$1.42 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.35 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the State of Eritrea for the Fisheries Resources Management Programme as
contained in paragraph 47.

Proposed grant to the State of Eritrea for the Fisheries
Resources Management Programme (FReMP)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Strategic context. More than two decades after attaining its independence in

1993, Eritrea is still faced with many development challenges. The main economic
sectors have yet to fully recover, resulting in high unemployment, few
income-generation opportunities, an unsupportive business environment for
investment, and weak macroeconomic conditions. The country is prone to periodic
droughts and remains dependent on rainfed agriculture, which makes it highly
vulnerable to food and nutrition insecurity.

2. On the Human Development Index,1 Eritrea scored 0.391, ranking 186th out of
188 countries in 2014. The country also scored poorly on the Global Hunger Index2
with a score of 33.8 in 2014. Nonetheless, recent economic performance has been
positive, driven mainly by the mining sector. Real gross domestic product (GDP)
growth was estimated at 2 per cent in 2014 and 2.1 per cent in 2015 – double that
of 2013. The current GDP composition is services (59.9 per cent),
non-manufacturing (17.3 per cent), agriculture, animal husbandry, forestry and
fisheries (16.9 per cent), and industry (5.9 per cent). Exports increased in 2014
and 2015, but the current account balance is estimated to have deteriorated from
0.2 per cent of GDP in 2014 to -1.2 per cent in 2015, and is forecast to be
1.5 per cent of GDP in 2016. This is partly due to decreases in both remittances
and the "development and recovery" tax (a 2 per cent tax levied on the Eritrean
diaspora). Based on International Monetary Fund Article IV 2009,3 Eritrea was at
the pre-decision point for becoming a heavily indebted poor country (HIPC) and
therefore may be eligible for HIPC multilateral debt relief. Eritrea is classified as
"red" by the Debt Sustainability Framework and is therefore entitled to 100 per
cent grant financing.

3. Agriculture, animal husbandry and fishing are mainstays for most Eritreans, with
between 60 per cent and 70 per cent of the population relying on these subsectors
for their livelihoods; they also account for between 20 per cent and 30 per cent of
commodity exports. However, these subsectors are affected by highly variable
climatic conditions, inefficient rain-fed subsistence farming systems, limited
resource allocation and low profit margins. The fact that over 80 per cent of poor
people live in rural areas and depend on agriculture suggests that increasing
agricultural production and productivity would have a significant impact on poverty.
Eritrea has 26 per cent arable land, but only 4 per cent is under cultivation. Mining
is becoming important and is the main attraction for foreign investment. The

1 United Nations Development Programme Human Development Report 2015 (http://hdr.undp.org/en/2015-report).
2 The Global Hunger Index, produced by the International Food Policy Research Institute, is an aggregated measure of:
overall undernourishment; child wasting; child stunting; and child mortality (http://www.ifpri.org/topic/global-hunger-index).
3

http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2013/071813.pdf: Only information for 2009 is available from the IMF; since then,
there has been no agreement with Eritrea’s Government on mission dates or modalities for the next Article IV.



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

growth outlook is promising if Eritrea exploits all its opportunities for trade and
opens its economy to foreign investment in sectors other than mining.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
country strategic opportunities programme

4. Eritrea has substantial and relatively underexploited marine and fisheries
resources, comprising nearly 1,000 fish species. These fisheries exist in an
unpolluted and undercapitalized marine environment; the fisheries sector
contributes only about 3 per cent of the country's GDP. The maximum sustainable
yield (MSY) of Eritrea’s Red Sea fisheries has been estimated by several sources at
80,000 tons per year (some fisheries experts provide a more conservative MSY
range of between 40,000 and 80,000 tons per year since there has been no recent
stock assessment). Small pelagic fisheries account for about half of this MSY and
are currently underutilized. Recorded total fish catches rarely exceed 10,000 tons
per year, of which fewer than 2,000 tons are caught by small-scale fishers.

5. This programme will support Eritrea’s Government in ensuring that the country’s
marine fishery resources are utilized in a sustainable manner to improve the
livelihoods of coastal communities. Specifically, the Fisheries Resources
Management Programme (FReMP) will: (i) support increased fish production while
ensuring that production levels do not exceed historical MSY estimates (for small
pelagic fish, it will be limited to 19,000 tons per year); (ii) support the Ministry of
Marine Resources in monitoring and enforcement; (iii) update MSY estimates and
adjust targets when needed; and (iv) invest in restoration and protection of the
ecosystem.

6. The projected total fish production represents an estimated gross first sales
value-at-landing of approximately US$50 million. This involves a huge investment
in fishing, processing and other support services like boat building, supply of
fishing gear, cold storage, production of ice and packaging material, and
opportunities in fish distribution and marketing. FReMP will mainly target fishers
who use traditional motorized wooden boats (along with a few using improved
motorized fiberglass boats). Other beneficiaries will include "foot fishers" who do
not own any fishing assets. The programme will address many limiting factors and
contribute to increased productivity, production and improved livelihoods of the
target beneficiaries. Eritrea’s mangrove forests also offer opportunities for
supplementing livelihoods with honey production, fodder for small livestock, and
fuelwood, ensuring the viability of fisheries over the long term.

7. Inland fisheries and aquaculture present another investment opportunity for
increased fish production, incomes and nutrition. The Government, with support
from other development partners, has established over 330 reservoirs, of which
70 are stocked with fish species including tilapia, carp and catfish. However, the
country’s inland fisheries resources are not widely exploited since many local
communities are: unaware of the nutritional benefits; they lack fishing skills and
equipment; and fishing is not part of their tradition. In addition, there are
opportunities for engaging in aquaculture using cages placed within water
reservoirs or in external ponds drawing water from the reservoirs. FReMP will
target 15 water reservoirs to demonstrate good practices and test successful
models that can be replicated and scaled up in the other reservoirs. The
programme will also assist in developing climate-resilient conservation plans for
the water reservoirs, which will lead to improved crop and livestock production,
and enhance rural populations’ nutrition and incomes.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
8. Programme Area. FReMP will be national in scope, targeting all six zobas

(regions) in Eritrea's coastal and inland areas. There will be a special focus on



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

marine fish landing sites, inland water reservoirs for aquaculture and fish markets.
On the Red Sea coast, it will target the Northern Red Sea and Southern Red Sea
zobas. In the inland zobas of Anseba, Debub, Gash Barka, and Maekel, the
programme will be site-specific, operating in selected water reservoirs with high
fishery production potential.

9. Target Group. The target group consists of: (i) small-scale fishers (men and
women small boat owners, crew members and foot fishers) who will participate
either as individuals or as cooperatives; and (ii) rural smallholder farmers involved
in subsistence agriculture and small livestock-keeping around inland water
reservoirs, and those involved in rehabilitating their catchment areas, who are
interested in economic activities along the inland fisheries supply chain; (iii) youth
entrepreneurs (fishers and non-fishers) interested in establishing business
enterprises or cooperatives that respond to market demand for fishery products
and services; (iv) women, especially women-headed households, who will account
for at least 30 per cent of the programme’s beneficiaries; and (v) demobilized
soldiers and internally displaced persons.

B. Programme development objective
10. Programme goal and development objective. FReMP will be implemented over

a seven-year period from 2017 to 2023. The programme’s goal is to contribute to
household food and nutrition security, and alleviate rural poverty. Its development
objective is to increase incomes and improve nutrition among targeted
beneficiaries, and promote the sustainable management of natural resources. In
pursuit of this objective, FReMP will support marine and inland small-scale fishers
to produce a surplus (within the MSY of the fisheries) for the market. To achieve
this, it will forge sustainable partnerships with various actors along the fish
production and marketing value chain. The aim will be to transform Eritrea’s
small-scale fisheries sector from subsistence to a sustainable commercial industry.

C. Components/outcomes
11. Component 1: Develop sustainable fisheries systems. This component will

support the establishment of necessary infrastructure and technologies for
production and post-harvest operations, marketing, and consumption of both
marine and inland fisheries. It will be achieved through three sub-components:

(i) Development of marine fisheries production and post-harvest systems;

(ii) Development and sustainable utilization of inland fisheries; and

(iii) Market development and promotion of fish consumption.

12. Component 2: Fisheries enterprise support services. This component seeks
to: (i) promote the development and build capacity of cooperatives and other
enterprise groups; and (ii) strengthen input-provision services to ensure that
legally constituted cooperatives and enterprise groups have access to the inputs
required to undertake economically viable and sustainable fish-related businesses.
These objectives will be achieved through two sub-components:

(i) Entrepreneurial capacity development; and

(ii) Strengthening of input supply services.

13. Component 3: Institutional strengthening and implementation support.
The objectives of this cross-cutting component are to: (i) ensure that the
institutions responsible for implementing and overseeing the programme’s various
implementation processes have the capacity to effectively carry out their duties;
and (ii) manage and facilitate the programme in an efficient and effective manner
by coordinating planning and implementation, financial management and control,
procurement support, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), knowledge management



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and sharing, progress reporting, and liaising with other stakeholders. These
objectives are to be achieved through two sub-components:

(i) Capacity building of the Ministry of Marine Resources and other implementing
agencies for the development of the fisheries sector; and

(ii) Programme coordination and implementation support services.

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

14. The programme’s overall approach is to strengthen production systems and market
linkages. FReMP will use communities as an entry point, engaging local institutions
in participatory planning for sustainable fisheries development. The programme will
be implemented through – and fully embedded in – the Government’s
decentralized system, and sustainability will be a central aspect of the programme
approach. The programme will support enterprises in engaging with markets in
order to increase returns on their investments and establish public and private
mechanisms to ensure continuity of benefits. Gender will be mainstreamed across
the programme by: (i) ensuring that gender issues are considered in policy
dialogue and staff training; (ii) establishing programme work plans that are gender
sensitive and identifying gender focal points at the national and zoba levels;
(iii) promoting women’s participation in programme activities, particularly those
focused on small pelagic fish production and market linkages; and (iv) closely
monitoring gender empowerment.

B. Organizational framework
15. The management, coordination and implementation of FReMP will involve various

government institutions and private-sector entities. The Ministry of Marine
Resources will be the lead executing agency and will be supported by: (i) a
programme steering committee chaired by the minister responsible for fisheries
and with representation from ministries with direct relevance to the programme
goal and development objective; and (ii) an adequately staffed national
programme coordination office (NPCO). At the zoba level, FReMP will be
implemented, managed and coordinated through the zoba administration systems.
Zoba programme coordination offices will be established in all the six zobas to
strengthen programme management and coordination.

C. Planning, M&E, and learning and knowledge management
16. Planning. Annual work plans and budgets (AWP/Bs) will be the key instruments

for implementation and operational control. AWP/Bs will be prepared for all
programme participants, starting with the primary stakeholders at the community
level. These plans will identify activities according to needs and priorities through a
participatory planning process.

17. The NPCO will receive, review, harmonize and consolidate the AWP/Bs from the six
zobas and all other programme areas in collaboration with the Ministry of Marine
Resources. The NPCO will submit the consolidated AWP/Bs to the programme’s
technical committee for review and endorsement before submitting them to the
programme steering committee for approval and to IFAD for review on a "no
objection" basis. In order to facilitate the proper preparation of AWP/Bs, training
will be provided at programme start-up.

18. Monitoring and Evaluation. M&E will be embedded in the institutional
strengthening and implementation support component, coordinated by the NPCO.
This system will reach all implementers at the national and zoba levels, and will be
supported by additional professional staff, who will work closely with
subject-matter specialists to strengthen learning and knowledge management. The
M&E system will feed into the Ministry of Marine Resources management
information system and IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System.



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

19. Learning and knowledge management. Learning and knowledge management
will be based on the programme’s M&E system, especially on reviews and
participatory assessments of lessons learned during implementation. The
national-level M&E team will liaise with zoba-level counterparts to develop a
learning and knowledge management system.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. The proposed financial management arrangements for

FReMP have been assessed as medium risk. Therefore it is recommended that the
Laccie accounting software be used instead of the Government’s financial
management system. The NPCO, which will be the accounting hub, has gained
experience through the Fisheries Development Programme (FDP) in the
implementation of IFAD-funded projects. In addition, the Laccie accounting
software was specifically designed for donor-funded projects and is able to
generate the required financial reports.

21. Flow of funds. A designated account will be opened at the Central Bank of
Eritrea to receive the proceeds from the IFAD grant, and Germany and GEF
contributions. A programme operating account at a bank acceptable to IFAD will
be operated in accordance with Government regulations. To facilitate
traceability of funds, each zoba will have a dedicated operating account to
receive activity-tagged cash advances against approved AWP/Bs, which will be
accounted for prior to any request for subsequent advances.

22. Audits. The Government’s audit processes will be used for FReMP. As was the case
for FDP, Eritrea’s Auditor-General will have the discretion to undertake the audit or
to appoint an independent private audit firm acceptable to IFAD. Either way, the
auditor’s terms of reference will require IFAD's "no objection" review on an annual
basis. The Ministry of Marine Resources’ internal auditors will include FReMP in their
annual rolling internal audit plans and issue formal reports at least twice each year.

23. Procurement. All procurement funded by the programme will be carried out in
accordance with national procurement procedures to the extent that they are
consistent with IFAD’s Project Procurement Guidelines. The country’s legal and
regulatory framework for public procurements has been assessed as sufficiently
robust. There are checks and balances within the system to ensure that public
procurement is undertaken transparently and competitively. Lessons learned from
FDP indicate that a programme-specific procurement officer should be recruited to
strengthen: (i) records management; (ii) contract management; (iii) the
integration of procurement into budget formulation; and (iv) reporting.

24. Transparency, governance and anti-corruption. The Government will maintain
a governance and anti-corruption framework throughout the programme
implementation period to mitigate the risk of fraud and corruption, and promote
effective utilization of programme funds. Specific measures to mitigate identified
fiduciary risks will include: (i) use of the Laccie accounting system at the NPCO to
reduce the risk of human error; (ii) checks and balances in contracting and
administration; (iii) the integration of FReMP into internal audit plans within all
zobas; (iv) activity-tagged transfers to zobas instead of general cash releases;
(v) maintaining the current statement of expenditure ceiling used in other
IFAD-funded projects in Eritrea, given the inherent risk; (vi) adequate staffing
arrangements; and (vii) continued capacity building of the cooperative credit unit
to handle the asset financing.

E. Supervision
25. FReMP will be jointly supervised by IFAD and Eritrea’s Government. The frequency

and composition of missions will be determined by actual requirements through
collaboration with IFAD and the Government. Preferably, supervision missions will
take place every six months. Supervision will not be seen as a general inspection



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

or evaluation, but as an opportunity to assess achievements and lessons learned,
and to jointly reflect on improving implementation and increasing the likelihood of
achieving the programme’s development objective.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
26. Programme costs. The total programme costs over seven years, including

contingencies, taxes and duties, are estimated to be US$32.12 million as detailed
in table 1.
Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD grant GEF FAO Germany Government Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Develop sustainable
fisheries systems 4 958 40.4 6 508 53.0 - - 26 0.2 286 2.3 504 4.1 12 284 38.2
2. Fisheries enterprise
support services 3 376 31.4 128 1.2 - - 5 940 55.3 445 4.1 846 7.9 10 735 33.4
3. Institutional
strengthening and
implementation
support 6 666 73.2 1 254 13.8 500 5.5 - - 686 7.5 - - 9 105 28.3

Total programme
costs 15 000 46.7 7 890 24.6 500 1.6 5 966 18.6 1 417 4.4 1 351 4.2 32 124 100.0

B. Programme financing
27. The total combined FReMP investment and incremental recurrent costs, including

physical and price contingencies, are estimated at US$32.12 million
(ERN 481.8 million). The programme will be financed by the Government, the IFAD
grant, Germany, GEF, FAO and beneficiary contributions. IFAD has confirmed a
grant equivalent to US$15 million from the Tenth Replenishment of IFAD’s
Resources (IFAD10), which represents 46.7 per cent of the total programme cost.
Germany will contribute US$5.96 million (18.6 per cent of the total programme
cost); GEF has committed US$7.89 million (24.6 per cent); FAO will contribute
US$500,000 (1.6 per cent); and beneficiaries will contribute approximately
US$1.35 million (4.2 per cent of the total programme cost) through their
participation in construction, setting up fishery sites and purchasing inputs like
fishing gear. The Government will finance the taxes and duties (US$1.42 million,
representing 4.4 per cent of total costs). Details of the financing arrangements are
shown in table 2.



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD grant GEF FAO Germany Government Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

I. Investment costs
A. Works 3 367 32.8 6 155 59.9 - - 26 0.3 227 2.2 504 4.9 10 279 32.0

B. Vehicles 1 707 72.1 54 2.3 - - - - 605 25.6 - - 2 367 7.4

C. Equipment and materials 2 206 22.5 353 3.6 - - 5 929 60.4 487 5.0 845 8.6 9 820 30.6

D. Consultancies 562 38.3 356 24.3 500 34.1 - - 48 3.3 - - 1 466 4.6

E. Training 4 187 86.7 629 13.0 - - 10 0.2 1 - 1 - 4 829 15.0

Total
investment costs 12 029 41.8 7 548 26.2 500 1.7 5 966 20.7 1 368 4.8 1 351 4.7 28 761 89.5

II. Recurrent costs
A. Salaries and allowances 1 370 80.0 343 20.0 - - - - - - - - 1 713 5.3

B. Operating costs 1 601 97.0 - - - - - - 50 3.0 - - 1 650 5.1
Total recurrent costs 2 971 88.3 343 10.2 - - - - 50 1.5 - - 3 363 10.5
Total programme costs 15 000 46.7 7 890 24.6 500 1.6 5 966 18.6 1 417 4.4 1 351 4.2 32 124 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
28. Benefits and Beneficiaries. FReMP will target 17,500 households

(87,500 people) through 600 groups. The cost per beneficiary is US$361 (about
US$1,800 per household). The programme will provide direct support to inland
fishing cooperatives, small pelagic fishing enterprises, fish value-addition
enterprises (e.g. fish drying), fish mongers and traders, fish marketing, provision
of inputs through the cooperative support unit and the establishment of a
sustainable ice plant.

29. Expected benefits include: (i) increases in the production and quality of
marketable fish; (ii) higher prices for producers and traders as a result of the
aggregation of fish products and improved marketing processes; (iii) increased
community-level resource rental revenues; (iv) consumer benefits such as
enhanced availability and affordability of fish products by reducing inefficiencies
along the value chain; and (v) empowered government systems that have
benefited from capacity development.

30. Economic analysis. The programme has the potential to generate an economic
rate of return of 17 per cent over a ten-year period.

31. Impact indicators. FReMP is expected to facilitate the development of sustainable
production, processing and market linkages for marine and inland fisheries, and
deliver increased volumes of fish to consumers. This will: generate employment,
especially for youth and women; increase incomes of small-scale fishers in Eritrea’s
coastal and inland communities; increase the volume and quality of marketed fish
in coastal and inland areas; and enhance food and nutrition security in the target
communities.

D. Sustainability
32. Institutional sustainability. The participatory programme design process and

the bottom-up planning approach will ensure that programme implementation
modalities respond to the target communities’ concerns, sector-specific priorities,
national development policies and strategies, and the national institutional
framework. The approach creates ownership and builds the foundation for
sustainability after the programme ends. FReMP implementation will be fully
embedded within the Government’s institutional framework at all levels and the
Government has committed to continue this integration after programme



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

implementation. The institutional building-capacity approach encompasses
government institutions at various levels as well as cooperatives and enterprise
groups to ensure that skills continue to support programme-initiated activities after
completion.

33. Economic/income sustainability. The programme will build the capacity of
target groups in business plan development for their subprojects and prudent
financial management; enterprise groups will be linked to markets. The financial
analysis of the programme indicates that members of different enterprise groups
will improve their incomes and earn good returns on their investments. These
financial benefits on investments in the sector, coupled with improved access to
inputs, will promote sustainability and enhance replicability and scaling up. The
availability of a revolving fund through the cooperative credit unit will provide
opportunities for highly performing enterprise groups to expand their businesses in
the long run.

34. Environmental and climatic sustainability. The programme will promote
environmentally sustainable fishing practices by adopting a precautionary
approach, which involves promoting and enforcing good fisheries management
practices. FReMP’s interventions will support: adaptation to climate change through
investing in "climate buffers", which include watershed management; increasing
water and soil retention to reduce the impacts of drought and extreme rainfall; and
rehabilitation and planting of mangroves to safeguard their important role in the
coastal ecosystem. This approach also integrates expected climate change impacts
and utilizes these data in feasibility studies for infrastructure.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
35. Several potential risks could undermine the programme’s success if they are not

mitigated. Delayed programme start-up, slow disbursements during the early years
of implementation and high staff turnover have been recurrent problems in the
portfolio. To mitigate these risks, FReMP will operate with similar institutional
arrangements as FDP and will be managed by the same experienced programme
management unit. Expansion of fishing activities, if not properly controlled, could
lead to overexploitation of fish resources beyond the MSY for both marine and
inland fisheries. Mitigation measures include: (i) setting conservative catch levels
below historical MSY estimates (19,000 tons per year for small pelagics);
(ii) supporting the Ministry of Fisheries Resources in monitoring, control and
surveillance capacity; (iii) updating MSY estimates and adjusting targets when
needed; and (iv) investing in restoration and protection of the ecosystem. For
inland fisheries, the programme will facilitate the establishment of fishing
cooperatives with standard codes of fishing and environmental practice. The
programme will also support a hatchery to restock water reservoirs as necessary.
In addition, extension agents from the Ministry of Marine Resources and fishing
cooperatives will receive training in stocking and sustainable harvesting.

36. Based on Eritrea's 2015 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 18, the country’s inherent risk is high. The fiduciary risk has been
assessed as medium due to the introduction of mitigation measures highlighted
above.

37. Climate risks. The programme’s sensitivity to the impacts of climate change is
assessed as moderate. The greatest risk relates to the unknown impact of
increasing sea temperatures on marine fish resources. Through its monitoring
activities, the programme will be able to adjust to changes in fish stocks. At the
design stage, there were no data available to carry out an in-depth climate risk
assessment.



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

38. The design of FReMP is compliant with: (i) IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025;
(ii) Reaching the Rural Poor: IFAD Policy on Targeting; and (iii) IFAD Policy on
Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment. In addition, the nutrition focus of the
programme is aligned with the Government’s strategy on food security and
nutrition, and IFAD’s commitment to nutrition-sensitive interventions and action
plans on mainstreaming nutrition. FReMP will be implemented in compliance with
IFAD’s Environment and Natural Resource Management Policy, and IFAD's Climate
Change Strategy. Climate change adaptation measures are integrated into
programme activities in order to address the inherent risks resulting from a
changing climate and the potential multiplication of these effects on ecosystems.
As an extra safeguard, IFAD has developed a complaints procedure on alleged
non-compliance with its social and environmental policies and mandatory aspects
of its social, environmental and climate assessment procedures.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
39. The programme is fully aligned with Government investment priorities as defined in

the Eritrea Food Security Strategy, the Eritrea Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper and the five year (2013-2017) strategic development plans for the country’s
agriculture and fisheries sectors. It will be fully embedded in the Government’s
decentralized institutional framework and delivery mechanisms. Links between the
steering and technical committees as well as among the management teams will
ensure coordination, collaboration, learning and scaling up of good practices.
Operational linkages between the Ministry of Marine Resources and other relevant
ministries, and other development partners in the fisheries sector are expected to
result in synergies with the programme.

Innovations and scaling upC.
40. Innovation. Eritrea’s small pelagic fisheries present opportunities for introducing

new techniques and innovative products and recipes. Novel techniques and fish
products to be piloted include solar-dried assortments, pickling, fish powder,
protein concentrates, salted-pressed sundried fish snacks, fermented products, fish
oil, fish sauces and different fish recipes. Successful products will be introduced to
fish processing and marketing enterprise groups for commercial uptake. The
programme will also pilot new technologies to boost fish production.

41. Scaling up. Experiences from FDP will be used to guide programme interventions,
especially the formation of cooperatives and enterprise groups, capacity
development and input financing. FDP established an asset-financing model, which
has become instrumental in sustaining the country’s small-scale fishing sector,
particularly for large fish along the coasts. FReMP will scale up this proven model
for sustainable access to fishing inputs and replicate it in small pelagic fish and
inland fisheries supply chains. Enterprise groups at different links in these chains
will be able to access the inputs they need to undertake economically viable and
sustainable fish-related businesses.

42. The programme will pilot mariculture – the cultivation of marine organisms for food
– and aquaculture development activities in marine and inland systems, with the
objective of demonstrating their technical and economic viability. The inland
fisheries intervention will target up to 15 water reservoirs to generate good
practices that are replicable in the remaining water reservoirs across the country.

Policy engagementD.
43. The programme presents an opportunity to: (i) test new approaches, models and

technologies within small pelagic inland fisheries and coastal areas; and (ii) support
the Government’s own efforts to analyse the effectiveness of its fisheries policies,



EB 2016/LOT/P.11

10

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

including those on sustainable production and management of fisheries resources.
Lessons learned through the programme will be used to inform Government-led
dialogue around national policies. The programme will maintain policy engagement
around fish product marketing systems and related legal and regulatory
frameworks, particularly regarding the role of the National Fisheries Corporation
and fisher cooperatives in the pricing of fish products.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
44. A programme financing agreement between the State of Eritrea and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
Recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is included as appendix I.

45. The State of Eritrea is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

46. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
47. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a Debt Sustainability Framework
grant to the State of Eritrea in an amount equivalent to ten million seven
hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 10.75 million) and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia for the
Participatory Small-scale Irrigation
Development Programme – Phase II
(PASIDP II)

Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia

Participatory Small-scale Irrigation Development
Programme Phase II (PASIDP II)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources

Total programme cost: US$145.3 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 72,950,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$102 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with a
service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 1,080,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$1.5 million)

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) Trust
Fund grant:

SDR 7,870,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$11 million)

Contribution of borrower: US$18.7 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$12.1 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/118/R.18

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Federal Democratic of Ethiopia for the Participatory Small-scale
Irrigation Development Programme Phase II (PASIDP II), as contained in
paragraph 43.

Proposed loan and grant to the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia for the Participatory Small-scale
Irrigation Development Programme Phase II (PASIDP II)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development, and poverty context
1. During the last decade, the Government of Ethiopia has achieved impressive results

in economic growth and poverty reduction. Broad-based gross domestic product
growth averaged 10.8 per cent each year between 2003/2004 and 2013/2014, and
annual population growth was 3 per cent. This strong economic growth was driven
by significant public investment and expansion of services and agriculture. The
Government committed more than 60 per cent of its total expenditures to
poverty-oriented sectors such as agriculture, education, health, water and road
construction. Ending extreme poverty in Ethiopia requires sustaining current efforts
and ensuring that economic growth is inclusive, especially in the rural areas. Many
non-poor households in Ethiopia are just above the poverty line and vulnerable to
falling into poverty in the case of a significant shock.

2. To sustain the country’s strong economic growth, it is critical to enhance the
productivity of agriculture, particularly farming systems such as small-scale irrigation
with high potential for productivity increases. The Government’s Growth and
Transformation Plan II for 2015/2016-2019/2020 emphasizes the important role of
agriculture as a driver of economic growth.

3. Ethiopia is endowed with a highly diverse agroecological environment spanning from
temperate and moist tropical highlands to hot and arid lowlands, matched by a
diverse sociocultural setting. As much as this heterogeneity has to offer in terms of
natural resources, a common characteristic is environmental fragility. Major
challenges include soil degradation, deforestation and loss of biodiversity. Climate
change projections for Ethiopia indicate a significant increase in temperature and a
likely increase in droughts, heavy rains and floods, particularly in the lowlands.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. The Government of Ethiopia and IFAD are moving towards a programmatic approach
with a longer-term vision for lending in the Ethiopian small-scale irrigation
subsector. The first phase of the Participatory Small-scale Irrigation Development
Programme (PASIDP), which was implemented between 2008 and 2015, contributed
to reducing the country’s vulnerability to adverse climate risks and drought as well
as rural poverty and food insecurity. The country programme evaluation by the
Independent Office of Evaluation of IFAD recommended financing a second phase of
PASIDP since small-scale irrigation offers great potential for reducing the impact of
climate change, enhancing economic growth and reducing poverty, which are all
aspirations of the Government. This second phase will complete and hone the
intervention model developed in the first phase, and will pilot the geographical



EB 2016/118/R.18

2

expansion that will mainly be undertaken in the third phase, with an ultimate final
vision of scaling up the programme nationwide.

5. PASIDP II is based on the assumption that poor farmers who are provided with
access to a secure irrigation production base and access to markets and services will
be able to produce and market greater volumes of crops in a profitable manner. The
investment will include watersheds contiguous with the irrigation schemes, which
exhibit varying levels of degradation, in order to stabilize them, improve their
productive capacity and enhance their resilience. This will improve farmers’
prosperity, food security and nutrition, enhancing their resilience against external
shocks – including those induced by adverse weather and climate change as
witnessed in 2015 as a result of the El Niño weather phenomenon.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
6. The programme area of PASIDP II will cover four regions in Ethiopia: (i) Amhara;

(ii) Oromia; (iii) Southern Nations, Nationalities and Peoples’ Region; and (iv) Tigray.
By the time of the midterm review, opportunities to expand the programme
interventions into other regions on a pilot basis will be explored.

7. PASIDP II will benefit 108,750 households, of which: (i) 46,250 utilize small-scale
irrigation schemes and some fields in the adjacent watersheds; (ii) 37,500
households live in and utilize the adjacent watersheds; and (iii) 10,000 benefited
from irrigation support under PASIDP I and will benefit from the agronomic and
market linkages support under PASIDP II. In addition, 15,000 employment
opportunities will be created as a result of the growing labour requirements on farms
and in marketing chains. Within the selected irrigation schemes and adjacent
watersheds, PASIDP II will use a self-targeting approach together with mechanisms
to promote the inclusion of women, youth and vulnerable groups.

B. Programme development objective
8. The programme development objective is to improve income and food security for

rural households on a sustainable basis.

C. Components/outcomes
Component A: Investment in small-scale irrigation infrastructure

9. The expected outcome of component A is that farmers will have access to
sustainable irrigation schemes; the programme aims to develop at least 15,000
hectares (ha) of small-scale irrigation schemes. Subcomponent A.1 will support
(i) the selection of schemes; (ii) feasibility studies and detailed designs; (iii) the
establishment and strengthening of irrigation water users' associations (IWUAs); and
(iv) environmental and social impact studies and management plans. Subcomponent
A.2 will support the development of the selected irrigation schemes, including
multiple-user systems alongside irrigation.

Component B: Investment in capacity for sustainable agriculture
10. The expected outcome of component B is that farmers will have increased

market-oriented skills and capacity for sustainable agriculture. Component B will
support activities designed to ensure that beneficiaries operate in an environment
that is conducive to rural commercial development. Subcomponent B.1 will support
the strengthening of farmers’ cooperatives, the development of agribusiness linkages
and access to financial services. Subcomponent B.2 will: (i) support the
improvement of crop husbandry practices, mainly through farmers’ research groups
and extension support; (ii) facilitate access to improved seeds; (iii) include gender-
sensitive activities; and (iv) promote nutrition-sensitive agriculture. Subcomponent
B.3 will support improved watershed management and promote climate-smart
agriculture.



EB 2016/118/R.18

3

Component C: Programme management, monitoring and evaluation, and
knowledge management

11. Component C will focus on (i) learning and knowledge management; and
(ii) programme management, monitoring and evaluation.

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

12. Programme implementation will be governed by four main principles: (i) alignment
with government systems and procedures, and integration of programme
implementation into decentralized government institutions; (ii) empowerment of
beneficiaries to lead programme implementation through their grass-roots
institutions; (iii) cooperation with private service providers and business entities;
and (iv) partnerships and collaboration with other development partners and
stakeholders in the sector.

B. Organizational framework
13. Programme governance. A national programme steering committee (NPSC) will

provide overall policy and strategic guidance on programme focus, priorities and
institutional strengthening. The NPSC will be chaired by the Minister of State for
Agriculture and Natural Resources, and shall be composed of ministers of state from
relevant sectors including the: Ministry of Water, Irrigation and Electricity; Ministry
of Trade; Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change; Ministry of Finance
and Economic Cooperation; and Ministry of Industry. It will also include executives of
the Federal Cooperative Agency, the Ethiopian Agricultural Research Institute and
other institutions aligned with the programme’s strategic focus.

14. Programme management. The Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources will
be the lead implementing agency. The Minister of State for Natural Resources will be
responsible for coordinating implementation with support from the Directorate of
Small-scale Irrigation. A federal programme coordination and management unit
(FPCMU) will ensure: (i) planning, monitoring and evaluation, (ii) stakeholder
coordination at the federal level; and (iii) quality control of investments and cost-
efficiency. The Ethiopian Agricultural Transformation Agency will provide technical
and analytical support, and mobilize service providers for South-South Cooperation
to build capacity in areas of innovation, including support to market access alliances,
promotion of climate-smart innovations and agricultural finance.

15. Regional programme coordination and management units (RPCMUs) will coordinate
investment planning, procurement and coordination of design consultants, works
contractors and capacity-building service providers. At the district and
programme-site levels, implementation will be fully integrated into local government
structures. IWUAs will actively participate in the entire process of irrigation scheme
development, from identification to the final hand-over.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

16. The programme will be implemented on the basis of approved annual workplans and
budgets, which will be prepared jointly by the FPCMU, RPCMUs, district governments
and implementing partners. The FPCMU will consolidate the budget and present it to
the NPSC for approval pending IFAD’s prior review.

17. In line with the result-based management approach, progress towards programme
outputs, outcomes, impact and sustainability will be regularly monitored. Baseline
and impact surveys will be conducted at start-up, midterm and programme
completion to assess the effectiveness of the investment. Feasibility studies for each
irrigation scheme and watershed will provide baseline data to assess performance
and results.



EB 2016/118/R.18

4

18. To improve performance and build local partners’ capacity, the programme will
promote participatory monitoring and evaluation (M&E) tools. The FPCMU will
facilitate periodic structured discussions to share any issues encountered, solutions
and results. Learning and sharing of knowledge will be based on the programme’s
M&E system, particularly on reviews and participatory assessments of lessons
learned during implementation.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. A senior finance manager will be appointed to ensure the use of a consistent,

comprehensive chart of accounts and accounting software at the federal and regional
levels. An accountant will be recruited at the FPMCU and in each region.

20. Funds flow and disbursement arrangements. A designated account will be
opened at the National Bank of Ethiopia to receive the proceeds from the IFAD loan,
the IFAD grant and the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP)
grant. A programme operating account will be maintained by the FPCMU in
accordance with government regulations and a separate account will be opened for
the receipt of counterpart funding. The RPCMUs and implementing partners will also
open dedicated bank accounts in their regions to facilitate the transparency of funds.

21. Programme audits. The Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources internal
audit department will include the programme in its internal audit plans. The Office of
the Federal Auditor General will either directly perform the external audit, request
that the Audit Service Corporation perform it or hire an independent audit firm
acceptable to the Fund. The internal and external audit recommendations will be
reviewed by the NPSC.

22. Retroactive financing and start-up costs. As an exception to section 4.08(a)(ii)
of the General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, specific eligible
expenditures during the preparatory period from 1 July 2016 to 31 December 2016
up to the equivalent of US$2 million pre-financed by the Government will be
reimbursed from the IFAD loan after the financing agreement has entered into force
and the conditions precedent to withdrawal have been met. In addition to this
retroactive financing, withdrawals for start-up costs are encouraged for eligible
expenditures incurred between the date of entry into force of the Financing
Agreement and the satisfaction of the conditions precedent to withdrawal.

23. Procurement. The country’s legislative and regulatory framework provides an
adequate operational environment for procurement, including procurement for
works. Lessons from the previous phase imply that a programme-specific
procurement officer should be recruited to strengthen: records management;
contract management; the integration of procurement into the budget formulation
process; and reporting. Annual procurement plans will be subject to prior review by
IFAD and will serve as tools for planning, implementing and monitoring all the
programme’s procurement activities.

E. Supervision
24. The programme will be directly supervised by IFAD. Features likely to require

implementation support include: (i) planning and preparatory studies for irrigation
schemes, including the early establishment of IWUAs and facilitating beneficiaries’
active participation; (ii) implementation of an environmental and social management
framework (ESMF); (iii) programme M&E; (iv) procurement; (v) access to finance,
inputs and markets; and (vi) targeting.

IV. Programme costs, financing and benefits
A. Programme costs
25. Total programme costs over seven years, including contingencies, taxes and duties,

are estimated at US$145.3 million, as presented in the table below. Component A



EB 2016/118/R.18

5

represents 71.9 per cent of the costs, component B 20.5 per cent and component C
7.6 per cent.
Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant
ASAP Trust
Fund grant Beneficiaries

Borrower/
recipient Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

A. Investment in
small-scale irrigation
Infrastructure 82 226 78.7 1 000 1.0 1 287 1.2 4 452 4.3 15 523 14.9 104 489
B. Investment in capacity
for sustainable agriculture 11 571 38.8 - - 8 516 28.6 7 621 25.6 2 108 7.1 29 815
C. Programme
management, M&E and
knowledge management 8 203 74.6 500 4.5 1 196 10.9 - - 1 091 9.9 10 990

Total 102 000 70.2 1 500 1.0 11 000 7.6 12 072 8.3 18 722 12.9 145 294

B. Programme financing
26. Programme financing comprises an IFAD loan of US$102 million on highly

concessional terms and an IFAD grant of US$1.5 million. An additional grant of
US$11 million (7.6 per cent of the total programme cost) from the ASAP Trust Fund
will support the mainstreaming of climate-resilient interventions within the
programme. The Government will provide the equivalent of US$18.7 million,
representing 12.9 per cent of total programme costs, to cover all duties and taxes.
Public services at the national, regional and district levels will play a major role in
programme implementation. The beneficiary contribution is estimated at
US$12.1 million, and will be provided in labour and materials.
Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant
ASAP Trust
Fund grant Beneficiaries

Borrower/
recipient Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

Training 4 142 33.4 - - 6 475 52.1 - - 1 801 14.5 12 417
Works 78 594 79.5 - - 1 000 15.0 4 452 4.5 14 831 15.0 98 876
Consultancies 3 954 47.0 1 500 17.8 1 988 23.6 - - 969 11.5 8 412
Goods, services and
inputs 9 348 50.5 - - 1 094 5.9 7 620 41.1 455 2.5 18 516
Salaries and allowances 3 572 84.1 - - 443 10.4 - - 233 5.5 4 247
Operating costs 2 390 84.6 - - - - - - 434 15.4 2 825

Total 102 000 70.2 1 500 1.0 11 000 7.6 12 072 8.3 18 722 12.9 145 294

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
27. The programme is expected to lead to: (i) a significant increase in farm productivity,

market output and incomes for 46,250 farm households cultivating 18,400 ha of
irrigated agriculture; (ii) higher yields in at least 60,000 ha of adjacent watersheds;
(iii) additional jobs for 15,000 young and landless people who are not members of
the households with irrigation schemes or watersheds; and (iv) improved market
access and higher yields for 10,000 farming households that received support under
PASIDP I.

28. With an economic rate of return of 28.8 per cent over 20 years and a net present
value of US$165 million per annum, the programme is an economically viable
investment. The sensitivity analysis indicates a solid resilience to increases in



EB 2016/118/R.18

6

programme costs and reductions in output prices. The adoption rate and time lags of
benefits are the most sensitive factors.

D. Sustainability
29. The participatory process of irrigation scheme establishment creates ownership and

the necessary foundations and commitments for sustainability after programme
completion. Programme implementation will be fully embedded in the Government’s
institutional framework at all levels, which will continue after programme
implementation.

30. Mutually beneficial market linkages will ensure the sustainability of beneficiaries’
incomes. The financial analysis indicates that producers will substantially improve
their incomes with solid returns on their investments. These financial benefits from
investment in the sector will not only promote sustainability but enhance replicability
and opportunities for scaling up.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The design of PASIDP II has benefited from a risk assessment study recently

undertaken by the Platform for Agricultural Risk Management. Extreme risks with a
low or moderate frequency but high severity (such as extreme droughts or market
outbreaks) require the intervention of macro-level players.

32. The programme has been confirmed as Environmental and Social Category A since a
number of irrigation schemes may result in a loss of environmental services provided
by the natural ecosystem or have significant implications that affect a broader area
and are not easily remedied. An ESMF and a free prior and informed consent
implementation plan have been developed to guide the programme during
implementation, and environmental and social impact assessments (ESIAs) will be
conducted for those schemes classified as Category A, while environmental and
social management plans (ESMPs) will be prepared for those in Category B. The
programme will endeavour to avoid schemes that may result in a high probability of
resettlement. If any scheme is selected that will trigger physical or economic
resettlement, a resettlement action plan (RAP) will be prepared and disclosed as a
precondition for financing the scheme. The RAP process should entail meaningful
consultation and negotiation with any people who will potentially be affected in
accordance with the free prior and informed consent implementation plan. In terms
of climate risk, PASIDP II is classified as "medium". The climate risks will be
mitigated by increasing the ability of affected communities to adapt to environmental
and economic variability, demographic shifts, shocks and long-term changes.

33. As a result of the uncertain implications of – and resources required for – managing
ESIAs for Category A schemes, priority will be given to schemes classified as
Category B. During early implementation, ESIAs will be prepared and IFAD will
organize an independent review to assess their implications and determine the
Borrower’s and IFAD’s capacity to manage and implement these schemes.

34. Based on Ethiopia’s 2015 Transparency International Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 33 and public financial management assessments, the programme’s
fiduciary risk has been rated as medium. The measures highlighted in section III.D
of this report are considered sufficient to mitigate any fiduciary risks.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

35. Programme design is aligned with IFAD’s Policies for Targeting; Gender Equality and
Women’s Empowerment; Improving Access to Land and Tenure Security; the
Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries
and Forests; the Framework and Guidelines for Land Policy in Africa; and IFAD’s
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP). The programme



EB 2016/118/R.18

7

is also aligned with IFAD’s Environment and Natural Resource Management Policy
and Climate Change Strategy.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
36. The programme is fully aligned with the investment priorities under the

Government’s Growth and Transformation Plan II. Linkages between the steering
committees and technical committees, as well as between the management teams of
programmes such as the Sustainable Land Management Project and the Agricultural
Growth Programme will ensure coordination, collaboration, learning, and scaling up
of good practices. Operational linkages with the Ministry of Industry’s Small and
Medium Enterprise Finance Project and the Agricultural Commercialization Clusters
project are expected to result in synergies with the programme.

Innovations and scaling upC.
37. The main innovations for scaling up outcomes include the: (i) mainstreaming of

participatory planning and selection of schemes; (ii) development of agribusiness
linkages and market access to mitigate marketing risk, especially for perishable
crops; (iii) integration of climate-adaptation strategies, including watershed
improvement and management, building on experiences with the Community-based
Integrated Natural Resource Management Project; (iv) promotion of improved crop
husbandry and access to improved inputs and financial services in order to achieve
the targeted yields and improve water productivity; (v) enhanced focus on women
and youth as priority target groups; (vi) mainstreaming of nutrition-sensitive
agriculture; and (vii) alignment with IFAD’s new SECAP and international
engagement with respect to climate change resilience.

Policy engagementD.
38. Productive use of water resources is a priority guiding Ethiopia’s agricultural

development agenda. Strengthening existing models for irrigation and enhanced
watershed management is a vital priority for policy engagement. The programme
presents an opportunity to: (i) test new implementation approaches, models and
technologies, identify successes and share relevant lessons; and (ii) support the
Government’s own efforts to assess the implementation and effectiveness of its
policies. The lessons learned in pursuing these approaches will be used to inform
Government-led dialogue around national policies.

39. Much of the policy engagement will take place within the framework established by
the Government for policy dialogue with its development partners and other national
stakeholders, including the Rural Economic Development and Food Security Sector
Working Group, and its subcommittees.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
40. A programme financing agreement between the Federal Democratic Republic of

Ethiopia and IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed
financing to the borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is included
in appendix I.

41. The Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

42. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



EB 2016/118/R.18

8

VII. Recommendation
43. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia in an amount equivalent to
seventy two million nine hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights
(SDR 72,950,000) (approximately US$102 million) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Federal
Democratic Republic of Ethiopia in an amount equivalent to one million and
eighty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 1,080,000) (approximately
US$1.5 million) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an ASAP grant to the
Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia in an amount equivalent to seven
million eight hundred and seventy thousand special drawing rights
(SDR 7,870,000) (approximately US$11 million) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Kenya
and proposed grant under the country-specific
grants window to the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations for the Kenya
Cereal Enhancement Programme – Climate-
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-
CRAL)

Republic of Kenya

Kenya Cereal Enhancement Programme – Climate-
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-CRAL)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Republic of Kenya

Recipient: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations (FAO)

Executing agency: State Department of the Ministry of Agriculture,
Livestock and Fisheries

Total KCEP-CRAL cost: US$118.0 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 43.85 million (equivalent to approximately
US$61.8 million)

Amount of Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
(ASAP) grant:

SDR 7.10 million (equivalent to approximately
US$10.0 million)

Amount of IFAD grant to FAO: US$2.0 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional

Cofinancier: European Union

Amount of cofinancing: European Union: EUR 9.5 million (equivalent to
US$11.7 million)

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of borrower/recipient: US$1.5 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: Beneficiaries: US$29.1 million
Financial institutions: US$1.9 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/114/R.9

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Kenya and to the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations for the Kenya Cereal Enhancement Programme – Climate-
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-CRAL), as contained in
paragraph 51.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Kenya and
grant under the country-specific window to the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations for the
Kenya Cereal Enhancement Programme – Climate-
Resilient Agricultural Livelihoods Window (KCEP-CRAL)

I. Strategic context and rationale
Country and rural development and poverty contextA.

1. Socio-economic background. Kenya has a total land area of 582,646 km2 and
an estimated population of 43 million people. High fertility combined with declining
mortality has contributed to a population growth rate estimated at 2.6 per cent.
Kenya’s arid and semi-arid lands (ASALs) make up more than 80 per cent of the
country’s land mass and are home to approximately 36 per cent of its population.
The remaining 64 per cent of the population lives in medium- and high-potential
areas in the central and western parts of the country, where the population density
is up to ten times the national average of 69 people/km2. In October 2014, Kenya
became a low-middle-income country. Despite uncertainties in the period leading
up to elections, rising insecurity and erratic weather, growth is expected to
continue in the next five years at an annual average of 5.9 per cent, facilitated by
ongoing infrastructure development. However, the challenges of poverty and
income inequality remain.

2. Agriculture and smallholder farming. The agriculture sector is the backbone of
Kenya’s economy, employing 70 per cent of the rural population and accounting for
65 per cent of export earnings. However, its share of GDP has declined from nearly
40 per cent in the 1970s to 25.3 per cent in 2013. Production of industrial and food
crops and horticulture accounts for 82 per cent of agricultural GDP and 94 per cent
of export earnings from agriculture. The remaining three subsectors of agriculture
– livestock, fisheries and forestry – account for the remaining 18 per cent of
agricultural GDP and 8 per cent of export earnings from agriculture, with significant
potential for added growth.

3. Rural poverty. The poverty rate in Kenya dropped from 52.2 per cent in 1997 to
45.2 per cent in 2009,1 and the Human Development Report 2013 ranked the
country 145th of 186 rated, with a human development index of 0.519.2 Over
75 per cent of Kenya’s population lives in rural areas, where, in 2009, poverty was
estimated at 50 per cent of the population. ASALs have the lowest development
indicators and the highest incidence of poverty in the country.

1 Kenya Integrated Household Budget Survey (KIHBS), 2005/06; Exploring Kenya’s Inequality (Kenya National Bureau of
Statistics and Society for International Development, 2013).
2 Human Development Report 2013 (New York: United Nations Development Programme, 2013), p. 146.



EB 2015/114/R.9

2

4. Food security and nutrition. Food security remains a major challenge for the
Government of Kenya. According to the Global Hunger Index,3 Kenya remains a
food-insecure country despite a slight reduction in hunger. Approximately 10
million Kenyans suffer from chronic food insecurity and poor nutrition.

5. Vulnerability to climate change. According to the Stockholm Environment
Institute,4 if climate change in Kenya is not addressed, the economic costs of its
impact are estimated at 3 per cent of GDP per year by 2030, and could reach
5 per cent by 2050. The agriculture sector, which contributes over 25 per cent of
annual GDP, is particularly affected by changing climatic conditions. Nearly
98 per cent of crop production is rainfed,5 and almost 50 per cent of animal
production occurs in ASALs. The increased incidence of drought and unreliable
rainfall are expected to significantly affect the sector.

Rationale and alignment with government priorities andB.
RB-COSOP

6. Programme rationale. Kenya is a food-deficit country that imports up to
20 per cent of its annual cereal requirements. Improvement in cereal production,
including maize, sorghum, millet and associated pulses, is constrained by the
limited adoption of improved crop technologies and practices. ASALs are an
important producing area: they account for 30 per cent of cereal production and
54 per cent of pulses produced in the country. Semi-arid areas have a comparative
advantage in the production of pulses, accounting for 99 per cent of the production
of pigeon pea, 95 per cent of green gram, 93 per cent of cowpea and 60 per cent
of millet. Semi-arid areas are also central to the production of sorghum, accounting
for 48 per cent of the total. In addition, 37 per cent of beans and 26 per cent of
maize are produced in semi-arid lands.

7. Alignment with government priorities and IFAD RB-COSOP. The KCEP-CRAL
is consistent with the country’s agriculture-sector development strategy 2010-
2020. The strategy’s main objectives are to achieve an agricultural growth rate of
7 per cent per year and reduce food insecurity by 30 per cent by promoting
innovative, commercially oriented and climate-smart modern agriculture. The
programme is also aligned with IFAD’s results-based country strategic
opportunities programme (RB-COSOP) 2013-2018, which recognizes that Kenya’s
food requirements go beyond increased food production in high- and medium-
potential areas, and calls for increased production in ASALs. Finally, IFAD’s support
in ASALs is guided by its Climate Change Strategy and Environment and Natural
Resource Management Policy. IFAD will mobilize resources from its Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) to assist smallholders in improving
their livelihoods and becoming more resilient to climate change in the fragile ASAL
ecosystem.

II. Programme description
Programme area and target groupA.

8. Programme area. The programme area covers eight semi-arid counties in the
eastern and coastal regions of Kenya, with a combined population of over 5 million
people: Embu, Tharaka Nithi, Kitui, Machakos, Makueni, Taita Taveta, Kwale and
Kilifi. These counties were included based on: (i) agroecological suitability and
production potential of maize, sorghum, millet and associated pulses, which are
important to Kenya’s food security; (ii) incidence of poverty; (iii) vulnerability to
climate change; (iv) geographical concentration to maximize impact; and
(v) presence of similar development programmes (to avoid duplication). Within
these counties, 25 subcounties will be selected at start-up using the same criteria.

3 International Food Policy Research Institute, 2014.
4 Stockholm Environment Institute, 2009.
5 World Resources Institute et al., 2007.



EB 2015/114/R.9

3

9. Target group. The KCEP-CRAL will reach 100,000 smallholder farmers whose
livelihoods depend on maize, sorghum, millet and associated pulses, including:

(a) 60,000 food-insecure smallholder farmers, who will be supported in
graduating from recurring food insecurity and climate vulnerability to food
security and then to market-oriented commercial farming; and

(b) 40,000 smallholder subsistence farmers, who will be supported in graduating
into commercial farming.

10. Of these 100,000 smallholder farmers, the programme aims to sustainably lift
80,000 out of poverty (80 per cent of targeted farmers). There will be a special
focus on woman-headed households and on youth, given the constraints they face
in accessing agricultural services and inputs. The programme will also empower
county governments and communities to manage their natural resources more
sustainably and consensually, and will build their resilience to climate change
through community investments. A secondary target group will consist of
stakeholders along agricultural value chains – such as agro-dealers, private
extension services, buyers, processors and lead farmers providing support services
to smallholders – and who will facilitate smallholder access to enhanced agricultural
services.

Programme development objectiveB.
11. The overall development goal of the KCEP-CRAL is to reduce rural poverty and food

insecurity among smallholders in Kenya’s ASALs by developing their economic
potential, while improving their natural resource management capacity and
resilience to climate change in an increasingly fragile ecosystem. This goal will be
pursued through: (i) graduation of smallholder farmers to commercially oriented,
climate-resilient agricultural practices through improvements in productivity, post-
production management practices and market linkages for targeted value chains;
and (ii) empowerment of county governments and communities to sustainably and
consensually manage their natural resources and build resilience to climate change.

Components/outcomesC.
12. Programme components. The KCEP-CRAL is structured around three technical

components, supported by programme management:

13. Component 1. Capacity-building for climate-resilient productivity
enhancement and natural resource management. Through an e-voucher
platform giving smallholder farmers access to improved agricultural inputs and
technologies, the programme will enhance farmers’ productivity with a view to
commercialization. Activities in this component will support farmers in establishing
productive and climate-resilient crop enterprises suited to ASALs, and in improving
productivity through the adoption of good agricultural practices, such as
conservation agriculture and associated water conservation practices. The
programme will also support targeted counties in planning adaptation strategies,
adopting sustainable natural resource management practices and building
resilience to climate change.

14. Component 2. Post-production management and market linkages. The
programme aims to support farmers in capitalizing on productivity gains by
promoting improved on-farm grain handling and management, access to storage,
and warehouse receipt systems. These activities are expected to increase
smallholders’ access to markets and build their capacity to sell their produce at
more favourable prices.

15. Component 3. Financial services. This component is designed to: link farmers
to financial services in order to boost yields and income for reinvestment in their
farming businesses; and build the capacity of value-chain stakeholders, including
youth, to profitably engage in the provision of agricultural services.



EB 2015/114/R.9

4

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

16. The KCEP-CRAL is an expansion to ASALs of the Kenya Cereal Enhancement
Programme (KCEP), which began in April 2014 through a partnership involving the
Government, the European Union and IFAD. Its programme approach is based on
an expanded strategic partnership of the Government, the European Union and the
United Nations Rome-based agencies (RBAs): IFAD, FAO and the World Food
Programme (WFP). This partnership builds on each partners’ comparative
advantage in supporting farmers’ graduation from food insecurity to market-
oriented farming.

17. Within the partnership, WFP will provide support to food- and nutrition-insecure
farmers. With this support, households can gradually build productive assets and
acquire agricultural production and risk management skills to meet basic food
needs. IFAD will support subsistence farmers in graduating to market-oriented
farming by addressing constraints on production, post-harvest management,
processing and marketing. Through the ASAP Trust Fund, IFAD will also support
farmers’ investments in improved natural resource management and resilience to
climate change. Throughout this process, FAO will support farmer groups and
county governments in adopting good agricultural practices, including conservation
agriculture, while the European Union will sustain the achievement of programme
objectives by providing additional funding for implementation through IFAD and
FAO.

18. The programme approach encompasses an innovative public/private partnership
with financial institutions that aims to expand access to financial services as
beneficiaries graduate from subsidized support to market-oriented farming. Natural
resource management and climate change adaptation are mainstreamed in each
component to ensure that programme interventions are sustainable and improve
the resilience of targeted smallholders. Finally, while the programme will support
targeted households in meeting their cereal needs and in producing a surplus for
markets, WFP will support the transfer of good nutrition practices to households
through its protracted relief and recovery operation.

B. Organizational framework
19. Implementation framework. The lead agency for programme implementation is

the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries. This agency will be responsible
for coordinating programme implementation, supported by a programme
coordination unit (PCU) for IFAD-funded activities, and liaising with FAO and WFP
focal points for activities carried out by these agencies. A steering committee
chaired by the Principal Secretary of the State Department of Agriculture will be set
up at the national level to provide oversight and strategic guidance of
implementation. To operationalize the RBA partnership, an RBA technical
coordination group will comprise the PCU coordinator and FAO and WFP
representatives. The group will be responsible for annual planning, budgeting,
mobilizing RBA contributions to the programme and identifying opportunities for
collaboration with other donor-funded activities in target counties.

20. Grant to FAO for capacity-building of county structures. At the local level,
programme implementation will be aligned to Kenya’s devolution framework, with
the counties as primary implementers. Given the limited capacity of newly set up
county government structures, IFAD will provide FAO with a grant to build the
capacity of county agricultural offices to plan, execute and monitor agricultural
services and investments within the County Integrated Development Plan:

(i) A dedicated RBA implementation support team in each target county will
plan, execute and monitor agricultural services in the context of the KCEP-
CRAL. Each county’s support team will be composed of a lead technical



EB 2015/114/R.9

5

support officer and a national United Nations volunteer – both with an
agribusiness and programme management background. These experts will
work with FAO and WFP programme officers, and with the National Drought
Management Authority coordinator at the county level.

(ii) Capacity-building of county agricultural offices will strengthen the outreach of
agricultural extension agents in delivering agricultural services to farmers.
This includes training packages and cost provisions for agricultural services to
farmers in the context of programme implementation.

21. A memorandum of understanding will be signed with WFP to define roles and
responsibilities in programme execution. The agreement between the European
Union and IFAD will be revised to reflect the European Union’s increased KCEP
contribution to cover the CRAL window. The Union has also entered into a
contribution agreement with FAO to disseminate good agricultural practices,
including conservation agriculture, in the framework of the programme.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

22. Programme planning. Programme planning will follow a bottom-up and gender-
and-youth sensitive approach at the county level. Throughout the programme’s
seven-year implementation period, the PCU will support counties in sensitizing and
mobilizing stakeholders, and in requesting support. Eligible farmer and county
requests for programme support will be included in the KCEP-CRAL annual
workplan and budget (AWP/B), which will conform to the Government’s planning
cycle. For community-level investments, participatory rural appraisals will be
carried out to facilitate the formation of community-based organizations, which will
oversee implementation. Planning at the county level will be reflected in the County
Integrated Development Plan.

23. Monitoring and evaluation, and knowledge management. The programme’s
development goals will be monitored by a robust system, which will be aligned with
Kenya’s National Integrated Monitoring and Evaluation System and in compliance
with IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS). RIMS is capable of
measuring results in terms of climate-change resilience, natural resource
management and the graduation of smallholders.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
24. Financial management. To ensure effective financial oversight, a programme

finance team will be set up at the lead national agency. In addition, there will be an
accountant in each of the three regions covered by the programme. At the county
level, an accountant from the National Treasury will be responsible for programme
financial management.

25. Internal controls. To complement government mechanisms, the following
internal controls will be instituted: (i) the PCU finance/administration manager will
be an agent (non-transacting) on all programme county and regional bank
accounts; (ii) at the county level, the national treasury accountant will be a
signatory to the programme bank account, together with the designated county
programme coordinator; and (iii) budget control will be supported through the
programme accounting software and the use of commitment ledgers (sometimes
called vote books) at the county level.

26. Accounting systems, policies and procedures. An off-the-shelf accounting
package with the ability to generate expenditure trends by component, category,
and activities in United States dollars, euro and Kenyan shillings will be used.
Development of programme uniform coding (chart of accounts) will be a joint effort
by the PCU finance team, those responsible for monitoring and evaluation, and
technical officers.



EB 2015/114/R.9

6

27. Financial reporting and monitoring will be conducted in accordance with
International Public-Sector Accounting Standards on a cash basis. In addition to
annual audited financial statements, IFAD will require semi-annual interim financial
reports.

28. The grant to FAO will be disbursed based on AWP/Bs. In addition, FAO will submit
statements of expenditure with respect to the use of at least 75 per cent of the
immediately preceding advance (and 100 per cent of previous advances). FAO will
provide regular reports to IFAD, including six-month unaudited financial reports,
and will submit a copy of FAO audited financial statements that cover any part of
the grant proceeds within six months following the official publication of FAO’s
audited statements.

29. Procurement. With the enactment of the Public Procurement and Disposal of
Assets Act and the Public Procurement and Disposal Regulations, Kenya has
established a sound legal framework for public procurement with clear hierarchical
distinctions. The legal and regulatory framework of the Public Procurement and
Disposal of Assets Act will be used in programme procurement. KCEP-CRAL
procurement provisions will build on the Ministerial Tender Committee of the
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries. Items common across more than
one county will be procured nationally in bulk; contract award decisions will be
made by that committee. For activities such as spot road improvements and
construction of storage facilities that cannot be bulked and procured nationally, the
KCEP-CRAL will rely on the County Service Delivery Coordinating Unit Tender
Committee, as the legal authority to approve contract awards, and on the County
Governments Procurement Regulations.

E. Supervision
30. The programme will be jointly supervised by IFAD and the lead agency, with the

participation of FAO, WFP and the European Union. One supervision mission and
one follow-up mission will be conducted each year to review the programme
approach and its effectiveness. Special attention will be given to reviewing the
effectiveness of the RBA partnership in the graduation of farmers.

IV. Programme costs, financing and benefits
A. Programme costs
31. The total investment and incremental recurrent costs of the KCEP-CRAL are

estimated at US$118.0 million, including physical and price contingencies.
Programme investments by component are:

 Component 1. Capacity-building for climate-resilient productivity
enhancement and natural resource management accounts for
US$11.1 million, representing 9.4 per cent of total base costs.

 Component 2. Post-production management and market linkages accounts
for US$8.8 million, representing 7.5 per cent of total base costs;

 Component 3. Financial services, including the e-voucher scheme, accounts
for US$77.7 million, representing 65.8 per cent of total base costs; and

 Programme management accounts for US$11.7 million, representing
9.9 per cent of total base costs.

32. In addition, preparatory activities and implementation support at the county level
accounts for US$8.7 million (7.4 per cent of total base costs).



EB 2015/114/R.9

7

Table 1
Components by Financiers

(US$ '000) GoK
IFAD
Loan

ASAP
Grant

IFAD
Grant EU add-on

Financial
Institutions Beneficiaries Total

Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount

462 5 124 - 2 000 1 134 - - 8 719

Adoption of  improved f arming practices including GAP and CA 24 - - - 1 086 - - 1 110
Community-based sustainable NRM and adaptation to Climate
Change - - 10 000 - - - - 10 000

24 - 10 000 - 1 086 - - 11 109

Strengthening of  f armer organizations and post-harvest
management 282 3 360 - - - - 173 3 815
Market Linkages and value addition 37 3 361 - - - - 1 579 4 977

320 6 721 - - - - 1 752 8 793

E-voucher platf orm f or productivity enhancement - 37 237 - - 7 142 1 860 26 212 72 451
Value Chain Financing 246 3 295 - - 543 - 1 172 5 255

246 40 532 - - 7 685 1 860 27 384 77 706
500 9 400 - - 1 781 - - 11 680

Total PROGRAMME COSTS 1 551 61 776 10 000 2 000 11 686 1 860 29 136 118 008

A. Capacity building for clim ate-resilient productivity
enhancem ent and NRM

Preparatory activities/ Implementation Support and Capacity-
building at county-level
Com ponents

E. Programme Management
Subtotal

C. Financial Services
Subtotal

Subtotal
B. Post-Production Managem ent and Market Linkages

Notes: GAP - good agricultural practice CA- conservation agriculture

Table 2
Expenditure Accounts by Financiers Financial
(US$ '000) GoK IFAD Loan ASAP Grant IFAD Grant EU add-on Institutions Beneficiaries Total

Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount Am ount

I. Investm ent Costs
A. Works 231 4 119 - - - - 983 5 334
B. Vehicles 214 905 - 187 291 - - 1 597
C. Equipments & Materials 274 2 544 521 61 606 - 390 4 395
D. Consultancies 316 3 939 2 754 1 475 - 66 8 550
E. Trainings 516 4 657 3 125 - - 1 030 71 9 399
F. Grants and Subsidies - 36 299 3 600 - 7 111 829 27 626 75 465

Total Investm ent Costs 1 551 52 463 10 000 248 9 482 1 860 29 136 104 739
II. Recurrent Costs

A. Salaries and Allow ances - 6 671 - 1 752 1 427 - - 9 850
B. Operating Costs - 2 642 - - 777 - - 3 419

Total Recurrent Costs - 9 313 - 1 752 2 204 - - 13 269
Total PROGRAMME COSTS 1 551 61 776 10 000 2 000 11 686 1 860 29 136 118 008

B. Programme financing
33. The total costs of the KCEP-CRAL window will be financed by the Government, an

IFAD loan, an ASAP grant, an IFAD grant under the country-specific window to
FAO, a European Union contribution through IFAD, financial institutions and
beneficiaries as follows:

 The Government will finance taxes and duties valued at US$1.5 million
(representing 1.3 per cent of the KCEP-CRAL window).

 The IFAD loan to the Republic of Kenya, estimated at US$61.8 million
(52.3 per cent of the KCEP-CRAL window), will finance start-up activities,
capacity-building of farmer organizations, post-harvest management
activities, market linkage and value chain strengthening, and programme
management costs.

 The ASAP grant, estimated at US$10.0 million (8.5 per cent of the KCEP-
CRAL window), will finance mainstreaming of natural resource management
and climate resilience throughout the programme.

 The IFAD grant to FAO, estimated at US$2.0 million (1.7 per cent of the
KCEP-CRAL window), will be dedicated to capacity-building and the costs



EB 2015/114/R.9

8

incurred by county agriculture offices delivering agricultural services to
farming communities.

 The European Union additional contribution through IFAD is valued at
US$11.7 million, corresponding to EUR 9.5 million (9.9 per cent of the KCEP-
CRAL window).

 Finally, the contribution of financial institutions to the programme’s e-voucher
scheme and related financial services is estimated at US$1.9 million
(1.6 per cent of the KCEP-CRAL window). The beneficiary contribution is
assessed at US$29.1 million (24.7 per cent of the KCEP-CRAL window).

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. Overall, the KCEP and its CRAL window will support 140,000 smallholder farmers in

attaining food security and graduating into market-oriented commercial farming.
Through the CRAL window, 100,000 smallholder farmers in Kenya’s ASALs have
been targeted. The KCEP-CRAL will provide opportunities for increased returns on
smallholder agricultural production and marketing, with direct benefits including:

 Increased yields from improved agricultural technologies – including
conservation agriculture and good agricultural practices – and strengthened
extension systems;

 Increased climate resilience through adapted varieties and technologies,
better climate information and community resilience investments;

 Increased quality of marketable produce from post-harvest management,
training and access to equipment;

 Higher prices as a result of aggregation from village storage facilities and
other grain-bulking structures;

 Labour-saving technologies such as the use of herbicides (compared with
conventional weeding) and minimum tillage/direct seeding;

 Value addition through demonstrations of novel processing opportunities and
facilitation of linkages between business owners and financial institutions;

 Efficiency gains as a result of road spot improvements; and

 Incremental tax revenues generated for the central Government and county
governments from increased volumes of taxable production.

35. Economic analysis shows that the programme has the potential to generate an
economic rate of return of 15 per cent over a 20-year period. Benefits will accrue
to a range of stakeholders across many value chains, making the entire investment
even more viable and spreading its impact across the entire nation through
increased employment and tax revenues. Thus the actual economic rate of return
will likely be higher than the 15 per cent reported. Sensitivity analysis concluded
that the programme’s economic rate of return is relatively stable. It is estimated at
8.3 per cent if costs increase by 10 per cent, and at 13.3 per cent if benefits
decrease by 10 per cent.

D. Sustainability
36. The sustainability of programme investments and development results will be

ensured by:

 Mainstreaming natural resource management and climate-change adaptation;

 Promoting conservation agriculture and good agricultural practices;

 Empowering county governments and communities for sustainable natural
resource management and resilience to climate change;



EB 2015/114/R.9

9

 Building the capacity of stakeholders; and

 The e-voucher scheme and inclusive financial services.

37. At the institutional level, financial services, managed by financial institutions, will
be provided to stakeholders through a public/private partnership. This will enable
these institutions to expand their client base while they contribute to the
sustainable financial inclusion of ASAL smallholders. Investments by financial
institutions as programme partners are good indications of financial sustainability.
The relationship established between financial institutions and programme
beneficiaries will endure beyond the programme’s lifespan as these institutions
continue to provide beneficiaries with improved financial services.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
Risks Mitigation measures
Droughts or floods affect expression of
demand among target communities.

 Mainstream resilience packages in
programme activities

Climate-related risks hinder attainment
of programme objectives.

 Strengthen community-based resilience
systemsMainstream climate resilience in
programmes, plans and policies

Weather variability and crop failure
discourage financial providers from
participating in the programme.

 Assess feasibility of crop insurance
schemes. Strengthen climate information
services and climate-based extension
messages for smallholders

Low penetration of financial service
providers and cultural beliefs hinder
participation by target groups.

 Raise awareness
 Link target groups to contract farming and

outgrower schemes

Capacity of devolved structures to
manage implementation of activities is
weak.

 Embed capacity-building and
implementation support to county
structures for the programme’s
implementation organizational framework
and activities

 Empower county-level authorities with
resources for close monitoring,
supervision, timely updates and feedback

RBA coordination for mobilizing technical
and financial contributions to the
programme is weak.

 Embed RBA joint technical coordination
mechanisms at national and county levels
in the programme organizational
framework

Technical capacity for operationalizing
programme strategies and executing
programme activities is weak.

 Provide counties (PCU) with operational
strategies and technical tools for
programme execution under each
component

 Carry out activities requiring specific
technical competences through specialized
partners or service providers in
collaboration with counties. Identify
partners with specialized expertise for
each component

Exchange rate fluctuates  Conduct regular multi-currency monitoring
and reporting of programme costs

Fiduciary risks: Kenya’s Transparency
International 2014 Corruption
Perceptions Index was 2.5, which is an

 Specify external audit terms of reference,
conduct rolling internal audits, utilize off-
the-shelf accounting software and



EB 2015/114/R.9

10

Risks Mitigation measures
indication of high risk. disaggregate reporting by category,

component and financier

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

38. The programme responds directly to the following objectives of the IFAD Strategic
Framework 2011-2015: improved natural resources and the economic asset base;
improved access to services; capacity-building of rural people to manage profitable
and sustainable enterprises; opportunities for women and youth; sustainable
natural resource management; and adaptation to climate change.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
39. Support to developing the economic potential of ASALs is a priority in Kenya’s

Constitution and Vision 2030. The main goal is to fast-track their sustainable
development by increasing investment and ensuring that the use of resources is
reconciled with the realities of people’s lives. The National Policy for the
Development of ASALs recognizes that sorghum and millet are the most suitable
cereals for the environment, while maize continues to be cultivated by most
smallholder farmers as the primary cereal of choice.

40. The KCEP-CRAL is fully aligned with the Government’s priorities for ASALs and
harmonizes the efforts of major development partners – the Government, the
European Union and RBAs – in support of agricultural and rural development. In
line with national policies, the programme approach is adapted to the socio-
economic and biophysical characteristics of ASALs: (i) frequent drought; (ii) low
and unreliable rainfall; (iii) high vulnerability to climate change; (iv) fragile
ecosystems; and (v) high food insecurity and poverty.

41. The programme is also fully integrated into Kenya’s development partner
frameworks for agricultural and rural development. It directly contributes to
advancing the development results agreed by the Government and the United
Nations in Kenya under Kenya’s United Nations Development Assistance
Framework 2014-2018: strategic result 1 – inclusive and sustainable economic
growth; and strategic result 2 – environmental sustainability, land management
and human security. It will also generate knowledge products on food security,
approaches to graduation of smallholders to commercial farming, and climate
resilience in semi-arid areas. These products will be disseminated in development
partner working groups such as the Agricultural and Rural Development Donor
Group and the ASALs Donor Group, in order to inform policies and programming for
ASALs.

42. The programme’s organizational framework for implementation is aligned with
national systems. At the local level, programme implementation and RBA
coordination will be aligned with Kenya’s devolution framework. Counties will be
the primary implementers of the programme using community-based approaches.
Given the capacity gaps faced by the newly established county structures, the
programme’s organizational framework includes dedicated implementation support
to the counties for programme execution, coordination of RBA contributions and
the promotion of synergies with other donor-funded initiatives.



EB 2015/114/R.9

11

Innovations and scaling upC.
43. The programme incorporates innovative features such as:

 A partnership involving the Government, the three RBAs and the European
Union to steer farmers’ graduation from food insecurity to commercial
farming, with a focus on good agricultural practices, natural resource
management and resilience;

 A partnership with Equity Bank to set up an electronic platform combining
debit cards with e-vouchers to support smallholder access to new
technologies and financial services;

 Weather-based crop insurance, which will be piloted in the programme areas;

 Technical packages that introduce farmers to innovative combinations of
adapted inputs and practices for managing natural resources, which have
been tested by the Kenya Agricultural and Livestock Research Organization.

44. Moreover, the KCEP-CRAL will promote business models, including new business
partnerships between smallholders and buyers, governance structures and financial
mechanisms for storage and processing facilities. The innovative features described
above, if successfully implemented, will generate significant knowledge and the
potential for replication and scaling up in Kenya and the region. Monitoring and
knowledge management will thus be important in assessing and comparing
performance, learning from experience and documenting achievements and good
practices.

Policy engagementD.
45. The programme will generate lessons learned, good practices and innovations that

inform policy dialogue on agricultural development in semi-arid areas. Specific
areas of interest include: (i) adapted technical packages; (ii) inclusive business
models for farmers’ access to services and markets; (iii) innovative financial
instruments; (iv) approaches for graduating smallholder farmers from food
insecurity to commercial agriculture; and (v) increasing resilience to climate
change and natural resource management. Special attention will be given to
documenting the impact of synergies among the Government, RBAs, the European
Union and the private sector – each of which brings comparative advantages to
addressing complex agricultural and rural development challenges in ASALs.

46. Capitalizing on these synergies, as mentioned previously, the programme will
generate knowledge products on food security, graduation approaches, commercial
farming and resilience in semi-arid areas that will inform policy and programming
in ASALs.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
47. A financing agreement between the Republic of Kenya and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

48. A grant agreement between the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
Nations and IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed
grant under the country-specific window to FAO.

49. The Republic of Kenya is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD
and from IFAD’s Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme Trust Fund,
acting through IFAD in its capacity as trustee of the trust fund.

50. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



EB 2015/114/R.9

12

VII. Recommendation
51. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Kenya in an amount equivalent to forty-three million eight
hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 43,850,000), and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme Trust Fund grant to the Republic of Kenya
in an amount equivalent to seven million one hundred thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 7,100,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant not exceeding two
million United States dollars (US$2,000,000) to the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Liberia for the Tree Crops Extension Project
(TCEP)

Republic of Liberia

Tree Crops Extension Project (TCEP)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Liberia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$30.73 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 9.48 million (equivalent to approximately
US$13 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant:

SDR 3.28 million (equivalent to approximately
US$4.5 million)

Contribution of borrower: US$1.86 million

Contribution of beneficiaries/private
sector:

US$2.31 million

Cofinancier/financing gap: US$9.06 million

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Liberia for the Tree Crops Extension Project, as
contained in paragraph 47.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Liberia for
the Tree Crops Extension Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Despite significant improvements since the end of the civil war, Liberia remains a

fragile state with weak institutions, policies and governance. The outbreak of the
Ebola virus disease has further constrained Liberia’s limited institutional capacity
and impacted its economy, threatening post-war gains. Liberia is classified as a
Least Developed Country and a Low-Income Food-Deficit Country,1 and relies
heavily on foreign assistance. The gross national income per capita was US$400 in
20142 and, according to the 2014 Human Development Index (HDI), increased by
68.2 per cent from 2000 to 2013. With a 2013 HDI value of 0.412, Liberia ranked
175 out of 187 countries in human development.

2. According to United Nations statistics, the population is estimated at 4.4 million,
with an annual growth rate of 2.6 per cent. Liberia has a large youth population: in
2013, 42.9 per cent of the population was estimated to be under 14 years of age.
The agriculture sector is the primary source of livelihoods for 48.9 per cent of the
active population – mainly in smallholder and subsistence farming. Liberia signed
the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme (CAADP) compact
and has thus committed to the Maputo Declaration on Agriculture and Food Security
and of a 10 per cent budget expenditure on agriculture, though it currently commits
only 3 per cent.

3. The tree crop sector was traditionally one of Liberia’s biggest employment sectors
and an integral part of its social fabric and economy. Primary cash crops included
cocoa, coffee, oil palm and rubber. During the Liberian civil war, the tree crop
sector was devastated and many farmers displaced from their land. The abandoned
farms and plantations degenerated into forest and their associated support
structures were damaged or destroyed. Market linkages vanished, while exports
dropped to near-zero levels. Rehabilitation and growth in the tree crop sector can
do much to increase farmers’ incomes, revive the rural economy and contribute to
consolidating peace. This section focuses on the rationale and underlying
development hypothesis for IFAD involvement. It briefly explains how the project’s
development objective contributes to specific objectives of the Government of
Liberia’s Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS) and the CAADP and to the relevant
objectives of the results-based country strategic opportunities programme
(RB-COSOP). Moreover, it shows how the project links with ongoing IFAD
projects/grants (e.g. synergies/complementarities) and with the activities and
policies of other international agencies (harmonization) and major stakeholders.
Similarly, the country's forest, soil and water resources require effective and
sustainable management practices to improve agricultural productivity and
increased resilience in the face of climate change.

1 Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, list of Low-Income Food-Deficit Countries for 2014.
2 World Bank, World Development Indicators: gross national income per capita, Atlas method (current US$).



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. The Government is prioritizing both structural investments for long-term economic
growth and the post-Ebola recovery process. The Liberia RB-COSOP reached its
midterm in 2013, and was reviewed to identify the way forward for IFAD support
under the 2013-2015 performance-based allocation system (PBAS) cycle and
beyond. Overall, the midterm review revealed that strategic objectives under the
RB-COSOP were still relevant, but the transition from emergency to development
approach should be acknowledged more, which justifies a stronger focus on support
to the cocoa subsector.

5. The proposed Tree Crops Extension Project (TCEP) is part of the Government’s
strategy to promote export-oriented growth, with deep engagement by private
stakeholders in the cocoa value chain. Liberia became a member of the International
Cocoa Organization (ICCO), and IFAD contributed to its first membership fees. The
TCEP is aligned with government policies, in particular: (a) the Agenda for
Transformation (AfT), which was launched in 2012; (b) the Cocoa Export Strategy
2014-2018, 3 which is a blueprint for increased competitiveness of Liberian cocoa in
the global market; (c) the Economic Stabilization and Recovery Plan (2015-2017);
(d) the new Land Rights Act, to be enacted in 2015; (e) the restructuring process of
the Liberia Agricultural Commodities Regulatory Authority (LACRA) Act, which will
regulate the cocoa subsector; and (f) the National Adaptation Programme of Action
for climate change resilience.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. The TCEP will intervene in approximately eight statutory districts in Nimba County.

This geographical expansion will complement the ongoing Smallholder Tree Crop
Revitalization Support Project (STCRSP) in Lofa County.

7. The TCEP will benefit 11,000 stakeholders of the cocoa value chain, including:
(i) 8,000 cocoa smallholder members of kuu groups4 and farmer field schools
(FFS); (ii) approximately 2,400 additional farmers, who will benefit from the
rehabilitation of roads, input supply and market linkages; and (iii) 600 people
through job creation along the value chain. To select the 8,000 cocoa smallholders,
the TCEP will combine a self-targeting approach with tools to ensure inclusiveness.
Priority will be given to women, youth (18-35) and survivors of the Ebola outbreak.

B. Project development objective
8. The overall development goal of the TCEP is “to improve the livelihoods and climate

change resilience of rural households in Nimba County". The development objective
is to improve the incomes and climate change resilience of smallholder cocoa
producers in the county.

9. Some key impact and outcome indicators are: (i) 8,000 smallholder farmers have
increased the quantity of cocoa sold; (ii) 4,000 smallholder farmers have increased
their resilience to climate change; (iii) gross sales of cocoa per farm have increased
from US$178 in year 1 (Y1) to US$1,718 in Y6; (iv) at least 90 per cent of cocoa is
paid as grade 1 and receives 75 per cent of the ICCO reference price in Y6;
(v) 200 kilometres (km) of roads made passable all year round by end-Y3; and
(vi) 9,800 tonnes of cocoa sold through cooperatives and private-sector partners
(PSPs).

3 Developed with the support of the International Trade Centre.
4 Kuu is a traditional community-based cooperative work group that carries out brushing and cleaning of agricultural plots.



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

C. Components/outcomes
10. Component A: Revitalization of cocoa plantations. Basic revitalization and

replanting will take place in Y1-Y4 and will follow these phases: 1,000 hectares (ha)
in Y1, 2,500 in Y2, 3,000 in Y3 and 3,500 in Y4. Starting in Y2, 2,000 ha will be
targeted for replanting. Value chain linkage development, and greater focus on crop
husbandry and post-harvest handling, will be undertaken in Y1-Y6. Establishment
and operation of a seed station in Nimba County will also be supported to
guarantee the availability of improved planting material for farmers, village
nurseries and privately owned nurseries. Diversification of cocoa farms with banana
and plantain will be pursued for food security, climate resilience and smoothing of
cash flow, while simultaneously increasing the role of women in the farm economy.

11. Component B: Rehabilitation and maintenance of roads. Approximately
200 km of farm-to-market roads will be rehabilitated in Nimba County, using the
implementation methodology developed under the STCRSP. Regarding
maintenance, the TCEP will have a three-pronged approach: (i) capacity-building in
road maintenance; (ii) improvement of the road maintenance strategy, including
development of a financing mechanism; and (iii) transition financing of
maintenance on a cash-for-work basis.

12. Component C: Service provision for value chain development. This
component aims to: (i) strengthen the capacity of farmers’ cooperatives at the
district level; (ii) strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA) and
Cooperative Development Agency (CDA) at decentralized levels; (iii) ensure that
climate change adaptation is mainstreamed in the technical support systems for
value chain development; and (iv) monitor deforestation in the tree crop sector.
The main innovation under the TCEP is the use of a long-term growth path for
institutional capacity-building of cooperatives.

13. Component D: Project coordination, monitoring and evaluation. The
objective of this component is to ensure effective, efficient operational planning,
implementation, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and knowledge management.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

14. Approaches and manuals developed under the STCRSP will be updated, and
STCRSP implementation arrangements harmonized with those of the TCEP. The
TCEP will build on the existing expertise and human resources of the STCRSP.
Moreover, the project will adopt a value chain approach to link cocoa farmers,
organized at the grass-roots level in kuu groups and FFS, with cooperatives and
PSPs.

15. Cocoa revitalization of farms will take place in Y1-Y4. Rehabilitation of roads will
take place in Y2 and Y3 and preparatory works will start in Y1. Finally, with regard
to the provision of services for value chain development, the approach to enhancing
the institutional capacity of cooperatives will be less supply-driven and more
bottom-up, while also clearly defining the responsibilities of the cooperatives in
their partnerships with the project and with grass-roots groups. Previous mapping
and capacity assessments of farmers’ cooperatives in Liberia have lacked sufficient
discrimination on which to base the selection for project inclusion.

Organizational frameworkB.
16. MOA is designated as lead project agency for the TCEP. It will have overall

responsibility for implementation and will ensure linkages to other relevant
ministries and agencies. MOA will also work closely with the CDA and LACRA.

17. The national steering committee (NSC) of the STCRSP will also serve the TCEP. The
NSC will orient the project strategy, oversee planning, review progress and impact,



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and ensure linkages with related projects, government services and relevant value
chain stakeholders. The programme management unit (PMU) will be the secretariat
of the NSC.

18. The PMU, which is anchored in the Planning and Development Department of MOA,
is in charge of implementing all donor-funded projects in agriculture. Within the
PMU, coordination, management and M&E of the TCEP will be the responsibility of
the project implementation unit (PIU) in Monrovia, which has responsibility for all
IFAD-funded projects in Liberia. The IFAD-PIU will ensure day-to-day management
of the TCEP. In addition, the TCEP will establish a county PIU in Sanniquellie, Nimba
County.

19. The main implementing partners of the TCEP will be: (a) selected cooperatives
engaging in business agreements with the kuu groups and FFS; (b) at least two
PSPs, who will engage in procurement plans with the project and the cooperatives;
(c) the Central Agricultural Research Institute (CARI); and (d) other specialized
service providers, including national and international consulting firms,
non-governmental organizations (NGOs), commercial financial institutions and
others.

20. At the county level, the TCEP will liaise with the decentralized functions of MOA and
CDA. The county agricultural coordinator (CAC) and district agricultural officers
(DAOs) will monitor implementation of components A and C. The county resident
engineer (CRE) will liaise with the project on implementation and monitoring of
component B. A memorandum of understanding will be signed with the project to
define roles and responsibilities.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

21. Planning. The Monrovia PIU will consolidate an annual workplan and budget
(AWP/B) for each project year, on the basis of proposals from the county PIU. The
AWP/B will include: (i) a detailed description of planned project activities for the
coming project year, and the sources and uses of the related funds; (ii) an
18-month procurement plan for items to be procured with IFAD financing; and
(iii) indicators and associated targets extracted from the logical framework. The
draft AWP/B will be submitted to the NSC for clearance and then to IFAD for
comments and final non-objection.

22. Monitoring and evaluation. The logical framework of the TCEP will form the basis
for measuring outputs, outcomes and impacts of the project. The results of the
TCEP will then feed into the MOA subsector contribution to the national AfT M&E
system. The TCEP M&E system will take targeting of women and youth into account
– as a minimum, disaggregating data by gender and age. Moreover, indicators will
be developed to measure the results of specific activities targeting the most
vulnerable segments of the target population.

23. Baseline data will be collected prior to project implementation to ensure that results
are closely monitored to continuously improve the outreach, relevance and
effectiveness of interventions. To this end, in June 2015 SCOPEinsight5 carried out
an assessment of 15 cocoa cooperatives in Nimba and Bong counties in order to
diagnose capacity to enable the project to better tailor training curricula to the
specific needs identified. This exercise will be repeated in TCEP Y3 and Y6. In
addition, the PMU has contacted CARI to conduct a mapping exercise of
cocoa/coffee farms in Nimba County with which the project will potentially work.6

5 SCOPEinsight is an independent rating agency based in the Netherlands that assesses the business potential of
farmer organizations in agriculture, dairy, forestry and aquaculture in developing countries.

6 MOA/PMU is exploring other partnerships that could support the implementation of M&E activities under TCEP
(i.e. young professionals, the Liberia Institute of Statistics and Geo-Information Services (LISGIS), and county
community colleges).



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Finally, the TCEP will apply IFAD standard reporting procedures during
implementation.

24. M&E will be undertaken at multiple levels and by multiple stakeholders to support
effective implementation. Indicators have been developed during project design and
will be further refined as project activities become more detailed.

25. Forest cover and deforestation risks will be monitored in TCEP target areas through
a geo-information service (under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme [ASAP] grant).

26. Knowledge management plays a central role in IFAD’s scaling up agenda, and
the knowledge management strategy of IFAD-supported projects in Liberia will be
strengthened beginning with the TCEP. An action plan will be developed at start up.
This plan will outline activities to be undertaken, as well as roles and responsibilities
of project staff and implementing partners, to ensure the collection of high-quality
data, in-depth analysis, and creation of knowledge products for evidence-based
decision-making and to contribute to policy dialogue on the cocoa subsector.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
27. Country context and risk rating. The inherent risk in Liberia is assessed as

medium. The Corruption Perceptions Index score for Liberia has slightly
deteriorated from 41 in 2012 to 38 in 2013 and 37 in 2014. According to the latest
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability assessment, conducted in 2012, the
Government has made significant improvements since the last assessment (2007),
but the overall state of public financial management remains moderately weak.

28. Responsibility for financial management of the project will rest with the PIU that is
responsible for implementing other ongoing IFAD projects. As part of the project
design process, a financial management assessment was undertaken. Financial
management arrangements and the capacity of the PIU were assessed as mostly
adequate to meet IFAD requirements; thus initial risk is considered medium. The
PIU will prepare periodic interim financial reports and annual project financial
statements in accordance with accounting standards acceptable to IFAD. All
financial management arrangements will be detailed by the PIU in a financial
procedures manual to be approved by the Fund.

29. Flow of funds. There will be two designated bank accounts (in United States
dollars) opened in the Central Bank of Liberia, one for the IFAD loan and one for
the ASAP grant. IFAD financing shall be disbursed against duly certified withdrawal
applications in accordance with IFAD disbursement procedures to be specified
further in the letter to the borrower.

30. Audit arrangements. The borrower, through the PIU, will appoint independent
auditors acceptable to IFAD, under terms of reference cleared by IFAD, and in line
with the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits. An audited annual consolidated financial
statement for the entire project, together with a management letter on audit
observations on internal controls, shall be submitted to the Fund within six months
of the end of the fiscal year.

SupervisionE.
31. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD. Annual supervision missions,

including follow-up missions when needed, will be organized with the participation
of MOA, the Ministry of Finance and Development Planning, CDA, LACRA,
cooperatives and beneficiaries. Supervision will not be conducted as general
inspections, but as opportunities to assess achievements and lessons learned, and
to reflect on how to improve implementation and impact. Missions will be an
integral part of the knowledge management cycle.



EB 2015/LOT/P.38/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
32. Total project costs over six years, including contingencies, taxes and duties, are

estimated at US$30.73 million. The TCEP will absorb the entire 2013-2015 PBAS
allocation of US$13 million for Liberia under highly concessional lending terms, as
well as US$4.5 million in ASAP grant funding for climate change resilience activities.
The Government will finance taxes and duties on imported goods and the value
added tax (VAT) for a total of US$1.86 million. PSPs are expected to provide credit
of at least US$0.96 million. This amount includes PSP investments in the marketing
chain, as well as working capital that could be provided to cooperatives to buy
cocoa. The contribution of farmers totals US$1.35 million and consists of a
40 per cent contribution of own labour to the revitalization and replanting of cocoa
plantations and management of village nurseries, as well as to solar dryers. A
financing gap of US$9.06 million remains.

33. The ASAP grant will be used to finance: (a) in-country production of high-quality,
climate-adapted and disease-free planting material (seeds and grafting), including
through international partnerships; (b) promotion of farming practices that serve as
a buffer against increased climate pressures (higher shade, more-intensive plant
management including grafting and pruning, and income diversification through
various tree crops); (c) corresponding training of technicians and farmers;
(d) provision of solar dryers and training in their use; (e) participatory land-use
planning and monitoring based on satellite imagery, to ensure that increased
profitability of the tree crop sector and improved road access to remote areas do
not lead to deforestation; and (f) institutional capacity-building, policy dialogue and
knowledge management in the field of climate change resilience.

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Millions of United States dollars)

IFAD
2013-2015

PBAS
Financing

gap
IFAD grant

(ASAP) Government

Private-
sector

partners Beneficiaries Total
Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
A. Revitalization of

cocoa plantations 3.49 34.8 0.16 1.6 3.43 34.2 0.64 6.4 0.96 9.6 1.35 13.5 10.03 32.6
B. Rehabilitation and

maintenance of
roads 0.64 6.3 8.9 87.1 - - 0.68 6.6 - - - - 10.22 33.3

C. Service provision for
value chain
development 4.62 76.0 - - 1.07 17.6 0.39 6.3 - - - - 6.08 19.8

D. Project coordination,
monitoring and
evaluation 4.25 96.5 - - - - 0.15 3.5 - - - - 4.4 14.3

Total 13 42.3 9.06 29.5 4.5 14.6 1.86 6.0 0.96 3.1 1.35 4.4 30.73 100.0

B. Project financing
34. The TCEP will absorb the entire 2013-2015 PBAS allocation of US$13 million for

Liberia under highly concessional lending terms, as well as US$4.5 million in ASAP
grant funding for climate change resilience activities. The financing gap of
US$9.06 million – mainly to finance rehabilitation of roads (component B) – could
be financed by IFAD’s PBAS 2016-2018 allocation (modalities to be confirmed). The
Government and IFAD will explore further cofinancing opportunities.



E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.3

8
/R

ev.1

7

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD
2013-2015 PBAS Financing gap

IFAD grant
(ASAP) Government

Private-sector
partners Beneficiaries Total

Expenditure category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

I. Investment cost 9.3 35.1 9.0 34.1 4.1 15.4 1.78 6.6 0.96 3.7 1.35 5.1 26.49 85.8
A. Works 99 1.1 8.5 90.9 99 1.1 0.7 7.0 - - - - 9.4 30.5
B. Goods, services

and inputs 2.1 49.7 0.1 2.5 0.6 13.8 0.3 7.0 - - 1.15 27.0 4.3 14.0
C. Vehicles 0.8 84.9 - - 0.07 8.1 0.07 7.0 - - - - 0.9 3.1
D. Equipment and

materials 1.1 24.6 0.04 0.9 1.9 42.0 0.3 7.0 0.96 21.2 0.2 4.3 4.5 14.8
E. Consultancies 1.9 67.8 - - 0.7 25.7 0.2 6.5 - - - - 2.8 9.3
F. Training 2.6 82.3 0.04 1.1 0.3 10.2 0.2 6.4 - - - - 3.1 10.1
G. Workshops 0.1 81.8 0.02 11.2 - - 0.009 7.0 - - - - 0.1 0.4
H. Services 0.5 45.4 0.3 24.5 0.3 30.2 - - - - - - 1.1 3.7

II. Recurrent costs 3.7 86.0 0.06 1.2 0.4 9.9 0. 08 2.8 - - - - 4.24 14.2
A. Salaries and

allowances * 2.5 95.2 - - 0.1 4.8 - - - - - - 2.6 8.5
B. Operational

costs 1.2 72.2 0.06 3.1 0.3 17.7 0. 08 7.0 - - - - 1.64 5.6

Total 13.0 42.3 9.06 29.5 4.5 14.6 1.86 6.0 0.96 3.1 1.35 4.4 30.73 100
*

Institutional capacity in Liberia is very weak and few service providers are available. Hence the required expertise needs to be internalized in the project. About 44 per cent of recurrent costs are
for staff salaries at the centralized level; 16 per cent for allowances to conduct field visits; 10 per cent for support to decentralized functions of MOA, CDA and young professionals; 9 per cent for
staff salaries at the local level; 8 per cent for salaries of staff tree crop experts; and the remainder for equipment and vehicles.



EB 2015/LOT/P 38/Rev.1

8

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
35. Project benefits. The TCEP will have 11,000 beneficiaries: 8,000 cocoa

smallholder farmers, 2,400 additional farmers (who will benefit from spillover
effects) and approximately 600 people through job creation along the value chain.
Considering an average household size of 5.9 in the project area, this adds up to
64,900 household members. The project is expected to lead to increases in cocoa
production, marketing and exports as a result of: (a) revitalization of abandoned
plantations; (b) replanting of new trees on existing plantations; (c) higher yields at
the smallholder level, owing to improved production practices promoted through
dedicated extension systems; and (d) higher quality of cocoa as a result of
improved post-harvest handling and marketing. As a result of component B, the
rehabilitation of farm-to-market roads will procure access to markets, reduce time
and costs to reach local markets and limit the post-harvest losses caused by bad
transportation conditions. Regarding component C, the strengthening of
cooperatives will contribute to increasing their bargaining power in price-setting
when negotiating with buyers. It will also contribute to delivery of quality services
to cocoa farmers and guarantee sustainability of the approach, in particular,
dissemination of improved planting material, extension services, and access to
inputs and to output markets.

36. Financial analysis. The four financial models developed to simulate interventions
of the TCEP are based on information collected by the ongoing STCRSP and the
TCEP design team in April and July 2015. The financial crop models capture:
(i) increases in cocoa yield; (ii) increases in quality; and (iii) increases in prices for
higher quality, as well as better bargaining power for farmers. The yield
assumptions are based on information from other projects in Liberia and the region.
Cocoa price assumptions are based on World Bank price information and
projections (constant 2015 prices). Assumptions regarding grades are based on the
experiences of ongoing projects.

37. Economic analysis. The economic rate of return (ERR) of 37.2 per cent over
20 years is profitable from an economic standpoint and generates a total of
US$108.8 million in the same period (social discount factor: 4.3 per cent). The
sensitivity analysis indicates a solid resilience to: (i) increases in costs due to a
combination of risks affecting output prices, yields and adoption rates; (ii) lower
adoption rates due to a limited outreach of extension services; and (iii) increases in
project costs due to higher prices of service providers, road construction and
inputs.

D. Sustainability
38. It is proposed to classify the project as posing moderate socio-environmental risks

– category B – in view of: targeting of existing plantations and rehabilitation of
existing roads; safeguards against indirect deforestation; measures against
environmental risks of the application of agrochemicals; and careful monitoring of
negative social impacts. A Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment
Procedures (SECAP) note has been prepared. In terms of climate risks, a
preliminary classification of moderate climate risk is proposed at this stage.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The main risks and mitigation measures to be adopted are: (i) weak governance

and institutional capacities – the TCEP will adopt direct contracting procedures,
follow IFAD procurement guidelines, and strengthen training and control systems
related to financial management; (ii) weak cooperatives and market linkages – kuu
groups and FFS will enhance the capacity and bargaining power of farmers. Market
linkages will be established through PSPs and cooperatives. The TCEP will also
provide institutional support to cooperatives; (iii) increased disease pressure will be
mitigated through the setting up and training of pesticide application teams in



EB 2015/LOT/P 38/Rev.1

9

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

cooperatives and FFS, as well as through promoting the use of shade from trees
and diversification of farming systems; (iv) deforestation – interventions will be
restricted to existing farms; forest conservation agreements and participatory land-
use monitoring will contribute to controlling deforestation risk; (v) increased use of
pesticides and fertilizer – the fertilizer application promoted will be in doses too low
to cause environmental harm; biopesticides will be applied through specially set up,
trained and equipped spraying teams, thereby reducing the risk of inappropriate
use; (vi) insufficient planting material and/or not adapted to specific needs – a
collection station will be set up for screening and multiplication of seed and bud
woods for grafting; (vii) low quality of cocoa – solar dryers will be introduced for
individual farmers and at the cooperative level. LACRA will be involved in quality
control.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

40. The design of the TCEP is compliant with the relevant IFAD policies, including the
IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015, Rural Enterprise Policy, Private Sector
Development and Partnership Strategy, Rural Finance Policy, Gender Equality and
Women’s Empowerment, Youth Policy Brief, Targeting – Reaching the Rural Poor,
and Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
41. The Cocoa Export Strategy 2014-2018 is a blueprint for the increased

competiveness of Liberian cocoa in the global market. On the basis of an in-depth
diagnostic, the strategy proposes 15 structural interventions in the cocoa value
chain, of which at least eight will be addressed by the TCEP. These structural
interventions aim to: (i) speed up efforts to rehabilitate cocoa farms abandoned
during the civil war and better organize farm operations; (ii) improve land
management practices, aligned with Global Good Agricultural Practice
(GLOBALG.A.P.) and good management practice standards, especially at the
smallholder and cooperative level; (iii) increase availability of inputs by developing
a locally manufactured input supply chain, and by improving access to imported
inputs; (iv) use high-quality saplings/seedlings through collaboration with research
institutes in Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana and the United Kingdom, among other countries;
(v) increase levels of mechanization, leading to increased capabilities of sector
stakeholders for transformation and processing; (vi) better train local buying
agents engaging in best practices and ensure that they are maintained at the
farmgate level; (vii) increase support to women cross-border traders and other
women’s groups and actors active in the sector through mentoring, training in
improved negotiation skills, technical support and access to efficient grievance
mechanisms; and (viii) develop in-market support/national promotion branding.

Innovations and scaling upC.
42. Several approaches adopted by the TCEP are innovative: (a) organization of

farmers at the grass-roots level to enhance their bargaining power; (b) integration
of climate change resilience and related institutional capacity-building; (c) greater
focus on the supply chain for new genetic cocoa material; (d) added attention to
the post-harvest aspects and quality of cocoa; (e) extra emphasis on service
delivery by cooperatives to their members; (f) the combination of basic
revitalization of plantations with enhanced revitalization and replanting;
(g) additional focus on measures to include women and promote their access to
benefits; and (h) use of a long-term growth path for institutional capacity-building
of cooperatives, combined with a more-systematic approach and institutional
auditing.



EB 2015/LOT/P 38/Rev.1

10

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

Policy engagementD.
43. ASAP grant. Within the ambit of the new LACRA Act (once enacted) and the United

Nations Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation Programme
(UN-REDD) policy development in Liberia – and in collaboration with other
development partners – the TCEP will support a national round-table on climate-
friendly cocoa and the potential expansion of cocoa production towards wetter
counties as part of a countrywide climate change adaptation strategy. Other items
that could be discussed are: (a) switching to farmgate pricing with a prescribed
minimum; (b) stimulating the cocoa sector through quality premiums and enforced
minimum standards; and (c) bilateral agreements with Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire on
technical exchanges, exchange of germplasm, multiplication strategies, control of
diseases and child labour issues.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
44. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Liberia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

45. The Republic of Liberia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

46. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
47. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Liberia in an amount equivalent to nine million four hundred
and eighty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 9,480,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the
Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme to the Republic of Liberia
in an amount equivalent to three million two hundred and eighty thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 3,280,000), and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

















































President’s report

Proposed grant to the
Islamic Republic of Mauritania for the
Inclusive Value Chain Development Project

Islamic Republic of Mauritania

Inclusive Value Chain Development Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Islamic Republic of Mauritania

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$45.2 million

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability
Framework grant:

10.75 SDR million (equivalent to approximately
US$15.0 million)

Amount of IFAD Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
Trust Fund grant:

4.3 SDR million (equivalent to approximately US$6
million)

Contribution of Government: US$5 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.2 million

Contribution of private sector: US$2 million

Financing gap: Approximately US$15 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing for the Islamic Republic of Mauritania for the Inclusive Value Chain
Development Project, as contained in paragraph 49.

Proposed grant to the Islamic Republic of Mauritania for
the Inclusive Value Chain Development Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Mauritania has about four million inhabitants, 50 per cent of whom derive their

livelihoods from crop and livestock farming and fishing (World Bank, 2013). The
annual demographic growth rate was 2.8 per cent in 2013. The country covers an
area of 1,030,700 km2, more than two thirds of which is desert.

2. During the period 2005-2010, the rural sector contributed an average of 25 per
cent of GDP, which breaks down by subsector as follows: 11 per cent plant
production, 9 per cent livestock and 5 per cent fishing (World Bank, 2016).1 During
the same period, annual average growth in GDP linked to the primary sector was
4.1 per cent, with significant discrepancies between years as a result of irregular
precipitation.

3. Mauritania is classified as a lower middle-income country.2 The human development
index (HDI) improved from 0.424 to 0.487 between 2004 and 2014 but remains
below the average for sub-Saharan Africa, which stands at 0.502. Although more
than half the population live in rural areas, the country is urbanizing very rapidly
and the population is very young: 44 per cent of Mauritanians are under 15 years of
age,3 60 per cent under 25 and just 5 per cent are over 60.

4. The incidence of rural poverty remains high, particularly in the country’s south. The
proportion of the population defined as poor fell from 51 per cent in 2000 to
47 per cent in 2004, 42 per cent in 2008 and 31 per cent in 2014.4,5 Despite the
progress made, this percentage remains high, particularly in rural areas where
74 per cent of poor people live, and in the country’s south where 44.4 per cent of
the rural population still live below the poverty line compared to 16.7 per cent in
urban areas.6

5. The food and nutritional situation of Mauritania’s population is cause for concern.
According to the last food security survey (FSMS, 2015) conducted by the Food
Security Commission with support from the World Food Programme (WFP),
23.8 per cent of Mauritania’s households are food-insecure, particularly in the
country’s southern agro-pastoral strip. Ongoing food insecurity leads to high rates
of chronic malnutrition among children under five, with national rates above
20 per cent,7 while acute malnutrition affects 14 per cent of children.8,9

6. Local value chains face competition from imports. Mauritania imports an average of
60 per cent of the staple foodstuffs consumed in the country. Only red meat and
fish are covered by domestic production, while two thirds of cereals are imported.
Imports of market garden products, mainly from Morocco and Europe, have been

1 World Development Indicators.
2 World Bank, October 2015.
3 WFP, Food Security Survey in Mauritania, July 2009.
4 These poverty rates are based on a poverty line estimated in real terms at MRO 169,445 at 2014 harmonized prices.
5 World Bank, October 2015.
6 MAED, National Poverty Profile in Mauritania. Draft version, June 2015.
7 Critical threshold according to WHO.
8 SMART national nutritional survey, Mauritania, Ministry of Health and UNICEF, June 2015.
9 IFPRI Global Nutrition Report 2015.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

2

rising since 2010. Despite substantial investments in developing rice growing areas,
the volume of rice imports remains high. Sugar and oil consumption are entirely
import-dependent. It is therefore essential to take demand into account before
undertaking any intervention in production to reduce the country’s food
dependence. This demand-driven approach is all the more important given the
experience of the Value Chains Development Programme for Poverty Reduction
(ProLPRAF), the previous project cofinanced by IFAD, which showed the local
markets can quickly become saturated.

7. Mauritania is among the countries most vulnerable to climate change. Based on the
environmental performance index for 2010, the country is in 161st place of
163 countries. Climate change amplifies natural risks such as periodic drought and
flooding, the resulting risks of network breakdown and human impacts. Climate
change also reduces productivity and biomass quality, which has a detrimental
impact on pastureland and non-timber forest products. High temperatures also
pose an obstacle for product conservation.

8. Mauritania’s financial sector is relatively modest in size and not well developed in
rural areas. With about 15,000 members, or 0.4 per cent of the population, and
US$1.7 million in financial savings,10 coverage by rural credit unions remains
limited. Low demographic density and low levels of capitalization among rural
people, hence their credit unions, place constraints on financial inclusion in value
chains.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
results-based COSOP

9. In a country context characterized by high levels of poverty and malnutrition, poor
value chain competitiveness, heavy dependence on imports and climate phenomena
that accentuate impoverishment among the population, PRODEFI builds upon and
scales up IFAD’s experience in Mauritania and elsewhere in the subregion by
adopting a poverty reduction approach based on supporting inclusive value chains.
The PRODEFI approach is fully aligned with national policies and strategies – the
Rural Sector Development Strategy, the National Agricultural Development Plan,
the National Food Security Strategy, the National Programme of Action for
Adaptation to Climate Change – and IFAD’s country strategy note. It is also based
on the experience of technical and financial partners with a presence in Mauritania,
particularly the European Union, WFP and the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations (FAO).

10. ProLPRAF showed that market access is a determining factor in food security for
poor people. It identified pro-poor value chains with good nutritional potential in
which vulnerable people, women in particular, could position themselves through
partnerships with the private sector and benefit from the value added with project
support in production, processing, transportation and commercialization. Promoting
policy dialogue between the Government and the main value chain actors will help
install an enabling environment for promotion of local production.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
11. PRODEFI will be implemented in the wilayas (regions) in the country’s

south – Brakna, Assaba, Gorgol, Guidimakha, Hodh El Gharbi and Hodh Ech
Charghi. In these six wilayas, intervention will be localized and phased. During the
first phase, in each value chain, the project will intervene around markets where
ProLPRAF gains need to be reinforced. During the second phase, PRODEFI will
gradually expand its activities in all six wilayas.

B. Project development objective
12. The overall objective of PRODEFI is to improve the incomes and food and nutritional

10 Central Bank annual reports and interviews during formulation mission.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

3

security of poor rural people, particularly women and young people, in the project
area. The development objective is to include poor rural people, including women
and young people, in profitable and resilient value chains. PRODEFI will contribute
directly to achieving the objectives of the Rural Sector Development Strategy and
the National Agricultural Development Plan.

13. The project will target 42,600 direct beneficiaries and 243,000 indirect
beneficiaries, mainly farmers and other upstream and downstream value chain
actors. For the first phase, four value chains have been selected based on ProLPRAF
results and their poverty reduction potential: market gardening, poultry farming,
goat milk and non-timber forest products. For the second phase, plans call for
PRODEFI to operate in new value chains based on the results of the market studies
done during the first phase. A pilot operation in inland fishing will be conducted as
of project start-up around lake Foum Gleita.

C. Components/outcomes
14. The project will be structured around the following three components:

15. Component 1: Revitalization of value chains and development of pro-poor
public-private-producer partnerships (4Ps). The desired effect is for value
chain working groups (GTFs) and partnerships to support value chain development
and defend the interests of poor producers. To this end, the project will:
(i) reinforce and scale up GTF activities undertaken by ProLPRAF; (ii) promote a
better match between supply and demand and help set up higher performing and
more inclusive value chains by capitalizing producers, bringing actors into the
banking system, formalizing commercial transactions and facilitating partnerships
between actors, from simple contractual arrangements to 4P type partnerships; and
(iii) facilitate access to markets through structural improvements.

16. Component 2: Development and promotion of production models. The
intended effect is for the beneficiaries to adopt resilient, market-driven production
models that are sensitive to nutritional challenges. To this end, the project will
support: (i) competitive production models programmed to respond to market
demand, contracts and the 4Ps facilitated under component 1; and (ii) making
available training and advisory services associated with these production models,
i.e. nutritional education, agricultural advice, training for young people and
functional literacy.

17. Within the framework of these activities, the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP) financing granted will make it possible to take better account of
climate change by facilitating the use of solar energy – from production to storage
and processing – and promoting sustainable management techniques for natural
resources such as water, pastureland and plant resources, which are particularly
important in the non-timber forest products value chain.

18. Component 3: Coordination, M&E and knowledge management. Funding will
be provided for: (i) the project coordination and management unit based in
Nouakchott; (ii) the operations of two project operational management units, based
in Kaedi and Kiffa; (iii) the technical and financial assistance pool, based on cost
sharing with the Poverty Reduction Project in Aftout South and Karakoro – Phase II;
and (iv) strategic and technical steering activities as well as M&E, knowledge
management and communication.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

4

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
19. The project approach adopted by PRODEFI is to scale up the successes of ProLPRAF

while reinforcing and complementing them and integrating them with national
strategies through systematic, expanded policy dialogue. The project will adopt a
value chain approach driven by market demand. It will support actors involved the
value chains, both individually and collectively, as well as policy dialogue.Within the
framework of component 1, the actors will benefit from assistance in organization
and consultation to improve the matching of supply to demand. Project
interventions will consist of building the capacities of the actors in organization,
governance and leadership. The project will promote actor-to-actor contracting,
prioritizing producers and private promoters of innovative projects. Under
component 2, the project will, in developing market-driven production models as
defined in component 1, promote an increase in agricultural productivity and
processing by offering support to producers – underscoring financial viability,
improved nutrition and adaptation to climate change.

20. In addition, to gain efficiency, the project will adopt an outsourcing approach with
support from experienced national and international operators and consulting firms.
Operational partnerships will be promoted with other technical and financial
partners, civil society and the private sector to implement activities.

B. Organizational framework
21. Technical oversight of PRODEFI will be provided by the Policy, Planning, Statistics,

M&E and Cooperation Directorate (DPSSEC) of the Ministry of Agriculture, with
technical links to the departments in charge of the value chains targeted by the
project: livestock, fisheries and environment. The government contribution to the
project will be included in the budget of the Ministry of Economy and Finance. The
national steering committee will report to the Public Investment and Economic
Cooperation Directorate of the Ministry of Economy and Finance. In addition, the
participation of GTF representatives will be crucial to facilitate policy dialogue
around value chain promotion. The same national steering committee could also
pilot other projects as part of IFAD’s programme in Mauritania.

22. With respect to programme coordination, a team in Nouakchott will be responsible
for operational and strategic project steering, with a mandate to, first, coordinate
and support work by branches and, second, facilitate policy dialogue on value chain
development at the national level.

23. Two operational management units, located in Kaédi and Kiffa and reporting
directly to the project coordinator, will be responsible for implementing the project.
Each unit will be administered by a branch head, based respectively within the
agriculture office in Kiffa and the livestock office in Kaédi. Both branches will be
supported by a deputy branch head and will benefit from the services of an M&E
assistant who will provide support for monitoring contracting, targeting, gender
equality, youth and nutrition, as well as a financial officer, secretariat and drivers.
Work premises will be shared with the regional offices.

24. With a view to gradually putting in place a programme approach to IFAD’s portfolio
in Mauritania, a shared pool of technical and financial assistance will provide
support to both projects in the portfolio. To this end, the PRODEFI PMU will be
housed in shared premises at the Nouakchott branch of PASK II.

C. Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
Planning

25. The PRODEFI activities will be presented each year in the form of an annual
workplan and budget (AWP/B) prepared on the basis of actors in the value chains
identified with GTF support and supported by annual action plans. Needs expressed
at the local level will be gathered on a participatory basis and consolidated by
wilayas with support from the operational management branches concerned. These



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

5

workplans will be subject to validation by technical steering committees, then
consolidated by the project coordination team in a national AWP/B and transmitted
for comments to the Ministry of Agriculture, then approved by the national steering
committee before being sent to IFAD for non objection.

M&E
26. The PRODEFI M&E system will be set up to provide information and analysis needed

to steer project implementation and plan sufficient human and financial resources
for implementation. It will measure progress in project implementation and its
effects and impact on the target groups. It will also report on a limited list of
indicators in connection with the Results and Impact Management System (RIMS),
the effects of climate change (ASAP financing) and nutrition.

27. The system will be participatory, and the main M&E stakeholders will be GTFs,
implementation partners and service providers. Socio-economic baseline surveys
will be done by external service providers at project start-up and completion, and
will be strengthened with a study on the problematic issue of gender and poverty,
which will be conducted on the basis of the women’s empowerment in agriculture
index.

Learning and knowledge management
28. A knowledge management strategy will be developed under PRODEFI. The

approach will consist of creating a value chain between M&E, knowledge and
communication in order to collect, process, document, add value to and
disseminate on a large scale the data and information generated by activities in the
field, using multimedia and new technologies. The lessons learned will be
communicated via the PRODEFI website and at various national and international
workshops.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
Financial management

29. From start-up, PRODEFI will benefit from fiduciary support to encourage a forward
planning dynamic, which will be reviewed and supported during supervision
missions.

Flow of funds
30. To facilitate disbursements, the Recipient will open a designated project account

denominated in United States dollars at the Central Bank of Mauritania. The
National Pesticide Control Commission (CNCP) will open three current accounts
denominated in Mauritanian Ouguiya as the operating accounts in the two cities
where the PRODEFI branches will be located and in Nouakchott, where CNCP has its
headquarters. Start-up costs in amounts and categories to be defined during
negotiations with the Government are provided for upon the entry into
effectiveness of the PRODEFI financing agreement. Commitments and payments for
these expenses will be submitted by the Government of Mauritania to IFAD for non
objection on the basis of a detailed AWP/B.

Audit
31. The project will have an internal control function with activities based on an annual

plan drawn up by the internal controller. In addition, a full project audit conforming
to relevant international standards will be conducted each year by a firm drawn
from a shortlist with demonstrated experience in auditing the accounts of
IFAD-funded projects or programmes.

Procurement
32. Contracts for goods, works and services funded by IFAD will be awarded in

accordance with the regulations of the Recipient, provided they are compatible with
IFAD’s procurement guidelines. Procedures governing contracts below the threshold
for sector commission jurisdiction will be set forth in the PRODEFI fiduciary manual.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

6

E. Supervision
33. Project supervision and administration of the financing will be done directly by

IFAD.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
34. The total cost of the project, which will be implemented over eight years, will be

US$45.2 million, of which US$4.2 million in respect of physical and financial
contingencies and US$41.0 million in base costs, which break down as follows:
US$18.3 million for component 1 (45 per cent), US$16.9 million for
component 2 (41 per cent) and US$5.8 million for component 3 (14 per cent).



7

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.1

4

Table 1
Project cost by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Components
IFAD

IFAD
ASAP

Other
FIN.

(Deficit)
Private Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

A. Value chain revitalization and 4P development
1.Professionalization of actors
and value chain steering 1.1 43.1 - - 1.1 43.1 - - - - 0.4 13.8 2.6 5.8
2.Contracting initiatives and
partnerships between value
chain actors 2.5 25.4 1.0 10.6 2.5 25.4 2.0 21.0 1.4 13.9 0.4 3.6 9.7 21.5
3.Structural improvements for
market access 3.3 41.5 - - 3.3 41.5 - - 0.4 4.6 1.0 12.5 7.9 17.5

Subtotal 6.9 34.0 1.0 5.1 6.9 34.0 2.0 10.1 1.7 8.5 1.7 8.4 20.2 44.7

B. Production models development and promotion
1.Production and processing
models 4.2 26.3 4.8 30.0 4.2 26.2 0.0 - 0.5 2.8 2.3 14.6 15.9 35.3
2.Advisory assistance and
supply of services 1.2 43.0 - - 1.2 43.0 - - - - 0.4 14.0 2.8 6.1

Subtotal 5.4 28.8 4.8 25.6 5.4 28.7 0.0 - 0.5 2.4 2.7 14.6 18.7 41.4

C. Coordination, M&E and knowledge management
1.Coordination and
management 2.3 46.2 - - 2.3 46.2 - - - - 0.4 7.6 4.9 10.8
2.M&E, knowledge
management and
communication 0.5 36.4 0.2 13.6 0.5 36.4 - - - - 0.2 13.7 1.4 3.1

Subtotal 2.8 44.0 0.2 3.0 2.8 44.0 - - - - 0.6 9.0 6.3 13.9
Total 15.0 33.2 6.0 13.3 15.0 33.2 2.0 4.5 2.2 4.8 5.0 11.0 45.2 100.0



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

8

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.X

B. Project financing
35. PRODEFI, with a total cost of US$45.2 million, will be financed by: (i) IFAD, in the

amount of US$21 million (46.5 per cent of total cost), in the form of a grant for
US$15 million under the Debt Sustainability Framework for the 2016-2018 cycle of
the performance-based allocation system (PBAS), and a grant for US$6 million
under ASAP; (ii) private partners, in the amount of US$2 million (4.5 per cent);
(iii) the Government of Mauritania, in the amount of US$5 million (11 per cent);
and (iv) the beneficiaries, in the amount of US$2.2 million (4.8 per cent). The
financing deficit, in the amount of US$15 million, will be covered by other sources
of financing. Otherwise, it will be covered by a second tranche of IFAD financing
under the next PBAS cycle (2019-2021), subject to the availability of resources for
that cycle and subject to Executive Board approval.

Table 2
Project cost by category of expenditure and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Category of expenditure4

IFAD
PBAS

IFAD
ASAP

OTHER
FIN.

(Deficit)
Private Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount    %
I. Investment expenses

A. Works 4.9 36.8 1.2 8.9 4.9 36.7 0.0 - 0.7 5.6 1.6 12 0 13 3 29.3
B. Vehicles 0.1 30.2 - - 0.1 28.9 0.0 0.6 0.0 0.3 0 1 40 0 0 3 0.7
C. Equipment and
supplies 0.3 19.1 0.3 21.9 0.3 18.8 0.0 0.1 0.0 0.1 0 6 40 0 1 4 3.2
D. Training and
workshops 2.4 37.7 0.7 10.5 2.4 37.7 - - - - 0 9 14 0 6 4 14.1
E. Consultations 1.4 40.6 0.2 7.0 1.4 40.6 - - - - 0 4 11 9 3 5 7.7
F. Goods and services
and inputs 2.7 27.6 2.6 25.8 2.7 27.6 0.1 1.0 0.5 4.7 1 3 13 2 9 9 22.0
G. Grants and subsidies 1.5 21.4 1.0 15.0 1.5 21.4 1.9 28.3 1.0 13.9 0 0 - 6 9 15.2

Total investment
expenses 13.3 31.9 6.0 14.4 13.3 31.8 2.0 4.9 2.2 5.2 4 9 11 8 41 7 92 1

II. Operating expenses
A. Salaries and benefits 1.6 50.0 - - 1.6 50.0 - - - - - - 3 3 7.3
B. Operations 0.1 35.0 - - 0.1 35.0 - - - - 0 1 30 0 0 3 0.6

Total operating expenses 1.7 48.9 - - 1.7 48.9 - - - - 0 1 2 2 3 6 7 9
Total 15.0 33.2 6.0 13.3 15.0 33.2 2.0 4.5 2.2 4.8 5 0 11 0 45 2 100 0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
36. The financial analysis performed on the 4Ps and production models show that the

investments will be profitable, with internal rates of return (IRRs) higher than the
opportunity cost of capital and positive net present value (NPV). Based on the
assumptions included in the logical framework, the overall EIRR for the project is
20.5 per cent, generating NPV of US$19.6 million. The economic analysis takes into
account all of the aggregate benefits of the production models, 4Ps, environmental
co-benefits and the benefits deriving from tracks. The sensitivity analysis shows
robust results under all scenarios with different levels of risk.

D. Sustainability
37. The sustainability of PRODEFI results will be ensured by: (i) taking into account

market requirements and the profitability of investments in value chains;
(ii) strengthening and gradual participation of institutional actors such as GTFs,
government institutions and research centres, and economic actors such as
entrepreneurs and sponsoring companies, that are sustainably anchored in value
chain development; (iii) promoting a producer capitalization dynamic through
savings as a prerequisite for investments; and (iv) promoting production models
that are resilient to climate change and investments with positive environmental
externalities, as well as lower operating costs thanks to complementary ASAP
financing from IFAD.



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

9

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.X

E. Risk identification and mitigation
38. The risk level presented by PRODEFI is considered moderate. The risks considered

most likely and most serious are systemic risks linked to the macro-economic
context, including competition from imports, as well as climate hazards, weak
domestic supply of services, and limited technical and management capacities for
implementation of the country programme. These risks will be mitigated through
greater involvement in policy dialogue to promote inclusive value chains, financing
for adaptation measures and use of outsourcing.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
39. The project is in compliance with IFAD strategies, principles and tools in the areas

of rural finance and value chain financing, as well as gender equality. It is fully
consistent with IFAD's strategy on climate change (2010), particularly the objective
promoting innovative approaches to assist smallholder producers, both women and
men, to better adapt to climate change.

40. PRODEFI is classified in category B in that it is not expected to have any major
adverse environmental or social impact. Its climate vulnerability is deemed
moderate given the inclusion of adaptation considerations in all project activities.
The project also includes a set of technologies and approaches intended to prevent
greenhouse gas emissions and enable carbon storage.

B. Alignment and harmonization
41. The project is fully aligned with the objectives of the strategy on rural sector

development, which has as one of its five strategic directions the development of
value chains with growth potential, generating permanent employment and
motivating incomes, with support from structured mechanisms for consultation and
effective value chain management to the benefit of the organizations of value chain
actors. In addition, it is fully consistent with the National Agricultural Development
Plan, which calls for promoting the competitiveness of agricultural value chains. The
recent installation of the Value Chain Directorate at the new Ministry of Livestock
underscores the importance given to value chains within the Mauritanian
institutional landscape.

42. With respect to nutrition, an inter-sector action plan on nutrition has been drafted
under the initiative of the Renewed Efforts against Child Hunger and Undernutrition
(REACH) partnership with support from the United Nations Children’s Fund
(UNICEF), the World Health Organization (WHO), FAO and WFP. A national
multi-sector strategy on nutrition (2016-2025) is also nearing completion. PRODEFI
will be part of the implementation of this strategic plan.

43. In the area of climate change, in 2015 Mauritania prepared an INDC in connection
with the 21st Conference of the Parties of the United Nations Framework Convention
on Climate Change. PRODEFI will contribute to implementing national priorities
through its support for small-scale irrigation and regeneration of plant cover.

C. Innovation and scaling up
44. A number of innovations and best practices introduced by ProLPRAF will be scaled

up under this project, e.g.:

(i) The market-driven value chain approach, through dialogue among the actors
within GTFs. The situational analysis done of GTFs at the time of project
design and the lessons learned from ProLPRAF allowed for a rigorous
identification of support on a larger scale for GTF governance, organization,
capacity for awareness-raising, leadership and youth representation;

(ii) The 4P initiatives undertaken during year one of ProLPRAF, which serve as a
model for developing 4P initiatives for PRODEF;

(iii) Capitalization of smallholder producers through savings, using the Centre for



EB 2016/LOT/P.14

10

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.X

International Studies and Cooperation (CECI) model piloted by Catholic Relief
Services in Mauritania, which showed promising results that warrant scaling
up the initiative; and

(iv) Support for community associations for joint management of natural
resources and non-timber forest products.

D. Policy engagement
45. PRODEFI will support GTF federations and inter-professions in engaging in policy

dialogue with the Government on improving the economic environment for value
chains. The exchanges will relate mainly to: (i) policies to promote inclusive value
chains; (ii) promoting local products; (iii) implementing legislation on cooperatives
and other professional organizations; and (iv) policy on trade and tariffs. This policy
dialogue process will result in concrete proposals on matters such as health and
quality standards for value chain products, improving national legislation and
enforcement, and market opportunities that could lead to improving food and
nutritional security for households. Within this framework, the project will work with
others operating in the area of institutional support and policy dialogue to ensure
good coordination among interventions.

VI. Legal instruments and powers
46. A financing agreement between the Islamic Republic of Mauritania and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
Recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in appendix I.

47. The Islamic Republic of Mauritania is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

48. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
49. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Islamic Republic of
Mauritania under the Debt Sustainability Framework in an amount equivalent
to ten million seven hundred and fifty special drawing rights
(SDR 10,750,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Islamic
Republic of Mauritania under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP) in an amount equivalent to four million three hundred
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 4,300,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President






















































President’s Report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Niger for the Family Farming Development
Programme (ProDAF) in Maradi, Tahoua and
Zinder Regions

Republic of Niger

Family Farming Development Programme (ProDAF) in
Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder Regions

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/beneficiary: Republic of Niger

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total programme cost: US$207.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 17,250,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$24.25 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 17,250,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$24.25 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with an
annual service fee of three quarters of a point (0.75%)
per annum

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP):

SDR 9,250,000 (equivalent to approximately
US$13.0 million)

Cofinanciers: OFID, Italian Cooperation, GEF, ongoing IFAD projects

Amounts and terms of cofinancing: OFID: US$6.0 million (loan)

Italian Cooperation: US$28.2 million (loan)

GEF: US$8.0 million (grant), to be confirmed

Ongoing IFAD projects: US$10.5 million (loan)

Contribution of borrower/beneficiary: US$33.4 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$11.1 million

Funding gap US$48.5 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Niger for the Family Farming Development Programme
(ProDAF) in Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder Regions, as contained in paragraph 49.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Niger for the
Family Farming Development Programme (ProDAF) in
Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder Regions

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Niger, a landlocked country with a territory of 1,267,000 km², is counted among

the world’s least developed and low-income food-deficit countries. Approximately
80 per cent of its estimated population of 17.13 million lives in rural areas, with
more than 60 per cent inhabiting three regions: Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder. The
latest Human Development Index ranks Niger in last place at 186th, with
75.9 per cent of its population living on less than US$2 per day.

2. In a natural environment marked by an arid climate with little rainfall and high
temperatures, the agricultural sector accounted for nearly 45.2 per cent of the
country’s GDP in 2010, exhibiting higher growth than the rest of the economy
during the period. Agriculture is Niger’s main source of export earnings after
mining.

3. Agriculture in Niger is based primarily on small-scale family farms, which vary in
size according to region and combine rainfed crops with irrigated crops. Irrigated
cropping is increasing and accounts for 30 per cent of agricultural production and
90 per cent of sector exports.

4. The major agricultural constraints are climate-based, economic and technical, not
to mention organizational. Access to the factors of production (inputs, equipment),
advisory assistance, rural financing and markets is still limited. Forecasting models
are projecting a significant drop in cereal yields if nothing is done to better adapt
the country's production systems to climate change.

5. Despite these sectoral constraints, opportunities to boost agro-sylvo-pastoral
productivity and to promote farming exist. Cereal and horticultural crop yields could
be substantially increased with the use of improved cropping techniques, better
seed, the introduction of animal-drawn ploughing, the dissemination of innovations
and better irrigation techniques. These significant increases in yield could enable
rural families to produce enough for household consumption and the sale of
surplus, while at the same time improving their resilience to climate change.

6. Niger has policies for development and support of the various sectors of the
economy, especially the agricultural sector. These policies include the Sustainable
Development and Inclusive Growth Strategy (SDDCI), Vision 2035, the Economic
and Social Development Plan (PDES) 2012-2015 and the 3N Initiative (I3N) for
food and nutrition security and sustainable agricultural development. With support
from its technical and financial partners, the Government of Niger drafted its
National Nutrition Policy and its National Food and Nutrition Security Policy, revised
in 2011, placing particular emphasis on interventions to guarantee the population
sufficient, varied and quality food.



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
Results-Based COSOP

7. ProDAF was conceived in a global context in which 2014 was declared the
International Year of Family Farming, aimed at restoring the central position of
family farming in the agricultural, environmental and social policies of national
action programmes. IFAD operations in Niger implemented under the country
strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) 2013-2018 are in line with and
contribute to meeting the aims of national development policies and their
objectives, actions, and strategies. The strategic coherence between I3N and IFAD
operations in Niger derives from the lessons learned from 11 projects implemented
over the past 30 years and the experiences of the Government and other technical
and financial partners with whom IFAD implements its interventions.

8. With the object of providing the Government of Niger with substantial coordinated
support in the implementation of its agricultural policies, IFAD established
operational and financial partnerships by working in close collaboration with the
Belgian Fund for Food Security (FBSA), Italian Cooperation/DGCS, Spanish
Cooperation/AECID, the World Food Programme (WFP), the OPEC Fund for
International Development (OFID) and the Global Environment Facility (GEF), and
by making overtures to private funds (SINERGI) and the banking sector (BAGRI,
ASUSU, etc.).

9. IFAD has built its strategy in Niger on family farming adapted to a context of
structural risks and potential external shocks. This model is capable of tackling the
challenges of improving population food and nutrition security and fostering poverty
reduction, economic growth, sustainable rural development and resilience to
climate change.

10. Family farming remains highly vulnerable to the effects of climate change, with its
negative impact on population food and nutrition security. Forecasting models are
projecting a significant reduction in yields if no action is taken to adapt the
country's production systems to climate change. The programme focuses on
increasing the resilience of the family farming model by stressing sustainability at
the economic, social, environmental and climate level. The rationale for including
ASAP funding in ProDAF is the need to guarantee the sustainability of the targeted
production systems by ensuring their resilience to climate change. Likewise, the
rationale for the ProDAF intervention is the vulnerability of its target populations.

II. Programme description
A. Project area and target group
11. ProDAF will be implemented in IFAD’s area of concentration in Niger, identified by

COSOP 2013-2018 as the south-central corridor of the Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder
regions. The population directly targeted by the programme will be that of the
economic development poles, with the population of bordering areas indirectly
benefitting from the dynamic generated by programme activities. Some 2,030,000
people – or 290,000 households – are involved in agro-sylvo-pastoral activities.
ProDAF will focus particularly on 240,000 family farms.

12. Three types of family farms have been identified and targeted: (i) highly vulnerable
family farms; (ii) moderately vulnerable family farms; and (iii) family farms with
little vulnerability. The programme also targets two demographic groups: women
and young people. Among the latter, special attention will be paid to young women
particularly affected by early marriage. Women and young people must respectively
represent at least 30 per cent of the beneficiaries of all programme activities.

B. Programme development objective
13. The programme’s general objective is to help sustainably guarantee food and

nutrition security and rural households’ resilience to crises in the Maradi, Tahoua



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

3

and Zinder regions. The development objective is to sustainably increase the
income of 240,000 family farms, their resilience to external shocks, including
climate change, and their access to local, urban and regional markets in the three
regions.

C. Components/outcomes
14. In order to meet the development objective, the programme is built on three

components: (i) strengthening sustainable family farming; (ii) improving access to
markets; and (iii) programme management and coordination, monitoring and
evaluation, and knowledge management.

15. Component 1: Strengthening sustainable family farming. This component is
geared to sustainably boosting the productivity of family farms.

16. Subcomponent 1.1: Structured, productive farms resilient to climate risks.
Interventions will be carried out in 22 watersheds in the programme area. These
activities will consist of: (i) recovering 16,000 ha of degraded land; (ii) stabilizing
dunes around watersheds in a 2,000 ha area; (iii) creating 2,500 ha of sylvo-
pastoral space; and (iv) planting hedgerows on 400 ha of land. To make better use
of the available water resources, the programme will: (i) build/rehabilitate
139 dams in series to recover approximately 700 ha of land for irrigation; (ii) build
seven multipurpose mini-dams; and (iii) create four ponds. The programme will
furnish equipment for 6,800 ha of small-scale irrigation and get it up and running.
Thus, the programme will generate a total of 7,500 ha of irrigated land.

17. Subcomponent 1.2: Capacity building for rural dwellers. These activities are
designed to strengthen the institutions and organizations that provide assistance to
family farms: rural civil society organizations (farmers’ organizations, CRA/RECA),
decentralized technical services and the territorial authorities (communes, regional
boards). The programme anticipates a 30 per cent increase in current yields in
eight years through two complementary outreach mechanisms: 805 farmer field
schools and agricultural advisory assistance. These mechanisms will benefit
240,000 growers and cover some 190,000 ha.

18. The programme anticipates a 40 per cent increase in the yield of the principal
irrigated crops. It will take advantage of the mechanism of horticultural field
schools (CEPM), with 945 CEPM providing support to 30,000 growers on an
estimated 7,500 ha of vegetable farms.

19. In order to improve small-animal husbandry and poultry farming, the programme
will include three intervention measures: (i) the creation of six new private
veterinary services in the vicinity; (ii) advisory assistance in poultry farming and
small-animal husbandry, with the introduction of 210 innovations in small-animal
husbandry, benefitting 15,750 households; and (iii) the distribution of animals to
reconstitute the livestock capital of 13,500 non-resilient two-person households
(women and young people).

20. RECA and the CRAs will remain favoured ProDAF partners. Through operational
partnerships with the agricultural world (that is, the rural farming community of the
three intervention regions), the following will be actively involved in project
implementation: FUCAP and FUFO in Tahoua; FUMA Gaskiya, Sa’a and Albishirinku
Manoma in Maradi; FUBI and CSAOCP in Zinder; as well as the regional branches of
FCMN-Niya. The Chamber of commerce, industry, and handicrafts of Niger (CCIAN)
and connections with bordering countries (Niger-Nigeria Chamber of Commerce)
will be strategic priorities.

21. Subcomponent 1.3: Women’s leadership and the improvement of nutrition
security. These activities are geared to sustainably improving the nutritional status
of rural households and reducing chronic malnutrition among the most vulnerable
groups through the creation of 1,350 women’s groups under the Mata Masu Dubara
Programme. This programme will set up 90 new women-operated granaries for food



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

4

security and 4,500 home gardens for nutritional support and provide 5,500
households with farming tool kits. In all, these activities will benefit the 12,500
most vulnerable households. Nutrition awareness activities will touch roughly
100,000 households through the nutritional monitoring of children under 5 and
cooking demonstrations.

22. Component 2: Access to markets. This component is designed to improve the
access of family farms to markets through the construction/rehabilitation of rural
infrastructure.

23. Subcomponent 2.1: Structures for access to marketing platforms. A
semi-wholesale market will be built in nine new economic development poles, and
18 supplementary satellite hubs have been identified. The programme will
rehabilitate/build 850 km of rural roads. Routine and periodic maintenance of these
roads will be performed by independent road maintenance teams in cooperation
with the management of the semi-wholesale market, the Community Advisory
Assistance Directorate, the Ministry of Equipment and the Autonomous Road
Maintenance Financing Fund.

24. Subcomponent 2.2: Modes of infrastructure management and the financing
of economic operators. The programme will include the creation of management
structures for all commercial rural infrastructure created or rehabilitated and
provide the requisite assistance. The social engineering process will include the
implementation of a cooperation framework (Hadin Gwiwa in Hausa) involving all
economic operators at the site. A local cooperatives union will be responsible for
managing each satellite hub. The programme will also provide assistance to the
promoters of farming activities or collaborate with agricultural activities leading to
profitable sales-oriented ventures. This support will be provided through the
creation of a cost-sharing financial mechanism.

25. Subcomponent 2.3: Regional trade integration. The programme will work to
facilitate cross-border trade, increase knowledge about cross-border trade
constraints and propose and test solutions with economic operators. The activities
will be carried out in partnership with the Nigeria-Niger Joint Commission for
Cooperation, as well as consular trade offices, economic operators and professional
organizations.

26. Internal programme funding mechanisms. The programme’s support and
investments are financed in the following manner: (i) activities directly managed by
the programme, as in the case of infrastructure, are fully funded by subsidies;
(ii) activities targeting the most vulnerable households are funded by grants; and
(iii) activities that support economic activities are funded by cost-sharing
mechanisms.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
27. The ProDAF approach is grounded in the following three intervention principles:

(i) improvement of food and nutrition security; (ii) territorial continuity of the
interventions through the economic development pole; and (iii) scaling up the
current project activities of IFAD and its partners. The programme will promote a
strategy for learning, capitalizing on lessons learned, and communication that will
be evaluated during the course of the activities. Public-private sector
complementarity in the various intervention domains is guaranteed. ProDAF will be
implemented in collaboration with other technical and financial programmes under
way in Niger’s agricultural sector through strategic and operational partnerships.

28. The programme will be implemented in phases based on: (i) coordination with the
activities of the PASADEM and Ruwanmu projects; (ii) the maturity of local partners
– the local authorities and economic operators – that will be jointly involved in the



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

5

programme; and (iii) the ability of teams on the ground to manage the
administrative and financial processes involved in implementing the activities.

B. Organizational framework
29. ProDAF will be placed under the Ministry of Agriculture. The National Steering

Committee is responsible for strategic orientation and will verify the coherence of
the programme in this respect with national strategies; it will also approve the
annual workplans and budgets (AWPBs). The Ministry in charge will delegate project
management by decree to the three autonomous regional project management
units (URGPs), whose operations it will oversee. These units will be set up in
Maradi, Tahoua and Zinder and will enjoy administrative and financial autonomy. A
national advisory assistance unit (CENAT) has been created and tasked with
providing support for project engineering, political dialogue, rural roads, monitoring
and evaluation and financial consolidation of the programme.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

30. Programme planning will be an ongoing process based on the AWPBs. The
monitoring and evaluation system will be designed using the logical framework as a
tool for management, planning and decision-making by the partners in programme
implementation. The programme’s computer database will be linked directly to the
geographic information system (GIS) to allow for map-based visualization of
programme results.

31. ProDAF’s planning and monitoring and evaluation system will scale up IFAD’s
existing systems in Niger and merge them into a single database for a GIS and
common manual of procedures. During the preparation of the AWPB, quantitative
objectives will be broken down by region and implementation phase at programme
launch after a review of the logical framework with the stakeholders involved. Two
reviews at, respectively, one third and two thirds of the way into the programme
and a final evaluation are planned to compare the changes observed with the
baseline situation.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
32. ProDAF has a reliable and rigorous internal fiduciary management and control

environment, along with a qualified team inherited from ongoing IFAD projects,
which have resulted in remarkable performance levels. An account in CFA francs
(CFAF) will be opened in the name of the programme at a commercial bank in
Niamey acceptable to IFAD. An operations account in CFAF will also be opened for
each regional project management unit and CENAT itself (four in all). Based on
quarterly cash flow needs, each of the accounts will receive funds from accounts
designated (by a lender or donor), opened in response to a request for funds by the
URGPs. At the request of CENAT, tasked inter alia with quality control, coherence
and financial consolidation, the account will be activated and managed in
accordance with the renewable funds mechanism.

33. This innovative procedure will enable the programme to receive a substantial
advance corresponding to funds for expenditures equal to six months of the AWBP.
These funds will be subject to regular and periodic verification of payments. The
teams of the ongoing projects regularly and optimally use the latest version of the
Tompro financial management software, which has proved entirely satisfactory for
preparing reimbursement requests and monthly reports.

34. The procurement system is governed by current laws, decrees and legal provisions,
which contain general principles, controls and regulations for public procurement
and public service concessions and set public procurement thresholds for the state,
public establishments, state enterprises, and corporations with majority public
ownership, on the one hand, and territorial or local groups, on the other. A priori



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

6

control of procurement procedures is exercised by the General Directorate for the
Control of Public Procurement and Financial Liabilities.

35. ProDAF will be audited annually by a qualified firm.

E. Supervision
36. ProDAF will be under the direct supervision of IFAD. During the first 12 to

18 months, the supervision mission will verify that the main preparatory measures
have been adopted for the implementation of each component, as well as for
programme management, and monitoring and evaluation.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
37. The total cost of the programme over an eight-year period, including provisioning

for unexpected physical contigencies and price increases, is CFAF 103.6 billion,
equivalent to US$207.2 million. It consists of a cost of CFAF 22.3 billion
(US$44.7 million), covered with financing that has already been approved, and
CFAF 81.3 billion (US$162.5 millions), to be covered with new financing. The
US$162.5 million to be covered with new financing is comprised of a base cost of
US$142.7 million and US$19.8 million (12 per cent) in provisioning for unexpected
physical contigencies and financial events. This figure includes taxes in the amount
of US$19.6 (12 per cent), and the foreign exchange cost is set at US$46.0 million
(28 per cent).

B. Programme financing
38. ProDAF’s total cost of US$207.2 million will be financed by: (i) IFAD, thanks to the

harmonization of the AWPB of its PASADEM and PPI-RUWANMU projects (US$10.5
million) with that of ProDAF, the performance-based allocation system (PBAS)
2013-2015 financing (US$48.5 million, 50 per cent grant and 50 per cent loan),
and ASAP funds (grant of US$13.0 million); (ii) the GEF (grant of US$8.0 million, to
be confirmed); (iii) OFID (loan of US$6.0 million); (iv) and Italian Cooperation
(loan of US$28.2 million); (v) the Government of Niger (US$33.4 million – US$18.6
million in tax exemptions and US$14.8 million in funding); and (vi) the beneficiaries
(US$11.1 million). A funding gap of US$48.5 million remains, which could be
financed by IFAD’s PBAS 2016-2018 (modalities to be determined).



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

7

Table 1
Programme costs by component and funding source
(Thousands of United States dollars)

PBAS IFAD
2013-2015

50% Loan–50% Grant Funding gap ASAP GEF Beneficiaries Government Total

Components Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

A. Strengthening of sustainable family farming
1. Structured,

productive farms
resilient to climate
risks

15 774.5 22.0 15 743.5 22.0 10 122.3 14.1 7 061.6 9.9 9 724.4 13.6 13 169.1 18.4 71 595.5 44.1

2. Capacity building for
rural dwellers

6 173.4 42.1 6 198.1 42.2 1 365.4 9.3 - - 128.0 0.9 815.7 5.6 14 680.6 9.0

3. Women’s leadership
and the
improvement of
nutrition security

2 812.6 44.0 2 812.6 44.0 - - - - - - 762.9 11.9 6 388.0 3.9

Subtotal Strengthening
of sustainable family
farming

24 760.5 26.7 24 754.1 26.7 11 487.7 12.4 7 061.6 7.6 9 852.4 10.6 14 747.8 15.9 92 664.1 57.0

B. Access to markets
1. Structures for

access to marketing
platforms

12 662.4 32.5 12 662.4 32.5 - - - - - - 13 670.6 35.1 38 995.4 24.0

2. Management of
infrastructure and
the financing of
market operators

3 267.3 39.4 3 267.3 39.4 - - - - 1 286.0 15.5 469.3 5.7 8 289.8 5.1

3. Regional trade
integration

1 720.6 44.0 1 720.6 44.0 - - - - - - 466.6 11.9 3 907.8 2.4

Subtotal Access to
markets

17 650.2 34.5 17 650.2 34.5 - - - - 1 286.0 2.5 14 606.5 28.5 51 192.9 31.5

C. Programme
management and
coordination,
monitoring/
evaluation and
knowledge
management

6 084.2 32.6 6 084.2 32.6 1 482.8 7.9 964.4 5.2 - - 4 045.4 21.7 18 660.9 11.5

Total 48 494.9 29.8 48 488.5 29.8 12 970.5 8.0 8 026.0 4.9 11 138.4 6.9 33 399.7 20.6 162 518.0 100.0

Table 2
Programme costs by expense category and funding source
(Thousands of United States dollars)

PBAS IFAD
2013-2015

50% Loan–50% Grant Funding gap ASAP GEF Beneficiaries Government Total
Expense Category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Works 20 991.3 31.3 20 638.2 30.8 1 893.9 2.8 3 023.8 4.5 128.0 0.2 20 285.3 30.3 66 960.6 41.2

2. Vehicles 1 277.1 30.2 1 429.2 33.8 293.9 7.0 87.8 2.1 - - 1 135.0 26.9 4 223.0 2.6

3. Equipment and
materials

1 000.6 34.0 1 000.6 34.0 109.1 3.7 67.5 2.3 - - 765.2 26.0 2 943.0 1.8

4. Training 1 827.7 37.4 1 833.7 37.5 376.9 7.7 36.1 0.7 - - 815.5 16.7 4 890.0 3.0

5. Consultations 6 930.7 33.5 6 908.7 33.4 1 693.3 8.2 500.4 2.4 - - 4 675.8 22.6 20 708.9 12.7

6. Goods & services &
inputs

7 154.4 25.7 7 365.1 26.4 6 907.1 24.8 3 792.8 13.6 - - 2 645.1 9.5 27 864.5 17.1

7. Grants & subsidies 2 634.3 16.2 2 634.3 16.2 - - - - 11 010.3 67.6 0.0 - 16 278.9 10.0

8. Salaries &
indemnities

5 637.2 36.4 5 637.2 36.4 1 324.9 8.6 382.4 2.5 - - 2 498.6 16.1 15 480.3 9.5

9. Operating costs 1 041.4 32.9 1 041.4 32.9 371.5 11.7 135.2 4.3 - - 579.2 18.3 3 168.7 1.9

Total 48 494.9 29.8 48 488.5 29.8 12 970.5 8.0 8 026.0 4.9 11 138.4 6.9 33 399.7 20.6 162 518.0 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
39. A total of 290,000 rural households – that is 2,030,000 people – will benefit from

programme activities and sustainably increase their productivity, resilience to
climate risks and access to local and urban markets. In particular, the programme’s



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

8

overall IRR is 15.7 per cent. A sensitivity analysis was conducted; it found that the
IRR is sensitive to a drop in sales prices or yields. A drop of 30 to 40 per cent in
yields results in IRRs of 11.4 per cent and 9.9 per cent respectively, while a
30 per cent drop in sales prices results in an IRR of just 10.4 per cent.

D. Sustainability
40. The sustainability of ProDAF’s intended outcomes is ensured by its effective

partnership with local public institutions, organized rural civil society and the
private sector in designing and implementing the activities. Additional factors
include: the guarantee of the economic and financial profitability of the commercial
infrastructure built or rehabilitated; the microprojects financed; watershed
management for sustainable use of land and water resources; and investments in
small-scale irrigation equipment financed through cost-sharing under local market
conditions by local financial institutions capable of renewing such financing.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
41. The main risks and the mitigation measures adopted are as follows:

(i) The political and security situation in the programme area is
deteriorating. The programme strategy is based on an intervention that
targets local organized economic actors and communities capable of ensuring
the sustainability and continuity of the investments. The operational
mechanism boosts national and local technical and operational capacity in
collaboration with the IFAD Country Office in Niamey.

(ii) Adverse weather events. ProDAF will contribute to better forecasting of
changing weather patterns by producing and distributing meteorological
information to prevent/anticipate crises and provide adaptive technologies
that will enable producers to practice farming that is resilient to shocks
associated with climate change.

(iii) Vulnerable beneficiaries can survive crises produced by severe
weather events resulting in their decapitalization. The programme will
help anticipate, absorb, and respond to shocks by increasing the resilience of
households vulnerable to crises and contributing to the social safety net
programme.

(iv) Lack of support from territorial authorities. The programme retains the
commune as the administrative gateway for all interventions while involving
the authorities in local public-private partnerships.

(v) The fees paid by market operators are essential for guaranteeing the
sustainability of the semi-wholesale markets. Implementation partners
will employ financial analysis to help economic operators and mayors’ offices
negotiate contribution/fee levels.

(vi) Social divisions and conflicts in communities/communes. Social
engineering by ProDAF prior to any civil intervention will facilitate local
consensus building between the authorities and organized economic
operators. In the long term, this process will lead to the creation of local
public-private partnerships.

(vii) The security situation in the programme area. The risk that the security
situation will deteriorate and hinder overland travel by the supervision
missions is real. The programme will therefore strengthen the operational
capacity of the IFAD Country Office and national advisory assistance to carry
out these missions.



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

9

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
42. The programme is fully integrated into IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and

aligned with IFAD policies, especially its targeting policy, its policy on improving
access to land and tenure security and its environment and natural resource
management policy, as well as the Fund’s basic principles and strategies related to
climate change, gender and knowledge management. ProDAF is classified as an
environmental Category B programme.

B. Alignment and harmonization
43. The programme, like all other IFAD activities in Niger, is implemented within the

framework of its COSOP 2013-2018. It is in alignment with the objectives and
intended outcomes of the PDES, the I3N, and the I3N Acceleration Plan and
contributes to their attainment. In order to offer substantial and coordinated
support to the Government of Niger for implementation of its agricultural policies,
IFAD is working in financial and/or operational partnership with Italian and Spanish
Cooperation, KfW, the World Food Programme (WFP), FAO, the OPEC Fund for
International Development (OFID) and the GEF. ProDAF is also developing
synergies and complementarities with other donors and lenders active in the sector,
such as the French Agency for Development (AFD); Swiss (SDC), Danish (DANIDA),
and Luxembourg (LuxDev) bilateral cooperation agencies; the GIZ, the European
Union, the World Bank, IFC, USAID and the Millennium Challenge Corporation
(MCC).

C. Innovations and scaling up
44. ProDAF’s scaling up approach falls under the programme’s development objective,

which is to sustainably increase the income of family farms and improve their
adaptation to climate change and access to local, urban and regional markets. In
order to accomplish this, ProDAF capitalizes on proven, measured, and documented
outcomes obtained through the operations of IFAD or other partners in Niger, while
at the same time improving tools and approaches based on the lessons learned to
boost efficiency, impact, and sustainability. ProDAF’s scaling up is part of the
ongoing dynamic process of innovation, learning and scaling up launched after the
formulation of the two earlier projects and COSOP as part of the long-term vision
for IFAD activities in Niger. The tools for scaling up IFAD activities in Niger are not
only the operations financed by the Fund but the political dialogue and knowledge
management established in the various domains. The partners are another key
vehicle for scaling up to mobilize additional financial resources and/or
supplementary expertise.

D. Policy engagement
45. ProDAF’s intervention logic is to facilitate political dialogue and institutional

improvements through advocacy built on its activities in the field. The activities for
promoting political dialogue are designed to give ProDAF the opportunity to
participate in the strengthening of national public policies for sustainable
agricultural development and food and nutrition security (I3N), financing of the
agricultural sector (in association with the public and private sectors) and
administrative decentralization (support to local groups, communes, etc.), moving
toward a subregional dimension in the areas of transportation corridors and
cross-border trade (CEDEAO, UEMOA, CILSS, NEPAD).

VI. Legal instruments and authority
46. A financing agreement between the Republic of Niger and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/beneficiary.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

47. The Republic of Niger is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.



EB 2015/114/R.8/Rev.1

10

48. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
49. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Niger in an amount equivalent to seventeen million two
hundred fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 17,250,000) and upon
such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the
terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Niger, within the Debt Sustainability Framework, in an amount equivalent to
seventeen million two hundred fifty thousand special drawing rights
(SDR 17,250,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that, under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP), the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of Niger in
an amount equivalent to nine million two hundred fifty thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 9,250,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Rwanda for the Rwanda Dairy Development
Project

Republic of Rwanda

Rwanda Dairy Development Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning/ Republic of
Rwanda

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources

Total project cost: US$65.1 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 31.35 million
(equivalent to approximately US$43.6 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.79 million
(equivalent to approximately US$1.1 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional loan

Cofinancier: Heifer Project International (HPI)

Amount of cofinancing: Heifer Project International: US$4 million
Private sector: US$6.6 million

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$3.9 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$5.9 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Rwanda for the Rwanda Dairy Development Project, as
contained in paragraph 46.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Rwanda for
the Rwanda Dairy Development Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country, rural development and poverty context
1. Rwanda is a small, landlocked country in east-central Africa with a land area of

26,338 km2. Its estimated population in 2016 is 11.55 million with an annual
growth rate of 2.36 per cent. Population density has increased from 321 persons
per km2 in 2002 to 445 persons per km2 in 2015 – the highest in Africa.

2. While Rwanda has had an impressive record translating its sustained growth into
poverty reduction across the country, poverty remains a major challenge with
slightly over 4.4 million people estimated to be living in poverty. The country is
ranked 163rd out of 188 countries in the 2014 Human Development Index,
classifying Rwanda as a low human development country. The latest national
poverty survey identified 39.1 per cent of the population as poor and 16.3 per cent
as extremely poor (unable to afford the basic basket of goods and services
estimated at RwF 159,375 per household per year in 2014).1

3. Poverty is mostly a rural phenomenon: the incidence of poverty in rural areas is
estimated at 43 per cent compared to 22 per cent in urban areas. The country’s
land distribution is skewed – 36 per cent of households own 6 per cent of all farm
land, with an average of 0.1 hectare (ha) per household (compared to the national
average of 0.33 ha per household). The HIV prevalence rate has fallen below 3 per
cent as a result of concerted efforts to promote awareness and behaviour change,
coupled with ensuring that pregnant women living with HIV have access to
antiretroviral medicines.

4. Official estimates show that 19 per cent of Rwandan households are food insecure.
Food insecurity follows a similar distribution across districts as poverty and is
highest in the northern (46.2 per cent) and western (45.3 per cent) provinces. Food
insecurity is often related to the stability of rural incomes, access to land, animal
ownership and events such as crop failures and seasonal scarcities, which reduce
access to food. While there has been a marked reduction in the prevalence of
chronic malnutrition over the last decade, stunting continues to be above the World
Health Organization severity threshold and is a major public health concern. Almost
38 per cent of children under 5 are chronically malnourished, with stunting levels
above 40 per cent reported in over 30 per cent of districts in the country.

5. Dairy is a strategic commodity and the dairy subsector is crucial for rural
development, poverty reduction and food and nutrition security in Rwanda. It offers
a pathway out of poverty for the large number of households keeping livestock and
those who provide services and add value throughout the supply chain. The current
"farm gate" value of annual milk production is approximately US$153.90 million.
The dairy subsector is the largest segment of the livestock sector in Rwanda, which
accounts for 10.5 per cent of agricultural gross domestic product and is the fastest
growing subsector within agriculture.

1 National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda (NISR), Rwanda Poverty Profile Reports 2013/2014, 2015.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

2

6. In recognition of the importance of dairy, the Government has made significant
investments in the industry over the past decade aimed at transforming it from
subsistence to a business-oriented, modern sector capable of meeting the country’s
demand for dairy products and producing surpluses for the regional market. The
results of these investments are clearly visible today and include the transformation
of the national cattle herd from 600,000 cattle dominated by local breeds with low
milk production potential in the 1990s to today’s national herd of 1.35 million,
which includes 54 per cent improved dairy breeds. In tandem with this
transformation of the sector, annual milk production increased from 50,000 metric
tons in 2000 to 731,000 metric tons in 2015. Per capita milk consumption has also
steadily increased from below 20 litres per year in the 1990s to 64 litres per year in
2015.

7. While the impressive growth of the dairy sector in Rwanda has enabled the country
to become a significant player in the regional dairy industry, the sector’s
performance still lags behind that of competing countries in the region, and there
are still many challenges to be tackled. The Government’s National Dairy Strategy
seeks to build on the gains made so far to address the remaining factors
constraining the dairy sector from achieving its potential. A key thrust of the
strategy is to formalize the dairy value chain and – considering the health benefits
– increase national consumption of processed milk instead of the raw milk currently
being consumed. The strategy also seeks to improve value addition and product
diversification based on the anticipated milk surplus. The National Dairy Strategy
aims to not only increase the number of improved breed cows but enhance their
productivity through improved feeding across seasons. The latter is important to
ensure consistent milk supply, particularly during the dry season when milk supply
has consistently been far below demand. The Government is also seeking to expand
the milk-collection infrastructure, including the establishment of more milk
collection centres (MCCs) and increased commercialization of their operations.
Improved productivity and efficiency along the dairy value chain are expected to
reduce costs, making Rwanda’s dairy products less expensive and more competitive
in regional markets.

8. The National Dairy Strategy emphasizes the importance of public-private-producer
partnerships in achieving its objectives. The Government has spearheaded the
development of the dairy industry through projects such as the African
Development Bank-funded Livestock Infrastructure Support Project and the Rwanda
Dairy Competiveness Programme I and II funded by the United States Agency for
International Development. In addition, the Netherlands Development Organisation,
Heifer Project International (HPI), Send-a-Cow and the recently completed East
Africa Dairy Development Programme funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation have supported dairy development in Rwanda. The projects are being
implemented in prescribed districts, with the Rwanda Dairy Competitiveness
Programme II active in 17 districts across the country’s five milksheds.

9. Despite remarkable progress in developing the country’s dairy sector, significant
challenges remain. Key among them are: (i) low milk productivity, attributed to the
low number of improved dairy cattle and compounded by inadequate forage, animal
feeding practices and seasonal fluctuations in water availability; (ii) limited support
services (such as artificial insemination, veterinary services, extension and inputs),
and inadequate knowledge of dairy cattle management; (iii) limited organization of
farmers for collective action in marketing of milk and accessing inputs and services;
(iv) inadequate development and management of milk collection, processing and
marketing infrastructure for the supply of quality milk to domestic and regional
markets; (v) limited access to financing for dairy value chain actors, especially
women and youth; and (vi) a nascent policy and institutional framework and the
need for specific laws, regulations and institutional capacity development to
encourage the industry’s growth.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

3

10. The dairy sector is susceptible to climate change on both the production and
marketing sides as water and land become more limited for fodder production and
temperatures increase, requiring changes in forage-feeding systems. This makes
the transport and safe storage of milk to consumers more complex and requires
more energy use. On the other hand, dairy farming contributes to climate change
since increasing dairy production may contribute to anthropogenic greenhouse gas
(GHG) emissions, biophysical degradation and loss of biodiversity if green
strategies are not promoted along with good dairy-management practices. For
these reasons, dairy production needs to be increased through well-managed
intensification rather than an extensification approach, and must incorporate
climate-smart measures and technologies to mitigate against adverse
environmental impacts.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
COSOP

11. The proposed Rwanda Dairy Development Project (RDDP) will address these
challenges and capitalize on the opportunities created by past investments in the
sector. At the current level of productivity, milk-supply projections show that the
country will not be able to meet the rapidly growing domestic demand for milk and
sustain the upward trend in cross-border exports to the Democratic Republic of the
Congo and the Republic of Burundi. RDDP is expected to contribute to closing this
gap. The project design builds upon lessons learned in the dairy sector by
developing the value chain through: improving cattle productivity, milk quality and
the processing capacity of the dairy industry; and strengthening the policy and
institutional framework for the sector. RDDP supports all three strategic objectives
of the results-based country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) 2013-
2018.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
12. The project area comprises 12 districts throughout Rwanda. Selection of the

targeted districts was based on: (i) the current cattle population and level of milk
production; (ii) current and projected market development potential, including
investments in MCCs, dairy processing plants and animal feed factories; and
(iii) levels of poverty, food insecurity and malnutrition. With an estimated
population of 4.6 million, poverty in the project area is higher than the national
average, with the highest poverty in targeted districts in the north and west.

13. The project’s primary target group comprises slightly over 100,000 resource-poor
rural households, of whom 80,000 will be involved in dairy farming and 20,000 in
off-farm activities along the dairy value chain. The target groups include:

 51,800 smallholder dairy farmers in zero-grazing systems who typically own
up to three cows – this is the predominant livestock system in Rwanda,
accounting for 92 per cent of all livestock keepers, producing mainly for home
consumption and selling a small surplus locally;

 22,200 smallholder dairy farmers in semi-extensive grazing systems with up
to 10 cows – they are principally located in the northern and eastern
provinces, and typically have 5-10 ha, which form a good base for sufficient
supply of forage for their cattle, but face challenges associated with shortages
of water and pastures during dry months;

 6,000 Girinka (one-cow-per-poor-family) beneficiaries, who will receive a cow
in-calf and pass on the first heifer to a qualifying neighbour – these
households meet the criteria set by the government programme, with some
land for forage production and ability to construct a cowshed;



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

4

 15,400 young farm assistants age 15 to 24 working as wage labourers on
dairy farms, especially in women-headed households with no male adults –
they are typically from very poor families, with little or no education, and a
limited skills base;

 5,400 rural women age 15-35, who will benefit from new economic
opportunities and the creation of small off-farm business opportunities; and

 640 livestock farmer field school (L-FFS) facilitators, 450 producers of forage
seeds and vegetative-planting materials, 175 veterinarians, 72 community
animal health workers and artificial insemination technicians, members of
dairy cooperatives, milk-collectors and dairy processors.

14. The gender strategy aims to provide equal opportunities for women and men to
participate in, and benefit from, development of the dairy value chain through
RDDP-supported activities. It is expected that women will account for at least
45 per cent of all project beneficiaries. Women-headed households and women in
men-headed households will be empowered to build small businesses or engage in
activities related to dairy farming. The Gender Action Learning System will ensure
that women fully participate in household decision-making, especially regarding
dairy activities. Women’s participation in L-FFS will encourage their membership
and leadership in dairy farmers’ organizations, apex organizations and policy
engagement. Climate-smart investments will support the use of labour-saving
technologies such as rainwater harvesting, and the intensification of dairy
production will provide opportunities for biogas systems, which can be used for
household energy.

B. Project development objective
15. The overall goal of RDDP is to contribute to pro-poor national economic growth and

improve the livelihoods of resource-poor rural households. This will be achieved by
focusing on food security and nutrition, empowering women and youth, increasing
smallholder dairy farmers’ incomes and developing a climate-resilient dairy value
chain. Specifically, the project seeks to increase the dairy sector’s competitiveness
and profitability through the provision of quality products from small-scale
producers to domestic and regional consumers, thus improving their livelihoods,
food security and nutrition while building overall resilience.

16. There are two specific objectives:

 Sustainably intensify dairy production and increase productivity among
participating smallholder farmers. This shall be achieved through: the
promotion of improved climate-smart dairy-farming practices and access to
quality dairy inputs; extension services including veterinary and artificial
insemination services; green technologies; and business and financial
services, following a hub-model approach.

 Increase incomes among 80 per cent of participating smallholder farmers
from dairy farming through the combined effects of increased milk production
and improved market access. This shall be achieved through the:
development of 30 dairy hubs; establishment and strengthening of dairy
farmers’ organizations; and facilitation of linkages to markets and dairy value
chain actors such as milk collectors, processors, transporters, traders and
investors in milk quality through public-private-producer partnerships.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

5

C. Components/outcomes
17. To achieve its objectives, RDDP has three technical components:

18. Component 1: Climate-smart dairy production intensification aims at
increasing the capacity of smallholder dairy farmers and farm assistants to
sustainably produce and supply higher volumes of quality milk to the dairy market.
This component focuses on: (i) enhancing the capacity of smallholder dairy farmers
and farm assistants to improve their knowledge, attitudes and behaviours for
increased milk productivity and quality; (ii) providing smallholder dairy farmers with
sustainable access to public and private livestock services and inputs; and
(iii) supporting resource-poor households without cattle to acquire dairy assets so
that they can begin dairy farming through the Girinka programme and increase
their capacity to implement climate-smart investments aimed at sustainably
improving milk productivity and quality, as well as increasing household-level milk
consumption.

19. Component 2: Producer organization and value chain development is
designed to enable farmers to capitalize on productivity gains realized through
investments made under component 1. This component aims to increase their
earnings through: (i) organization and capacity-building of dairy-farmer
cooperatives for improved service delivery to farmers in milk collection and
marketing, input supply, animal-health services and financial services under the
hub model; (ii) investment in climate-resilient milk collection, processing and
marketing infrastructure aimed at reducing post-production losses and enhancing
the supply of quality milk in the domestic and regional markets; and (iii) leveraging
financing for climate-resilient dairy enterprise development aimed at catalysing
growth in all segments of the dairy value chain.

20. Component 3: Institutional and policy development aims to facilitate the
establishment of an evidence-based, inclusive policy framework and institutional
structure for the Rwandan dairy sector. It will achieve this by supporting:
(i) formulation of a national dairy policy and legislation necessary for improving the
regulatory environment of the sector; (ii) policy implementation and institutional
strengthening; and (iii) policy-related analysis and technical assistance.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
21. The starting point of RDDP will be the value chain for milk and milk products; it will

focus on supporting milk production, marketing and processing. In the process, it
will also support public and private production service providers such as
extensionists, input suppliers, artificial insemination and veterinary services,
smallholder dairy farmers and their organizations, informal traders and
transporters, small private dairy and MCC operators, and milk processors. The
project will facilitate the emergence of diverse subsector value chains offering a
range of products to different markets. In all of them, emphasis will be on:
increasing the quantity of milk marketed and processed; promoting efficiency in
value chains; ensuring the quality and safety of the final products; and increasing
household-level milk consumption.

B. Organizational framework
22. The lead agency in project implementation will be the Ministry of Agriculture and

Animal Resources (MINAGRI). Within the Ministry, daily operations will be managed
by the single project implementation unit (SPIU), which currently implements the
IFAD-supported Project for Rural Income through Exports, Post-harvest and
Agribusiness Support Project and the Kirehe Community-based Watershed
Management Project in Rwanda. In line with the sector-wide approach principles
and to mainstream project implementation within government agencies responsible
for dairy development, the main implementing body for the project will be the



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

6

Rwanda Agriculture Board (RAB), which will work closely with HPI in developing the
dairy-hub model. Other implementing partners will be the Rwanda Council of
Veterinary Doctors, the Rwanda Cooperative Agency, Rwanda’s Business
Development Fund and the Rwanda National Dairy Platform. These agencies will
provide facilitation and technical services in line with their mandated roles to
support project implementation. Collaboration will also be forged with the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) for technical support.

23. Performance-based contracts. Project implementation will be structured around
performance-based memoranda of understanding and partnership agreements with
government and non-governmental agencies, and service contracts with recruited
service providers. To ensure uninterrupted service delivery during implementation,
MINAGRI will enter into multi-year agreements with government implementing
partners and HPI, but provide annual reviews to ensure the achievement of results.
All service contracts for multi-year engagement will be issued on an annual basis,
and will be renewable only upon achievement of clearly set performance targets.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

24. Project management will be guided by a results-based management approach,
which aims to ensure that all processes, services and activities of the project and its
implementing partners contribute to achieving the project targets within the
framework of the project’s theory of change. As part of this approach, planning will
be guided by the project’s strategy, logframe and broader results framework, which
will inform the development of annual workplans and budgets.

25. The objectives of the project’s monitoring and evaluation system are to: (i) provide
information on progress towards results as required for results-based management
at all levels; (ii) enable the tracking of physical progress against the targets in the
annual workplan and budget; and (iii) collect and disseminate lessons for learning
purposes, including options for scaling up, replication and risk management. In line
with IFAD's Results and Impact Management System (RIMS), results will be
measured at the output, outcome and impact levels. The project logframe will be
extracted from the results framework and linked to the economic and financial
analysis in line with IFAD guidelines.

26. A knowledge management strategy for the dairy sector will be developed building
on three pillars: people, processes and technology. Quarterly reviews with
implementing partners will be organized by the SPIU to discuss progress towards
planned results in order to prepare quarterly progress reports, which will focus on
lessons learned, challenges and good practices. Study tours, exchange visits and
learning visits will be organized for lateral knowledge transfer.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
27. MINAGRI will have overall responsibility for the project’s financial management

system. It will be administered through the existing SPIU financial management
structure, which is regarded as a best practice in the region. The SPIU uses the
TOMPRO accounting system for both project and government reporting. The
financial reporting and audit standards are acceptable to IFAD.

28. Project audit. The SPIU will recruit an internal auditor to assess compliance of the
project's internal controls and procedures. The external audit will be performed by
the Office of the Auditor General.

29. Funds flow and disbursement arrangements. IFAD will disburse loan and grant
proceeds through a designated account to be opened at the National Bank of
Rwanda. The operational and counterpart funds accounts, denominated in Rwandan
francs, will also be opened at the National Bank of Rwanda, through which daily
payments to suppliers will be made. Funds will be transferred to other
implementing partners from the operational account. Implementing partners may



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

7

be required to open bank accounts specifically for RDDP funds depending on
whether they will receive substantial advances for activities under their
responsibility. Project funds will flow from the SPIU to the RAB and other
implementing partners only once memoranda of understanding are in place.

30. Start-up costs. Withdrawals for start-up costs are encouraged for eligible
expenditures to be incurred between the date of entry into force of the financing
agreement and the satisfaction of the conditions precedent to withdrawal.

31. Procurement. RDDP will adopt national procurement systems in line with the
international competitive-bidding threshold for goods, works and services, provided
that this system is in compliance with IFAD’s guidelines and in accordance with the
financing agreement and the letter to the borrower. The following actions will be
mainstreamed during RDDP implementation to ensure greater transparency and
accountability in financial management and procurement: (i) disclosure of
information to a wider audience, including at the community level;
(ii) beneficiary/civil society oversight for monitoring purposes and to ensure that
project-related information is discussed openly; (iii) a responsive complaints-
handling system; and (iv) sound accounting and audit measures within a context of
rigorous financial management.

E. Supervision
32. Project supervision will be carried out by IFAD jointly with MINAGRI, and with the

participation of HPI. Two implementation support/supervision missions will be
conducted every year and a midterm review will be organized by MINAGRI in the
third year. The IFAD Country Office will play an important role in supervising the
project by continually assessing bottlenecks and risks to successful implementation
and sustainability, and monitoring changes in implementation that require proactive
adjustments to the project design, implementation arrangements and logframe.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
33. Total project costs over six years, including physical and price contingencies, are

estimated at US$65.1 million, as presented in table 1 below, which summarizes
overall costs by component and financier. Component A represents 42 per cent of
total base costs, component B, 46 per cent and component C, 3 per cent; project
coordination and management costs are 9 per cent.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

8

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier

(Thousands of United States dollars)
IFAD IFAD Private

loan grant Heifer banks Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount %
A. Climate-smart dairy
production intensification

- - - -

1. Knowledge, attitudes and
behaviour

8 973.6 - 840.4 9 814.1 15.1

2. Sustainable access to
public and private livestock
services

6 485.2 535.7 404.0 115.6 603.6 790.4 8 934.5 13.7

3. Asset building and climate-
smart productivity

6 084.4 - 594.0 1 584.8 - 625.5 8 888.7 13.7

Subtotal: Climate-smart dairy
production intensification

21 543.3 535.7 998.0 1 700.4 603.6 2 256.3 27 637.3 42.5

B. Producer organization and
value chain development

1. Organization and capacity-
building of farmer
cooperatives and other value
chain players

4 236.0 - 2 908.7 - - 283.5 7 428.2 11.4

2. Investment in milk collection
and processing infrastructure

3 146.2 344.7 90.2 - 928.2 1 036.7 5 546.0 8.5

3. Financing for dairy
enterprise development

7 368.1 - - 4 866.7 4 400.0 11.7 16 646.5 25.6

Subtotal: Producer
organization and value chain
development

14 750.2 344.7 2 998.9 4 866.7 5 328.2 1 332.0 29 620.7 45.5

C. Institutional and policy
development

1. Policy formulation 332.3 - - - - 3.9 336.2 0.5
2. Policy implementation and
institutional strengthening

1 073.4 - - - - 141.0 1 214.4 1.9

3. Policy-related knowledge
management

65.8 210.3 - - - 41.3 317.3 0.5

Subtotal: Institutional and
policy development

1 471.5 210.3 - - - 186.1 1 867.8 2.9

D. Project coordination and
management

1. Project management 4 767.4 - - - - 59.1 4 826.5 7.4
2. Monitoring and evaluation 1 086.5 - - - - 30.3 1 116.8 1.7

Subtotal: Project coordination
and management

5 853.8 - - - - 89.4 5 943.3 9.1

Total 43 618.8 1 090.7 3 996.9 6 567.1 5 931.8 3 863.9 65 069.1 100.0

B. Project financing
34. The project will be financed by: (i) IFAD in the amount of US$44.7 million

(69 per cent of the total cost) through a highly concessional loan of US$43.6 million
and a grant of US$1.1 million; (ii) HPI for US$4 million (6 per cent of the total
cost); (iii) the private sector/banks for US$6.6 million (10 per cent of the total
cost); (iv) the Government of Rwanda for US$3.9 million (6 per cent) in the form of
tax exemptions; and (v) beneficiaries for US$5.9 million (9 per cent). Table 2 below
details project costs by expenditure category and financier.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

9

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD IFAD Private
loan grant Heifer banks Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount %

I. Investment Costs
Works 510.2 - 112.0 622.2 1.0
Vehicles 145.4 - 36.4 181.8 0.3
Equipment and materials 5 095.1 344.7 248.9 115.6 952.5 1 689.2 8 445.9 13.0
Goods, services, and
inputs 9 796.3 210.3 1 476.2 - 579.3 2 026.4 14 088.4 21.7
Consultancies 5 842.5 535.7 1 133.6 - - 0.0 7 511.8 11.5
Training and workshops 9 505.6 - 1 138.2 - - 0.0 10 643.8 16.4
Grants and subsidies 7 777.2 - - 6 451.5 4 400.0 - 18 628.7 28.6

Total investment costs 38 672.3 1 090.7 3 996.9 6 567.1 5 931.8 3 863.9 60 122.5 92.4
II. Recurrent costs

A. Salaries and
allowances 3 737.9 - - - - 0.0 3 737.9 5.7
B. Operating costs 1 208.6 - - - - 0.0 1 208.6 1.9

Total recurrent costs 4 946.5 - - - - 0.0 4 946.5 7.6

Total 43 618.8 1 090.7 3 996.9 6 567.1 5931.8 3 863.9 65 069.1 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
35. The economic and financial analysis shows that the project would be profitable with

an internal economic rate of return of 26.2 per cent and a net present value of
US$44.1 million at a 12 per cent economic discount rate. Sensitivity analysis shows
that the economic profitability of RDDP remains satisfactory even if the project
costs increase by 50 per cent, the project benefits decrease by 50 per cent or the
benefits lag behind by two years. The project is financially profitable at the
production, processing and marketing segments of the value chain, with the
financial internal rate of return for farmers ranging from 22 per cent to 43 per cent
depending on the production system (for small-scale processors, it is estimated at
43 per cent and for milk collection and marketing enterprises, it ranges from 25
per cent to 36 per cent).

D. Sustainability
36. RDDP will contribute to improving the livelihoods of targeted dairy-farmers and

strengthening the resilience of their production systems through the promotion of
dairy farming as a profitable business. The sustainability of project benefits will be
ensured through:

 Implementation by national bodies and utilization of national procedures to build
country ownership and sustain investment in the dairy value chain;

 A focus on empowerment of dairy groups through L-FFSs, which contributes to a
bottom-up approach for technology transfer, knowledge dissemination and
support service delivery, enabling dairy farmers to access these services at
affordable cost well beyond the project time frame;

 An emphasis on cost-sharing with farmer beneficiaries to ensure their ownership
and project investment support to enhance beneficiaries’ entrepreneurial
capacities so that farmer groups can access services and develop business
enterprises supported by financial institutions, and conclude contracts with
nationwide milk processors;



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

10

 Facilitation of dairy hubs’ access to financial services, which will enable them to
establish long-term business relationships with the financial sector so that
businesses can grow and advance to a commercial scale; and

 Promotion of partnerships with stakeholders such as HPI for dairy-business hub
development, FAO for technical assistance regarding animal-health and feeding,
and operational partnerships with the Business Development Fund and the
Rwanda Veterinary Doctors Council to ensure the continuity of project
interventions beyond IFAD support.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
Main risks Mitigation measures
Medium: Business management
capacity of dairy hubs does not
develop fast enough to cope with their
expansion and ensure that activities
are managed effectively in support of
dairy value chain development.

RDDP is expected to provide inputs appropriate to the needs of the hubs
that will be supported by an extensive training and business coaching
programme. Where appropriate, the project will support a "turnaround"
programme that has proved effective in other projects supporting
cooperative development.

Low: RDDP interventions encourage
non-commercial value chain
investments.

RDDP has been designed in accordance with a value chain approach. The
sustainability of this approach rests on commercial incentives and
private-sector participation. The project will support dairy-farmers, MCCs
and other dairy value chain stakeholders to build financially self-sustaining
commercial linkages based on commercial incentives rather than reliance
on subsidies. Results of the economic analysis show that the project has a
good and resilient economic profitability that should remain satisfactory
even in case of strong adverse developments in project costs, benefits and
implementation delays.

Medium: Under-investment in rural
roads, water and electricity
infrastructure perpetuates the
problems of low-quality milk for
processing, high production costs and
limited opportunities for export.

The Government has committed to provide additional resources through
the Feeder Roads Development project to finance feeder road
improvements under component 2, which are currently estimated at
US$12.8 million.

Low: Disease outbreak (e.g. foot-and-
mouth disease, Rift Valley Fever,
Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia)
can cause losses for dairy producers
and the dairy industry if contingency
and mitigation plans are not
implemented by national veterinary
authorities.

The Government has put in place disease-control measures that include
regular vaccination campaigns against these diseases and elaborate
movement control of livestock and livestock products. Lessons learned
from IFAD-funded projects in Zambia and Malawi on disease control have
been considered in formulating project activities to strengthen national
capacity for mitigating the risk of disease outbreaks.

Medium: The effects of climate change
can have significant impacts on
natural resources, especially pasture
and forage/crop production, affecting
seasonal available grazing and
reducing the nutrition and lactation of
cattle.

The project’s climate-smart dairy intensification approach will strengthen
community resilience through the sharing of dairy-farming best practices
and adoption of green innovations in order to cope with extreme climate
events. The project will train dairy farmers in forage conservation and
invest in pasture improvement and conservation at the farm level. The
project will also promote investments in climate-resilient and low-carbon
post-production procedures, cooling, processing and value addition to
reduce product losses and increase the incomes of farmers and rural
labourers.

Medium: Rwanda has been ranked as
maintaining a high level of integrity in
public administration and has made
significant progress in establishing
mechanisms to support integrity and
transparency in public procurement
systems. The 2015 Transparency
International Corruption Perception
Index score of 54 places the country at
medium risk.

Mitigation measures include strengthening the internal audit function,
performing financial management assessments of new implementing
agencies, upgrading accounting software and maintaining a project
implementation manual with all financial procedures.



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

11

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
37. RDDP complies with IFAD’s policies on targeting, gender equality and women’s

empowerment, private sector, climate change, environment and natural resource
management. The project is designed to be consistent with the IFAD’s Private
Sector Development and Partnership Strategy, its Rural Finance Policy and the
associated Decision Tools for Rural Finance. The project is also in line with the
approaches outlined in the Framework for Gender Mainstreaming in Programme
Management Department Operations.

38. The project’s Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP)
category is B considering that RDDP will promote enhanced natural resources
management and integration of livestock and crop production. It will ensure that
climate-resilience technologies (e.g. solar energy and biogas) are widely adopted
along with improved management of natural resources and dairy cattle herds,
which in turn will mitigate environmental risks.

B. Alignment and harmonization
39. RDDP investments will be integrated with ongoing IFAD, government and other

partner-supported initiatives related to livestock, dairy and rural infrastructure
development. The project is aligned with core programme areas of the
Government’s Strategic Plan for the Transformation of Agriculture (PSTA III),
including: (i) agriculture and animal resources intensification; (ii) research and
technology transfer, advisory services and professionalization of farmers; (iii) value
chain development and private sector investment; and (iv) institutional
development. In addition, RDDP will contribute to the goals of the Economic
Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy II and the National Strategy on
Climate Change and Low-Carbon Development.

C. Innovations and scaling up
40. RDDP builds on past and on-going experiences with improving the national dairy

industry through the dairy-hub model. Through the promotion and support of this
successfully-tested model, project interventions will seek to strengthen dairy-
farmers’ cooperatives and set up basic dairy infrastructure under a business
framework that will evolve into sustainable farmer-managed dairy hubs. These
dairy hubs will act as a nexus of private sector-led interventions designed to
increase access to productive services such as feed and other inputs, artificial
insemination and veterinary-extension services, output markets and dairy-related
business development services such as finance, insurance, and market support.

41. Scaling-up of results under the RDDP will be achieved through linking focused
project investment resources to leverage private co-investments and borrowing
from the commercial banking system through public-private-producer partnerships
– and in so doing, developing commercial value chain relationships and services
that are market driven and sustainable. RDDP will strengthen the dairy value chain
and, in particular, the linkages between smallholder dairy producers and their
organizations on one hand, and processors and traders on the other. It will also:
promote the development of a scalable model for integrating financial and non-
financial services into commercial relationships between smallholder dairy farmers
and processors; and support efforts to reduce the cost of doing business in the
dairy-processing industry, thus creating incentives for further investments in the
entire sector.

D. Policy engagement
42. By considering policy engagement as a full-fledged component of the project, IFAD

emphasizes the need for a conducive – and inclusive – institutional framework for
the Rwandan dairy sector in which smallholders are involved from the formulation



EB 2016/118/R.19/Rev.1

12

to the implementation of policies. The project will support dairy-farmer
cooperatives, the Rwanda National Dairy Platform and the Rwanda Council of
Veterinary Doctors in strengthening their technical and organizational capacities,
thereby ensuring continuity and sustainability of support after the implementation
period. The project will work across all phases of the national policy cycle –
including policy formulation, implementation and evaluation – and will emphasize:
partnerships and learning from previous experience; integration into national policy
processes and existing governance structures; and the generation and use of
evidence to inform policy decisions

VI. Legal instruments and authority
43. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Rwanda and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

44. The Republic of Rwanda is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

45. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
46. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Rwanda in an amount equivalent to thirty-one million three
hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 31,350,000)
(approximately US$43.6 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Rwanda in an amount equivalent to seven hundred and ninety thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 790,000) (approximately US$1.1 million) and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President













































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Tunisia for the
Siliana Territorial Development
Value Chain Promotion Project

Republic of Tunisia

Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain Promotion
Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Republic of Tunisia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Water Resources and Fisheries

Total project cost: US$34.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan
(under the performance-based
allocation system [PBAS] 2016-2018):

EUR 21.6 million (equivalent to approximately US$23.6
million)

Amount of IFAD grant
(under PBAS 2016-2018):

EUR 0.46 million (equivalent to approximately US$0.5
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 18 years, including a grace period of five years and an
interest rate corresponding to the annual reference rate
set by IFAD semi-annually

Retroactive financing: For eligible expenses up to a maximum amount
equivalent to US$100,000 incurred after the date of
signing of the financing agreement up to the date of
effectiveness of the agreement

Contribution of borrower/recipient: US$7.6 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.5 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing for the Republic of Tunisia for the Siliana Territorial Development Value
Chain Promotion Project, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Tunisia for
the Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain
Promotion Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Economic and social context. Tunisia is a middle-income country in North Africa

covering an area of 164,000 km2, three quarters of which is characterized by an
aridity that is attenuated only in the northeast. The country occupies a
geo-strategic position in terms of trade outlets, particularly towards Europe and the
Mediterranean region. In 2014 the total population was 10,982,000, growing at
1.03 per cent yearly, of whom 50.2 per cent were women and 32 per cent lived in
rural areas, for an average density of 67 inhabitants per km2. However, distribution
of the population across the country is highly unequal, with 70 per cent living in the
urban and industrialized coastal area and the remaining 30 per cent in the rural and
agricultural interior.

2. Incidence of poverty. The poverty rate in Tunisia is an estimated 15.5 per cent,
meaning that some 1.6 million Tunisians live below the poverty line. The
predominantly rural regions of the centre-west and south-east are particularly
affected and increasingly lag behind the rest of the country. The Governorate of
Siliana, which is home to 223,100 people, more than half living in non-communal
environments, is among the most disadvantaged regions.

3. Agriculture and fishing. Beyond the key role it plays in the country’s food
security, this sector continues to occupy an important place in the Tunisian
economy, generating close to 10 per cent of GDP and contributing actively to job
creation – currently at 16 per cent of the national level – and to the balance of
payments through exports. Of a national total on the order of 162,000 km2, arable
land covers an estimated 10 million hectares, including 420,000 hectares under
irrigation and 75 per cent using water-saving equipment. There are currently
516,000 farms averaging 10.2 hectares. However, within this average there are
significant disparities: 53 per cent of farms are 5 hectares or less in size, while
3 per cent of farms have over 50 hectares and manage some 37 per cent of the
land. Livestock are raised by 71 per cent of farms.

4. Having benefited from a positive growth rate of 3 per cent per annum for many
years, the agriculture sector was hard hit by the crisis in global agricultural markets
that took place in 2007-2008. A recent analysis shows that the sector will need to
promote the evolution of agricultural policies and institutions, in addition to
overcoming a series of structural constraints accentuated by the effects of climate
change. A five-year plan for the sector covering the period 2016-2020 is under
preparation. Based on boosting competitiveness and the sector’s appeal for private
investors, the plan underscores promoting sustainable development of natural
resources, adaptation of production systems to climate change, value chain
development and competitiveness, modernizing farms, revising the framework of
incentives, and building the capacities of farmers’ organizations.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Strategic framework. In the absence of a consolidated strategic framework for
the sector, an effort has been made to seek the greatest possible alignment
between IFAD’s orientations and those of the Tunisian Government. A national
economic and social development plan is nearing completion and a national process
of dialogue should lead to preparation of a long-term vision for the agriculture
sector. Pending the finalization of this process, IFAD has prepared a country
strategy note to guide interventions during the period 2017-2018 until a country
strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) is prepared at the end of 2017.

6. Rationale. IFAD has intervened in the governorate by implementing two integrated
rural development projects that have laid the groundwork for ensuring the region’s
agricultural development. At the request of the Government of Tunisia, the Fund
proposes to finance a project that can build upon those gains, focusing on adding
value to the products of the region’s value chains offering the greatest potential, to
enable smallholder producers to capture any value added thus generated and to
create sustainable employment, either directly in connection with the value chains
selected or indirectly by developing related services. The choice of this type of
project is all the more justified by the fact that developing value chains and
improving their competitiveness is one of the priorities set by the five-year plan for
2016-2020.

7. The Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain Promotion Project (PROFITS) is
justified by the following: (i) the existence of significant agro-economic potential for
producing and adding value to the products of value chains, particularly those
involving tree growing, provided that smallholder operations are secured against
hazards and have their investment capacities supported at every level; (ii) the
weakness of governance and management on the part of actors upstream and
downstream of these value chains, as well as limited share of value added captured
and access to profitable markets; (iii) inadequate capacities to add value to these
products compared to current needs and potential, while investments in this area
would enable a larger share of value added to be captured locally; and (iv) the
existence of major discrepancies between producers in terms of technical and
economic skills as a result of ineffective public structures and approaches to
extension, justifying a technical and economic advisory assistance arrangement
combining the public and private spheres to benefit all value chain actors. Finally,
the approach selected is intended to generate more jobs, improve and diversify
income sources for vulnerable social groups and thus combat poverty with a view to
promoting an economy marked by social solidarity.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. Project area. The project will cover 35 sectors in five delegations in the southern

portion of the Governorate of Siliana,1 which is home to some of the country’s
poorest people. The project area comprises essentially mountain systems within the
geographical region of the Tunisian dorsal, located between 600 and 1,300 metres
above sea level and suitable for fruit tree growing and livestock breeding.

9. Target group. There are 114,122 people living in the project area. The direct
beneficiaries will be 14,000 of the most disadvantaged households
(54,500 individuals, or half the area’s inhabitants) who have knowhow and work in
the agricultural economy, small family farms with up to 2 hectares of irrigated land
or 20 hectares of rainfed land practising extensive settled and/or pastoral (in
forests) livestock breeding with herds of up to 30 head of sheep and goats,
households involved in processing and adding value to value chain products, and

1 Bargou, Makhtar, Kesra, Er-Rouhia and Siliana South.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

3

young men and women seeking employment and economic opportunities. In
addition, the project will target primary students with nutritional education.

10. Targeting strategy. Pro-poor, inclusive value chain development will be based on:
(i) creating an enabling environment for the inclusion of the poorest people,
including women and youth, by promoting communication with target groups, then
awareness-raising and training for value chain actors; (ii) geographical targeting
using the criteria indicated previously, refined by differentiation based on the
agroecological area and the value addition approach; (iii) direct targeting using
criteria to classify beneficiaries for the various activities and services set up by the
project, as discussed and defined with communities; (iv) self-targeting to identify
services and products within value chains that are adapted to each category of
beneficiaries: smallholder farmers, young people promoting small enterprises,
women; (v) quotas associated with support measures to ensure 30 per cent
participation by women and 20 per cent by young people; and (vi) operational
measures with responsible targeting, gender equality and nutrition to ensure
implementation of the project targeting strategy.

B. Project development objective
11. The overall objective of the project is to improve living conditions for vulnerable

rural people living in the southern part of Siliana, particularly by creating new
sustainable employment opportunities with value chain development and value
addition. The specific objectives are to sustainably develop value chains by taking
advantage of the diversity of unique terroirs in the region, with profitable inclusion
of organized smallholder producers, young people and women, and strengthening
the ability of smallholders to make effective and rational use of socio-economic
potential within value chains.

C. Components/outcomes
12. The project will be structured in two main components: (i) value chain promotion

and value addition; and (ii) creation of enabling conditions for value chain
development and strengthening with management/coordination arrangements.

 Component 1: Value chain promotion and value addition. The main outcome of
this component will be to enable value chain actors to identify opportunities to
develop the value chains concerned and coordinate their actions accordingly.
There are three subcomponents: (i) organizing value chain actors in production
areas; (ii) developing economic activities between value chain actors and
building capacities to add value to value chain products; and (iii) building the
actors’ professional capacities.

Subcomponent 1.1 calls for setting up spaces for consultation and dialogue
among all value chain actors and operators, in the form of value chain platforms,
leading to the participatory development of frameworks for action and the
establishment of win-win partnerships between value chain actors.

Subcomponent 1.2 will consist of supporting value chain actors to prepare and
implement business plans with other private and public actors, to develop each
value chain as a whole and to improve the overall value added and distribute it
more equitably, benefiting smallholder farmers. These business plans may
encompass a whole range of activities and may receive project support in the
form of strengthening and economic assistance to bring them to fruition. Such
activities will involve, in particular, support for farms to convert to tree growing
and engage in livestock-related activities, as well as start-up microenterprises in
production and services. All activities will be piloted by agricultural development
groups (GDAs). The subcomponent also calls for making available to existing or
future mutual agricultural services societies (SMSA), based on value chain action
frameworks, value addition units to be built and equipped with project funding.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

4

These value addition units will be managed by the SMSA, which will receive
specialized technical assistance from the project.

Subcomponent 1.3 will involve mainly capacity-building for value chain actors,
particularly GDA and SMSA.

 Component 2: Creating enabling conditions for value chain development in an
improved institutional environment, by setting up arrangements for private
technical and economic advisory assistance for producers organizations and
financing the repair or construction of infrastructure needed for value chain
development – irrigated perimeters, new tracks for market access, catchment
lakes and restructuring of rural landholdings. Within this component efforts will
also be made, through participatory policy dialogue among all actors within value
chain platforms, to support the identification by the latter of obstacles to value
chain development and propose improvements to the legal and procedural
framework to address them. There are three subcomponents: (i) setting up
sustainable arrangements for technical and economic advisory assistance and
service provision; (ii) building public infrastructure relating to the value chains;
and (iii) consultative dialogue on policy and on the legislative and regulatory
framework for value chains.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
13. PROFITS will operate under a value chain approach to promote win-win

partnerships between actors in the selected value chains and the creation of local
economic development hubs. Thus, the Government will intervene essentially in
support of organized smallholder producers by implementing two components:
(i) direct support to private value chain actors based on the implementation of their
business plans and their professionalization through capacity-building, and based
on setting up local value chain platforms as inter-professional spaces for exchange
and orientation (component 1); and (ii) indirect support to create enabling
conditions for value chain development, specifically by setting up support structures
– in particular, innovative technical and economic advisory assistance
arrangements, including management councils and physical infrastructure – and
promoting policy dialogue (component 2). Although this is not an environmental or
youth employment project per se, it will address these concerns – e.g. by
supporting the conversion of cereal growing areas to the selected value chains,
which are more labour-intensive and more environmentally friendly, with technical
advice oriented towards organic agriculture and a rational use of chemical inputs.
The value chain professionalization dynamic will open up prospects for both direct
employment for skilled labour and indirect employment in the provision of services
and advice.

B. Organizational framework
14. Project management will take place at three levels. The central coordination unit

(CCU), which already exists at the Investment Financing and Professional
Organizations Directorate (DGFIOP) of the Ministry of Agriculture, will provide
central project coordination. At the regional level, a rural development division
(RDD), or another structure responsible for project execution will be created within
the Regional Commission for Agricultural Development in Siliana (CRDA). The RDD
will be assisted locally by light project implementation coordination structures
based on territorial outreach units. Project management and socio-professional
organization capacities of these structures will be strengthened with external
technical assistance.

15. For steering and coordination, plans call for setting up three coordination
structures: (i) a national steering committee; (ii) a regional coordination and
steering committee; and (iii) a local coordination committee set up for each



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

5

delegation. In addition, a regional technical committee will be set up to coordinate
the steering of arrangements for technical and economic advisory assistance.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledge
management

16. Planning. Through the value chain platforms supported by the required technical
assistance and specialized expertise, plans call for developing an action framework
for each value chain, then business plans for farmers organizations or other
operators within the value chains outlining investments, implementation modalities
and physical and financial participation by the different actors. These planning
instruments will identify the investments with the best returns for the target
population, with business plans for different types of upstream and downstream
investment.

17. The annual workplan and budget (AWP/B) will be prepared by DPCDR jointly
with the CRDA technical services and project partners, based on the design report,
COSTAB projections adjusted to reflect actual figures, value chain action
frameworks, priority needs of beneficiaries formulated within the platforms,
implementation capacities, budget allocations and recommendations by supervision
missions.

18. The M&E system will be set up on the basis of the system implemented by DGFIOP
for the Natural Resource Management Project (PGRN 2) funded by the World Bank,
already installed for the IFAD-funded second phase of the Agropastoral
Development and Local Initiatives Promotion Programme for the South-East
(PRODESUD-II) and the Agropastoral Value Chains Project in the Governorate of
Médenine (PRODEFIL). This system will make it possible to define: (i) planning for
activities and budgets; (ii) monitoring of physical and financial gains and their
impact on project management and logical framework indicators; (iii) evaluation of
results effectiveness by analysing outcomes and achievement times, and efficiency
based on performance on the cost of achievements; (iv) evaluation of results
disaggregated by specific target group, e.g. women and young people; and
(v) monitoring of disbursements. The system will be adapted during year one of the
project to take account of these specificities and indicators of results and impact
from the logical framework and the Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS). Preparation of the baseline study and adaptation of the M&E system will be
undertaken using retroactive financing so that the baseline study is available prior
to actual project start-up.

19. Knowledge management. The project will disseminate innovations and lessons
learned at workshops, seminars and round tables and in radio and television
broadcasts, as well as opinion surveys of beneficiaries on the effects and impact of
project achievements, publication and dissemination of documents, brochures and
other media on the project and its results – which will serve as sources of
information and orientation for the preparation and planning of other development
projects in similar areas elsewhere in the country. A website will be created for this
project.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. The flow of funds for the project will proceed as provided

for in the financing agreement through the designated account. The Siliana CRDA,
delegated by the Ministry of Investment and International Cooperation and the
Ministry of Agriculture, will issue disbursement and payment orders drawn on IFAD
accounts and designated accounts at the Central Bank of Tunisia. Two designated
accounts will be opened at the bank, one for the loan and one for the grant.

21. Based on the experience acquired by IFAD in the country, the Government’s
intention to combat corruption and the reforms under way on fiscal management,
risk evaluation in connection with financial management and governance indicators



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

6

shows that the overall fiduciary risk is considered moderate. This risk will be
mitigated with a series of measures set as disbursement conditions: (i) drafting of a
decree to set up the regional development planning and coordination unit within the
RDD or another structure responsible for project execution within the CRDA;
(ii) designation, in agreement with IFAD, of key project staff, namely the project
coordinator, value chain manager, five local coordinators, an M&E officer and
accountant; (iii) installation of integrated accounting management and M&E
software; and (iv) preparation of an operational and financial management manual
for the project.

22. Disbursements. The IFAD loan and grant proceeds will be disbursed over six
years, based on the disbursement categories and amounts specified in annex 2 of
the financing agreement. Withdrawals of funds from the loan and grant accounts
will take place on the basis of the corresponding contracts and invoices. Other
eligible expenses will be justified by certified expense statements, and supporting
documents will be kept for verification by the external auditor and supervision
missions.

23. Procurement. Project procurement will be done in accordance with the provisions
of the IFAD procurement guidelines approved by the Executive Board in September
2010. As part of the PRODEFIL design, approved in 2014, IFAD evaluated national
regulations on procurement to ensure their compatibility with IFAD guidelines.
Following the evaluation it was decided that the national regulations could be used.
Activities under direct management will not be financed under the project. The
borrower will submit a procurement plan to the Fund each year prior to the end of
October including proposed contracts, procurement methods and procedures for
prior review by IFAD as applicable.

24. Audit. The borrower will, in accordance with the procedures and criteria set forth in
the Fund’s project audit guidelines, have an audit of the accounts done each fiscal
year by the Comptroller General reporting to the Ministry of Finance and agreed by
the Fund, and will submit a certified copy of the audit report to the Fund within six
months following the end of the year under review. The report will also contain an
opinion on procurement modalities for contracts financed under the project. The
DPCDR will prepare semi-annual financial statements on the project activities, and
will ensure that the accounting books are kept in accordance with government
practices and procedures agreed by IFAD. In addition, internal control will be
provided by the relevant services of the Ministry of Agriculture, supported by the
Comptroller at the regional level. In view of the frequent delays in submission to
IFAD of the final audit report for projects under way, IFAD will undertake the
necessary monitoring and rigorous application of the relevant provisions.

25. Governance. The Tunisian procurement system is aligned with the fundamental
principles of procurement for IFAD-funded projects. These are as follows: open
competition, equity, impartiality, integrity, transparency, good governance and
anti-corruption measures. The general rule for awarding contracts is to use open
tender procedures, and direct contracting is both highly limited and strictly
regulated.

E. Supervision
26. The project will be supervised on an annual basis by IFAD, with support missions as

needed. Special attention will be paid to eligibility criteria for project activities in
terms of targeting poor people, particularly women and young people. The
composition of IFAD’s supervision and monitoring missions will also reflect the
status of progress made on the project components and activities, targeting and
gender equity considerations, as well as lacunae in terms of the project’s
organizational structures.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

7

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
27. The total cost of the project, over a six-year duration and including physical and

financial contingencies, is estimated at US$34.245 million. Base costs are estimated
at US$30.806 million, or 89.9 per cent of total cost. Physical and financial
contingencies represent US$3.439 million, or 10 per cent of total cost and
11 per cent of base costs. Investment costs, in the amount of US$31.5 million,
represent 92 per cent of total cost. Operating costs are just US$2.772 million, or
8 per cent of total cost.
Table 1
Project cost by component and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/
counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Value chain promotion
and value addition 8 982 68.6 218 1.7 1 717 13.1 2 184 16.7 13 101 38.2
2. Creation of enabling
conditions for value chain
development 13 432 76.7 261 1.5 827 4.7 2 982 17.0 17 502 51.0
3. Coordination and
management 1 248 33.3 24 0.6 - - 2 467 66.9 3 687 10.8

Total 23 610 68.9 502 1.5 2 544 7.4 7 633 22.2 34 289 100.0

B. Project financing
28. The project will be financed as follows: an IFAD loan on ordinary terms in the

amount of US$23.6 million, or 68.9 per cent of total project cost; an IFAD grant for
US$0.5 million, or 1.5 per cent of total cost; a contribution by the Government in
the amount of US$7.6 million, or 22.2 per cent of total cost, and contribution by
beneficiaries in the amount of US$2.5 million, or 7.4 per cent of total project cost.

29. It was agreed that recruitment of technical assistance providers by the project may
take place upon signature of the financing agreement. Reimbursement for technical
assistance will be made once the agreement has entered into force and on the
condition that the expenditures incurred meet the criteria for admissibility under
section 4.08 of the General Conditions for Agricultural Financing.
Table 2
Project cost by category of expenditure and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Category of expenditure
IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Consulting services 4 043 79.0 502 9.8 11 0.2 533 11.0 5 119 14.9
2. Training 1 022 89.0 - - - - 126 11.0 1 149 3.4
3. Equipment and
materials 6 761 63.3 - - 2 132 20 1 783 16.7 10 676 31.1
4. Vehicles 480 83.3 - - 96 16.7 576 1.7
5. Civil engineering works 11 305 82.4 - - 130 0.9 2 292 16.7 13 727 40.0
6. Operating fund - - - - 271 100 271 0.8
7. Salaries and benefits - - - - - - 594 100.0 594 1.7
8. Operating and
maintenance - - - - - - 2 177 100.0 2 177 6.3

Total 23 610 68.9 502 1.5 2 544 7.4 7 633 22.2 34 289 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the project is 17.1 per cent, which

is considered extremely satisfactory for a project that addresses the challenging



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

8

problems of natural resource management in the marginalized areas of Tunisia. All
project costs have been taken into consideration, including those of the
components for which not all benefits have been quantified, such as rural tracks,
groundwater protection and recharge, and piezometric monitoring of groundwater
aquifers.

D. Sustainability
31. The sustainability of the project achievements will be ensured by means of:

(i) capacity-building for the administration to internalize the value chain approach
and make value chains operate effectively; (ii) support and assistance to producers’
organizations to enable them to fully take on a leading role in the process of value
chain promotion and liaison between their members and value chain operators,
particularly commercial operators, and to sustainably manage the value addition
units made available to them; (iii) facilitating the development of sustainable
win-win partnerships among value chain actors and operators; (iv) supporting
promoters of small enterprises created and supported by the project to enable them
to manage them profitably and sustainably; (v) making the advisory assistance
arrangements set up by the project permanent by integrating them within the
structure of the administration in charge of agricultural extension; (vi) undertaking
policy dialogue on improving the value chain environment so that the private sector
can invest in the various value chain links, particularly downstream; and
(vii) capacity-building for GDA to properly manage and maintain the public
infrastructure financed by the project.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
32. The main risks identified and measures planned to mitigate them are as follows:

(i) inadequate human resources, in terms of number and skills, within CRDA and
the executing agencies, to be mitigated by making use of multi-disciplinary
technical assistance and strengthening the technical services of executing agencies;
(ii) uncertainty as to the decentralization process provided for in the constitution, to
be undertaken in the coming years, which could lead to a review of the powers and
remit of central and local structures. To address this risk, plans call for a midterm
review of the project’s organization chart based on the results of this process;
(iii) fragility of the socio-professional fabric and limited capacities of staff, to be
mitigated with capacity-building and support for these structures by specialized
assistance throughout project execution; (iv) ecological and environmental risks
relating to setting up new crushing units and upgrading abattoirs, which could be
mitigated by performing environmental impact assessments and adopting specific
treatment measures for the crushing units and abattoirs; and (v) risks relating to
the durability of the private advisory assistance arrangements, to be addressed
with a rigorous participatory selection of service providers, based on realistic
business plans and taking into account demand for advice, awareness-raising of
GDA and SMSA and informal groups on gradually taking over the costs of private
advice, support to GDA and SMSA for implementation of forms of remuneration for
private advice based on membership fees and charges added to the prices of
products delivered by their members.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
33. The project is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework and will contribute to an

inclusive and sustainable rural transformation by: (i) building the productive
capacity of poor rural people within the selected value chains; (ii) raising the profits
of rural poor people through their market participation, support for business plan
development and relations with value chain actors, particularly market actors;
(iii) strengthening environmental sustainability and resilience of rural poor people
to climate change. The principles of the Fund’s policies on targeting, empowerment,



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

9

gender equality, innovation and knowledge transfer, scaling up and partnership are
equally upheld by this project.

B. Alignment and harmonization
34. Contribution by the project to country strategy objectives. The overall design

and intervention approach are fully aligned with the vision of implementing the
priority orientations of the Strategic Plan for National Development 2016-2020 now
nearing completion, in terms of poverty reduction, interregional balance and
improving youth employment. To this end, the development of agricultural value
chains involving the different actors and preserving the interests of vulnerable
groups is crucial to achieve those objectives, particularly in regions affected by
poverty, unemployment and degradation of natural resources.

35. Complementarity. The preparation of this project coincided with the formulation
of three new projects to operate mainly in Siliana but also in other locations, which
also call for supporting the development of agricultural and forest value chains.
They are as follows: (i) the Natural Resource Management Programme in
Vulnerable Rural Territories, piloted by the Agricultural Land Use and Protection
Directorate and supported by the French Development Agency (AFD) and the
French Global Environment Facility (FFEM); (ii) the Forest and Pastoral Value Chain
Development Project, coordinated by the Forestry Directorate and supported by the
World Bank; and (iii) the EPARD programme financed by the European Union. The
Governorate of Siliana is also involved in part through the Technical Assistance
Project for Sustainable Agricultural Development supported by the German Agency
for International Cooperation (GIZ). For these projects, value chain development is
an important lever for promoting both agricultural and non-agricultural activities
and strengthening the livelihoods and incomes of vulnerable people.

C. Innovation and scaling up
36. Innovations. The project as a whole is innovative in that it introduces a new

approach – the value chain approach – to territorial development. The main
innovations are as follows: (i) initiatives between value chain operators, such as
platforms bringing together value chain actors and operators leading to win-win
partnerships, with business plans materializing in the form of contracts between
operators at different links of the value chains; (ii) promotion of policy lobbying on
challenges facing value chains in connection with territorial development;
(iii) technical and economic advisory assistance arrangements for small-scale
operators to facilitate ownership of the value chain approach by producers and
improve their production standards and farm management; (iv) making available
pilot value addition units to groups of farmers (SMSA), to be managed by them;
and (v) use of specialized private technical assistance to implement the project.

37. The project will make the best use of these innovations through scaling up by
identifying interventions to be consolidated and expanded, scale of intervention,
evolution in the number of beneficiaries in the short, medium and long term;
drivers of expansion such as leaders and contextual incentives; secured resources
such as financing and natural, strategic, institutional, organizational and political
resources, partnerships and participatory knowledge management; and the
trajectories and pathways of such an approach.

D. Policy engagement
38. The value chain approach as a lever of sustainable territorial development is still

incipient, and the current vision is essentially centred around adding value to
certain strategic products. In terms of policy dialogue, actions to strengthen
farmers’ organizations and to promote and develop value chains will be analysed
and proposals formulated in order to contribute to: (i) initiatives and win-win
partnerships between value chain operators; (ii) synergies between territorial
development and value chains; (iii) adapted technical and economic advisory



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

10

assistance arrangements for family farms to promote ownership of the value chain
approach and improve farm management; (iv) management of value addition units
by groups of farmers (SMSA); and (v) setting up value chain platforms to put
forward reform proposals.

VI. Legal instruments and powers
39. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Tunisia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

40. The Republic of Tunisia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Tunisia in an amount equivalent to EUR twenty-one million six
hundred thousand (EUR 21,600,000), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Tunisia in an amount equivalent to EUR four hundred and sixty thousand
(EUR 460,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Zambia for the Enhanced Smallholder
Agribusiness Promotion Programme

Republic of Zambia

Enhanced Smallholder Agribusiness Promotion
Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Zambia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total programme cost: US$29.672 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 15.5 million (equivalent to approximately
US$21.25 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.74 million (equivalent to approximately US$1.01
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinancier(s): Private sector, Indaba Agricultural Policy Research
Institute (IAPRI), Platform for Agricultural Risk
Management (PARM)

Amount of cofinancing: Private sector: US$3.46 million
IAPRI: US$0.51 million
PARM: US$0.20 million

Terms of cofinancing: Private sector: partners’ contribution
PARM: grant
IAPRI: In-kind technical assistance.

Contribution of borrower: US$2.01 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.23 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to Republic of Zambia for the Enhanced Smallholder Agribusiness
Promotion Programme, as contained in paragraph 55.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Zambia for
the Enhanced Smallholder Agribusiness Promotion
Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Zambia is a landlocked country covering 752,618 km2 with a population of

16 million. Over 70 per cent are aged under 30 and the population grows at
3 per cent per year. While Zambia attained lower-middle-income country status in
2011, inequalities remain very high and poverty reduction has been slow.

2. During the 2010-2014 period, gross domestic product (GDP) grew at an average of
7 per cent. However, growth fell to 5 per cent in 2014 and 3 per cent in 2015,
largely due to lower copper prices and power outages. The Zambian kwacha (ZMW)
has undergone depreciation, from around ZMW 5.5/US$ in 2012 to ZMW 10/US$ in
2016.

3. Widespread and extreme rural poverty and high unemployment remain significant
challenges. Over 50 per cent of Zambians live below the poverty line and
41 per cent in extreme poverty. At 77 per cent, poverty in rural areas is three times
higher than in urban areas.

4. Agriculture and agroprocessing account for approximately 40 per cent of GDP and
12 per cent of exports, with agricultural production contributing approximately
21 per cent to GDP. Zambia has abundant arable land that is relatively fertile and
experiences good rainfall. The agriculture sector has a dual structure, comprising: a
small number (approximately 740 households) of large commercial farmers and
approximately 50,000 emerging commercial farming households; and
approximately 1.5 million smallholder farming households. There is a large
productivity gap between the commercial and smallholder subsectors. Bridging this
gap and linking farmers to expanding markets has major potential to drive rural
economic growth and poverty reduction.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Connecting smallholder farmers to the flourishing agribusiness sector will allow
IFAD’s target group to share in the rising prosperity enjoyed in urban areas and the
rapidly growing demand for high quality food.

6. Zambia is plagued with a high level of child malnutrition, with stunting rates at
50 per cent and 46 per cent in rural and urban areas, respectively.1 Further
investment to support smallholder farmers is required to reduce poverty and
increase food and nutrition security. The Government favours the commercialization
of small-scale agriculture as a major driver of rural poverty reduction. Agribusiness
is encouraged to strengthen linkages between smallholder farmers and consumers
through increased private sector participation in service delivery, such as in input

1 Central Statistical Office – 2015 Living Conditions Monitoring Survey Key Findings.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

2

supply, output marketing and agroprocessing. This calls for improved quality,
reliability and scale of production, especially from small and medium agricultural
enterprises. The policy framework promotes self-reliance among farming
households and encourages the development of partnerships among farmers,
government and the private sector.

7. The ongoing Smallholder Agribusiness Promotion Programme (SAPP) is making
significant progress towards smallholder commercialization and agribusiness
promotion. According to the SAPP 2015 midterm review (MTR), 26 per cent of
sampled households reported increased sales of agricultural commodities averaging
64 per cent per household. Approximately half of households reported increased
selling prices, while 98 per cent reported increased value of sales, and 69 per cent
increases due to value addition. Approximately a quarter of the sampled households
benefited from improved market linkages, while 69 per cent accessed extension
services in business-related issues. Household ownership of assets increased for
55 per cent of those sampled.

8. The SAPP MTR identified a number of lessons that would improve effectiveness and
inform the design of the proposed Enhanced Smallholder Agribusiness Promotion
Programme (E-SAPP):

(a) The need to forge commercial linkages between smallholders and emerging
commercial farmers and higher level value chain actors rather than rely on
the service provider model, which has proven costly and not very effective.

(b) The need to decentralize operations and rationalize institutional arrangements
within existing structures.

(c) The need to improve the skills of smallholder farmers and small and
medium-sized enterprises to identify business opportunities, develop business
plans and negotiate with private sector value chain actors.

(d) The potential of matching grant facilities (MGFs) to leverage significant
investments from the private sector when large enough to attract interest.

9. Under SAPP, the matching grant uptake was initially slow because: (a) the
development of grant guidelines was a protracted process; (b) the guidelines were
found to be too complex and some potential partners were deterred from
submitting applications; (c) the technical service provider used had no presence
close to the beneficiaries and had to rely on subcontracting; (d) a lack of
involvement of district staff meant there was limited knowledge about the grants at
district level; (e) when SAPP eventually involved district staff, they did not have the
capacity to advise communities in developing fundable proposals; (f) the
beneficiary cash contribution of 10 per cent deterred applications; and (g) potential
applicants for “large” grants found the size of these grants too small to attract their
interest.

10. E-SAPP will focus on building strong and sustainable partnerships aimed at
facilitating the transformation from subsistence farming to farming as a business.
The programme will build on SAPP’s achievements in developing sustainable and
profitable partnerships connecting farmers to commercial opportunities.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
11. E-SAPP has a multiple commodity focus and nationwide coverage. The selection of

the commodities will define the geographic focus of interventions. The programme
will focus on three commodity groups: (a) legumes (groundnuts, soybeans, beans
and cowpeas); (b) small livestock (poultry, goats, sheep and pigs); and (c) rice.
These were selected on the following basis: (a) over 70 per cent of smallholders
produce these commodities as both food and cash crops; (b) the commodities have



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

3

significant nutritional benefits; (c) they help fill the seasonal hunger period;
(d) they have high potential for commercialization through partnerships with the
private sector, efficiency gains and value addition; (e) there is a high level of
interest among market intermediaries; and (f) there is potential to deliver quick
results. However, the larger grants under the public-private-producer partnerships
(4Ps) facility will not be restricted to the above value chains or regions.

12. Target group: The Government classifies Zambia’s 1.5 million smallholder farming
households in three categories. Category A (subsistence farmers) will form the
majority of the target group. Category B (economically active) and C (commercially
oriented farmers) will also be targeted to help develop the programme’s
agribusiness linkages, considering that they are already producing a surplus for the
market. The programme will work with approximately 40,000 category A,
16,000 category B and 5,000 category C households.

B. Programme development objective
13. The programme development objective (PDO) of E-SAPP is to increase the volume

and value of agribusiness outputs sold by smallholder producers. The programme
goal is to increase the incomes and food and nutrition security of rural households
involved in market-oriented agriculture. This underlines the central importance of
food and nutrition in efforts to improve the lives of the rural population, but also
the ambition to reach beyond basic needs and increase incomes to enable
households to improve dwellings, send children to school and invest in agriculture.

C. Components/outcomes
14. The PDO will be achieved through three technical components.

15. Component 1: Enabling environment for agribusiness development will help to
establish an enabling policy and institutional environment for commercially oriented
agriculture and rural development. It will advance the capacity-building work
initiated by SAPP and help to address risk management issues. In addition,
subsector policies will be reoriented to integrate climate risk management.

16. Component 2: Sustainable agribusiness partnerships will build the capacity of
smallholders and their service providers to compete for, and implement, matching
grants. This is a key success factor to facilitate the integration of smallholder
farmers within value chains, promote their engagement in the MGF process and
improve their productivity, incomes and nutritional outcomes. This will be achieved
through nutritional education and training on farming as a business, as well as
extending and strengthening SAPP’s MGF experience within a 4P framework. There
will be three MGF windows: linkage of graduating subsistence farmers to markets;
enhancing micro, small and medium-sized agroenterprise (MSME) development;
and facilitating pro-smallholder agribusiness partnerships. They will support
interventions on the supply and demand sides alike to increase output, productivity,
quality and resilience.

17. Component 3: Programme implementation will be conducted through a
programme coordination office (PCO). E-SAPP will finance, in addition to the
planned activities, the PCO costs, office equipment, office consumables, and
vehicles and associated maintenance costs. It will provide PCO staff salaries,
training and technical assistance to address specific needs. The PCO will be
responsible for coordinating and monitoring programme activities, including:
financial management and reporting; procurement; the preparation of annual work
plans and budgets (AWPBs); and monitoring and evaluation (M&E)/knowledge
management. The PCO will conduct annual AWPB review meetings, annual outcome
surveys, biannual implementation reviews and annual knowledge-sharing
workshops. Results and learning-oriented reporting will be based on inputs from
beneficiaries and implementing partners.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

4

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

18. Based on lessons learned from SAPP, the entry point for target clients will be the
market intermediaries. The focus will be on a “market pull” approach rather than
“supply push” approach. Market intermediaries include output off-takers, input
marketing, service provision and commodity associations. The 4P clients will be
larger agribusinesses, with the exclusion of commodities such as maize that are
heavily supported by the Government and other development partners. MSMEs will
also be targeted, especially in developing linkages with category B and C
households. The market intermediaries are the primary partners of E-SAPP, with
the smallholders as the beneficiaries. This approach offers opportunities for
sustainable scaling up and replication on the basis of commercial incentives.

19. E-SAPP will adopt a whole value chain approach to improve the economic surplus
by identifying areas where efficiency, productivity and quality can be improved. It
will use government institutions and private-sector partnerships as the entry point
through which to reach smallholder farmers and MSMEs. Implementation will span a
seven-year period, fully embedded in the Government’s decentralized system. The
programme will be harmonized with the IFAD country programme and initiatives of
the Government and other development partners. Potential collaboration is being
explored with the World Bank, the African Development Bank, the United States
Agency for International Development, the European Union, the United Kingdom’s
Department for International Development and the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations.

Operational frameworkB.
20. The Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) will be the executing agency and delivery systems

will be fully integrated into decentralized government structures. Implementation
arrangements will build on the mechanisms employed by SAPP, enabling a
seamless transition from SAPP to E-SAPP. The MoA Policy and Planning Department
will be responsible for administration and coordination, and supported by a
programme steering committee chaired by the Permanent Secretary of MoA or
his/her nominee.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

21. The logical framework will be used as a tool for planning and M&E, to ensure that
necessary information is available for management decision-making, and to
facilitate reporting to the Government, IFAD and stakeholders. Planning will be a
decentralized process, starting at the district level with the preparation of
commodity-specific plans, which will be aggregated into a programme-wide AWPB.
To ensure a truly aligned portfolio, AWPBs for all IFAD programmes will be
harmonized to capitalize on comparative advantages, minimize duplication,
encourage linkages between them and ensure the optimal use of resources.

22. The M&E system will build on the experience of SAPP and provide information that
informs management decision-making and reporting, including data for IFAD’s
Results and Impact Management System. Monitoring will focus on the activities
defined in the AWPB, and on creating a cumulative overview of results/outputs. The
M&E system will be decentralized under the oversight of a planning/M&E officer and
a knowledge management officer. Knowledge management will ensure a continuous
learning process in which data are compiled, analysed and disseminated as lessons
learned, along with thematic studies and stories from the field. Information-sharing
within the aligned portfolio will receive particular attention.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

5

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
23. Financial management. Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions

Index rates inherent risk in Zambia as “medium”, characterized by improved
governance, increasing opportunities for the private sector, and some weaknesses
in public sector management. The fiduciary risk was assessed by IFAD as “high”
mainly due to persistent delays in justification from districts, with consequent
liquidity problems, accounting software not optimally functioning and internal audit
in need of strengthening; improved safeguard measures will therefore be put in
place to reduce risk to “medium”. E-SAPP will employ similar financial management
systems to those used under SAPP, including the accounting software. However,
E-SAPP procurement will be started in advance by another ongoing IFAD project.
Strong training and technical assistance will be provided from the outset. Coverage
of biannual internal programme audits will be included in the audit plan of the MoA
Internal Audit Unit, which will be included in E-SAPP start-up trainings. Internal
audit reports and action plans to implement audit recommendations will be shared
with IFAD as a reporting requirement. Financial reporting will be based on IPSAS2
standards.

24. A designated account denominated in United States dollars will be held at the Bank
of Zambia. Two operating accounts, one denominated in Zambian kwacha and the
other in United States dollars, will be held a commercial bank – the latter is
intended to mitigate foreign exchange risk and will be used for paying foreign
suppliers for contracts denominated in United States dollars and for foreign travel
costs.

25. To address the risk of delayed justification of expenditures by districts: transfers to
districts will be made on the basis of activity-tagged advances that must be retired
before subsequent releases; a system for monitoring advances to districts will be
included in the accounting software; and agents/assistants will be recruited at the
provincial level to follow up and facilitate the justification process and to ensure
expenditure reports and supporting documentation from the districts are collated
and submitted to the PCO on a timely basis.

26. The MGF will be managed by a service provider selected on the basis of relevant
experience, working under the supervision of the PCO. Community mobilization and
training will also be outsourced. The matching grants will be replenished upon each
disbursement to grantees, not once grantees have fully utilized the grants. A
performance-based payment schedule will be included in contracts, and grants will
be regularly monitored. Procedures will be included in the grant manual to
guarantee transparency and minimize the risk of malpractice. After allocation of the
grants under their respective windows, the borrower shall ensure that audits of the
grant allocation process, approval and use of grant funds are carried out by an
independent service provider acceptable to IFAD. Withdrawals from the grants
category may only be made on condition that IFAD has determined that such audits
are satisfactory.

27. Audit. The Office of the Auditor General of Zambia will conduct an external audit of
E-SAPP annually or will have the discretion to appoint an independent private audit
firm acceptable to IFAD. Internal control systems at the PCO level will be
established and MoA will maintain oversight through its Internal Audit Unit.
Supervision missions will review internal audit reports and assess management
responses to recommendations. Internal controls will also be verified during the
annual external audit by the Auditor General, and reported to IFAD in management
letters. The audit reports will be submitted to IFAD no later than six months after
the end of each fiscal year.

2 International Public Sector Accounting Standards – Cash Basis.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

6

28. Procurement. National procurement procedures will be applied to the extent that
they are consistent with IFAD’s guidelines and provided they are assessed as
satisfactory or better. This applies to all procurement except international
competitive bidding for contracts above an agreed threshold. Procurement planning
will follow the templates in the IFAD Procurement Handbook as already adapted for
SAPP and the other IFAD-supported programmes in compliance with the Zambia
Public Procurement Authority (ZPPA). A procurement assessment of SAPP
operations resulted in a medium risk score, largely as a result of staffing challenges
facing the MAL’s Procurement and Supplies Unit (PSU), which tend to cause delays
in the procurement cycle, exacerbated by lengthy processes, including for the
approval of contracts by the Ministry of Justice. Measures to improve procurement
performance will include: the recruitment of a procurement specialist to support the
PSU; capacity-building for the PSU, ZPPA and the Ministry of Justice to address the
procurement delays; and the incorporation of procurement modules into the
financial management software.

SupervisionE.
29. IFAD and the Government will conduct supervision missions, normally every six

months, to assess achievements and lessons learned and reflect on ways to
improve performance. Implementation support will focus on planning, procurement,
financial management, M&E and the provision of technical assistance. The most
important skills to be provided include: value chain analysis; financial management
and procurement; M&E; poverty and gender analysis and targeting; and
programme management. Key issues likely to require the attention of the missions
will include: M&E, learning and knowledge management; implementation and
reporting delays; procurement; partnerships, beneficiaries and the private sector;
and capacity-building interventions.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
30. Total costs, including price contingencies, duties and taxes, are estimated at

equivalent to US$29.7 million, of which approximately US$1 million (3 per cent)
represents the foreign exchange content and US$1.2 million (4 per cent) duties and
taxes. Total base costs amount to approximately US$28.1 million, while price
contingencies account for an estimated US$1.5 million (5 per cent of base costs).
Investment costs account for 80 per cent of the base costs, and recurrent costs
20 per cent. Funds allocated to management and coordination amount to
approximately US$5.0 million (17 of total costs).



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

7

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Borrower IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries Private sector Other financiers Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Enabling environment
for agribusiness
development growth
A. Agribusiness policy
development 99 4.4 1 251 56.0 65 2.9 - - 108 4.8 712.3 31.8 2 235 7.5
B. Institutional
strengthening for
agribusiness 277 17.1 1 119 69.0 227 14.0 - - - - - - 1 623 5.5

Subtotal 375 9.7 2 371 61.4 291 7.6 - - 108 2.8 712.3 18.5 3 858 13.0
2. Sustainable
agribusiness
partnerships
A. Strategic linkage of
graduating subsistence
farmers to markets 374 3.4 8 200 73.9 719 6.5 1 232 11.1 572 5.2 - - 11 098 37.4
B. Enhancing agro
MSME Development 369 5.7 4 255 65.3 - - - - 1,890 29.0 - - 6 515 22.0
C. Facilitating pro-
smallholder market pull
agribusiness
partnerships 150 5.1 1 895 64.6 - - - - 887 30.2 - - 2 932 9.9

Subtotal 894 4.4 14 350 69.9 719 3.5 1 232 6.0 3 349 16.3 - - 20 544 69.2
3. Programme
Implementation 737 14.0 4 533 86.0 - - - - - - - - 5 270 17.8

Total programme
costs 2 006 6.8 21 254 71.6 1 011 3.4 1 232 4.2 3 457 11.7 712.3 2.4 29 672 100.0

B. Programme financing
31. IFAD will fund the programme through a grant equivalent to approximately

US$1.01 million and a loan on highly concessionary terms in an amount equivalent
to approximately US$21.25 million. Grant-funded activities relate mostly to
capacity-building and facilitating the transition of households from category A to
category B, and eventually to category C. The Government will provide
US$ 2 million in cofinancing, in the form of taxes and duties, and beneficiaries
US$1.23 million, mainly in-kind. The private sector will contribute US$3.46 million
through share of the matching grants; the Indaba Agricultural Policy Research
Institute (IAPRI) approximately US$0.51 million through technical assistance for
policy development; and the Platform for Agricultural Risk Management (PARM)
US$0.2 million for agriculture risk management activities.



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

8

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Borrower IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries Private sector IAPRI PARM Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Investment Costs
A. Consultancies - - 1 587 68.9 585 25.4 132 5.7 - - - - - - 2 304 7.8
B. Equipment and
materials 21 16.0 108 84.0 - - - - - - - - - - 129 0.4
C. Works - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
D. Vehicles 355 41.3 505 58.7 - - - - - - - - - - 860 2.9
E. Workshops - - 335 47.1 104 14.6 103 14.4 108 15.2 62 8.7 - - 712 2.4
F. Training 749 20.7 1 120 31.0 321 8.9 283 7.8 1 145 31.6 - - - - 3 617 12.2
G. Goods, services
and inputs - - 3 252 100.0 - - - - - - - - - - 3 252 11.0
H. Grants and
subsidies - - 9 610 75.5 - - 715 5.6 2 204 17.3 - - 200 1.6 12 729 42.9
I. Unallocated - - 250 100.0 - - - - - - - - - - 250 0.8
Total investment costs 1 125 4.7 16 768 70.3 1 011 4.2 1 232 5.2 3 457 14.5 62 0.3 200 0.8 23 854 80.4
2. Recurrent costs
A. Operating costs 143 16.0 572 63.9 - - - - - - 180 20.1 - - 896 3.0
B. Salaries and
allowances 738 15.0 3 913 79.5 - - - - - - 270 5.5 - - 4 922 16.6
Total recurrent costs 882 15.2 4 485 77.1 - - - - - - 451 7.7 - - 5 817 19.6

Total
programme
costs

2 006 6.8 21 254 71.6 1 011 3.4 1 232 4.2 3 457 11.7 512 1.7 200 0.7 29 672 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
32. The programme will promote the transformation of smallholder farmers from mainly

subsistence level to commercially oriented production by building sustainable and
profitable partnerships with agribusinesses. The economic rationale hinges on
improving smallholders’ integration within value chains through partnerships with
agribusinesses (the 4P approach) that provide improved access to technologies and
inputs, knowledge about improved technologies, better services and enhanced
marketing opportunities. The beneficiaries will be assisted in developing their
entrepreneurial and business capacity through access to technical support and
training.

33. The result will be: (a) increased productivity and product quality; (b) better and
more stable prices through participation in contract farming and/or outgrower
arrangements offering improved market access; (c) expanded farm size and wider
adoption of improved farming practices; (d) sustainable partnerships with the
private sector and enhanced access to services; and (e) added value through
aggregation, sorting, grading, drying and storage.

34. Direct programme beneficiaries. The primary beneficiaries will be approximately
61,000 smallholder households, in particular young people and households headed
by women. This includes 40,000 category A subsistence farmers; 16,000
economically active category B farmers; and 5,000 commercially oriented category
C farmers. Assuming an average household size of five, the total number of
beneficiaries will be approximately 305,000.

35. Indirect programme beneficiaries. A large number of smallholders will benefit
indirectly through the diffusion of knowledge about improved technologies, and
improved access to marketing services and business information. Consumers will
also benefit from more better quality products and better prices, with positive
effects on nutrition and food security. In addition, all those living in the areas where



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

9

E-SAPP is active will benefit from strengthened local economies, increased job
opportunities and the development of complementary economic activities
(e.g. input dealers).

D. Sustainability
36. Economic/income sustainability. The value chain/market-led approach will

foster entrepreneurship among smallholder farmers and their integration within
value chains. This will result in the orientation of smallholder groups and individuals
towards market opportunities and a lasting commitment among value chain
partners to enhance value creation. Linkages to markets will ensure that mainly
subsistence farmers have an outlet for their surplus production to assist them make
the transition to farming as a business. As long as the established linkages prove to
be profitable and mutually beneficial, the long-term outcomes will be sustainable.

37. Environmental sustainability will be enhanced through the application of
environmental standards by the MGF recipients, and the implementation of
environmental and social management plans as part of grant-funded activities. This
will be achieved through capacity-building in environmental and social procedures
and risk management. While beneficiaries will acquire tangible benefits from these
standards and plans, those results may not materialize in the short term. The
management team will oversee the Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) to reinforce the benefits of integrating environmental
management practices and counteract trade-offs for short-term benefits that may
adversely affect the natural resource base. The ESMF will define the responsibilities
and benchmarks for monitoring environmental impacts and include feedback
mechanisms to incorporate any positive externalities.

38. Institutional sustainability. To ensure relevance, ownership and sustainability,
E-SAPP will mainstream planning, implementation and M&E into the Government’s
decentralized institutional frameworks and align them with national goals and
policies. Participating institutions will be supported and strengthened to build
institutional capacity (as per subcomponent 1.B) and sustainability. Communities
and grass-roots institutions will be mobilized and strengthened to build their
capacity for sustainability and to take ownership of programme interventions.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The logical framework identifies the main risk areas, and risk monitoring forms part

of the M&E approach. The main risks and mitigation measures are detailed below.

40. There is a possibility that the pipeline of large-scale 4P grantees will not materialize
into grants uptake, due to lack of awareness or the existence of more attractive
grant facilities under other programmes. This risk will be mitigated through:
(a) promoting the existence and terms and conditions of the 4P grants;
(b) identifying potential grantees and inviting them to make applications; and
(c) collaborating with other development partners to ensure that the various
matching grant funds have harmonized terms and conditions. Discussions have
already been held with other development partners concerning this issue.

41. Extension teams at the district level and lower may not be adequately prepared to
identify and support potential MSME grant recipients. Among the lessons learned
from SAPP was that training on business and grant procedures focused on too
narrow a range of government staff. E-SAPP will ensure that marketing, general
and commodity specialist extension staff receive training in farming as a business,
engaging with the private sector and managing/overseeing the MSME grants.

42. The limited capacity of some institutions may delay implementation. To mitigate
this risk, the programme includes capacity-building for institutions facing identified
capacity challenges (subcomponent 1.B).



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

10

43. Private sector stakeholders may be reluctant to fully engage in the programme,
resulting in reliance by farmers on government institutions for services that could
be provided by the private sector. To mitigate this risk, the programme provides for
private sector representation on the programme steering committee. In addition,
the MGF service provider will play a catalytic role in private sector participation.

44. A delay in programme start-up would lead to the possibility of implementation
delays and a disbursement lag. To minimize this risk, IFAD and the Government are
taking steps to ensure a seamless transition between SAPP and E-SAPP.

45. A lack of good quality matching grant applications would result in the slow
disbursement of grant resources. The programme will provide training for
applicants, promote the MGF widely and identify potential grantees based on value
chain scoping studies.

46. Climate change and variability will potentially have a negative impact on
productivity, in particular of rainfed agriculture and where farmers have limited
resources to manage risks such as pests and diseases. Measures to reduce impacts
include capacity-building in climate risk management, and vulnerability analysis
that will inform the selection of value chains.

47. Fiduciary risk, as mitigated by the controls detailed in section III.D above, results in
medium assessment.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

48. E-SAPP will be implemented in compliance with IFAD’s Strategic Framework
2016-2025, as well as IFAD’s policies on natural resource management and climate
change. The programme recognizes the economic and social value of natural assets
through capacity-building for farmers in environmental management, and the
criteria used in the selection of MGF partners. It will support climate-smart
approaches and defines minimum standards for grantees in relation to climate
resilience and capacity-building on environmental, social and climate risk
management. It will also adhere to the principle of livelihood diversification to
reduce vulnerability and build resilience. E-SAPP is also compliant with IFAD’s
Targeting Policy (2006) and Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment Policy
(2012). Of the 10,000 market-ready poor households to be targeted, at least
30 per cent will be headed by women and 25 per cent by young people. Moreover,
the nutrition focus is aligned with IFAD’s commitment to nutrition-sensitive
interventions and mainstreaming nutrition.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
49. The programme supports the Government’s policy on reducing poverty through

smallholder commercialization in conjunction with private sector partners. Within
this framework, MoA is expected to focus on its core functions, which include policy
formulation, legislation and regulation. The programme has been developed in
consultation with partners engaged in improving agricultural productivity and
market linkages. Relevant partners will be invited to participate in the screening
and selection of commodities, the mapping of selected value chains, and the
development and implementation of intervention plans.

Innovations and scaling upC.
50. E-SAPP builds on IFAD experience as a 4P endeavour aiming to reduce rural

poverty by stimulating rural economic development through the transformation of
smallholder producers (including subsistence farmers) into profitable small-scale
commercial farmers. It seeks to improve the effectiveness of policies and practices
to accelerate the growth of farming as a business among Zambia’s 1.5 million
smallholder households. The programme will enhance the focus on women and



EB 2016/119/R.22/Rev.1

11

young people as priority target groups and support the mainstreaming of
nutrition-sensitive agriculture/agribusiness.

Policy engagementD.
51. Policy engagement is an integral part of the programme in recognition of the need

for a conducive and inclusive institutional framework for the agribusiness sector
that involves smallholders in policy from design to implementation. The programme
will support the Government in establishing an enabling policy and institutional
environment for commercially driven agriculture and rural development, and help
put structures in place to address agricultural risk management-related issues.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
52. A programme financing agreement between the Republic of Zambia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

53. Republic of Zambia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

54. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
55. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Zambia in an amount equivalent to fifteen million five hundred
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 15,500,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Zambia in an amount equivalent to seven hundred and forty thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 740,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





















































President's report

Proposed loan and grant to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo for the North Kivu
Agriculture Sector Support Project (PASA-NK)


Democratic Republic of the Congo

North Kivu Agriculture Sector Support Project (PASA-NK)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/beneficiary: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Livestock

Total project cost: US$52.974 million

Amount of IFAD loan under the 2013-
2015 performance-based allocation
system (PBAS) allocation:

SDR 12.10 million (equivalent to approximately
US$16.89 million)

Amount of IFAD grant under the 2013-
2015 PBAS allocation:

SDR 12.10 million (equivalent to approximately
US$16.89 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: repayment term of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
commission of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinancier: OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID)

Amount of cofinancing: OFID: US$9.718 million

Contribution of the borrower/
beneficiary: US$5.950 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.528 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Democratic Republic of the Congo for the North Kivu Agriculture
Sector Support Project (PASA-NK), as contained in paragraph 49.

Proposed loan and grant to the Democratic Republic of
the Congo for the North Kivu Agriculture Sector Support
Project (PASA-NK)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country, rural development and poverty context
1. Following several decades of political instability, insecurity and economic

devastation, the Democratic Republic of the Congo is enjoying robust economic
growth and a stable macro-economic framework. Agricultural and mineral
resources are vast, among the largest in sub-Saharan Africa. The country has an
area of 2.34 million km² and a population of about 71 million, close to 70 per cent
of whom live in rural areas.

2. Growth in GDP, which has improved significantly since 2010, is greater than 7 per
cent. In addition to agriculture, which employs 64 per cent of the active population
and generates 33.4 per cent of GDP (Central Bank of the Congo, 2013), the most
important sectors are trade (22 per cent) and mining (12 per cent).

3. Economic growth, in tandem with public investment in the health and primary
education sectors, has enabled the Democratic Republic of the Congo to reduce the
incidence of poverty from 71.34 per cent in 2005 to 63.4 per cent in 2012. The
rural poverty rate remains high at 69 per cent in 2012. Food and nutritional
insecurity remain at alarmingly high levels: 54 per cent of rural households are
food-insecure, 43 per cent of children under five are chronically malnourished and
8 per cent suffer from acute malnutrition.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
RB-COSOP

4. The country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) 2012-2016 set two
strategic objectives: (i) improve smallholder farmers' access to effective production
services, appropriate technologies and local markets; and (ii) professionalize
farmers' organizations so that they can become economic partners with private
enterprises in rural areas.

5. PASA-NK is aligned with both COSOP strategic objectives, and will strengthen
portfolio results in terms of sustainable access by smallholder farmers to inputs
and markets, remuneration of agricultural products at more advantageous prices
for farmers (the COSOP calls for a 30 per cent increase) and stability of apex
producer organizations (POs). PASA-NK will also balance the distribution of IFAD-
cofinanced operations in the country's western and eastern regions.

6. The Government intends to develop inclusive value chains, in addition to
investments now under way in agro-industrial complexes (Nsele agro-industrial
zone and Bukanga-Lonzo agro-industrial park). This intention is fully aligned with
the National Agricultural Investment Plan (PNIA) and the aims of promoting value
chains in agriculture and agro-industry. The Government's vision and the strategic
objectives of the programme cofinanced by IFAD in the Democratic Republic of the



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

2

the Congo converge in North Kivu to remove the financial, institutional and physical
constraints now faced by the people living in the province.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
7. As indicated by its name, PASA-NK will be implemented in the province of North

Kivu, and more specifically in the territories of Beni, Lubero, Rutshuru, Nyiragongo
and Masisi. Activities will involve one or two crops in each of the territories
targeted.

8. North Kivu province falls within the post-conflict territories located to the country's
east, and covers an area of close to 60,000 km². The population in 2014 was an
estimated 6.5 million people, 88 per cent of them living in rural areas where the
population density is more than 100 habitants par km². According to the Human
Development Index, the province is ranked 10th of 11 provinces. An estimated 70
per cent of poor people in the province live in rural areas.

9. PASA-NK covers production and commercialization of four crops: maize, rice,
potato and Arabica coffee. The crops were selected on the basis of the following
criteria: (i) number of producers involved; (ii) potential for growth in production
and productivity; (iii) existence of expanding markets accessible to smallholders:
local, national, subregional and international markets, including fair trade niche
markets; (iv) potential for improving incomes and value added; (v) potential for
integration of vulnerable groups such as women, unemployed rural young people
and landless poor people; and (vi) presence in the subsector of a public service,
NGO or lead apex PO to provide technical guidance and other economic services.

10. Based on the four selected value chains, five lead organizations have been selected
to play a leading role in project implementation: (i) the Central Cooperative of
North Kivu (COOCENKI) for maize, to implement project activities in Rutshuru
territory; (ii) the League of Women Farmers Organizations of the Congo
(LOFEPACO) for rice, in Beni territory; (iii) the Farmers Union (SYDIP) for potato, in
Lubero, Masisi and Nyiragongo territories; (iv) the Federation of Agricultural
Producers Organizations of the Congo (FOPAC), for PO capacity-building and
advocacy; and (v) the NGO VECO for the Arabica coffee value chain, given the
tangible results it has achieved, to develop economic services for gourmet coffee in
Beni and Rutshuru.

11. PASA-NK will target, first and foremost, poor and very poor households who will
benefit from financial support granted by the project to facilitate access to
improved seed and fertilizer and agricultural advisory assistance. Storage and
processing activities will benefit all households. Activities to develop coffee growing
will affect poor, less poor and wealthy households owning coffee plantations. Poor
households will be defined as follows: (i) cultivated area of less than 1 ha;
(ii) livestock (type and number) of less than 5 head; (iii) transportation by bicycle
or scooter; and (iv) widows heads of household. Lead POs have suggested that
additional criteria be added, such as: (i) farmers working an area of at least 0.25
ha in a single location; and (ii) victims of domestic or sexual violence. A total of
28,400 households will benefit directly from the project activities.

B. Project development objective
12. The main objective of PASA-NK is to sustainably improve food security and incomes

among participating households. The development objective is to improve
productivity and profitability for four crops produced by smallholders – maize, rice,
potato and Arabica coffee.

C. Components/outcomes
13. Component 1: Capacity-building for actors supporting agricultural value

chains. Component 1, representing 58.1 per cent of total project cost, is divided



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

3

into three subcomponents: (i) development of economic services provided by POs;
(ii) institutional strengthening for POs; and (iii) support for the public sector. The
outcomes of these three subcomponents will be: (i) economic services provided by
POs are viable and appreciated by farmers; and (ii) the performance of provincial
public services in support of producers has improved.

14. Component 2: Support for rural infrastructure. Component 2, representing
22.5 per cent of total project cost, is divided into two subcomponents:
(i) rehabilitation of agricultural access roads; and (ii) capacity-building for
provincial and territorial coordination by the Agricultural Access Roads Division
(DVDA). The expected outcome is a reduction in the cost and time taken to
transport goods.

III. Project execution
A. Approach
15. PASA-NK calls for professionalizing POs around economic services to improve

smallholder access to agricultural inputs and markets and, accordingly, boost
agricultural productivity and incomes. These economic services comprise: (i) for
maize, access to improved seed, provision of advisory assistance, and storage and
warehousing to facilitate deferred group sales synchronized with periods of higher
prices for maize; (ii) for rice, access to improved seed and fertilizer, provision of
advisory assistance, storage and warehousing, and support for the LOFEPACO rice
mill; (iii) for potato, production of improved variety mini-tubers, access to fertilizer,
provision of advisory assistance, collection and sales facilitation for wholesalers;
and (iv) for coffee, improved variety nurseries, provision of advisory assistance,
washed coffee processing, facilitation of organic and fair trade certification, and
facilitation of quality green coffee sales on niche markets.

16. Based on this vision, the project will be implemented in accordance with the
following underlying principles:

17. Business plans. All lead POs will organize their interventions at the value chain
level based on business plans demonstrating the profitability of economic services
offered to their members. The economic services will be organized around weak
links in the maize, rice, potato and coffee value chains.

18. Financial terms. The project will trigger and support a virtuous process of
development within which POs will be assisted in undertaking economically viable
activities. In order to be viable, such activities must be based on a sound
mechanism for access to production factors, processing and commercialization.

19. Contractualization. This will be one of the building blocks of business plan
implementation by POs. Contractualization will govern relations with other actors
within the targeted food value chains: processors, traders, input suppliers and
other service providers.

20. Gradualism and sequencing of interventions. The project will be implemented
in the post-conflict area, where people are readjusting to stability. As a result,
project interventions and support will be organized in a prudent, gradual and
sequenced manner to ensure that each stage is properly managed and brings the
desired results.

B. Organizational framework
21. PASA-NK will be under the oversight of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and

Livestock. The provincial Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development of North
Kivu will become a member of the existing steering committee. The project will be
coordinated by a project coordination unit (PCU) with administrative and financial
management autonomy, based in Goma.



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

4

22. To facilitate project start-up, IFAD will provide the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries
and Livestock – as oversight agency – with a start-up advance of US$650,000 from
the grant proceeds, to: (i) recruit PCU staff and international technical assistants
who are to train the PCU to ensure ownership of the project objectives and
approach; (ii) put in place basic tools needed for first disbursement; and
(iii) undertake the baseline study to ensure that results are available as of year
one.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

23. Annual planning for the project will begin with an evaluation of business plan
execution by the economic services for the four value chains. This will establish
high-level direction to plan for the following year and update the business plans, as
part of the process of participatory self-evaluation and preparation of the annual
workplan and budget (AWP/B). The AWP/B for the following year will be based on
the updated business plans for each value chain, subsequent preparation of the PO
institutional strengthening plan, the scope of public services provided and
engagement with the private sector, based on the new business plan targets. The
planning of rehabilitation works on access roads will be aligned with opening up
access to areas targeted in the business plans.

24. The PCU will set up a simple, operational M&E system. The logical framework
provides minimum indicators to provide information on the effectiveness, efficiency
and impact of PASA-NK. In addition, the M&E system will provide information on
IFAD's Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) system, and will include a
geographical information system.

25. Knowledge management under PASA-NK will leverage existing initiatives. Thus,
FOPAC, which has a communication system in the form of its quarterly news
bulletin and rural radio network, will play a leading role provincially by
disseminating information on the project in the bulletin and studies on advocacy-
related issues, mapping land tenure conflicts and mapping value chains. At the
national level, the project will enter into an agreement with the ECO CONGO
network, a digital content platform to disseminate relevant information on
sustainable rural and agricultural development in the Democratic Republic of the
Congo. Both of the national confederations (COPACO and CONAPAC) publish a
periodical bulletin and PASA-NK could reserve space for an article twice a year. At
the regional and international level, it is proposed that the IFAD-cofinanced
Farmers Organizations Support Programme (PAOPA) be used for capitalization of
PASA-NK activities.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
26. The PCU will be responsible for financial management and procurement. However,

the rural engineering works will be the responsibility of a project manager with the
competencies and human resources needed for procurement. Contracts for civil
engineering works (building construction and rural road rehabilitation) are the most
difficult to organize and supervise for PCUs, as they have limited staff.

27. A strategy to mitigate fiduciary risks will be adopted, based on the following
measures:

• Monthly verification of the project accounting database, to be done jointly by
the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Agriculture and the IFAD country
office;

• Submission of a quarterly report using the template provided by IFAD
financial services. Reports are to be prepared by the PCU and sent to IFAD for
review;



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

5

• Recruitment of international technical assistance in financial management and
procurement, commencing at the outset of the project, to set up a more
effective organizational structure of fiduciary functions; and

• Semi-annual audit of project accounts and procurement by a qualified audit
firm. The PCU will be responsible for hiring the external auditors.

28. Flow of funds. Two mechanisms will be set up to finance project activities: (i) the
designated account and financing of project expenses with a justified and
reimbursable advance; and (ii) direct payments by implementing partners based on
the achievement of specific results.

29. Audit. The Government will, with the prior consent of IFAD, appoint external
auditors to perform two external audits of PASA-NK each fiscal year, in accordance
with international auditing standards and the procedures and criteria set out in
IFAD's guidelines on project audits (for use by borrowers/beneficiaries).

E. Supervision
30. IFAD will supervise the project directly in close collaboration with the Government.

IV. Project cost, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
31. The total cost of the project is estimated at US$52.974 million over a nine-year

period. The main sources of financing are: (i) IFAD with US$33.78 million, or 63.8
per cent of total project cost – the Democratic Republic of the Congo is classified as
"yellow" under the Debt Sustainability Framework, and is therefore eligible for 50
per cent grant and 50 per cent loan financing, i.e. a grant of US$16.89 million and
a loan of US$16.89 million; (ii) OFID with US$9.718 million, or 18.3 per cent of
total project cost; (iii) the Government with US$5.95 million in the form of
exemptions from taxes and tariffs on the goods and services to be purchased by
the project; and (iv) the beneficiaries with US$3.58 million, or 6.7 per cent of total
project cost.

Table 1
Project cost by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan OFID Government Beneficiaries Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

A. Capacity-building for actors
supporting agricultural value chains
1. Development of PO economic
services 16 022 75.3 - - 1 730 8.1 3 528 16.6 21 279 40.2

2. Institutional strengthening for POs 2 448 93.7 - - 164 6.3 - - 2 613 4.9

3. Support to public sector 5 276 76.4 689 10.0 940 13.6 - - 6 905 13.0

Subtotal 23 747 77.1 689 2.2 2 834 9.2 3 528 11.5 30 797 58.1

B. Support for rural infrastructure

1. Rehabilitation of access roads - - 8 481 75.0 2 827 25.0 - - 11 308 21.3

2. Capacity-building for DVDA - - 548 86.8 83 13.2 - - 631 1.2

Subtotal - - 9 029 75.6 2 910 24.4 - - 11 939 22.5

C. Coordination and management 10 032 98.0 - - 206 2.0 - - 10 238 19.3

Total cost 33 778 63.8 9 718 18.3 5 950 11.2 3 528 6.7 52 974 100.0



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

6

B. Project financing
32. Table 2 below indicates how the funds provided by IFAD will be used, by category

of expenditure.
Table 2
Project cost by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan OFID Government Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

I. Investment expenses

A. Studies 384 28.3 808 59.6 163 12.0 - - 1 355 2.6

B. Vehicles and equipment 2 418 65.3 146 4.0 1 137 30.7 - - 3 702 7.0

C. Training and workshops 8 164 93.4 188 2.1 -0 - 387 4.4 8 739 16.5

D. Civil and rural engineering 418 3.5 8 576 70.8 3 081 25.4 43 0.4 12 118 22.9

E. Support fund 9 279 67.1 - - 1 568 11.3 2 971 21.5 13 819 26.1

F. Technical assistance

National expertise 2 368 100.0 - - - - - - 2 368 4.5

International expertise 1 808 100.0 - - - - - - 1 808 3.4

Subtotal assistance technique 4 176 100.0 - - - - - - 4 176 7.9

Total investment cost 24 839 56.6 9 718 22.1 5 950 13.5 3 401 7.7 43 909 82.9

II. Operating expenses

A. Personnel 6 009 97.9 - - - - 126 2.1 6 135 11.6

B. Operating and maintenance 2 931 100.0 - - 0 - - - 2 931 5.5

Subtotal operating expenses 8 939 98.6 - - 0 - 126 1.4 9 065 17.1

Total project cost 33 778 63.8 9 718 18.3 5 950 11.2 3 528 6.7 52 974 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
33. All crop models indicate that the situation of smallholder producers will improve

with the project. The cost-benefit ratio is quite significant: 1.6 for potato, 1.4 for
rice, 1.3 for coffee and 1.2 for maize. Net present value is between US$81 and
US$565/household/year, calculated at an opportunity cost of capital of 30 per cent
per annum.

34. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the project is 18 per cent and the
NPV, at the opportunity cost of capital of 9.32 per cent, is US$16.5 million. A
sensitivity analysis shows that the results obtained are robust: it would take an
income reduction of 37 per cent or a cost increase of 59 per cent to bring down the
EIRR to the level of the opportunity cost of social capital.

D. Sustainability
35. The sustainability of project-supported activities has been considered from several

different perspectives.

36. Institutional sustainability. The project has opted to build implementation
partnerships with lead POs and NGOs with proven experience in the subject areas
targeted. This approach, by handing over direct responsibility to professional
agricultural actors, provides guarantees of continuity and sustainability. Moreover,
having technical services take part in, inter alia, project supervision, setting up
farmers field schools, providing agricultural advisory assistance and M&E, will
position these services better within the socio-economic development of the
province, which is an element of sustainability.

37. Financing arrangements. The approach adopted by the project calls for
providing a temporary subsidy for agricultural inputs – improved seed and fertilizer
– as a process trigger, together with a policy to mobilize savings and create a
credit culture among farming households, facilitating smallholder access to financial
services over the longer term.



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

7

38. Returns on economic services. More sustainable rice, maize, potato and Arabica
coffee production should enable beneficiary households to improve their savings
and investment capacity and encourage them to maintain the same levels of
fertilizer and improved seed use and value chain integration. Farmers should
therefore be in a position to pay for inputs at market prices by the time of project
completion.

39. Consolidation of associational and cooperative life. The project will contribute
to consolidating associational life by meeting the needs of beneficiary households
to enable them to participate in the activities of their POs, specifically by paying
dues and undertaking commercial transactions to purchase inputs and market
production. Commercial linkages between POs and market operators will enhance
the sustainability of the economic services.

40. Improving access and viable rural access roads. Improving access to
production areas and hubs and linking them to consumption centres are clearly
factors underpinning agricultural production. Rehabilitating access roads, supported
by a maintenance programme such as the one in effect in North Kivu, provides a
guarantee of sustainability in this regard.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
41. The four major risks and related mitigation strategies are outlined in the table

below:

Risks Mitigation measures
Deteriorating security situation
given electoral and economic
challenges in the Great Lakes
region

Losses of goods and
destruction of infrastructure
funded by the project

 The Congolese army and the United Nations Organization Stabilization Mission
in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (MONUSCO) conduct a search for
armed groups to disarm and neutralize them

 The European Parliament negotiates the text of legislation to dissuade European
companies from using blood minerals

 The United Nations system and MONUSCO monitor the security situation closely
 FAO and WFP collaborate closely on an analysis of the situation and the

complementarity of interventions (resilience, recovery, development)
 Trucks made available to lead POs ensure regular pickups and storage at well-

guarded central warehouses located in town
 Project activities are staggered

Land tenure issues: land
disputes and abusive breach of
land lease contracts

 The provincial decree of 2012 on customary land management stipulates
procedures for resolving land disputes

 FOPAC performs advocacy on land tenure issues to ensure secure access for
farmers

 Training of paralegals continues within the project framework
Delay in tax and quasi-tax
relief for agricultural production
and trade

 FOPAC organizes advocacy on this subject with supporting studies
 Synergies in action are sought with other organizations working on the same

subject, such as ELAN
 Updating of the national strategy is leveraged to revise the level and quality of

taxation applied to the subsector and, by extension, to others
Drop in prices, specifically for
Arabica coffee

 Coffee cooperatives are in command of processing and commercialization costs
 The gourmet coffee market, which offers prices that are 20 to 30 per cent higher

than the New York quoted price, is targeted
 Export prices and export procedures benefit from tax relief
 Revision of the national coffee strategy to commence in 2016 benefits from

support, focusing on competitiveness issues (taxation and legislation)

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
42. The project is fully aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and

complies with IFAD's policies on targeting, gender equality, natural resource
management, climate change and access to land and land tenure security.



EB 2015/116/R.15/Rev.1

8

B. Alignment and harmonization
43. PASA-NK is consistent with national legislation defining a strategic framework for

the agricultural and rural sector, i.e.: the Agriculture and Rural Development
Sector Strategy adopted in 2010, the Law on Fundamental Principles for Agriculture
passed in June 2012, the National Agricultural Investment Plan 2013-2020 adopted
in 2013, the Coffee Subsector Reactivation Strategy 2011-2015, the Provincial
Stabilization Strategy and the priority action plan introduced in the provinces,
including North Kivu.

C. Innovation and scaling up
44. In the context of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, the major innovation

under PASA-NK is creating linkages between POs and government services to
improve the economic services provided to farmers and explore opportunities for
commercialization. This approach could be scaled up under the programme
cofinanced by IFAD and, over the longer term, in areas where there is a relatively
well structured farmers movement and active trade in agriculture.

D. Policy engagement
45. PASA-NK contributes to implementation of the following policies: the provincial

decree on the management of customary lands, and the tax exemptions on trade
in agricultural products. The project will support FOPAC in carrying out advocacy
actions in these areas.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
46. A financing agreement between the Democratic Republic of the Congo and IFAD

will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/beneficiary. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

47. The Democratic Republic of the Congo is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

48. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
49. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms
to the Democratic Republic of the Congo in an amount equivalent to twelve
million one hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 12,100,000), and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Democratic
Republic of the Congo in an amount equivalent to twelve million one hundred
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 12,100,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Benin for the Market Gardening Development
Support Project

Republic of Benin

Market Gardening Development Support Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Republic of Benin

Executing agency: Ministry in charge of agriculture Ministére en charge de
l'agriculture

Total project cost: US$49.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan: 16.8 million SDR (equivalent to approximately
US$23.5 million)

Amount of IFAD grant:

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant:

0.35 million SDR (equivalent to
approximately US$0.5 million)

3.2 million SDR (equivalent to approximately
US$4.5 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinancier(s): OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID)

Amount of cofinancing: US$12.0 million

Terms of cofinancing: Loan

Contribution of borrower/beneficiary: US$4.8 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.9 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015 116/R.14

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Benin for the Market Gardening Development Support
Project, as contained in paragraph 53.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Benin for the
for the Market Gardening Development Support Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The population of Benin is estimated to be approximately 10 million, with a growth

rate of 3.5 per cent per year; 56 per cent of the population is rural. Benin is one of
the poorest countries in the world. Benin’s 2014 Human Development Index of
0.476 ranked in 169th out of 187 countries.

2. Agriculture is central to Benin’s economy, accounting for approximately 70 per cent
of employment and 30 per cent of GDP. Benin has recorded strong economic
performance, with an average annual growth rate of 3.9 per cent from 2006 to
2012, 5.6 per cent in 2013 and 5.7 per cent in 2014. Despite these positive trends,
economic growth has had a limited impact in terms of poverty reduction due to
high population growth and the vulnerability of the Beninese economy to external
shocks and climate change, and its dependence on primarily rainfed agriculture.

3. Poverty is characterized by strong regional disparities. Households most vulnerable
in terms of food consumption and poverty are those dependent on rainfed
agriculture (cereals and tubers) as the sole or primary source of income.

4. Youth and young adults (aged 15-35 years) account for approximately 60 per cent
of the national population. Due to a chronic lack of jobs in rural areas, youth
migration from rural to urban areas is growing by the year.

5. Benin is experiencing a deficit in vegetable production despite the market
opportunities existing in the country and elsewhere in the subregion. Moreover, its
high added value means market gardening production is a major direct and indirect
source of jobs for young people and women in urban, peri-urban and rural areas.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

6. The Strategic Plan for Agriculture Sector Recovery (PSRSA) aims to boost market
gardening production and productivity to meet domestic demand and strengthen
the contribution of Beninese producers to cross-border trade.

7. The Market Gardening Development Support Project (PADMAR) is fully aligned with
the 2011-2015 country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP). It is also in
keeping with the strategic direction of the PSRSA and perfectly aligned with axis 1
of the Growth Strategy for Poverty Reduction (CPRS), the National Agricultural
Investment Programme (NAIP), the Comprehensive Africa Agricultural
Development in Africa Programme (CAADP), the National Microfinance Strategy
(SNMF), the National Decentralization and Devolution Policy (PONADEC) and the
National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC).



EB 2015 116/R.14

2

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. The project will be implemented in southern Benin, working in 27 of the country’s

44 municipalities, located in seven of the country’s 12 departments: Atlantic,
Couffo, Littoral, Mono, Ouémé, Plateau and Zou. The project area has more than
5.8 million inhabitants. The departments and municipalities were selected based on
the following four criteria: (i) the potential for or emergence of profitable small-
scale market gardening; ii) the existence of useful hydro-agricultural potential that
could be developed for use by smallholders at a reasonable cost; (iii) proximity to
major consumer centres, including the cities of Lagos, Ibadan, Lomé, Accra and
Cotonou; and (iv) high rates of poverty, food insecurity, malnutrition and youth
unemployment.

9. The target group comprises: (i) market garden producers cultivating small areas –
1/8 hectare; (ii) vulnerable farming households with low crop diversification that
are motivated and interested in market gardening; and (iii) other value chain
actors, both upstream and downstream of production, including related services
and occupations such as input distribution, marketing, processing and trades
related to the construction and maintenance of irrigation infrastructure and
equipment supply.

10. Moreover, every link in the market gardening value chain will target as a matter of
priority: (a) young women and men (aged 18-24 years) and young adult women
and men (aged 25-35 years) with economic initiative, motivated and engaged or
seeking to establish themselves in the market garden vale chain; and (b) women
working as producers, processors or traders. The goal is set as at least 40 per cent
women and 50 per cent youth and young adult men and women among the direct
beneficiaries.

B. Project development objective
11. Overall project objective. The overall project goal is to help sustainably improve

food and nutrition security and reduce rural poverty in the project area.

12. Development objective. The development objective is to sustainably boost the
income of market gardeners, while strengthening their resilience to the effects of
climate change.

13. The project aims to reach 20,000 direct beneficiaries (120,000 household
members), including 17,000 market garden producers, and create 3,000 jobs
upstream and downstream of production, primarily for young men and women. It
will have significant impact through the provision of economic and social training to
growers and of institutional strengthening to market gardening organizations and
public and private institutions involved in the market gardening value chain. It is
expected that production will increase by at least 50 per cent and climate resilience
will be strengthened for 10,000 households as a result of the support provided by
the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP).

C. Components/outcomes
14. The project consists of the following three components:

Component 1. Value addition and marketing
15. Subcomponent 1.1. Partnership development and stakeholder

professionalization. Market garden value chain actors are expected to forge
professional partnerships that will add value to their products on local and
subregional markets. Activities will include: (i) support for the establishment of a
stakeholders’ forum, the “Market Gardening Stakeholders’ Form” (TFM), to promote
better governance in the market gardening value chain; (ii) a programme to
strengthen the institutional capacities of professional organizations; (iii) support to
existing systems in terms of information on pricing and vegetable markets; and



EB 2015 116/R.14

3

(iv) support to the development of services and jobs upstream and downstream of
production, especially for young holders of initiatives in new businesses that will
accompany the modernization of the sector.

16. Subcomponent 1.2. Market infrastructure and improved accessibility. The
expected outcome is the establishment of resilient infrastructure to enhance value
addition and facilitates market access. Activities will include: (a) support for the
construction and restoration of infrastructure collection, packaging and temporary
storage of market gardening inputs and produce; and (b) the repair of 120 km of
rural roads and construction of crossings needed to improve access to market
gardening production areas and the maintenance system.

Component 2. Improving market gardening productivity and production
17. Subcomponent 2.1. Resilient market gardening facilities. The expected result

is guaranteed and sustainable access to water and land for market gardening
producers. In this regard, the project will support the following activities: (a) the
development of 2,100 hectares of resilient market gardening plots, including 100
hectares of plots for the demonstration of innovative, water-efficient and low-
carbon market garden irrigation; (b) land tenure security for market gardening
producers; (c) the establishment of a committee to monitor the work and maintain
the market gardening plots, and capacity-building of committees charged with the
maintenance and management of irrigation systems and facilities; and (d) the
construction of flood protection dikes in areas at high risk of flooding. Solar-
powered pump irrigation systems will be used wherever conditions allow.

18. Subcomponent 2.2. Access to improved technologies and techniques. The
expected outcome is increased productivity and production among market
gardening producers in the context of climate change. Activities will include:
(a) specialized local advisory support provided by Market Gardening Technical
Specialists (TSMs) and link-producers; (b) access to quality production inputs
through the provision of market gardening kits including water-efficient irrigation
facilities and quality inputs; (c) support for the provision of quality inputs and
demonstrations on market gardening irrigation innovations; and (d) nutrition
integration support, including the promotion of the cultivation of local vegetables.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
19. The project is part of the broader trend of market gardening intensification in the

coastal areas of West Africa but has the following specific features: (i) it targets
small-scale market gardening producers so as to maximize their contribution to job
creation and the reduction of rural poverty; (ii) it takes into account the value
chain dimension, which will be developed through TFMs, and will strengthen
professional organizations and occupations and services upstream and downstream
of production; (iii) it systematically promotes modern, water-efficient and,
wherever possible, solar technologies, with a view to strengthening the
competitiveness of small market gardening enterprises; (iv) it systematically
promote quality inputs; (v) it promotes local leafy vegetables popular among
consumers and rich in vitamins and minerals; and (vi) it systematically strengthens
climate change resilience.

20. The IFAD Framework Programme in Benin (ProCaR) will be responsible for project
coordination and management, while field activities will be implemented through:
(a) TSMs, who will act as a technical reference group for the project at the
commune level in collaboration with regional centres for rural development
(CARDER) and agricultural development centres at the commune level; (b) link-
producers: experienced producers, living on site and receiving regular training and
support from TSMs, who will ensure the inclusion of their peers in market
gardening activities, each supporting and training 24 producers in market
gardening good practices, and receiving regular capacity-building from TSMs; and



EB 2015 116/R.14

4

(c) facilitators, who will run the TFMs to ensure they are able, in the medium term,
to ensure governance of the market gardening value chain.

B. Organizational framework
21. The Ministry of Finance will be the borrower/recipient for this project. The Ministry

in charge of agriculture will provide technical supervision. The ProCaR National
Steering Committee (NSC) will be modified to include representatives of PADMAR
stakeholders, including the National Platform of Farmers’ Organizations and
Agricultural Producers of Benin (PNOPPA). The Minister for Economic Development,
Public Policy Evaluation and the Promotion of Good Governance, or his
representative thereof, will chair the NSC. The NSC secretariat will be hosted by
the MAEP Department of Programming and Forecasting, supported by ProCaR. The
NSC will be responsible for approving annual work plans and budgets (AWPBs) and
monitoring the project.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

22. The activities implemented under the project will be presented each year in an
AWPB prepared with the help of TSMs and facilitators, and developed in the form of
site investment plans consolidated at the regional level. These regional investment
plans – standalone investments and enabling investments – will be consolidated by
the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) in a national AWPB to be submitted for
comments to the Ministry in charge of agriculture, then approved by the NSC,
before submission to IFAD for approval. Each draft AWPB will include: a detailed
description of the activities of the coming year; a procurement plan during covering
18 months the first year and 12 months from the second year; a statement of the
origin of funds and expected results. From the second year, the AWPB will include a
summary of the results achieved and constraints encountered during the year
concerned.

23. The project will develop a results-based monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system
to measure progress in implementation, its effects and its impact on target groups.
M&E will inform a small number of relevant indicators relating to the Results and
Impact Management System (RIMS), relating to the impacts climate change.

24. M&E will have three levels of indicators and include: (i) internal monitoring of
planning by measuring progress in physical and financial implementation against
the AWPB; (ii) monitoring of the logical framework indicators to measure the
attainment of expected outputs and outcomes; and (iii) impact assessment. The
indicators will be disaggregated by gender and age.

25. The project will draw on the core nutrition and food security indicators generated
by the baseline survey of the Adapted Rural Financial Services Development Project
(PAPSFRA). An anthropometric and socioeconomic survey will be conducted at the
end of the project. The ProCaR online database will be updated to reflect the
specific project indicators.

26. The approach adopted will aim to establish a value chain between M&E, knowledge
and communication, to collect, process, document and broadly disseminate,
through various media, using new information and communication technologies.
Data on results and impact will be collected and compiled into an electronic library.
The data will be analysed and trends in key indicators will be presented in a
differentiated format according to user needs (graphics, maps). The ProCaR
website, social networks and sharing workshops will be used to share and
disseminate results.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
27. Project funds will be managed in accordance with the procedures in force in Benin

and with IFAD procedures for the financial management of projects. They will be
set out in detail in the letter to the borrower and in the ProCaR manual of



EB 2015 116/R.14

5

administrative, financial and accounting procedures, which will be updated to
incorporate PADMAR.

28. The ProCaR PCU, which was created by ministerial order and has autonomous
financial and administrative management, will be responsible for the financial
management of the project. It will prepare semi-annual financial reports for
submission to the Government and to IFAD, as well as project financial statements
for each fiscal year. At project launch, the PCU will prepare an 18-month
procurement plan to be submitted to IFAD for approval. The plan will indicate, for
each market, the procurement method, the proposed thresholds and the applicable
preferences. Goods, works and services will be procured in accordance with
national procedures for procurement, subject to their compatibility with relevant
IFAD guidelines.

E. Supervision
29. IFAD will directly supervise the project and administer the financing (loan and

grant). In this regard, the Fund will conduct two supervision missions per year,
with the participation of representatives of the Ministry in charge of agriculture, the
Ministry for Development and other interested ministries and partners. The first will
be primarily a support mission and will focus essentially on reviewing and
finalizing: (i) the initial AWPB; (ii) the manual of administrative, financial and
accounting procedures; and (iii) procurement documents.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
30. The total projects costs amount to US$49.2 million over seven years, with a base

cost of US$47.8 million. Taxes account for 9.8 per cent of total costs, at US$4.8
million, including US$0.4 million and US$1.0 million respectively for physical and
financial contingencies (3 per cent of base cost). Investment costs amount to
US$46.8 million, or 95.1 per cent of the base cost. Operating expenses account for
US$2.4 million, or 4.9 per cent of the base cost.

Table 1
Project costs by component and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

Government IFAD loan IFAD grant OFID ASAP Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Value addition and marketing

Partnership development and
stakeholder professionalization 277.1 11.3 1 943.9 79.5 - - 203.6 8.3 - - 19.9 0.8 2 444.6

Market infrastructure and improving
access 1 343.0 18.0 - - - - 6 083.3 81.7 - - 19.7 0.3 7 446.0

Subtotal 1 620.1 16.4 1 943.9 19.7 - - 6 286.9 63.6 - - 39.7 0.4 9 890.6

2. Improving market gardening
productivity and production

Resilient market gardening facilities 1 534.5 18.3 - - - - 5 713.1 68.2 865.2 10.3 270.2 3.2 8 383.0

Access to improved technology and
techniques 1 221.9 4.7 17 572.6 67.1 500.0 1.9 - - 3 336.4 12.7 3 543.3 13.5 26 174.1

Subtotal 2 756.4 8.0 17 572.6 50.9 500.0 1.4 5 713.1 16.5 4 201.6 12.2 3 813.4 11.0 34 557.1

3. Coordination, M&E and
knowledge management

Coordination and management 226.5 6.7 2 875.1 85.3 - - - - 268.0 8.0 - - 3 369.6

M&E and knowledge management 235.8 17.2 1 108.3 80.6 - - - - 30.4 2.2 - - 1 374.5

Subtotal 462.3 9.7 3 983.5 84.0 - - - - 298.3 6.3 - - 4 744.1

Total 4 838.8 9.8 23 500.0 47.8 500.0 1.0 12 000.0 24.4 4 500.0 9.1 3 853.1 7.8 49 191.9



EB 2015 116/R.14

6

B. Project financing
31. The project will be financed by an IFAD loan and grant, an ASAP grant, a loan from

the OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID), a contribution from the
beneficiaries and a contribution from the Government of Benin. IFAD will
participate in the project financing by providing a loan in the amount of US$23.5
million on highly concessional terms (equivalent to CFAF 13.7 billion or 47.8 per
cent of total project costs) and a grant in the amount of US$0.5 million (equivalent
to CFAF 0.3 billion). The IFAD loan will be used as follows: 73.9 per cent for
improving productivity and production (component 2); 9.2 per cent for value
addition and marketing (component 1); and 16.9 per cent for coordination, M&E
and knowledge management. The IFAD grant funds will be entirely allocated to the
“Access to improved technologies and techniques” subcomponent, implemented
under component 2, specifically to new irrigation technology demonstration
activities.

32. OFID will provide a loan of US$12 million (equivalent to CFAF 7 billion FCFA or 24.4
per cent of total project costs), to be used as follows: 47.6 per cent for the resilient
market gardening facilities subcomponent, implemented under component 2, and
52.4 per cent for component 1 activities.

33. ASAP will provide a grant of US$4.5 million (equivalent to CFAF 2.6 billion or 9.1
per cent of total project costs), to be used as follows: 93.4 per cent to finance the
activities of component 2 and 6.6 per cent for coordination, M&E and knowledge
management.

34. Beneficiaries will contribute in the amount of US$3.9 million (equivalent to CFAF
2.3 billion or 7.8 per cent of total project costs), corresponding to their
participation in meeting the costs of developing market gardening plots, access to
mark gardening technologies, and building market and crossing infrastructures.

35. The Government will contribute an estimated US$4.8 million (equivalent to CFAF
2.8 billion or 9.8 per cent of total costs) to the project financing, corresponding to
the total taxes and duties due on the goods and services procured by the project.

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

Government IFAD loan IFAD grant OFID ASAP Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

I. Investment
costs

1. Rural/civil
works 2 503.8 18.0 100.7 0.7 325.7 2.3 10 168.6 73.1 521.2 3.7 289.9 2.1 13 909.9

2. Subsidies
and grants 0.0 - 11 819.9 66.2 - - 102.7 0.6 2 399.7 13.4 3 543.3 19.8 17 865.5

3. Vehicles 81.7 23.0 194.1 54.6 - - 53.0 14.9 26.5 7.5 - - 355.2

4. Equipment
and material 397.5 23.0 532.4 30.8 - - 382.4 22.1 396.0 22.9 19.9 1.2 1 728.1

5. Consultants 1 796.4 18.0 6 527.3 65.4 - - 1 192.4 11.9 464.1 4.7 - - 9 980.1

6. Training and
workshops 0.0 - 2 226.3 75.4 174.3 5.9 101.0 3.4 451.0 15.3 - - 2 952.6

Total investment
costs 4 779.4 10.2 21 400.6 45.7 500.0 1.1 12 000.0 25.6 4 258.5 9.1 3 853.1 8.2 46 791.5

II. Operating costs

A. Operating costs 59.5 18.0 270.8 82.0 - - - - - - - - 330.3

B. Staff costs 0.0 - 1 828.6 88.3 - - - - 241.5 11.7 - - 2 070.1

Total operating
costs 59.5 2.5 2 099.4 87.5 - - - - 241.5 10.1 - - 2 400.4

Total project
costs 4 838.8 9.8 23 500.0 47.8 500.0 1.0 12 000.0 24.4 4 500.0 9.1 3 853.1 7.8 49 191.9



EB 2015 116/R.14

7

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
36. The project will provide direct socioeconomic benefits to at least 20,000 market

gardening value chain actors (thereby reaching 120,000 individuals), including
approximately 17,000 market gardening households cultivating small plots of 1/8
hectare. It will create 3,000 new jobs, primarily for young people, upstream and
downstream of production, including in related services and occupations, such as
input distribution, marketing, processing and trades related to the construction and
maintenance of irrigation infrastructure and equipment supply. It will contribute to
the production of 68,000 tons of a range of vegetables per year by the sixth year
of implementation. The basic economic rate of return (ERR) of the project is 27.5
per cent. The net present value (NPV) is estimated at US$25.3 million.

37. The direct benefits expected are: (i) 1,100 ha of land converted and equipped with
irrigation system in areas of high water table;  60 ha converted and equipped in
areas where the water table is of moderate depth; 60 ha converted and equipped
in plateaus or low water table areas; 480 ha of lowlands converted; 300 ha
converted and equipped in areas with artesian water; (ii) 12,000 linear metres (ml)
of ASAP-funded flood-protection dykes for market gardening facilities; (iii) 120 km
of desert tracks repaired and 279 ml of crossings built for use in all seasons;
(iv) 150 business, upstream and downstream of market gardening production,
created or strengthened; and v) 27 communes equipped to maintain the repaired
tracks.

38. In terms of environmental benefits, the project will make it possible to avoid:
(i) approximately US$560,000 in fuel consumption per year; (ii) an estimated
1,423 t CO2 eq of greenhouse gas emissions per year, equivalent to approximately
US$12,800; and (iii) 25-50 per cent of market gardening produce lost to flooding,
drought or excessive heat over every two-year period, corresponding to 20,400
tons or US$6.1 million. The project will also reduce water consumption through the
use of water-efficient technologies.

D. Sustainability
39. Sustainability has been systematically built into project design. The inclusion of the

poorest people and the facilitation of their access to quality equipment and inputs
is intended to create, in the medium term, self-financing capacity or access among
farmers’ organizations (FOs) to funding from financial institutions for the use of
their members. For market gardening sites, demand-based project interventions
are the true gauge of sustainability; these include: land tenure protection, the
participation of market gardening producers and rural communities in investment,
the use of locally tested and relevant technologies, the building of their financial
management capacities so as to enable them to buy inputs and renew equipment,
as well as the participation of producers in maintenance.

40. There is a high likelihood that the project achievements will be sustainable. The
establishment and effective functioning of TFMs, financing for water-efficient
irrigation systems and the provision of high-quality inputs will give stakeholders
the means to increase their competitiveness and enhance their production quality.
The strategy of fully empowering FOs to provide affordable services to their
members is intended to ensure the sustainability of project gains. Finally, the
empowerment of TFMs will ultimately enable them to ensure market gardening
subsector governance.

41. Improving land tenure security among market gardening producers will promote
investment in and the sustainability of their modes of production and reduce
conflicts. The organizational and management capacities of relevant civic land
tenure structures will be strengthened. Moreover, mechanisms for managing and
maintaining market gardening plots and infrastructure will be established, and user
capacity strengthened. Year-round production and better understanding of and



EB 2015 116/R.14

8

access to national and subregional markets to sell produce at remunerative prices,
as well as a more integrated understanding of the seasonal nature of these
markets, will be major gains contributing to sustainability.

42. The project will invest in monitoring water resources and salinzation risk as key to
the economic and environmental sustainability of its activities.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
43. Following the adoption of mitigation measures, the project risk level is rated as

medium. It will nonetheless face systematic risks inherent to the market gardening
subsector and to the planned programme activities. These risks have been
identified and appropriate mitigation measures incorporated at the design level.
The support of ASAP will help further mitigate these risks.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
44. The project is fully aligned with IFAD strategy and policies, including the 2011-

2015 Strategic Framework, the climate change strategy, environmental and social
evaluation procedures, the targeting and gender strategy, supervision and
implementation support, and environment and natural resource management
policies. The project is also fully aligned with the objectives of ASAP.

B. Alignment and harmonization
45. The project is closely aligned with the strategic direction of the PSRSA and aligned

with axis 1 of the CPRS and with the NAIP, the CAADP, the SNMF, the PONADEC
and the NAPCC. It is in line with other projects and initiatives under way,
supported by IFAD and other donors, including the IFAD-supported PACER and
PAPSFRA projects, the Belgian Technical Cooperation-funded Market Gardening
Stakeholder Support Project, the United States Agency for International
Development -funded Growing Resources for Enhanced Agriculture Enterprises and
Nutrition project and the African Development Bank-financed Ouémé Valley
Agricultural Infrastructure Support Project. Regarding rural youth employment, the
project will create partnerships with the Multi-year Water and Sanitation Sector
Support Programme and the Special Programme for Youth in Agriculture in Benin
and the Songhai Centre.

C. Innovations and scaling up
46. In the context of action research, the project will demonstrate market gardening

sector innovations that have a direct impact on priority areas, such as:
(i) determining appropriate fertilizer dosage for various types of market gardening
produce; (ii) phytosanitary treatments and mechanical protection measures, in
particular integrated protection against biological pests; (iii) the use of pesticides
and fertilizers of biological origin; and (iv) evaluating the performance of local,
salt-tolerant market gardening crop varieties and short-cycle varieties in mitigating
climate risks, and organic material value addition (compost).

47. The project will also demonstrate innovations in irrigation, water-efficient systems
and solar-powered pumps, in partnership with FOs, the Directorate-General for
Rural Development and Equipment and the National Agricultural Research Institute
of Benin. These demonstrations will be developed with the assistance of specialized
institutes, and funded by the ASAP financing (innovative kits) and the IFAD grant
(draining and piping).

48. The project will invest in monitoring pesticide residues in groundwater and market
gardening produce as an innovative element in keeping with the sustainable
agricultural production focus of the project. The project will also assess the
salinization level of the soil. Innovations once tested and evaluated will be scaled
up.



EB 2015 116/R.14

9

D. Policy engagement
49. The project will contribute to the transformation of the market gardening subsector

through the professionalization of its stakeholders. It will conduct, through TFMs,
policy consultations on topics of relevance to value chain actors, such as:
(i) improving access to land rights among vulnerable groups (women and young
people); (ii) policy relating to imports and access to specific market gardening
fertilizers; (iii) sustainable access to financing for small market gardening
producers; (iv) setting quality standards for market gardening produce and inputs;
and v) and the taxation of imports and exports.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
50. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Benin and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

51. The Republic of Benin is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

52. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
53. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Benin in an amount equivalent to sixteen million eight
hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights (16,850,000 SDR) and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Benin in an amount equivalent to three hundred and fifty-five thousand
special drawing rights (355,000 SDR) and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an ASAP grant to the
Republic of Benin in an amount equivalent to three million two and twenty
thousand special drawing rights (3,220,000 SDR) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Malawi for the
Programme for Rural Irrigation Development

Republic of Malawi

Programme for Rural Irrigation Development

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and
Development

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water
Development

Total programme cost: US$83.95 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 19.30 million (equivalent to approximately
US$26.48 million)

Amount of IFAD
Debt Sustainability Framework grant:

SDR 19.35 million (equivalent to approximately
US$26.54 million)

Amount of IFAD Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
grant:

SDR 5.15 million (equivalent to approximately
US$7.06 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with a
service charge of three fourths of one per cent (0.75 per
cent) per annum

Cofinancier(s): Department for International Development (DFID);
private sector

Amount of cofinancing: DFID: US$0.5 million
Private sector: US$3.0 million

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$13.08 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$7.28 million (in kind)

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Malawi for the Programme for Rural Irrigation
Development, as contained in paragraph 56.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Malawi for
the Programme for Rural Irrigation Development

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Malawi is a densely populated landlocked country of some 15 million people in an

area of 118,484 km2, of which 24,000 km2 is covered by freshwater lakes and
mangroves. Population growth is almost 3 per cent per annum and the country has
one of the lowest per capita GDPs in the world. With a Human Development Index
of 0.414, Malawi is ranked 174th out of 187 countries (2014), while for its gender
development index it ranked 116th out of 208 countries (2013). Education levels are
low. Chronic food insecurity and malnutrition, combined with HIV/AIDS prevalence
of 11.9 per cent, add to the challenge.

2. Poverty is mainly rural. Approximately 51 per cent of the Malawian population lives
below the poverty line of a dollar a day (Millennium Development Goals [MDGs]
Report 2013), while in rural areas over 85 per cent of the people are poor.1 Rural
areas also have a higher occurrence of both stunted and underweight children than
do urban areas. In 2005, the Government of Malawi set up the Fertilizer Input
Supply Scheme, which increased maize production and enabled the country to
become self-sufficient in years with normal weather conditions. However, Malawi’s
progress against the MDGs remains mixed. Hunger has decreased, but persists.
Targets for poverty reduction and primary education are deemed unlikely to be
achieved by 2015.

3. Women have remained disadvantaged in many aspects of life, despite their large
share in the food-production labour force. They have little control over produce,
and benefit less from the income earned. Young people also face considerable
challenges, mainly in terms of few employment opportunities outside agriculture in
rural areas and the ongoing fragmentation of landholdings. Farming, predominantly
rainfed, is associated with low cash-income generation, hard labour and low status.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. Most smallholder families in Malawi live at the subsistence level, with cash or food
insecurity for several months of the year. Adverse climate effects exacerbate the
already precarious situation of many smallholders. In 2015, for example, floods
destroyed a large part of the maize harvest in southern Malawi, while other areas
suffered under prolonged drought, with severe consequences for crop yields, food
security and nutrition.

5. Land productivity has been declining for decades, mainly due to existing
inappropriate land and water management practices that do not support sustainable
crop production and erosion control measures. Moreover, farmers do not possess
sufficient financing to purchase fertilizer to restore soil fertility. Irrigation is scarce
and this curbs agricultural production to only one harvest per year.

1 National Statistical Office of Malawi, Statistical Yearbook 2008.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

2

6. Access to land under customary procedures is increasingly under threat due to the
high demand for arable land. Seasonal sublets of land have become frequent and
benefit those who can afford to pay, while the poor may lose their land.

7. Several government- and donor-funded programmes aim to reverse current trends
in the loss of soil fertility and declining yields. The Government invests in the
Fertilizer Input Supply Scheme to enhance soil fertility and increase yields of maize,
the main staple crop, and to boost national food security. Unfortunately, it faces
difficulties in sustaining the scheme due to its high costs.

8. The proposed Programme for Rural Irrigation Development (PRIDE) has been
designed to address the above issues through investments in irrigation and in
improved rainfed agriculture adapted to smallholders. It seeks to enable: higher
land and labour productivity; application of sustainable, climate-smart land and
water management practices; and a focus on agricultural markets to generate cash
income for smallholders.

9. The Government is committed to addressing rural poverty through agricultural
growth. The second Malawi Growth and Development Strategy (MGDS II) defines
water development as a key strategic area. In 2015, the Irrigation Master Plan and
Investment Framework (IMPIF) was formulated to expand access of smallholders to
irrigation in order to boost crop production and enhance resilience to adverse
climate events. The Government asked IFAD to invest in the IMPIF and in the
development of water management for smallholder agriculture.

10. PRIDE is fully compatible with IFAD’s country strategic opportunities programme
(COSOP) 2010-2015 and complements services provided by the existing IFAD
portfolio. Synergies will be developed with both the Rural Livelihoods and Economic
Enhancement Programme (RLEEP – value chain development) and the Sustainable
Agriculture Production Programme (SAPP – good agricultural practices in rainfed
systems).

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
11. The programme will be implemented over a seven-year period in two regional

clusters in the northern and southern regions of Malawi. The programme will target
poor smallholder farmers of the villages associated with each irrigation scheme. The
primary target group comprises food insecure households. Smallholder farmers will
be supported in: (i) being allocated secure land in the programme irrigation
schemes; (ii) joining water users’ associations (WUAs) and obtaining representation
on catchment management committees; and (iii) becoming business entities
(individually and as groups) to respond to market opportunities.

B. Programme development objective
12. The programme’s goal is to enhance the resilience of rural communities to food

insecurity, the effects of climate change and economic shocks. Its development
objective is that smallholder farmer households increase their income and nutrition
through sustainable agricultural production. The programme’s two major outcomes
are that smallholders: (i) operate climate-smart land and water management
systems; and (ii) adopt environmentally and economically sustainable agricultural
production systems on both rainfed and irrigated land.

C. Components/outcomes
13. Component 1: Irrigation development and catchment management. The

objective of this component is to develop climate-smart land and water
management systems for smallholder households on rainfed and irrigated land. The
objective will be achieved through preparation and management of about 15
irrigation schemes, together with establishment and strengthening of WUAs to
manage, operate and maintain irrigation schemes for appropriate land and water



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

3

governance. Agricultural productivity will be increased through irrigation, using
water storage for a second or third crop, while PRIDE will address environmental
degradation risks by investing in soil and water conservation measures. The latter
will be funded entirely by a grant from the IFAD Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP). The measures aim to restore soil cover on
vulnerable grounds, control erosion, and carry out reforestation of slopes and
protection of river buffer zones, as a contribution to national greenhouse gas
reduced-emission targets.

14. Component 2: Agriculture and market linkages. The objective of this
component is to promote adoption of environmentally and economically sustainable
agricultural production systems by smallholder households on both rainfed and
irrigated land. The programme will support efficient knowledge transfer to
smallholder farmers through trials and demonstrations, combined with better
information from the private sector on market potential and opportunities. The
component will promote climate-smart good agricultural practices (GAPs), including
the use of weather and climate information services, irrigation optimization,
application of integrated pest management and reduction of post-harvest losses.

15. Market linkages will be promoted through: value chain analyses to identify suitable
crops; training, mainly through farmer business schools; and commodity platforms
to bring together all actors in a value chain. A dedicated irrigation technology
window – under the Malawi Innovation Challenge Fund – will be piloted with the
private sector and cofunded by the United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP) and the United Kingdom’s Department for International Development
(DFID). The private sector will provide farmers with modern irrigation equipment
such as drip irrigation and will facilitate marketing of their produce.

16. PRIDE will mainstream nutrition in most of its activities, such as the choice of crops
or value chain commodities, and support this through the following measures:
(i) integrating a nutrition perspective in all GAPs promoted; (ii) promoting
diversified and improved nutritional production and consumption (integrated
homestead food production); and (iii) supporting the introduction of improved
cooking stoves, which reduce the need for fuelwood by as much as 60 per cent,
combined with nutrition education.

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

17. During the implementation phase, PRIDE will actively mobilize partners and
resources for communities in scheme cluster areas so that these communities can
sustainably harness natural resources for agriculture, build competence in
production, and profit from better market linkages. The implementation approach
comprises a phased development process: identification, preparation,
implementation and review. Programme management will be tasked with
monitoring and reporting regularly to safeguard positive environmental and social
outcomes. With an average design-to-commissioning time of three years, irrigation
investments will be phased in three lots, with one or two schemes per irrigation
service division in each lot. Progress and lessons learned in the first three years of
irrigation projects developed under the programme will be carefully documented
and will inform the schemes to be developed in the second phase.

18. PRIDE builds on lessons learned in various projects in Malawi, such as the World
Bank/IFAD-funded Irrigation, Rural Livelihoods and Agricultural Development
Project (IRLADP), and links with other projects in the water sector promoted by
various donor agencies.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

4

B. Organizational framework
19. The lead programme agency will be the Department of Irrigation (DOI) within the

Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Water Development (MOAIWD). The DOI will
establish a dedicated programme coordination office (PCO) which will be staffed
with highly qualified personnel, either from the government's roster or from the
labour market. Separate facilitation offices staffed by one coordinator each will be
established in the northern and southern regions. A programme steering committee
(PSC) will provide strategic oversight and is composed of senior representatives of
the ministries concerned, chaired by the Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and
Development (MOFEPD). The PCO will be assisted by a technical advisory team
representing the departments concerned with programme implementation: Land
Resources, Extension, Research (under MOAIWD), Land (under the Ministry of
Lands, Housing and Urban Development), Environmental Affairs (under the Ministry
of Natural Resources, Environment and Mining), Debt and Aid (under MOFEPD), and
others as needed. The programme will coordinate fully with the agriculture sector-
wide approach programme (ASWAp) to ensure full alignment with government
investments and policies.

20. In the village and scheme cluster areas, the programme will coordinate its entry
with the existing village-level leadership (traditional authorities) and structures,
organized in village development committees. These will convene a combined
village committee to provide oversight for programme and community activities.
Detailed preparations for land consolidation and irrigation scheme preparation will
be delegated to a WUA formation committee. Implementation of more
straightforward activities (soil and water conservation, GAPs and market linkages)
will be handed over to beneficiary groups and lead farmers.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

21. The programme’s approach to planning, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and
knowledge management will be in line with the 2001 National Irrigation Policy and
Development Strategy, the MOAIWD M&E framework and IFAD requirements, based
on emerging best practices of the IRLADP and other IFAD-funded projects.

22. The main planning tools for PRIDE comprise the logical framework, overall
programme budget and annual workplan and budget (AWP/B). Every year, a
decentralized, inclusive and demand-driven planning process will be undertaken.
The consolidated AWP/B will be presented to the PSC for approval and to IFAD for
concurrence. Implementation of the AWP/B will be monitored through the
programme’s M&E system, which will produce semi-annual reports.

23. Programme M&E will be based on IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS). The programme will conduct baseline and follow-up surveys combining
collection of basic demographic and socio-economic data with application of a
multidimensional poverty assessment tool. The latter will assist in tracking changes
in resilience to climate change. The baseline and follow-up surveys will employ the
Women’s Empowerment in Agriculture Index, which measures changes in women’s
empowerment levels as a result of an intervention.

24. Learning and sharing of knowledge will be based on the programme’s M&E system,
and particularly on reviews and participatory assessments of lessons learned during
implementation. These will translate into factsheets that will contribute to the wider
policy debate in the smallholder agriculture sector. Dissemination will take place
through programme and MOAIWD websites, or relevant institutions such as
research agencies, and will be presented at national workshops on key programme
themes.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

5

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
25. Financial management. A financial management assessment was carried out

during design and concluded that the proposed financial management
arrangements for PRIDE are at medium risk. Transparency International's Global
Corruption Perceptions Index scored Malawi at 34 per cent in 2014.2 IFAD’s Rural-
Sector Performance score regarding accountability and corruption in rural areas
scored Malawi at 3.75 in 2014, which translates into medium risk.

26. Mitigation measures aim to enhance the country’s financial management systems
through: use of computerized accounting software, specifically recruited
programme finance staff, accounting linked to M&E, and the use of dedicated bank
accounts. Processing of PRIDE’s day-to-day transactions will be handled outside the
government Integrated Financial Management System. However, the programme
will provide periodic returns to the Accountant General to enable the updating of
government accounts. Accounting will be linked to the M&E system, requiring that
the terms of reference of the financial management team and the M&E expert be
linked on these aspects. The proposed arrangement will be managed by the PCO
under the oversight and guidance of MOAIWD.

27. Flow of funds. IFAD and ASAP funds will flow into one designated account, from
which they pass to the programme operational accounts. The MOFEPD Treasury will
manage the designated account and the PCO the operational bank accounts. All
accounts will be opened at a commercial bank satisfactory to IFAD. Any
government agencies participating in PRIDE will be required to open a PRIDE-
specific bank account to receive activity-tagged cash advances against approved
AWP/Bs, to be retired before subsequent releases.

28. Procurement. All procurement funded under the programme will be carried out in
accordance with national procurement procedures to the extent they are consistent
with IFAD’s 2010 Project Procurement Guidelines. Malawi’s legal and institutional
framework for public procurements has been assessed as sufficiently robust.

29. A procurement assessment of IRLADP operations was undertaken as part of the
design of PRIDE and, as a result, a number of mitigation measures will be
incorporated concerning bid registers, contract administration, engagement of the
MOAIWD Internal Procurement Committee, and so forth. A procurement specialist
in the PCO will ensure compliance with IFAD requirements and that procurement
processes in practice are fully compliant with the legislative and regulatory
framework.

30. Governance. A governance and anti-corruption framework will be elaborated as
part of the programme implementation manual during the first year of
implementation. This will ensure transparency, accountability in the use of
resources, and participation, i.e. that people have a voice in decisions that may
affect them. Key features of the framework include: (i) inclusive targeting of
women and disadvantaged households; (ii) participation of community
representatives in local-level planning; (iii) community and participatory monitoring
of programme activities; (iv) both internal and external audit of programme
accounts and processes; (v) IFAD supervision and implementation support;
(vi) reporting of results to the PSC and IFAD, with key information published on a
programme website; and (vii) a grievance system.

E. Supervision
31. PRIDE will be directly supervised by IFAD jointly with the Government, with a focus

on: (i) fiduciary aspects; (ii) achievements and the quality of programme
implementation; and (iii) implementation support emphasizing environmental and
climate assessment procedures. Supervision missions will normally be carried out

2 Transparency International: 0 per cent means not corrupt and 100 per cent highly corrupt.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

6

twice a year. Timing of the missions will be coordinated with production of the six-
monthly progress report, so that missions can gauge the situation at the same cut-
off dates and thus provide an additional perspective on progress at PSC meetings.
During the start-up phase, implementation support will be provided to assist in
setting up adequate systems and to enhance technical capacities. Supervision will
focus on the quality of institutional arrangements, including timely installation of a
high-quality M&E system and creation of baselines.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
32. Total programme costs are estimated at US$84 million, including price and physical

contingencies, duties and taxes. The parameters underpinning these costs are: (i) a
seven-year programme period, starting in 2016; (ii) price contingencies of 6 per
cent, and physical contingencies of 3 per cent; (iii) local inflation set at 10 per cent,
and foreign inflation set at 2 per cent; (iv) an exchange rate fixed at US$1 =
440 Malawi kwacha (MK); and (v) the Government will waive duties, excises and
taxes or will finance the cost of all taxes on goods procured under the programme.
Taxes and duties are estimated at US$13 million of total programme costs.
Component estimates are summarized in table 1.
Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD
loan IFAD grant ASAP DFID

Private
sector

Beneficiaries
(in kind) Government Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount

I. Irrigation development and
catchment management 16 294 17 736 1 878 - - 7 283 10 527 53 718
II. Agriculture and market
linkages 2 979 7516 4 984 498 3 000 - 1 940 20 918
III. Programme management
and coordination 7210 1 288 201 - - - 616 9 314

Total 26 483 26 540 7 063 498 3 000 7 283 13 083 83 950

B. Programme financing
33. The programme will be financed by a total IFAD contribution equivalent to some

US$53 million in the form of 50 per cent loan and 50 per cent grant under the Debt
Sustainability Framework (DSF); ASAP grant financing in an amount equivalent to
about US$7.0 million; DFID financing of about US$0.5 million; private-sector
financing of about US$3.0 million; a Government contribution of about
US$13 million; and a contribution by beneficiaries of about US$7.3 million (in kind).
The IFAD loan will be provided on highly concessional terms, including a 40-year
maturity period, a 10-year grace period, and a 0.75 per cent annual service charge.

34. IFAD will provide start-up funds from loan and DSF proceeds in the amount of
US$560,000 to cover specified expenditures aimed at enhancing capacity for a
quick start-up.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

7

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant ASAP DFID Private sector

Beneficiaries
(in kind) Government Total

Expenditure category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Works 13 906 31.1 13 906 31.1 1 034 2.3 - - - - 6 953 15.6 8 896 19.9 44 696
2. Vehicles 565 70.0 - - - - - - - - - - 242 30.0 808
3. Equipment and materials 195 8.5 91 4.0 1 397 61.2 - - - - 157 6.9 443 19.4 2 284
4. Studies and consultancies 1 613 18.4 3 338 38.1 2 302 26.3 - - - - - - 1 506 17.2 8 760
5. Training 1 031 10.6 5 685 58.4 1 405 14.4 - - - - 172 1.8 1 439 14.8 9 732
6. Cofinancing - - 2 502 41.7 - - 498 8.3 3 000 50.0 - - -0 - 6 000
7. Operations and
maintenance 1 084 87.1 - - - - - - - - - - 161 12.9 1 245
8. Salaries and allowances 8 087 77.6 1 017 9.8 925 8.9 - - - - - - 395 3.8 10 425

Total 26 483 31.5 26 540 31.6 7 063 8.4 498 0.6 3 000 3.6 7 283 8.7 13 083 15.6 83 950

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
35. The programme’s overall economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is estimated at

20 per cent (base case), which is above the opportunity cost of capital in Malawi,
estimated at 12 per cent.3 The EIRR is based on the assumption that 80 per cent of
targeted farmers will adopt the GAP technology packages promoted by the
programme and 90 per cent will be engaged in farming of irrigated land.

36. PRIDE will generate financial benefits in the form of increased financial returns (net
incomes) to about 17,500 smallholder households as direct beneficiaries of the
programme. Social benefits will include a reduction in poverty rates in the
programme area owing to expected increased financial returns (about 10-fold) from
irrigated and improved rainfed agriculture, post-harvest technologies and improved
employment opportunities.

37. Other social benefits include improved nutrition and increased food security through
diversification of crop production. PRIDE will strengthen the status of women
through their economic and social empowerment. The main approach includes
promotion of gender-balanced access to irrigated land, representation in WUAs and
other farmers’ institutions, access to GAPs and cash-crop value chains.

38. Better access to and use of weather information, irrigation and community-based
approaches are expected to lead to sustainable land and water management. In
conjunction with a higher degree of commercialization among farmers, PRIDE is
expected to render smallholder farming systems more resilient and better-adapted
to the effects of climate change.

D. Sustainability
39. Sustainability of the benefits generated and approaches will be ensured through a

number of mechanisms. PRIDE embraces a clear strategy for horizontal and vertical
scaling up, with identified pathways, key drivers and institutional space.

40. Knowledge management will be central to information-gathering and learning. Key
results and information will be communicated to the wider public for participation
and to the Government for action in policy development. The focus on linking
smallholders to market will be key, as irrigation investments will only remain
profitable if commercialization of smallholder farming takes place. Farmers will
manage the irrigation schemes through a proven institutional set-up involving
WUAs and consultative planning. These institutions are expected to remain and
become the main development engine, as is the commercialization approach. Land
consolidation will be practised using existing procedures and involving community

3 World Bank: Average deposit interest rate paid by commercial or similar banks in Malawi.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

8

organizations and the Government. The dynamics will be analysed in annual
studies.

41. Environmental and social sustainability will be achieved through implementation of
specific environmental and social management plans and necessitates resettlement
plans based on the assessments and frameworks adopted by the Government.
These frameworks will ensure that potential environmental and social impacts or
required resettlement actions be identified and addressed accordingly, before the
related irrigation schemes are constructed.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
42. Risk management will include adoption of mitigation measures and their

monitoring. Delayed programme start-up has been a common feature in the past.
Preparation of the implementation manual and a start-up plan aim to counteract
potential delays. By programme start-up, the action plan will be agreed and
earmarked funding will enable staff training and the purchase of equipment.
Another key risk is slow registration of WUAs. The registration process has been
placed in the start-up phase to complete the process before construction begins.

43. PRIDE will recruit from both the public and private sector to avoid gaps in staffing
and to obtain the best skill levels. A critical risk involves follow-up on environmental
safeguards. In line with IFAD’s 2015 Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment
Procedures (SECAP), a full assessment was carried out during design, leading to the
Environmental and Social Management Framework and a Resettlement Action
Framework. These frameworks will guide the impact assessments, to be executed
during implementation, but prior to construction of the irrigation schemes. The PCO
will host an environmental coordinator to monitor needed actions in line with
Environment and Social Management Plans and Resettlement Action Plans.

44. The establishment of irrigated command areas will require a redistribution of land.
PRIDE will benefit from the processes and experience of IRLADP. At scheme
development, farmers will be provided equitable access to land. Any agreements
will be subject to free, prior and informed consent by the affected parties, and will
include compensation for any loss of land and assets due to irrigation development.
A grievance mechanism will ensure the possibility of recourse following decisions.

45. Risks related to financial management include: (i) flow of funds is delayed due to
poor management of the designated account located within the Reserve Bank of
Malawi; (ii) MOAIWD capacity for internal audit is limited; and (iii) submission of
audit reports is delayed. The following mitigation measures will be established:
(i) the designated account will be located at a commercial bank; (ii) internal audit
will be outsourced; and (iii) the Auditor General has agreed to ensure timely
submission of audit reports.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

46. Programme design is compliant with the main IFAD policies and strategies. SECAP
has classified PRIDE as category A. In line with SECAP, as mentioned above, an
Environmental and Social Management Framework and a Resettlement Action
Framework were developed during design and adopted by the Government. They
specify the next steps in terms of environmental and social impact assessments and
follow-up actions. PRIDE is compliant with IFAD’s Natural Resources Management
Policy and Climate Change Strategy. Climate-change adaptation measures are
integrated into programme activities to address climate risks and the potential
multiplication of effects, such as damage to landscapes and infrastructure.

47. Strategies for gender mainstreaming and targeting mechanisms have been
incorporated into programme design in accordance with the IFAD Policy on Gender
Equality and Women’s Empowerment and the IFAD Targeting Policy. PRIDE will be



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

9

implemented respecting IFAD’s Policy on Improving Access to Land and Tenure
Security, the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of
Land, Fisheries and Forests and the Framework and Guidelines for Land Policy in
Africa. Before supporting any intervention that might affect land access and use
rights of communities, the programme will ensure that their free, prior and
informed consent has been solicited through inclusive consultations based on full
disclosure of the intent and scope of the activities planned and their implications.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
48. PRIDE is fully in harmony with MGDS II, which defines water development as a key

strategic area. Under this strategy, the IMPIF plans and coordinates interventions in
irrigation funded by IFAD and other donor agencies. PRIDE is also aligned with the
Government's Climate Change Investment Plan and will contribute to two
adaptation programmes: (i) strengthening catchment area and soil and water
conservation management; and (ii) improving community resilience through
agricultural production. PRIDE will coordinate fully with the ASWAp to ensure full
alignment with government investments and policies. The programme is fully
supported by the donor group on food agriculture and food security in Malawi.

Innovations and scaling upC.
49. PRIDE complements RLEEP and SAPP in the current IFAD country programme in

Malawi. It will build on and scale-up the successes of IRLADP and other irrigation
projects in terms of adopting innovative approaches that ensure full community
participation and promote equitable land access.

50. PRIDE, itself, aims to serve as a model to be scaled up in Malawi and elsewhere.
The potential for scaling up seems good, as pathways are in place – such as policy
engagement. For example, an integrated natural resources management policy
framework has been established, and the government policy on WUAs is conducive
to participatory planning. Key drivers for scaling up include financial and fiscal
space. The Government is committed to funding operations and maintenance for
larger rehabilitation works, and it will be the responsibility of WUAs to carry out
regular maintenance of the schemes. WUAs and other grass-roots organizations
represent the institutional space, an approach that has been successful in IRLADP.
PRIDE will be equipped with a strong M&E and knowledge management system to
deliver the information needed for successful scaling up of its approach and to
render it a sustainable investment.

51. In terms of innovation, PRIDE will support the newly established irrigation window
of the Malawi Innovation Challenge Fund, funded by DFID and UNDP. It is expected
that the private sector will form a consortium to provide modern irrigation
technologies and marketing channels to smallholder farmers.

Policy engagementD.
52. Policy engagement is expected for compliance with environmental and social

safeguards, impact assessments, land tenure and the building of climate resilience.
The registration and full recognition of WUAs as key institutions is critical to the
success of PRIDE. The same applies to policies regarding GAPs and extension. The
mainstreaming of improved nutrition has become a key issue for IFAD. Dialogue on
these topics will take place at all levels – from community to national – to review
compliance, gather lessons learned and refine existing regulations.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
53. A programme financing agreement between the Republic of Malawi and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is included in
appendix I.

54. The Republic of Malawi is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.



EB 2015/116/R.16/Rev.1

10

55. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
56. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Malawi in an amount equivalent to nineteen million three
hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 19,300,000) (approximately
US$26.48 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a DSF grant to the Republic
of Malawi in an amount equivalent to nineteen million three hundred and fifty
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 19,350,000) (approximately US$26.54
million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in
accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an ASAP grant to the
Republic of Malawi in an amount equivalent to five million one hundred and
fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 5,150,000) (approximately
US$7.06 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Tunisia for the
Siliana Territorial Development
Value Chain Promotion Project


Republic of Tunisia

Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain Promotion
Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Republic of Tunisia

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Water Resources and Fisheries

Total project cost: US$34.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan
(under the performance-based
allocation system [PBAS] 2016-2018):

EUR 21.6 million (equivalent to approximately US$23.6
million)

Amount of IFAD grant
(under PBAS 2016-2018):

EUR 0.46 million (equivalent to approximately US$0.5
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 18 years, including a grace period of five years and an
interest rate corresponding to the annual reference rate
set by IFAD semi-annually

Retroactive financing: For eligible expenses up to a maximum amount
equivalent to US$100,000 incurred after the date of
signing of the financing agreement up to the date of
effectiveness of the agreement

Contribution of borrower/recipient: US$7.6 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.5 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing for the Republic of Tunisia for the Siliana Territorial Development Value
Chain Promotion Project, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Tunisia for
the Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain
Promotion Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Economic and social context. Tunisia is a middle-income country in North Africa

covering an area of 164,000 km2, three quarters of which is characterized by an
aridity that is attenuated only in the northeast. The country occupies a
geo-strategic position in terms of trade outlets, particularly towards Europe and the
Mediterranean region. In 2014 the total population was 10,982,000, growing at
1.03 per cent yearly, of whom 50.2 per cent were women and 32 per cent lived in
rural areas, for an average density of 67 inhabitants per km2. However, distribution
of the population across the country is highly unequal, with 70 per cent living in the
urban and industrialized coastal area and the remaining 30 per cent in the rural and
agricultural interior.

2. Incidence of poverty. The poverty rate in Tunisia is an estimated 15.5 per cent,
meaning that some 1.6 million Tunisians live below the poverty line. The
predominantly rural regions of the centre-west and south-east are particularly
affected and increasingly lag behind the rest of the country. The Governorate of
Siliana, which is home to 223,100 people, more than half living in non-communal
environments, is among the most disadvantaged regions.

3. Agriculture and fishing. Beyond the key role it plays in the country’s food
security, this sector continues to occupy an important place in the Tunisian
economy, generating close to 10 per cent of GDP and contributing actively to job
creation – currently at 16 per cent of the national level – and to the balance of
payments through exports. Of a national total on the order of 162,000 km2, arable
land covers an estimated 10 million hectares, including 420,000 hectares under
irrigation and 75 per cent using water-saving equipment. There are currently
516,000 farms averaging 10.2 hectares. However, within this average there are
significant disparities: 53 per cent of farms are 5 hectares or less in size, while
3 per cent of farms have over 50 hectares and manage some 37 per cent of the
land. Livestock are raised by 71 per cent of farms.

4. Having benefited from a positive growth rate of 3 per cent per annum for many
years, the agriculture sector was hard hit by the crisis in global agricultural markets
that took place in 2007-2008. A recent analysis shows that the sector will need to
promote the evolution of agricultural policies and institutions, in addition to
overcoming a series of structural constraints accentuated by the effects of climate
change. A five-year plan for the sector covering the period 2016-2020 is under
preparation. Based on boosting competitiveness and the sector’s appeal for private
investors, the plan underscores promoting sustainable development of natural
resources, adaptation of production systems to climate change, value chain
development and competitiveness, modernizing farms, revising the framework of
incentives, and building the capacities of farmers’ organizations.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Strategic framework. In the absence of a consolidated strategic framework for
the sector, an effort has been made to seek the greatest possible alignment
between IFAD’s orientations and those of the Tunisian Government. A national
economic and social development plan is nearing completion and a national process
of dialogue should lead to preparation of a long-term vision for the agriculture
sector. Pending the finalization of this process, IFAD has prepared a country
strategy note to guide interventions during the period 2017-2018 until a country
strategic opportunities programme (COSOP) is prepared at the end of 2017.

6. Rationale. IFAD has intervened in the governorate by implementing two integrated
rural development projects that have laid the groundwork for ensuring the region’s
agricultural development. At the request of the Government of Tunisia, the Fund
proposes to finance a project that can build upon those gains, focusing on adding
value to the products of the region’s value chains offering the greatest potential, to
enable smallholder producers to capture any value added thus generated and to
create sustainable employment, either directly in connection with the value chains
selected or indirectly by developing related services. The choice of this type of
project is all the more justified by the fact that developing value chains and
improving their competitiveness is one of the priorities set by the five-year plan for
2016-2020.

7. The Siliana Territorial Development Value Chain Promotion Project (PROFITS) is
justified by the following: (i) the existence of significant agro-economic potential for
producing and adding value to the products of value chains, particularly those
involving tree growing, provided that smallholder operations are secured against
hazards and have their investment capacities supported at every level; (ii) the
weakness of governance and management on the part of actors upstream and
downstream of these value chains, as well as limited share of value added captured
and access to profitable markets; (iii) inadequate capacities to add value to these
products compared to current needs and potential, while investments in this area
would enable a larger share of value added to be captured locally; and (iv) the
existence of major discrepancies between producers in terms of technical and
economic skills as a result of ineffective public structures and approaches to
extension, justifying a technical and economic advisory assistance arrangement
combining the public and private spheres to benefit all value chain actors. Finally,
the approach selected is intended to generate more jobs, improve and diversify
income sources for vulnerable social groups and thus combat poverty with a view to
promoting an economy marked by social solidarity.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. Project area. The project will cover 35 sectors in five delegations in the southern

portion of the Governorate of Siliana,1 which is home to some of the country’s
poorest people. The project area comprises essentially mountain systems within the
geographical region of the Tunisian dorsal, located between 600 and 1,300 metres
above sea level and suitable for fruit tree growing and livestock breeding.

9. Target group. There are 114,122 people living in the project area. The direct
beneficiaries will be 14,000 of the most disadvantaged households
(54,500 individuals, or half the area’s inhabitants) who have knowhow and work in
the agricultural economy, small family farms with up to 2 hectares of irrigated land
or 20 hectares of rainfed land practising extensive settled and/or pastoral (in
forests) livestock breeding with herds of up to 30 head of sheep and goats,
households involved in processing and adding value to value chain products, and

1 Bargou, Makhtar, Kesra, Er-Rouhia and Siliana South.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

3

young men and women seeking employment and economic opportunities. In
addition, the project will target primary students with nutritional education.

10. Targeting strategy. Pro-poor, inclusive value chain development will be based on:
(i) creating an enabling environment for the inclusion of the poorest people,
including women and youth, by promoting communication with target groups, then
awareness-raising and training for value chain actors; (ii) geographical targeting
using the criteria indicated previously, refined by differentiation based on the
agroecological area and the value addition approach; (iii) direct targeting using
criteria to classify beneficiaries for the various activities and services set up by the
project, as discussed and defined with communities; (iv) self-targeting to identify
services and products within value chains that are adapted to each category of
beneficiaries: smallholder farmers, young people promoting small enterprises,
women; (v) quotas associated with support measures to ensure 30 per cent
participation by women and 20 per cent by young people; and (vi) operational
measures with responsible targeting, gender equality and nutrition to ensure
implementation of the project targeting strategy.

B. Project development objective
11. The overall objective of the project is to improve living conditions for vulnerable

rural people living in the southern part of Siliana, particularly by creating new
sustainable employment opportunities with value chain development and value
addition. The specific objectives are to sustainably develop value chains by taking
advantage of the diversity of unique terroirs in the region, with profitable inclusion
of organized smallholder producers, young people and women, and strengthening
the ability of smallholders to make effective and rational use of socio-economic
potential within value chains.

C. Components/outcomes
12. The project will be structured in two main components: (i) value chain promotion

and value addition; and (ii) creation of enabling conditions for value chain
development and strengthening with management/coordination arrangements.

 Component 1: Value chain promotion and value addition. The main outcome of
this component will be to enable value chain actors to identify opportunities to
develop the value chains concerned and coordinate their actions accordingly.
There are three subcomponents: (i) organizing value chain actors in production
areas; (ii) developing economic activities between value chain actors and
building capacities to add value to value chain products; and (iii) building the
actors’ professional capacities.

Subcomponent 1.1 calls for setting up spaces for consultation and dialogue
among all value chain actors and operators, in the form of value chain platforms,
leading to the participatory development of frameworks for action and the
establishment of win-win partnerships between value chain actors.

Subcomponent 1.2 will consist of supporting value chain actors to prepare and
implement business plans with other private and public actors, to develop each
value chain as a whole and to improve the overall value added and distribute it
more equitably, benefiting smallholder farmers. These business plans may
encompass a whole range of activities and may receive project support in the
form of strengthening and economic assistance to bring them to fruition. Such
activities will involve, in particular, support for farms to convert to tree growing
and engage in livestock-related activities, as well as start-up microenterprises in
production and services. All activities will be piloted by agricultural development
groups (GDAs). The subcomponent also calls for making available to existing or
future mutual agricultural services societies (SMSA), based on value chain action
frameworks, value addition units to be built and equipped with project funding.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

4

These value addition units will be managed by the SMSA, which will receive
specialized technical assistance from the project.

Subcomponent 1.3 will involve mainly capacity-building for value chain actors,
particularly GDA and SMSA.

 Component 2: Creating enabling conditions for value chain development in an
improved institutional environment, by setting up arrangements for private
technical and economic advisory assistance for producers organizations and
financing the repair or construction of infrastructure needed for value chain
development – irrigated perimeters, new tracks for market access, catchment
lakes and restructuring of rural landholdings. Within this component efforts will
also be made, through participatory policy dialogue among all actors within value
chain platforms, to support the identification by the latter of obstacles to value
chain development and propose improvements to the legal and procedural
framework to address them. There are three subcomponents: (i) setting up
sustainable arrangements for technical and economic advisory assistance and
service provision; (ii) building public infrastructure relating to the value chains;
and (iii) consultative dialogue on policy and on the legislative and regulatory
framework for value chains.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
13. PROFITS will operate under a value chain approach to promote win-win

partnerships between actors in the selected value chains and the creation of local
economic development hubs. Thus, the Government will intervene essentially in
support of organized smallholder producers by implementing two components:
(i) direct support to private value chain actors based on the implementation of their
business plans and their professionalization through capacity-building, and based
on setting up local value chain platforms as inter-professional spaces for exchange
and orientation (component 1); and (ii) indirect support to create enabling
conditions for value chain development, specifically by setting up support structures
– in particular, innovative technical and economic advisory assistance
arrangements, including management councils and physical infrastructure – and
promoting policy dialogue (component 2). Although this is not an environmental or
youth employment project per se, it will address these concerns – e.g. by
supporting the conversion of cereal growing areas to the selected value chains,
which are more labour-intensive and more environmentally friendly, with technical
advice oriented towards organic agriculture and a rational use of chemical inputs.
The value chain professionalization dynamic will open up prospects for both direct
employment for skilled labour and indirect employment in the provision of services
and advice.

B. Organizational framework
14. Project management will take place at three levels. The central coordination unit

(CCU), which already exists at the Investment Financing and Professional
Organizations Directorate (DGFIOP) of the Ministry of Agriculture, will provide
central project coordination. At the regional level, a rural development division
(RDD), or another structure responsible for project execution will be created within
the Regional Commission for Agricultural Development in Siliana (CRDA). The RDD
will be assisted locally by light project implementation coordination structures
based on territorial outreach units. Project management and socio-professional
organization capacities of these structures will be strengthened with external
technical assistance.

15. For steering and coordination, plans call for setting up three coordination
structures: (i) a national steering committee; (ii) a regional coordination and
steering committee; and (iii) a local coordination committee set up for each



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

5

delegation. In addition, a regional technical committee will be set up to coordinate
the steering of arrangements for technical and economic advisory assistance.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, learning and knowledge
management

16. Planning. Through the value chain platforms supported by the required technical
assistance and specialized expertise, plans call for developing an action framework
for each value chain, then business plans for farmers organizations or other
operators within the value chains outlining investments, implementation modalities
and physical and financial participation by the different actors. These planning
instruments will identify the investments with the best returns for the target
population, with business plans for different types of upstream and downstream
investment.

17. The annual workplan and budget (AWP/B) will be prepared by DPCDR jointly
with the CRDA technical services and project partners, based on the design report,
COSTAB projections adjusted to reflect actual figures, value chain action
frameworks, priority needs of beneficiaries formulated within the platforms,
implementation capacities, budget allocations and recommendations by supervision
missions.

18. The M&E system will be set up on the basis of the system implemented by DGFIOP
for the Natural Resource Management Project (PGRN 2) funded by the World Bank,
already installed for the IFAD-funded second phase of the Agropastoral
Development and Local Initiatives Promotion Programme for the South-East
(PRODESUD-II) and the Agropastoral Value Chains Project in the Governorate of
Médenine (PRODEFIL). This system will make it possible to define: (i) planning for
activities and budgets; (ii) monitoring of physical and financial gains and their
impact on project management and logical framework indicators; (iii) evaluation of
results effectiveness by analysing outcomes and achievement times, and efficiency
based on performance on the cost of achievements; (iv) evaluation of results
disaggregated by specific target group, e.g. women and young people; and
(v) monitoring of disbursements. The system will be adapted during year one of the
project to take account of these specificities and indicators of results and impact
from the logical framework and the Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS). Preparation of the baseline study and adaptation of the M&E system will be
undertaken using retroactive financing so that the baseline study is available prior
to actual project start-up.

19. Knowledge management. The project will disseminate innovations and lessons
learned at workshops, seminars and round tables and in radio and television
broadcasts, as well as opinion surveys of beneficiaries on the effects and impact of
project achievements, publication and dissemination of documents, brochures and
other media on the project and its results – which will serve as sources of
information and orientation for the preparation and planning of other development
projects in similar areas elsewhere in the country. A website will be created for this
project.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. The flow of funds for the project will proceed as provided

for in the financing agreement through the designated account. The Siliana CRDA,
delegated by the Ministry of Investment and International Cooperation and the
Ministry of Agriculture, will issue disbursement and payment orders drawn on IFAD
accounts and designated accounts at the Central Bank of Tunisia. Two designated
accounts will be opened at the bank, one for the loan and one for the grant.

21. Based on the experience acquired by IFAD in the country, the Government’s
intention to combat corruption and the reforms under way on fiscal management,
risk evaluation in connection with financial management and governance indicators



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

6

shows that the overall fiduciary risk is considered moderate. This risk will be
mitigated with a series of measures set as disbursement conditions: (i) drafting of a
decree to set up the regional development planning and coordination unit within the
RDD or another structure responsible for project execution within the CRDA;
(ii) designation, in agreement with IFAD, of key project staff, namely the project
coordinator, value chain manager, five local coordinators, an M&E officer and
accountant; (iii) installation of integrated accounting management and M&E
software; and (iv) preparation of an operational and financial management manual
for the project.

22. Disbursements. The IFAD loan and grant proceeds will be disbursed over six
years, based on the disbursement categories and amounts specified in annex 2 of
the financing agreement. Withdrawals of funds from the loan and grant accounts
will take place on the basis of the corresponding contracts and invoices. Other
eligible expenses will be justified by certified expense statements, and supporting
documents will be kept for verification by the external auditor and supervision
missions.

23. Procurement. Project procurement will be done in accordance with the provisions
of the IFAD procurement guidelines approved by the Executive Board in September
2010. As part of the PRODEFIL design, approved in 2014, IFAD evaluated national
regulations on procurement to ensure their compatibility with IFAD guidelines.
Following the evaluation it was decided that the national regulations could be used.
Activities under direct management will not be financed under the project. The
borrower will submit a procurement plan to the Fund each year prior to the end of
October including proposed contracts, procurement methods and procedures for
prior review by IFAD as applicable.

24. Audit. The borrower will, in accordance with the procedures and criteria set forth in
the Fund’s project audit guidelines, have an audit of the accounts done each fiscal
year by the Comptroller General reporting to the Ministry of Finance and agreed by
the Fund, and will submit a certified copy of the audit report to the Fund within six
months following the end of the year under review. The report will also contain an
opinion on procurement modalities for contracts financed under the project. The
DPCDR will prepare semi-annual financial statements on the project activities, and
will ensure that the accounting books are kept in accordance with government
practices and procedures agreed by IFAD. In addition, internal control will be
provided by the relevant services of the Ministry of Agriculture, supported by the
Comptroller at the regional level. In view of the frequent delays in submission to
IFAD of the final audit report for projects under way, IFAD will undertake the
necessary monitoring and rigorous application of the relevant provisions.

25. Governance. The Tunisian procurement system is aligned with the fundamental
principles of procurement for IFAD-funded projects. These are as follows: open
competition, equity, impartiality, integrity, transparency, good governance and
anti-corruption measures. The general rule for awarding contracts is to use open
tender procedures, and direct contracting is both highly limited and strictly
regulated.

E. Supervision
26. The project will be supervised on an annual basis by IFAD, with support missions as

needed. Special attention will be paid to eligibility criteria for project activities in
terms of targeting poor people, particularly women and young people. The
composition of IFAD’s supervision and monitoring missions will also reflect the
status of progress made on the project components and activities, targeting and
gender equity considerations, as well as lacunae in terms of the project’s
organizational structures.



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

7

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project cost
27. The total cost of the project, over a six-year duration and including physical and

financial contingencies, is estimated at US$34.245 million. Base costs are estimated
at US$30.806 million, or 89.9 per cent of total cost. Physical and financial
contingencies represent US$3.439 million, or 10 per cent of total cost and
11 per cent of base costs. Investment costs, in the amount of US$31.5 million,
represent 92 per cent of total cost. Operating costs are just US$2.772 million, or
8 per cent of total cost.
Table 1
Project cost by component and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/
counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Value chain promotion
and value addition 8 982 68.6 218 1.7 1 717 13.1 2 184 16.7 13 101 38.2
2. Creation of enabling
conditions for value chain
development 13 432 76.7 261 1.5 827 4.7 2 982 17.0 17 502 51.0
3. Coordination and
management 1 248 33.3 24 0.6 - - 2 467 66.9 3 687 10.8

Total 23 610 68.9 502 1.5 2 544 7.4 7 633 22.2 34 289 100.0

B. Project financing
28. The project will be financed as follows: an IFAD loan on ordinary terms in the

amount of US$23.6 million, or 68.9 per cent of total project cost; an IFAD grant for
US$0.5 million, or 1.5 per cent of total cost; a contribution by the Government in
the amount of US$7.6 million, or 22.2 per cent of total cost, and contribution by
beneficiaries in the amount of US$2.5 million, or 7.4 per cent of total project cost.

29. It was agreed that recruitment of technical assistance providers by the project may
take place upon signature of the financing agreement. Reimbursement for technical
assistance will be made once the agreement has entered into force and on the
condition that the expenditures incurred meet the criteria for admissibility under
section 4.08 of the General Conditions for Agricultural Financing.
Table 2
Project cost by category of expenditure and source of financing
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Category of expenditure
IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Consulting services 4 043 79.0 502 9.8 11 0.2 533 11.0 5 119 14.9
2. Training 1 022 89.0 - - - - 126 11.0 1 149 3.4
3. Equipment and
materials 6 761 63.3 - - 2 132 20 1 783 16.7 10 676 31.1
4. Vehicles 480 83.3 - - 96 16.7 576 1.7
5. Civil engineering works 11 305 82.4 - - 130 0.9 2 292 16.7 13 727 40.0
6. Operating fund - - - - 271 100 271 0.8
7. Salaries and benefits - - - - - - 594 100.0 594 1.7
8. Operating and
maintenance - - - - - - 2 177 100.0 2 177 6.3

Total 23 610 68.9 502 1.5 2 544 7.4 7 633 22.2 34 289 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the project is 17.1 per cent, which

is considered extremely satisfactory for a project that addresses the challenging



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

8

problems of natural resource management in the marginalized areas of Tunisia. All
project costs have been taken into consideration, including those of the
components for which not all benefits have been quantified, such as rural tracks,
groundwater protection and recharge, and piezometric monitoring of groundwater
aquifers.

D. Sustainability
31. The sustainability of the project achievements will be ensured by means of:

(i) capacity-building for the administration to internalize the value chain approach
and make value chains operate effectively; (ii) support and assistance to producers’
organizations to enable them to fully take on a leading role in the process of value
chain promotion and liaison between their members and value chain operators,
particularly commercial operators, and to sustainably manage the value addition
units made available to them; (iii) facilitating the development of sustainable
win-win partnerships among value chain actors and operators; (iv) supporting
promoters of small enterprises created and supported by the project to enable them
to manage them profitably and sustainably; (v) making the advisory assistance
arrangements set up by the project permanent by integrating them within the
structure of the administration in charge of agricultural extension; (vi) undertaking
policy dialogue on improving the value chain environment so that the private sector
can invest in the various value chain links, particularly downstream; and
(vii) capacity-building for GDA to properly manage and maintain the public
infrastructure financed by the project.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
32. The main risks identified and measures planned to mitigate them are as follows:

(i) inadequate human resources, in terms of number and skills, within CRDA and
the executing agencies, to be mitigated by making use of multi-disciplinary
technical assistance and strengthening the technical services of executing agencies;
(ii) uncertainty as to the decentralization process provided for in the constitution, to
be undertaken in the coming years, which could lead to a review of the powers and
remit of central and local structures. To address this risk, plans call for a midterm
review of the project’s organization chart based on the results of this process;
(iii) fragility of the socio-professional fabric and limited capacities of staff, to be
mitigated with capacity-building and support for these structures by specialized
assistance throughout project execution; (iv) ecological and environmental risks
relating to setting up new crushing units and upgrading abattoirs, which could be
mitigated by performing environmental impact assessments and adopting specific
treatment measures for the crushing units and abattoirs; and (v) risks relating to
the durability of the private advisory assistance arrangements, to be addressed
with a rigorous participatory selection of service providers, based on realistic
business plans and taking into account demand for advice, awareness-raising of
GDA and SMSA and informal groups on gradually taking over the costs of private
advice, support to GDA and SMSA for implementation of forms of remuneration for
private advice based on membership fees and charges added to the prices of
products delivered by their members.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
33. The project is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework and will contribute to an

inclusive and sustainable rural transformation by: (i) building the productive
capacity of poor rural people within the selected value chains; (ii) raising the profits
of rural poor people through their market participation, support for business plan
development and relations with value chain actors, particularly market actors;
(iii) strengthening environmental sustainability and resilience of rural poor people
to climate change. The principles of the Fund’s policies on targeting, empowerment,



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

9

gender equality, innovation and knowledge transfer, scaling up and partnership are
equally upheld by this project.

B. Alignment and harmonization
34. Contribution by the project to country strategy objectives. The overall design

and intervention approach are fully aligned with the vision of implementing the
priority orientations of the Strategic Plan for National Development 2016-2020 now
nearing completion, in terms of poverty reduction, interregional balance and
improving youth employment. To this end, the development of agricultural value
chains involving the different actors and preserving the interests of vulnerable
groups is crucial to achieve those objectives, particularly in regions affected by
poverty, unemployment and degradation of natural resources.

35. Complementarity. The preparation of this project coincided with the formulation
of three new projects to operate mainly in Siliana but also in other locations, which
also call for supporting the development of agricultural and forest value chains.
They are as follows: (i) the Natural Resource Management Programme in
Vulnerable Rural Territories, piloted by the Agricultural Land Use and Protection
Directorate and supported by the French Development Agency (AFD) and the
French Global Environment Facility (FFEM); (ii) the Forest and Pastoral Value Chain
Development Project, coordinated by the Forestry Directorate and supported by the
World Bank; and (iii) the EPARD programme financed by the European Union. The
Governorate of Siliana is also involved in part through the Technical Assistance
Project for Sustainable Agricultural Development supported by the German Agency
for International Cooperation (GIZ). For these projects, value chain development is
an important lever for promoting both agricultural and non-agricultural activities
and strengthening the livelihoods and incomes of vulnerable people.

C. Innovation and scaling up
36. Innovations. The project as a whole is innovative in that it introduces a new

approach – the value chain approach – to territorial development. The main
innovations are as follows: (i) initiatives between value chain operators, such as
platforms bringing together value chain actors and operators leading to win-win
partnerships, with business plans materializing in the form of contracts between
operators at different links of the value chains; (ii) promotion of policy lobbying on
challenges facing value chains in connection with territorial development;
(iii) technical and economic advisory assistance arrangements for small-scale
operators to facilitate ownership of the value chain approach by producers and
improve their production standards and farm management; (iv) making available
pilot value addition units to groups of farmers (SMSA), to be managed by them;
and (v) use of specialized private technical assistance to implement the project.

37. The project will make the best use of these innovations through scaling up by
identifying interventions to be consolidated and expanded, scale of intervention,
evolution in the number of beneficiaries in the short, medium and long term;
drivers of expansion such as leaders and contextual incentives; secured resources
such as financing and natural, strategic, institutional, organizational and political
resources, partnerships and participatory knowledge management; and the
trajectories and pathways of such an approach.

D. Policy engagement
38. The value chain approach as a lever of sustainable territorial development is still

incipient, and the current vision is essentially centred around adding value to
certain strategic products. In terms of policy dialogue, actions to strengthen
farmers’ organizations and to promote and develop value chains will be analysed
and proposals formulated in order to contribute to: (i) initiatives and win-win
partnerships between value chain operators; (ii) synergies between territorial
development and value chains; (iii) adapted technical and economic advisory



EB 2016/LOT/P.15/Rev.1

10

assistance arrangements for family farms to promote ownership of the value chain
approach and improve farm management; (iv) management of value addition units
by groups of farmers (SMSA); and (v) setting up value chain platforms to put
forward reform proposals.

VI. Legal instruments and powers
39. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Tunisia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

40. The Republic of Tunisia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Tunisia in an amount equivalent to EUR twenty-one million six
hundred thousand (EUR 21,600,000), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Tunisia in an amount equivalent to EUR four hundred and sixty thousand
(EUR 460,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially
in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
















President’s report

Proposed grant to the Republic of Zimbabwe
for the Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization
Programme


Republic of Zimbabwe

Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Republic of Zimbabwe

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Mechanisation and Irrigation
Development

Total programme cost: US$51.5 million

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 18.3 million
(equivalent to approximately US$25.5 million)

Cofinancier(s): OPEC Fund for International Development

Amount of cofinancing: US$15.0 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be confirmed

Contribution of recipient: US$7.7 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.3 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Republic of Zimbabwe for the Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization
Programme, as contained in paragraph 53.

Proposed grant to the Republic of Zimbabwe for the
Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Zimbabwe is a landlocked country with a total area of approximately

390,757 square kilometres. The country’s population is estimated at 14.6 million
people (2014) and projected to grow to 20.3 million people in 2020. With a Human
Development Index of 0.509, Zimbabwe ranks 155th of 188 countries. Life
expectancy stands at 57.8 years, and stunting prevalence in children is an
estimated 27.6 per cent (2014). While still among the highest globally, the
prevalence of HIV has declined from 25 per cent in 1997 to 15 per cent in 2014.

2. Economic growth slowed from 4.5 per cent in 2013 to an estimated 1 per cent in
2015 as a result of weak domestic demand, high public debt, tight liquidity
conditions, drought, poor infrastructure and institutional weaknesses. Agriculture
provides direct and indirect livelihoods for over 70 per cent of Zimbabwe’s
population and supports one third of the formal labour force. Agriculture generates
between 15 and 18 per cent of gross domestic product, and contributes over
40 per cent of national export earnings.

3. The proportion of the population living below the national poverty line is estimated
at 72 per cent (84 per cent in rural areas). Zimbabwe’s recurrent droughts and food
security issues have remained dire over the past decade, exposing millions of
people to food insecurity and poverty. An estimated 1.5 million people – 16 per
cent of the rural population – will be unable to meet their minimum food needs and
will require humanitarian assistance in 2015/16. This is a 164 per cent increase
over the 2013/14 season.

4. Zimbabwe’s relations with the international community have been difficult for
years, mainly due to land reforms and political conflicts. There are now positive
signs of the international community re-engaging with the Government of
Zimbabwe. The Government has made progress on negotiations with international
financial institutions, notably the International Monetary Fund and the African
Development Bank, to settle the country’s arrears. In December 2015, IFAD’s
Executive Board approved Zimbabwe’s debt rescheduling proposal in the amount of
US$23.1 million.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Zimbabwe has one of the highest levels of water development for irrigation in the
region. Evidence suggests that households in smallholder irrigation schemes are
better off in terms of food production, income, nutrition and general well-being than
households relying on rainfed agriculture. In addition to achieving higher yields,
irrigators are able to increase crop production and incomes during the dry winter
season, when rainfed production is impossible.



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

2

6. More than 50 per cent of smallholder irrigation schemes in Zimbabwe are either not
functional or only partly functional. These schemes have been caught in a vicious
cycle of build/operate/rehabilitate, and are heavily dependent on government and
donor funding.

7. A common feature is that rehabilitation has primarily focused on infrastructure
development and repairs, often without the corresponding investments in farmers’
organization and empowerment, water management, agricultural production
activities and market linkages. Some schemes have been operating for many years,
even decades, many of them at sub-optimal levels. There is a general lack of
community ownership and participation in the management of irrigation assets.
While irrigation management committees (IMCs) exist in all schemes, and are seen
as a standard requirement, they do not have the formal status to enforce by-laws.

8. Decades of experience in irrigation development, both in Zimbabwe and elsewhere,
have evidenced the need for an integrated approach to ensure commercial and
environmental sustainability. This is the rationale behind the design of the
Smallholder Irrigation Revitalization Programme (SIRP). Without an increased
market orientation, improved access to inputs, and the adoption of good
agricultural practices to boost productivity, farmers cannot create the revenue
needed to increase their income and defray the operation and maintenance (O&M)
of irrigation schemes. Similarly, unless wider socioeconomic and biophysical
considerations are taken into account, equity issues will limit impact to a small
number of people, and environmental issues will undermine the overall success of
the programme.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
9. Programme area: SIRP will revitalize 6,100 hectares (ha) in about 152 existing

smallholder irrigation schemes, located mainly in communal and old resettlement
areas in the semi-arid sections of natural regions III, IV and V in the provinces of
Manicaland, Masvingo, Matabeleland South, and Midlands. The programme’s target
area contains about 47 per cent of the country’s estimated total irrigation-equipped
area of about 13,000 ha.

10. Target group: SIRP will target 29,750 smallholder poor rural households,
equivalent to about 148,750 people. Women (heads of household, wives and young
women) will account for at least 50 per cent of the target group, in line with their
participation in irrigated agriculture and off-farm activities. SIRP beneficiaries will
include: (i) 15,250 households (76,250 people) holding an average of 0.4 ha in
irrigation schemes; (ii) 12,500 households (62,500 people) with no access to
irrigation in the greater-scheme and subcatchment areas relying on rainfed
agriculture and livestock; (iii) 2,000 youth, who will be involved in production,
aggregation, marketing and service provision and will build small- and
medium-scale businesses along value chains; and (iv) 500 extension service
providers that will improve their capacity for more responsive and efficient service
delivery.

B. Programme development objective
11. The overall goal of SIRP is that rural households achieve food and nutrition security

and are resilient to climate change effects and economic shocks in the programme
districts. The programme development objective is that rural households
sustainably increase their income in schemes and adjacent rainfed areas supported
by the programme.

12. The programme goal will be achieved by revitalizing existing high potential
irrigation schemes and their adjacent rainfed areas (subcatchment areas), which
will result in: (i) an increase in production and productivity of selected



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

3

commodities; (ii) an increase in annual household incomes; (iii) increased market
integration; and (iv) a smallholder agricultural production system that is better
adapted to climate change.

C. Components/outcomes
13. SIRP’s structure is articulated around two complementary components, the first

focusing on sustainable development of smallholder irrigation, and the second on
climate-smart agriculture and market access.

14. Component 1: Sustainable smallholder irrigation development will focus on
revitalizing existing irrigation schemes and rendering them fully operational,
thereby contributing to improving the incomes of targeted households. This will be
achieved by rehabilitating 6,100 ha of existing irrigation schemes in the four target
provinces, while financing further scheme feasibility and design studies nationwide.
It will entail expanding the area of existing smallholder irrigation schemes under
effective O&M by irrigators and their water users organizations (WUOs), by
preparing and implementing revitalization plans at scheme level. This will be
complemented by capacity-building for government departments to provide quality
service to smallholder irrigators, and engaging in policy dialogue on issues affecting
small-scale irrigators.

15. Component 2: Climate-smart agriculture and market access aims to improve
productivity and sustainable crop production under both rainfed and irrigated
conditions, through improved cropping intensity on selected schemes and increased
adoption of improved varieties, fertilizers, good agricultural practices and
climate-smart agriculture practices and technologies. This component will seek to
improve village natural resources management planning, including soil and water
conservation in adjacent rainfed areas, by preparing and implementing greater
scheme agricultural plans. A natural resources management facility will be
established to provide matching grants to farmers in rainfed areas to undertake
income-generating projects that utilize natural resources in a sustainable manner
and complement soil and water conservation technologies. This component will
focus on improving farm profitability and household incomes by increasing market
access and linkages between the different value chain actors for both irrigation and
rainfed farmers. Moreover, this component will improve access to and use of
financial services through enhanced financial literacy of farmers and their
organizations and strengthening of community-based financial institutions. This
component will promote good nutritional practices and gender mainstreaming as
part of agricultural and market support. This will be complemented by
capacity-building for government departments to enable them to provide quality
services to smallholder farmers, and engage in policy dialogue on issues affecting
smallholder farmers.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
16. The proposed principles of engagement for programme design are as follows:

(a) In line with IFAD’s mandate, SIRP will target productive poor smallholders
who are currently engaging in irrigation as well as poor and vulnerable
smallholders engaged in rainfed farming in the adjacent rainfed areas;

(b) Without compromising on food security, the programme will support the move
towards smallholder irrigated farming as a business in order to enable
sufficient financial returns to targeted smallholders, long-term sustainability of
investment and replicability/scalability of the smallholder irrigation
development approach;

(c) SIRP will adopt a participatory approach. The programme will support farmers’
own development efforts, based on the preparation of a revitalization plan and



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

4

a greater scheme agricultural plan by farmers/irrigators through their
organizations;

(d) Investment will be made on a cost-sharing basis, with capital expenditure
financed mainly by the programme, and farmers fully covering the O&M of
their scheme, including the cost of water and depreciation of movable
equipment;

(e) The programme will prioritize the rehabilitation of existing schemes while
verifying adequate water availability at pre-feasibility stage, market proximity
to sell produce at competitive prices and interest on the part of the private
sector and financial institutions to work with the scheme or cluster, and
institutional arrangements;

(f) SIRP will engage with the private sector, such as off-takers, input suppliers
and financial institutions, early on in the process of prioritizing schemes to be
rehabilitated, in order to ensure viable linkages with input and output markets
and support services during implementation; and

(g) The Government’s capacity to provide services to smallholders will be
strengthened, while supporting the implementation of different business
models and business relations between farmers and the private sector.

B. Organizational framework
17. The lead implementing agency will be the Ministry of Agriculture, Mechanisation and

Irrigation Development (MAMID). The Ministry will execute the programme and
ensure that it is aligned with sector priorities and complements the
programmes/projects and initiatives of other development partners supporting the
sector. Implementation responsibilities rest with the Department of Irrigation (DoI)
for component 1, while the Department of Agriculture Technical and Extension
Services (AGRITEX) will lead component 2. At the provincial and district levels,
programme coordination will be provided by provincial and district agricultural
coordination committees, respectively.

18. A multi-sector stakeholder programme steering committee, chaired by the
Permanent Secretary of MAMID, will be established to provide overall programme
oversight, direction and advice. A dedicated and competitively recruited programme
coordination unit (PCU) will report to the Permanent Secretary, MAMID. The PCU
will be responsible for day-to-day management and ensure effective coordination of
DoI and AGRITEX activities under the programme. The PCU will be responsible for
consolidating annual workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs), procurement plans, and
progress and financial reports received from the districts and implementing entities,
and will coordinate the procurement of goods, works and services. The PCU will also
take charge of monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and provide support to
implementation and supervision missions. The PCU will serve as programme
steering committee secretariat.

19. A programme technical committee, comprising of staff drawn from government
technical departments, will provide technical support and advice to the PCU on
planning and progress issues.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

20. The main planning tools for SIRP will comprise the updated logical framework/M&E
framework, including indicators and targets, and the results-based AWP/B. The
logical framework provides indicators and targets for the programme as a whole,
whereas the RB-AWP/B will be used as the primary planning tool to set annual
targets and allocate financial resources. The financial and physical execution of the
RB-AWPB will be regularly monitored and reported on.

21. The M&E system will be the key source of comprehensive and reliable data to
inform improved planning and decision-making during implementation. It will be



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

5

relied upon to inform stakeholders on SIRP performance. Results generated by the
results and impact management system indicators will be reported back to IFAD on
an annual basis. The PCU will be responsible for ensuring a well-functioning M&E
system.

22. A baseline study will be designed and carried out at programme start-up in
pre-identified schemes. Baselines will be scheme specific as per outcome of the
selection process. The baseline studies will form the basis for assessing programme
effectiveness and results achievement. The household survey will be repeated at
mid-term and upon programme completion.

23. SIRP learning systems will involve monthly, quarterly, bi-annual and annual review
meetings/workshops, capturing information on progress, lessons and best practices
and finding solutions to implementation constraints at different levels. These review
platforms will serve as a learning event, as well as to monitor and influence the
process through which results are supposed to be achieved.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
24. Financial management. A financial management assessment carried out at

design assessed the overall fiduciary control risk as high. Consequently, the
proposed financial management arrangements for SIRP include appropriate risk
mitigation measures, inter alia: (i) competitive recruitment of a dedicated
programme accountant, and assignment of qualified accounting staff at the
provincial level; (ii) mobilization of additional technical assistance during start-up to
assist with the establishment of systems and financial procedures to be included in
the programme implementation manual; (iii) use of accounting software; and
(iv) the use of programme-specific designated accounts, to ensure that the residual
programme implementation rating will be medium risk.

25. MAMID’s Director of Finance and Administration will be responsible for ensuring
adequate financial management arrangements throughout SIRP implementation.
The operational day-to-day financial management functions, including budgeting,
accounting, funds flow management, internal control, financial reporting and
ensuring timely external audits, will be the responsibility of the PCU’s programme
accountant overseen by the Chief Accountant, DoI.

26. Programme audits. To provide assurances of strong internal controls, MAMID will
include regular internal auditing of the programme in its audit plans. During the
initial years an independent audit firm acceptable to the Fund will perform the
external audit, until such time as the Office of the Auditor General has been
appropriately assessed.

27. Funds flow and disbursement arrangements. Two separate designated
accounts operated and maintained by the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Development will be opened to receive programme funds from IFAD and the OPEC
Fund for International Development (OFID), respectively. Only one operational
account will be opened for settlements of advances to implementing agencies and
programme expenditures incurred. The PCU will manage and operate the
operational account.

28. Start-up costs. An advance may be requested to cover start-up costs for eligible
expenditure to be incurred between the date of entry into force of the financing
agreement and fulfilment of the conditions precedent to withdrawal.

29. Procurement. All procurement under SIRP will be carried out in accordance with
national procurement procedures, to the extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s
project procurement guidelines. A procurement assessment of MAMID undertaken
during SIRP design showed several inconsistencies between national and IFAD
regulations, concerning bid registers, bidding documents, contract administration,
procurement planning and selection of procurement methods. To address
procurement risks, a procurement specialist in the PCU will be responsible for



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

6

ensuring full compliance with IFAD requirements. The latter will be duly spelled out
in the financing agreement, letter to the recipient and programme implementation
manual.

E. Supervision
30. The SIRP will be directly supervised by IFAD. Direct supervision will encompass loan

and grant administration, procurement reviews, audit reviews, and supervision and
implementation support missions. Joint supervision missions with the Government
will be carried out bi-annually and will focus primarily on fiduciary aspects, physical
progress and the quality of programme implementation. In conjunction with
supervision, implementation support will be provided by IFAD to help ensure the
efficient achievement of programme objectives. Additional implementation support
and backstopping will be provided during the programme start-up phase to enhance
technical capacities, assist with the establishment of implementation arrangements
and assist in the setting up of required systems (e.g. M&E and financial
management). The proposed OFID cofinancing will be administered by IFAD.

IV. Programme costs, financing and benefits
A. Programme costs
31. Total programme costs to be incurred during the seven-year implementation

period, including price and physical contingencies, duties and taxes, are estimated
at US$51.5 million. This includes base costs amounting to US$47.6 million and
estimated physical and price contingencies in the amount of US$3.9 million
(8 per cent of the base costs). Estimated foreign exchange expenditure is about
US$15.2 million (30 per cent of total programme costs), whereas duties and taxes
amount to US$8.1 million (16 per cent). Investment costs represent 89 per cent of
the base costs, with recurrent costs accounting for the remaining 11 per cent.
Programme management costs are 4 per cent of total programme costs.

32. Local inflation rates were estimated at 1.3 per cent per annum in 2017 and
2 per cent per annum thereafter until 2023. Foreign inflation has been set at
2 per cent for seven years, based on the World Bank Manufactures Unit Value
Index. Taxes and duties were estimated using information provided by the
Zimbabwe Revenue Authority. The Government of Zimbabwe will either waive
duties, excises and taxes or directly finance their cost.
Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD grant OFID Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Sustainable smallholder irrigation
development 11 511 35 13 767 42 2 238 7 4 961 15 32 477

2. Climate-smart agriculture and
market access 12 253 73 1 233 7 1 045 6 2 333 14 16 864

3. Programme coordination 1 736 80 - - - - 441 20 2 176

Total 25 500 50 15 000 29 3 283 6 7 735 15 51 518

B. Programme financing
33. SIRP will be financed by the Government of Zimbabwe, programme beneficiaries,

IFAD and, pending official confirmation, OFID. IFAD will finance 50 per cent
(US$25.5 million) of overall programme costs on grant terms, under the Debt
Sustainability Framework. The Government will finance taxes and duties



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

7

(US$7.9 million), representing 15 per cent of total costs.1 Beneficiaries will
contribute 6 per cent of total programme costs, US$3.3 million, in the form of
financial contributions to O&M for rehabilitated infrastructure, cost sharing of
post-harvest technologies, and in-kind contribution to soil and water conservation
activities. It is anticipated that OFID will finance 29 per cent2 (US$15.0 million) of
programme costs, covering civil works related to irrigation rehabilitation and road
improvement.
Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD OFID Beneficiaries Government Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1.Consultancies 4 911 90 - - - - 546 10 5 457
2. Equipment and materials 2 475 98 - - - - 56 2 2 531
3. Goods, equipment and inputs 2 009 71 - - 697 25 108 4 2 814
4. Workshops 545 85 - - - - 96 15 641
5. Training 4 315 85 - - - - 762 15 5 077
6. Vehicles 1 091 45 - - - - 1 336 55 2 427
7. Works 7 621 28 15 000 56 348 1 3 931 15 26 899
8. Salaries and allowances 387 75 - - - - 129 25 515
9. Operating costs 2 145 42 - - 2 238 43 774 15 5 157

Total 25 500 50 15 000 29 3 283 6 7 735 15 51 518

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. SIRP will generate substantial economic and social benefits. The main quantifiable

benefit is the increase in production and productivity to be achieved with higher
yields following investments in the revitalization of irrigation schemes and in
farm-level training on both irrigated and rainfed plots. Cropping patterns on
irrigated plots will favour market-led production of higher value crops, leading to
increased farm incomes. The introduction of post-harvest technology and
infrastructure, as well as training in post-harvest handling, is expected to result in
reduced post-harvest losses. Investments in the rehabilitation of approximately
150 kilometres of access roads will reduce transport costs and enhance market
access for targeted smallholders.

35. Moreover, the programme is likely to generate a range of indirect benefits, such as
the creation of off-farm jobs in the service and marketing sectors, increased market
participation and food availability, institutional strengthening and policy changes.

36. The proposed investment shows robust financial results at both crop and farm level,
demonstrating clear incentives for farmers to participate and financial sustainability
for the irrigation scheme. The base case economic internal rate of return (EIRR) is
estimated at 25.9 per cent. The benefit/cost ratio is estimated at 2.29, and the
payback period at 7.3 years. The economic net present value is estimated at
US$41.7 million. The EIRR is robust to changes in the expected benefits or costs.
Switching values were calculated for incremental benefits and incremental costs.
Benefits would have to be reduced by 60 per cent or costs increased by
152 per cent for SIRP to become economically unviable. Such variations in costs
and benefits are unlikely to occur. Adoption rates ranging from 65 per cent to
85 per cent have been assumed in the cost benefit analysis.

1 The estimate of taxes and duties was based on the rates in effect at the time of the design. In conformity with the principle that
no taxes or duties would be financed out of the proceeds of the IFAD and OFID financing, any future changes in the rates and/or
structures of taxes and duties would apply to the programme.
2 If OFID funding does not materialize, alternative sources of funding will be sought by the Government of Zimbabwe.



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

8

D. Sustainability
37. The long-term sustainability of investments in irrigated infrastructure will be

ensured as follows: first, prior to investment a diagnostic study of the key issues
affecting scheme performance needs to be carried out with a high degree of
participation by the targeted farmers. This study will identify the root causes of
system failure and allow SIRP to adequately target investments. Second,
interventions will take into account larger natural resource management issues to
ensure environmental sustainability. By investing in community-based natural
resources management in adjacent rainfed areas and linking them with income
generating activities, SIRP proactively deals with potential environmental issues
whilst also ensuring a longer life time for the scheme itself. Third, the programme
will invest in building adequate capacity at all levels as required to sustainably
operate and maintain schemes, manage finances and effectively prevent or resolve
any social conflicts related to access to land or water.

38. Zimbabwe’s rural population is exposed to the effects of climate change, as the
recent drought showed. The proposed programme interventions are designed to
minimize those impacts. Revitalized irrigated agriculture becomes a key adaptation
pathway to respond to increasing intra-seasonal variability in the water supply.
Water-use efficiency will be improved by reducing conveyance losses and by
training farmers on irrigation water management. When designing extensions to
existing schemes, the increased crop water requirements due to increased
evapotranspiration will be assessed to determine potential irrigable area. The
selection of new schemes to be studied will be informed by the National Adaptation
Plan, currently under development, in order to select those areas most crucially
affected by climate change. Interventions in the adjacent rainfed lands aim to
restore the natural resource base and use it in a more sustainable way, thereby
increasing resilience to shocks. These interventions will help protect the irrigation
schemes from silting up and restore water bodies.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. The programme design prioritized risk identification and management to ensure a

successful re-engagement of IFAD in Zimbabwe and the sustainability of the
proposed interventions. The main approach has been simplified design and
implementation arrangements to limit the programme’s exposure. Measures in
financial management and procurement are proposed to manage remaining risks
deemed acceptable or inevitable.

40. Macro-economic and political instabilities, however, remain beyond programme
control. Other key risks to programme success have been identified as follows:
(i) non-fulfilment of IFAD arrears settlement; (ii) non-availability of cofinancing
from OFID; (iii) programme implementation delays; (iv) limited responsiveness of
service providers; (v) inability of farmers to contribute to initial commitment and
operational costs; (vi) effects of climate change; and (vii) market constraints.

41. The respective mitigation measures for the above risks include: (i) commitment by
the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe and the Ministry of Finance and Economic
Development to ensure liquidity to settle arrears as they fall due; (ii) close
follow-up by the Government of Zimbabwe with OFID; (iii) engagement of technical
assistance during programme start-up to help set up financial management
systems and address pre-disbursement conditions; (iv) capacity-building for public
sector service providers, and engagement of private-sector service providers under
performance-based contracts; (v) targeting schemes where farmers have
demonstrated willingness and ability to commit to operational costs; (vi) integration
of climate change effects into the planning and design of irrigation investments;
and (vii) improving farmers’ access to information and promoting value addition at
scheme level while establishing linkages to markets.



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

9

42. Based on the 2015 Transparency International Global Corruption Perceptions Index
score of 21, the country has been rated as high risk. A 2015 follow-on World Bank
financial management assessment indicated that improvements have taken place in
recent years but recommended a number of reforms. As provided in paragraph
24 above, the programme’s design arrangements include key financial management
safeguards to be adopted during implementation.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
43. SIRP design is fully aligned with all IFAD strategic objectives set for the

2016-2025 period.3 Strategies for gender mainstreaming and targeting have been
incorporated in programme design in accordance with the IFAD Policy on Targeting
and the Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment. All activities under
SIRP will comply with the IFAD Policy on Improving Access to Land and Tenure
Security. Proposed activities in rural finance are consistent with IFAD’s Rural
Finance Policy.

44. For environmental and social purposes, SIRP is classified as a category B operation,
as the focus of the investment is primarily on rehabilitating existing irrigation
schemes. The programme is expected to have limited adverse social impacts on
human populations or environmentally significant areas. These risks will be
minimized through a solid scheme selection and design process complemented by
investments in the greater scheme area. In line with IFAD’s Social, Environmental
and Climate Assessment Procedures, residual risks will be identified in the
environmental and social impact assessment and managed via scheme-specific
mitigation measures agreed upon in the environmental and social management
plan to be prepared for each SIRP-supported scheme.

B. Alignment and harmonization
45. The smallholder irrigation subsector is identified among priority areas for

investment in all relevant country strategy and policy documents.4 The Zimbabwe
Agenda for Sustainable Socio-Economic Transformation, the country’s poverty
eradication strategy, targets a 50 per cent increase in the country’s area equipped
with irrigation by 2018. Both the Comprehensive Agricultural Policy Framework and
Zimbabwe Agriculture Investment Plan share SIRP’s value chain approach to
increasing farm productivity, improving extension services and promoting the
commercialization of smallholder agriculture. All relevant country strategies
emphasize the importance of building the resilience of communities to food and
nutrition insecurity and the effects of climate change.

46. Furthermore, SIRP implementation responsibilities will be largely mainstreamed
within the Government’s existing systems and decentralized structures. This will
facilitate the creation of synergies with other development partners and ensure
complementarities between SIRP and other interventions in the sector.

C. Innovations and scaling up
47. The programme will adopt a holistic approach to smallholder irrigation revitalization

in Zimbabwe that encompasses infrastructure development, farmers’ organization
capacity-building and empowerment, natural resource management, agricultural
production, market linkages and access to finance. This is an innovative approach,
as it constitutes a departure from the usual focus on “hardware” investments. The
selection of irrigation schemes for revitalization will occur during programme

3 IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025.
4 Government priorities for the development of the agricultural sector are outlined in the: (i) Zimbabwe Agenda for Sustainable
Socio-Economic Transformation 2013-2018; (iii) Zimbabwe Agriculture Investment Plan 2013-17; (iv) draft Comprehensive
Agricultural Policy Framework 2012-2032; and (v) Zimbabwe 10-Point Plan for Economic Growth.



EB 2016/118/R.20/Rev.1

10

implementation, and will be based on predefined criteria that prioritize areas that
optimize a combination of biophysical, socioeconomic and institutional aspects, in
order to achieve economies of scale and scope, and maximize efficiency,
effectiveness and large-scale impacts. The participatory planning approach and the
requirement of having farmers contribute to O&M costs are innovative features,
intended to promote sustainability.

48. The programme will pilot and promote low cost technologies for storage and
processing of perishable products at irrigation scheme level and cluster level.
Innovative approaches to include youth in programme activities call for providing
vocational training and starter kits to promote off-farm employment along the value
chain.

D. Policy engagement
49. The programme will enhance national capacity through evidence-based policy

dialogue among stakeholders such as the Government, farmer representations,
WUOs and the private sector to engage in policy dialogue on issues related to
smallholder irrigation, natural resources management and market access. Several
priority issues have been identified during programme design, including:
(i) formalization of the status of IMCs to become legally recognized WUOs with
certified rights to water and lands; (ii) revision of water pricing for smallholder
irrigation; (iii) effective and cost-efficient implementation of environmental and
social management plans; and (iv) incentives for private companies to engage with
smallholder farmers.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
50. A programme financing agreement between the Republic of Zimbabwe and IFAD

will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

51. The Republic of Zimbabwe is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

52. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
53. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a Debt Sustainability Framework grant
to the Republic of Zimbabwe in an amount equivalent to eighteen million
three hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 18,300,000)
(approximately US$25.5 million) and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President































































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of Angola
for the Artisanal Fisheries and Aquaculture
Project

Republic of Angola

Artisanal Fisheries and Aquaculture Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Angola

Executing agency: Ministry of Fisheries

Total project cost: US$12.1 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 7.91 million (equivalent to approximately
US$11.1 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend terms, subject to interest at a fixed rate of
1.25 per cent in addition to a service charge of
0.75 per cent per annum on the principal amount
outstanding with a maturity period of 25 years, including
a grace period of 5 years, starting from the date of
approval by the Executive Board

Cofinancier(s): Although not included as part of this project proposal,
parallel grant financing is being finalized from the
European Community in the amount of
EUR 10.0 million.

Contribution of borrower: US$1.0 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD.





Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of Angola for the Artisanal Fisheries and Aquaculture Project,
as contained in paragraph 40.

Proposed loan to the Republic of Angola for the Artisanal
Fisheries and Aquaculture Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Angola is located in south-western Africa and is bordered by the Atlantic Ocean to

the west, Namibia to the south and the Democratic Republic of the Congo and
Zambia to the north and east, respectively. It is the third-largest country in sub-
Saharan Africa, covering an area of about 1.2 million square kilometres. Because
no population census has been conducted since 1970, population estimates must be
relied on and currently range between 16 and 18 million people, of whom some
41 per cent live in rural areas. Angola is one of Africa’s most resource-rich
countries, representing sub-Saharan Africa’s second-largest oil producer, after
Nigeria, and the world’s fourth-largest producer (in value) of diamonds. The
country also possesses a wealth of other natural resources, including minerals,
water, agriculture, forestry and fisheries.

2. Angola became independent from Portugal in 1975 after 14 years of fighting, but
was then immediately engulfed in one of Africa’s most prolonged civil conflicts,
between the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola (MPLA) and the
National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA). Peace seemed
imminent in 1992 when national elections were held, but fighting was renewed
when UNITA rejected the election results. A new peace agreement, the Lusaka
Protocol, was signed in 1994, but war resumed in 1998. In April 2002, a ceasefire
was called following the death of the UNITA leader, Jonas Savimbi; and on
21 November 2002, the Government and former rebels signed a peace agreement
that definitively ended the Angolan Civil War.

3. After almost four decades of war, much of the country’s economy had collapsed,
infrastructure was destroyed, institutions were weakened or no longer functioning,
the society was polarized, an estimated 4 million people were displaced, poverty
was rampant, and the newly created political process was fragile. Over the last 12
years since signing the peace accords, the Government, together with its national
and international partners, has developed and implemented programmes to restore
order and security, revitalize the economy, restore basic social services and
rehabilitate basic infrastructure. The political process appears to have stabilized,
and in the latest election (August 2012), the MPLA party of President Jose Eduardo
dos Santos won over 72 per cent of the vote.

4. Angola ranks 148th out of 186 countries on the Human Development Index (HDI)
(2012), an improvement when compared with its 2004 HDI ranking of 166th out of
the 177 countries. However, despite the progress made, poverty remains prevalent
throughout much of the country. An estimated 68 per cent of the population live
below the poverty line, and 15 per cent of households live in extreme poverty.
Poverty is more entrenched in rural areas where 94 per cent of households are
categorized as poor. Other indicators also point to the difficult conditions in the
country as a whole: (i) 38 per cent of the population lack access to safe water


sources; (ii) only 30 per cent of the population have access to government health
facilities; (iii) life expectancy at birth is estimated at 47 years (2010), among the
lowest in the world; (iv) despite major efforts at educational reform, about 75 per
cent of teachers have never received any relevant training; (v) only 54 per cent of
enrolled children complete the primary level; and (vi) Angola ranks 106th out of 134
countries in the gender gap index (2009).

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. The Government is fighting poverty on various fronts through (i) its 2005 Strategy
to Combat Poverty (ECP); (ii) its 2009 National Strategy for Food and Nutrition
Security (ENSAN); (iii) poverty alleviation activities including in its national annual
plans; and (iv) resources earmarked in each municipal budget for implementation
of annual local plans to combat poverty, including rural development. The
Government continues to allocate more than 30 per cent of its budget to improving
social conditions, a figure projected to increase over the next five years.

6. The ECP’s main goal is to halve the country’s poverty level by 2015 and to
consolidate peace and national unity through sustained improvement in the living
standards of all Angolans. The main priorities identified in the ECP are (i) the
reconstruction of infrastructure; (ii) increased access to education, health and other
basic services; and (iii) decentralization of governance structures. The ECP
highlights rural development, with a focus on improving food security and
revitalizing the rural economy. Key proposed actions are (i) strengthening the
production capacity of the traditional sector, particularly food crops and fisheries;
(ii) relaunching rural commerce; (iii) sustainably managing natural resources; and
(iv) reorganizing the legal framework and public institutions. Priority actions are to
be guided by the following basic principles: (i) a focus on smallholders; (ii) the
importance of community participation; (iii) the concentration of planning,
implementation and monitoring at the municipal level; (iv) complementary
activities with donors, the private sector and NGOs; (v) specific targeting of
women, including access to land; and (vi) HIV/AIDS treated as a cross-cutting
concern.

7. The goal set out in the ENSAN is to ensure that, at all times, all Angolans have
physical and economic access to adequate quantities of a variety of good-quality
food to enable them to contribute to the human, economic and social development
of the country. The main policy priorities are to: (i) increase and diversify
agriculture and sustainable fish production to improve the well-being of the
population; (ii) improve access to food; (iii) diminish levels of malnutrition; and
(iv) guarantee basic sanitation, and food and drinking water quality. Both the ECP
and the ENSAN are reflected in the Government's National Development Plan
(2013-2017).

8. Parallel to these efforts, the Government is also making considerable headway with
promoting decentralization through several complementary initiatives: (i) the
Integrated Municipal Programme for Rural Development and Poverty Alleviation;
(ii) the transfer of health services to the municipal level; and (iii) the creation of
consultation and social dialogue councils. In addition, the National Development
Plan includes measures that reinforce the integrated vision of development, as
evident in the newly launched Rural Villages Requalification Programme. The
multidimensional nature of poverty, recognized in the ECP and in Angola’s human
development indicators, suggests that livelihood and food security improvements
alone will not be enough to sustainably overcome poverty and maintain households
in rural areas. Opportunities for active citizenship, local participation in governance
processes and access to quality social services (health, education, water and
sanitation) are also needed and can help free up time for productive activities.


9. The proposed Artisanal Fisheries and Aquaculture Project (AFAP) will promote
community development planning that will (i) strengthen inclusive and participatory
processes; (ii) facilitate the involvement of communities in local-level decision-
making bodies; (iii) introduce a culture of saving and improved financial
management at the household and the micro, small and medium enterprise levels
through the promotion of savings groups; and (iv) strengthen local organizations
not only as delivery mechanisms for fishing assets and services but also as more
effective facilitators of a holistic development process within the fishing
communities.

10. The project will complement various ongoing interventions in the country,
particularly: (i) the World Bank-funded Market Oriented Smallholder Agriculture
Project in Malange Province; and (ii) the African Development Fund’s Fishery Sector
Support Project dealing with marine and coastal fisheries, which also could
potentially cofinance national inland fishery interventions. In addition, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, which is currently involved in other
fisheries activities in Angola, will likely be a partner in AFAP implementation.

11. IFAD has worked in Angola, and specifically in the fisheries sector, since 1991 and
is therefore in a strong position to be an effective partner to Angola as it addresses
its rural development challenges. The Fund also has considerable experience in
economic and institutional development in rural areas. Through AFAP, IFAD will
promote bottom-up approaches for rural development, centred on the capacity-
building of grass-roots organizations. It will also contribute to strengthening central
and local institutions following a thorough needs assessment. In addition, to ensure
effective project implementation, IFAD will tap into its experience from other
projects in the region (e.g. the Pro-Poor Value Chain Development Project in the
Maputo and Limpopo Corridors (PROSUL) and the Artisanal Fisheries Promotion
Project (ProPESCA), both in Mozambique).

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
12. The project will be implemented in four provinces in Angola’s central-north region:

Bengo, Cuanza Norte, Luanda and Malange. Component 1 (inland artisanal fisheries
development) will cover two areas: communes north of the Cuanza River, between
Dondo (Cuanza Norte) and the mouth of the Cuanza River (Luanda); and
communes traversed by the Dande and Bengo Rivers, in Bengo and Luanda. Both
areas have a large number of lakes, some of which are seasonally or permanently
linked to those rivers. All fishing communities are located around the lakes and
along the rivers. The component will target an estimated 15,000 people, or about
10,000 fishers and 5,000 processors and small traders.

13. Component 2 (small-scale aquaculture development) will be implemented in the
provinces of Bengo, Cuanza Norte and Malange. It will initially focus on Malange
and later expand to suitable areas in the other two provinces. The component will
target about 800 families, or 724 families engaged in small-scale family fish
farming, 62 in aquaculture as emerging farmers, and 14 as semi-commercial fish
farmers. Geographically, some 678 will be from Malange, 79 from Cuanza Norte
and 43 from Bengo.

B. Project development objective
14. The project’s goal is to reduced poverty in artisanal inland fishing and small-scale

fish-farming households in target communities. Its development objective is
improved food security and nutrition among artisanal inland fishing and fish-
farming households. The project design has incorporated a number of activities that
address climate change issues as they affect fisheries and aquaculture, the project’s
two technical components.



EB 2015/LOT/P.2

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

C. Components/outcomes
15. The project comprises two technical components:

(a) Component 1: Inland artisanal fisheries development. The project will
promote inclusive and sustainable inland fisheries sector development and
management contributing to strengthened livelihood strategies at the
household level;

(b) Component 2: Small-scale aquaculture development. The project will
promote inclusive and sustainable small-scale aquaculture sector development
and management contributing to strengthened livelihood strategies at the
household level.

16. To achieve the outcomes of both components, the project will support activities that
(i) strengthen institutional capacity (national, provincial, local/extension services);
(ii) improve community participation in economic and wider local development
processes; (iii) increase the quantity and quality of fish produced and sold on a
sustainable basis; and (iv) improve market-related infrastructure.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
17. Target groups. The project will conduct a mapping study to determine areas

suitable for aquaculture development. A service provider, in cooperation with
extension workers, will then decide on the target group within each community,
which should include woman-headed households, young and old people, people
with illnesses, and other disadvantaged and vulnerable groups.

18. Aquaculture development strategy. The project will work with the target groups
to identify areas where there is potential for aquaculture development, and then
introduce small-scale aquaculture to improve rural communities’ nutritional status
and food security. As the project progresses, it will encourage family fish farmers to
increase their production (for example by applying better technology or by
enlarging their pond surface area) in order to have surplus produce to sell on the
market. It is expected that some farmers will invest profits from fish sales back into
their fish farm (e.g. in improved fish food or more ponds built by hired labour),
“naturally” growing their small subsistence activity into a more commercial
enterprise.

B. Organizational framework
19. The Ministry of Fisheries will be responsible for policy and legislative initiatives

relevant to the project, and will make institutional adjustments in sector
administration and provide broad project oversight. A national project oversight
committee will be established to guide project planning and implementation,
provide high-level advice, review and approve annual workplans and budgets,
review implementation progress and impact, and address key issues. Project
coordination and management will be delegated to the Institute for the
Development of Artisanal Fisheries and Aquaculture (IPA), which will establish a
project coordination unit (PCU) responsible for programming, budgeting, resource
allocation, and monitoring and evaluation. In addition, the Ministry of Fisheries will
coordinate with the provincial governments of the four participating provinces, with
other government bodies, and with NGOs, private firms and individuals
implementing non-core project activities. The Ministry of Finance will play an
important supporting role: it will be responsible for the financial supervision of the
project; coordinate with the local authorities, at provincial, municipal and
communal levels, to ensure that project objectives and outcomes are achieved; and
maintain a dialogue with IFAD, particularly on policy and legislative matters.


C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

20. All project activities will be carried out through the joint and coordinated efforts of
IPA project staff, community facilitators (from the service provider), functional
literacy trainers and other stakeholders at the community level. All activities will be
jointly planned and regularly monitored with communities against targets and
expected results.

21. The project’s monitoring and evaluation system will be its main management tool
for tracking implementation progress and results. It will generate quality data that
will enable IPA and the Ministry of Fisheries to monitor the project, and it will also
provide information on the development of inland fisheries and aquaculture in the
project area for use at higher government levels. The system will allow IPA to
participate more effectively and knowledgeably in national science councils, and in
national and international forums on rural livelihoods and rural development, food
security, nutrition and poverty reduction, contributing to the existing knowledge
base, planning and policy discussions. The AFAP experience will feed into wider
regional learning on community-driven development, particularly the development
of adequate rural microfinance systems.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
22. Financial management. The project’s financial management will be coordinated

by IPA through its Financial Management Directorate (DAF/IPA). The PCU will be
responsible for administrative management, finance and accounting, budget
planning and cash flow, procurement and payments from project accounts. As
appropriate, the Ministry of Fisheries/Office for Studies, Planning and Statistics
(GEPE), together with the Ministry of Finance, will provide budget estimates,
mobilize counterpart funds, supervise, make disbursements and provide other
support needed for DAF/IPA to conduct the project’s financial management. IPA
already has some experience of working with projects funded by development
partners since it is implementing the African Development Bank-financed Fisheries
Sector Support Project.

23. Procurement. The project will follow national procurement procedures to the
extent that these are consistent with IFAD's project procurement guidelines. In this
regard, the PCU will be aided by an experienced procurement specialist recruited
along with all other PCU staff. A financial procedures manual will (i) set out the
operational procedures for procurement, management of contracts and payment of
receipts; (ii) describe a contract monitoring system; and (iii) give guidelines for the
creation of a records management system and registry of procurement records.
IFAD will provide support in the project’s first year to avoid possible delays in
project implementation.

24. Internal and external audit. The PCU will contract an internal auditor to ensure
compliance with audit requirements. All accounts, including the designated account
and statements of expenditure for each fiscal year, will be audited by qualified and
experienced independent external auditors acceptable to IFAD. The consolidated
annual financial statements will be compiled by the PCU/IPA within three months
after the end of each fiscal year and the audited financial statements will be
submitted within six months as per the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits.

25. Governance. Internal controls will be ensured through the establishment of
separate functions, reconciliation of accounts, supporting documentation
requirements and different approval levels depending on expense amounts. In an
effort to strengthen internal controls, the PCU will produce, and attach to the
project implementation manual as an annex, project financial management
procedures specifying detailed arrangements for the flow of funds, roles and
responsibilities, and procedures.



E. Supervision
26. IFAD will directly supervise all phases of the project jointly with the Government

and in-country partners.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
27. Total project costs, including physical and price contingencies, are estimated at

US$12.1 million (see table 1). Physical and price contingencies make up 13 per
cent of the total project costs; the foreign exchange component is estimated at
US$0.8 million; and taxes are estimated at US$0.7 million.
Table 1
Project costs by component
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component IFAD loan Borrower/counterpart Total

1. Inland fisheries 5 208 89.3% 627 10.7% 5 835 48.1%
2. Aquaculture 2 335 89.3% 279 10.7% 2 614 21.5%
3. Project management 1 875 95.8% 83 4.2% 1 958 16.1%

Unallocated 1 732 100.0 1 732 14.3%

Total 11 149 91.9% 989 8.1% 12 138 100.0%

B. Project financing
28. The project will be financed by IFAD and the Government of Angola. The IFAD loan

amounts to US$11.1 million (92 per cent of total project costs). The Government’s
contribution is estimated at US$1.0 million (8 per cent of total project cost) and will
cover actual costs, taxes and duties. Parallel financing is expected from the
European Commission in the form of a EUR 10 million grant. Table 2 provides a
summary by category of the proposed financing plan; the table, for now, does not
reflect European Commission grant funding.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Government IFAD loan Total
Amount % Amount % Amount %

Investment costs
1. Works 52 3.5 1 429 96.5 1481 12.2
2. Equipment and materialsa 71 13.5 454 86.5 525 4.3
3. Trainingb 477 13.6 4 297 91.0 4774 39.3
4. Consultanciesc 80 10.4 692 89.6 772 6.4
5. Salaries and allowancesd 268 11.5 2 054 88.5 2322 19.1
6. Operating costs 41 7.7 491 92.3 532 4.4
7. Unallocated 0 0.0 1 732 100.0 0 14.3

Total 989 8.1 11 148 91.9 12 100 100.0
a Equipment and materials comprises vehicles, boats, motorcycles and equipment
b Training comprises training, studies, meetings and workshops.
c Consultancies comprises local and international technical assistance
d Salaries and allowances comprises project staff and IPA staff.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
29. Financial and economic analyses were carried out to assess: (i) the financial

viability of the interventions at the beneficiary level; and (ii) the likelihood of
adopting the proposed project interventions. The financial models including family
fish farmer, emerging fish farmer, semi-commercial fish farmer, canoe fishing,
plank boat fishing and enterprise models (including traditional processing and fresh



fish trading) generally show positive financial returns for the proposed aquaculture
and fishery rural economic activities, with the financial internal rate of return
ranging from 34 to 237 per cent.

30. The economic analysis shows an economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of
12.3 per cent. A sensitivity analysis was undertaken to assess the impact on
economic returns against changes in output (fish price) and key input prices (ice
and feed prices). The analysis shows that the project’s main economic profitability
indicators are more sensitive to changes in the benefits than to changes in the
costs. The production models are more or less equally sensitive to a risk of 10 per
cent increase in production cost as to a 10 per cent benefit decrease, resulting in a
negative net present value (NPV). With a two-year delay, the EIRR is still positive
at 7.2 per cent, but the NPV slips into a substantial negative of 1,125.

D. Sustainability
31. Factors contributing to the long-term sustainability of project outcomes are the

following: (i) the Government’s long-term commitment to addressing rural
development, poverty alleviation and food and nutrition security, and recognition of
the importance and role that the inland fisheries and aquaculture subsectors play in
achieving the stated policy objectives and actions; (ii) adoption of a precautionary
approach to fisheries development capable of being replicated elsewhere in Angola;
(iii) empowerment of communities that will lead to their greater involvement in
local-level planning and management and decision-making processes; and
(iv) knowledge management activities providing the opportunity to generate and
disseminate project-related experiences and lessons learned to other institutions in
Angola and beyond.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
32. The major risks identified in the project are the following: (i) project-supported

activities may contribute to overexploitation of the resource in the absence of
baseline information, a monitoring programme and fishery management actions;
(ii) market demand may be insufficient to absorb the incremental fish production
derived from project interventions; (iii) the absence of climate-change data may
impede the assessment of impacts related to climate change; (iv) there may be
limited government institutional capacity in the sector; (v) service providers may
not be present in the project area; and (vi) fiduciary risks may exist. The
Transparency International score for Angola is 2.3 and IFAD’s Rural Sector
Performance Assessment E(ii) indicator for accountability, transparency and
corruption in rural areas is 2.75, both indicative of high risk. Use of the
Government’s Integrated Financial Management System has benefits in terms of
budgetary control but risks that funds may be slow to be released unless the coding
is accurate. The overall financial management risk at design has been assessed as
high largely because this is the first time IPA and IFAD are working together and
understanding will need to be built. Mitigation measures include: (i) adopting a
precautionary approach towards the expansion of fishing operations; (ii) ensuring
that institutional capacity is strengthened and that participation in local
development processes is improved; (iii) engaging the private sector to implement
some aspects of the project (e.g. hatcheries); (iv) maintaining continued policy
dialogue between government and IFAD; (v) using internationally accepted
standards for financial reporting, and for internal and external audits;
(vi) implementing off-the-shelf accounting software; (vii) preparing a project
implementation manual; (viii) seeking support from international technical
assistance; (ix) recruiting suitably skilled staff with IFAD’S prior no objection; and
(x) installing proper record-keeping and back-up processes.



V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
33. The proposed project is consistent with key IFAD policies and strategies, in

particular with its policies on targeting, rural finance, gender, and the environment,
and with its knowledge management and scaling-up strategy.

B. Alignment and harmonization
34. This project is fully aligned with government policies and priorities as outlined in the

ECP and ENSAN policy documents. Investments in fishery development will improve
participating households’ livelihoods and food security (addressing the three pillars
of food security – food availability food access and food use).

C. Innovations and scaling up
35. The project will introduce relevant innovations and capacity-building, and offer

products/services that meet the needs and use the capacities of the different social
groups, age groups, and men and women. Such an approach will allow beneficiaries
to participate according to their needs and capacities, and progress at their own
pace. In terms of scaling up, the project has significant potential for widening
coverage to a larger and more diversified programme; the African Development
Bank, the European Union and the World Bank have expressed interest in
developing a common approach and possibly cofinancing the promotion of the
fisheries and the wider agricultural and rural sectors.

D. Policy engagement
36. Support for a policy dialogue on fisheries and aquaculture development will be

central to this project. This will include support for policy dialogue between IFAD
and the Government through national and international technical assistance that
will address one or more of the following issues: (i) updating of the country’s
aquaculture development strategy, (ii) formulation of new aquaculture regulations
with special attention to the characterization and regulation of small-scale
aquaculture and the introduction of exotic fish species; (iii) development of
incentives for aquaculture; and (iv) policy compliance and law enforcement.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
37. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Angola and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

38. The Republic of Angola is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

39. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
40. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the Republic
of Angola in an amount equivalent to seven million nine hundred and ten
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 7 910 000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


































































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Kingdom of
Swaziland for the Smallholder Market-led
Project

Kingdom of Swaziland

Smallholder Market-led Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Kingdom of Swaziland

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$21.1 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 8.55 million (equivalent to approximately
US$9.6 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.36 million (equivalent to approximately
US$0.5 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 18 years, including a grace period of three years, with
an interest rate equivalent to one hundred per cent of
the variable interest rate, as determined annually by the
IFAD Executive Board

Cofinancier(s): To be identified

Amount of cofinancing: US$3.8 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be determined

Contribution of borrower/recipient: US$6.6 million

Contribution of private sector: US$0.6 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Kingdom of Swaziland for the Smallholder Market-led Project
(SMLP), as contained in paragraph 46.

Proposed loan and grant to the Kingdom of Swaziland for
the Smallholder Market-led Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Although Swaziland is classified as a middle-income country, with a relatively high

GDP of US$2,415 per capita, 63 per cent of the population live below the national
poverty line and an estimated one in four of the adult population is affected by
HIV/AIDS. The predicament of the most vulnerable worsened during the recent
fiscal crisis, which had an adverse impact on employment and key social
programmes, including basic health and educational programmes. Recent economic
growth, which owes much to higher Southern African Customs Union (SACU)
revenues over the past two years, has not been pro-poor and there are indications
that the terms currently enjoyed by Swaziland in SACU may soon become less
favourable.

2. Poverty in Swaziland is predominantly rural and varies among the country’s four
regions and between different ecological zones. Regionally, the prevalence of
poverty in 2010 was greatest in Lubombo region at 69 per cent, followed by
Shiselweni region at 68 per cent.

3. The main factors contributing to rural poverty are small landholdings and low land
productivity, compounded by frequent droughts that lead to crop failure and loss of
livestock. People are often isolated from markets and information sources and have
limited access to off-farm employment opportunities. All these factors are
aggravated by the very high prevalence of HIV/AIDS, trapping the poor in poverty
and militating against recovery. Frequent drought has been attributed to climate
change and has led to a decline in Swaziland‘s food production. About a quarter of
the Swazi population is food insecure and dependent on assistance, and a third of
children under five are stunted.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

4. Poverty and food insecurity are still widespread in rural areas, in spite of the
country’s economic development. The high poverty rates suggest that past
government policies and programmes have not been able to adequately address the
needs of the poor rural population. Smallholder agriculture remains the backbone of
rural livelihoods, while it is often drought prone and characterized by low
productivity and isolation from markets. IFAD projects, namely the Lower Usuthu
Smallholder Irrigation Project (LUSIP), the Lower Usuthu Sustainable Land
Management Project (LUSLM) and the Rural Finance and Enterprise Development
Programme (RFEDP), demonstrate the potential for smallholder farming systems to
(a) cover basic food needs; and (b) enter into remunerative value chains, if the
right inputs, services and market linkages are provided together with a strict focus
on targeting the poor and disadvantaged.

5. The above projects demonstrated the relevance of access to irrigation water for
smallholder crops such as maize, but even more so for potential high-value crops



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

2

such as vegetables. The RFEDP developed a honey value chain, which was adopted
by wholesalers and has become very prominent among farmers with small
landholdings and few livestock. The experience shows that the productivity of staple
crops such as maize can be enhanced through access to irrigation, inputs and
better farming technology, leading to better nutrition and food security among food
deficient households. More advanced, economically active households have strong
potential for entering remunerative value chains with the surplus produce of high-
value crops such as vegetables, which they are able to produce with the support of
dedicated business development services and dedicated wholesalers.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. The project will be implemented over a six-year period in 25 chiefdoms in the

rainfed Middleveld and Lowveld areas of the Lubombo and Shiselweni regions. It
will target poor smallholder farmers that are (i) food-deficient and living at a
subsistence level; and (ii) economically active and able to sell surplus production.
The farmers will be assisted in increasing their farm productivity and production
through access to irrigation, inputs, training and access to services. Economically
active farmers will sell surplus production to wholesalers to increase income. Along
selected value chains, employment opportunities will be created for young people,
for example in managing collection and information centres. The activities are
tailored to the capacities of smallholders, including women and families affected by
HIV/AIDS.

B. Project development objective
7. The project’s goal is to contribute to national poverty reduction. The development

objective is to enhance food and nutrition security and incomes among smallholder
producer families through diversified agricultural production and market linkages.
By the end of the project, rural poverty should be reduced by 20 per cent in the
targeted chiefdoms and food insecurity reduced by 50 per cent in currently food
deficient households. The project’s three major outcomes are: (i) the project
chiefdoms engage in effective planning and decision-making; (ii) soil and water
resources are sustainably managed for market-led smallholder agriculture in the
project chiefdoms; and (iii) smallholder producers in the project chiefdoms supply
crop and livestock products to market partners, while subsistence farmers are
enabled to produce sufficient nutritious food for themselves.

C. Components/outcomes
8. The project will have three components:

9. Component 1: Chiefdom development planning. In each chiefdom, community-
based development planning will be the starting point to identify and direct
development activities to the targeted households. To this end, an institutional
framework supporting decision-making by the traditional leadership will (where
needed) be established and strengthened. Community development committees
(CDCs) will be assisted in processing information on the chiefdom’s resource base,
population, any bottlenecks and opportunities, and development options and
priorities for inclusion in a chiefdom development plan.

10. Component 2: Infrastructure for soil and water conservation. Investments in
soil and water conservation at sub-catchment and homestead levels will help
harness irrigation and drinking water resources for both enhanced subsistence and
market-led agricultural production. The infrastructure will be designed for erosion
control and water catchment to improve and safeguard productive land. The main
interventions will focus on preventing silting in water reservoirs and harnessing
run-off for agricultural production. This component will comprise erosion control,
the rehabilitation of approximately 18 existing and construction of approximately
two new small earth dams and the installation of rainwater-harvesting equipment.



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

3

11. The process of planning, design, construction and operation and maintenance of the
above infrastructure combines oversight by the CDC, active participation of the
producers benefiting from the infrastructure, and sound engineering services
through existing or hired specialized agencies. The new construction of dams
requires a rigorous planning process, with environmental impact assessments and
checks and balances on engineering and aftercare. Producers benefiting from this
infrastructure will form users’ groups to operate, maintain and guard the
infrastructure.

12. Component 3: Market-led smallholder agriculture. The project will support
smallholder farmers in enhancing their crop and livestock production through
improved access to efficient technical advice, agricultural technology including post-
harvest processing and storage, farm inputs and irrigation. In addition to achieving
higher productivity, especially in the case of food deficient farm households,
economically active households will be linked to markets, including small local
traders and larger wholesalers such as the National Agricultural Marketing Board
(NAMBoard) and Eswatini Kitchen, a private company.

13. The project will concentrate on commodities that respond to the food and income
requirements of farmers and the productive capacity of the project area.
Commodities identified thus far include beekeeping, legumes, vegetables, fruits,
indigenous chicken and goats. In addition, technical support will be provided for
major staple crops such as maize and sorghum to safeguard household food
security.

14. The main approach for developing value chains will involve setting up innovation
platforms, where representatives of wholesalers, buyers, extension services,
business development services, rural finance services and smallholder farmers will
identify together the required improvements and innovations. Measures include
providing market information, estimating market demand, sourcing from new
internal and external markets, business plan development, financial services,
backward and forward linkages between wholesalers/buyers and producers, and
extension services. These activities aim to establish pro-poor value chains by using
existing unmet market demand as the entry point for agricultural development, and
will help gear agricultural practices to the specifics – in terms of quantity, quality
and timeliness – of that market demand, and ultimately raise incomes and increase
food availability among poor rural households.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

15. The Smallholder Market-led Project (SMLP) is a six-year project that uses the
availability of confirmed markets as a driver for promoting smallholder production
for household nutrition and sale of marketable surplus. Both intervention areas
follow a clear value chain development approach that includes all players from
production through to processing, services and marketing.

16. Chiefdom development planning (CDP) is the starting point to involve both food
deficient and economically active households. Investments in soil and water
conservation are the next step to increase productivity in smallholder farms and to
safeguard a sustainable natural resource basis for market-led production. The
involvement of wholesalers such as NAMBoard and Eswatini Kitchen will bring the
essential pull for the smallholders, while they also bring in the essential technical
services for improvements in agricultural production and marketing. Business
service providers, for instance TechnoServe, will bring in the required know-how for
both producers and wholesalers, in terms of technical and business-related aspects
such as business planning and access to finance. The project approach builds on
existing policies, approaches and market demands, and offers an opportunity to
apply them on a larger scale while maintaining a focus on poor rural areas.



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

4

17. The choice for market-led development builds on the success of earlier projects,
notably RFEDP, LUSIP and LUSLM, in promoting smallholder agricultural production.
Support in terms of agricultural extension for better crop and livestock husbandry
and better capture of soil moisture and rainwater resulted in larger volumes of
agricultural produce. The surplus produced was, however, absorbed locally, with
little or no produce reaching national markets or sold at national market prices.
Although smallholders clearly have productive potential, national wholesalers are
either unable to cover their markets or have resorted to sourcing their demand
from producers elsewhere. Current demand for agricultural products in Swaziland
has not been linked to the agricultural potential of smallholder producers.

Organizational frameworkB.
18. The Ministry of Agriculture will be the lead agency for SMLP and will delegate day-

to-day project implementation to the Swaziland Water and Agriculture Development
Enterprise (SWADE), a parastatal with proven experience in the management and
implementation of similar projects. At the outset – to ensure smooth project start-
up – SWADE will be supported and strengthened with short-term technical
assistance on financial management and monitoring. SWADE will establish a
dedicated project implementation unit (PIU), which will work under Ministry of
Agriculture oversight comprising a project steering committee (PSC) and two
technical committees. The PSC will provide strategic advice on project
implementation and review and approve the results-based annual workplan and
budget (AWP/B), procurement plan and financial and technical progress reports. It
will be chaired by the Principal Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and
composed of high-level representatives of the Ministries of Natural Resources and
Energy, Economic Planning and Development and Finance. Other participants may
include NAMBoard, the Swaziland Environment Authority and other important
stakeholders.

19. The technical committees will guide the PIU with technical advice on CDP and
infrastructure, and on market-led infrastructure. Both committees will host the
relevant ministries, technical agencies and private sector. Project partners will be
engaged under service agreements. Wholesalers already identified include
NAMBOARD and Eswatini Kitchen.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

20. Planning. The main planning tools for SMLP comprise the logical framework, the
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework with its indicators and targets, and the
results-based AWP/B. The logframe provides the overall targets for project
implementation at the output, outcome, development objective and impact levels.
The results-based AWP/B breaks down these targets by year and assigns financial
resources by financier.

21. Every year, each project partner will prepare a results-based AWP/B, for
consolidation by the PIU. Guidelines and templates provided in the project
implementation manual will facilitate the planning and reporting process. The
AWP/Bs will be prepared under a participatory approach based on the chiefdom
development plans (see component 1). They will incorporate information from the
M&E systems of the PIU and project partners, and recommendations from IFAD
supervision and implementation support missions. The PSC will approve
consolidated draft AWP/Bs, which will then be submitted to the Government and
IFAD to seek their concurrence.

22. Monitoring and evaluation. The project will undertake regular monitoring of
activities, output and outcomes. Regular outcome surveys will provide information
on progress at the household level, and how project activities have led to change
and impact. Chiefdom socio-economic profiles will be used as a basis to monitor
and assess progress and targeting of development activities, as well as periodic



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

5

review of agreements reached between market partners in the innovation
platforms. Project M&E will be based on IFAD’s results and impact management
system (RIMS) and be complemented with indicators and surveys as required.

23. The project will conduct baseline studies using RIMS and multidimensional poverty
assessment tool methodologies. In addition to standard collection of gender and
age disaggregated data, the baseline and follow-up surveys will employ the women
empowerment in agriculture index, which measures women’s empowerment
relative to that of men at household level. SMLP has also been identified as a
potential candidate for the IFAD impact assessment studies.

24. Learning and knowledge management. Learning and sharing knowledge will be
firmly based on the project’s M&E system. The PIU will issue progress reports on a
quarterly basis to be reviewed by the PSC and technical committees. Besides
project reports, policy workshops and short publications will be prepared on key
lessons learned and disseminated to inform the public and trigger feedback at
national and regional levels.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
25. Financial management. The project’s financial management system will be in

compliance with Swaziland’s and IFAD’s financial regulations and procedures. Under
these procedures, the project will adopt an appropriate financial management
system that will include financial planning through AWP/Bs, financial accounting and
reporting, funds flow management, procurement and audit. The project will ensure
that adequate capacity in terms of human resources and equipment are in place.
The PIU financial management team will open and maintain appropriate accounting
records including books of account, asset and contract registers. The chart of
accounts will be based on government accounting codes to ensure full compliance
with the national system in addition to meeting IFAD requirements of cost analysis
by financier, expense category and component. Previous experience with exchange
visits of financial management staff between countries in the region was successful
in promoting the adaptation of financial management best practice. Financial
statements and reports will be prepared at the end of each quarter for oversight by
the project director. The reports will be consolidated and presented in semi-annual
physical and financial progress reports. SWADE uses the accrual-basis International
Financial Reporting Standards and audits are conducted in accordance with
International Standards on Auditing, the same standards as IFAD. Well-reputed
private-sector audit firms have in the past issued unqualified audit opinions on the
three areas required by IFAD: financial statements, withdrawal applications and the
designated account.

26. Flow of funds. IFAD and any cofinancing funds will be disbursed to the project
through the Ministry of Finance into designated accounts held at the Central Bank
of Swaziland. The accounts will be operated by the authorized representative(s) of
the Ministry of Finance. Separate operational accounts in local currency will be
opened by the project for each funding source, including Government counterpart
funds. Payments of cash expenses will be in line with the approved AWP/B.

27. Procurement. All project procurement of goods, works and services will be carried
out in line with the approved project procurement plan, in accordance with the
Public Procurement Act and Procurement Regulations to the extent consistent with
IFAD’s 2010 Procurement Guidelines. The Government procurement legal
framework accommodates provisions of IFAD guidelines where there is conflict.

28. Governance. An enhanced framework for good governance has been developed for
SMLP to ensure: (i) transparency; (ii) accountability in the use of resources; and
(iii) participation, with people having a voice in decisions that may affect them. Key
features of the framework include: (i) inclusive targeting of women and
disadvantaged households; (ii) participation of community representatives in local-
level planning; (iii) community and participatory monitoring of project activities,



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

6

including a complaints mechanism; (iv) internal and external audits of project
accounts; (v) IFAD supervision and support; (vi) regular outcome surveys to
provide information on the coverage and quality of project outputs; (vii) reporting
of results to the PSC, IFAD and national government institutions, with key
information published on a project website; and (viii) a complaints and remedies
mechanism. The framework will support the transparent use of funds and
constitutes a preventive measure against misuse of project funds.

SupervisionE.
29. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD, with a focus on: (i) fiduciary

aspects; (ii) achievements and quality of project implementation; and
(iii) implementation support. Direct supervision will be a continuous process
requiring sustained communication and engagement with the Government,
specifically the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Finance, the PIU, project
partners and the target group. Instruments for guiding and improving
implementation will include continuous policy dialogue with the Government,
adjusting AWP/Bs, revising implementation manuals, supervision and midterm
review missions, and amending legal agreements as appropriate.

30. During the start-up phase, supervision will focus on ensuring that the institutional
arrangements to support project implementation are in place. IFAD will support a
series of workshops and training sessions to sensitize all potential stakeholders,
service providers and beneficiaries to the project objectives and their own roles and
responsibilities. Targeted training during the start-up phase will aim to increase
technical capacities and ensure adequate implementation quality.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
31. Total investment and recurrent costs, including contingencies, over the six-year

project life are estimated at US$21.1 million or 244.1 million Swazi emalangeni
(SZL). The parameters underpinning these costs are: (i) project duration of six
years; (ii) cost price inflation at 6 per cent for the project period and 3 per cent per
annum for six years for foreign inflation, in line with International Monetary Fund
estimates; (iii) an exchange rate calculated in constant purchasing power parity
from a base of SZL 10.6:US$1; (iv) government financing or waiver of all taxes on
goods, works and services procured under the project. Taxes have been estimated
using information from the Swaziland Revenue Authority that includes duties and
value added tax; (v) base costs are real costs at July 2014 prices; and (vi) physical
contingencies estimated at 5 per cent for the civil works. Price contingencies are
based on local and foreign inflation. The component estimates are summarized in
the following table:
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component IFAD loan IFAD grant Private sector
Government
of Swaziland

Unidentified
financing Total

1. Chiefdom development
planning

700 200 - 600 800 2 300

2. Infrastructure for soil and
water conservation

2 200 - - 1 200 3 000 6 400

3. Market-led smallholder
agriculture

5 600 100 600 2 900 - 9 200

4. Project management 1 100 200 - 1 900 - 3 200

Total 9 600 500 600 6 600 3 800 21 100



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

7

B. Project financing
32. The loan will be provided on IFAD ordinary terms and conditions with a three-year

grace period and an 18-year maturity. IFAD will provide a grant equivalent to
US$500,000 to enhance the project’s start-up capacity, such as designing baseline
and impact studies and establishing the overall project M&E framework and
financial reporting system.

33. The project will be financed by IFAD, the private sector, the Government and
unidentified financiers. The IFAD financing will be in the form of a loan in an
amount equivalent to US$9.6 million and a grant in an amount equivalent to
US$0.5 million, for a total IFAD contribution of US$10.1 million. The Government
will contribute US$6.6 million and the private-sector contribution is estimated at
US$0.6 million. The financing gap of US$3.8 million is expected to be funded by the
Global Environment Facility (GEF) or another cofinancier to be identified.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Private sector Government
Unidentified
financing Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Consultanciesa 4 800 71.4 500 8.1 200 3.6 200 3.3 400 6.5 6 100 29.1
2. Equipment and

materials
1 200 65.5 - - - - 200 14.0 400 20.5 1 800 8.6

3. Goods, services
and inputsb

1 200 86.2 - - - - 200 14.3 - - 1 400 6.6

4. Works 1 300 26.2 - - - - 700 14.0 3 000 60.4 5 000 23.6
5. Operating costs 1 100 86.2 - - - - 200 13.8 - - 1 300 6.2
6. Salaries and

allowances
- - - - 400 6.3 5 100 93.7 - - 5 500 25.9

Total 9 600 45.6 500 2.4 600 2.7 6 600 31.5 3 800 17.8 21 100 100.0
a Includes studies, technical assistance and training.
b Includes vehicles.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. The overall economic internal rate of return of the project is estimated at

23 per cent for the base case. The net present value of the net benefit stream,
discounted at 5 per cent based on the Central Bank of Swaziland benchmark
interest rate/discount rate, is SZL 259.9 million (US$24.8 million). The analysis
shows significant net incremental benefits for farmers and rural entrepreneurs in
the project area.

35. An estimated 55,250 households will benefit directly from the project, of which
about 70 per cent or 40,000 households are classified as poor. It is estimated that
30 per cent of the target group will fully take up the project interventions related to
value chain activities, which in turn will lead to substantial increases in incomes and
the availability of nutritious food.

36. Benefits will accrue from: (i) efficient planning and implementation of pro-poor
development activities at chiefdom level; (ii) increased and sustainable access to
water for irrigation and drinking; (iii) increased productivity in livestock, crop and
horticulture production; and (iv) sustainable access to markets, services
(extension, finance) and inputs.

D. Sustainability
37. Project sustainability will be supported by close alignment with the policy and

planning framework in Swaziland. The project will assist in addressing emerging
needs, e.g. by increasing agricultural productivity and supplying consumer markets
with national products. CDP is expected to become a simpler tool that is easy to



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

8

apply and fully meets people's needs. Moreover, it will foster transparency in
decision-making and funding for development activities at community levels. The
introduction of soil and water conservation will protect the key resources of
smallholder farmers from degradation and in turn enhance productivity. Efficient
knowledge management will be the key element to distil successful approaches and
disseminate them widely. The Ministry of Agriculture will ensure that extension
services are better equipped and regularly trained to serve the chiefdoms.
Wholesalers such as NAMBOARD are likely to continue investing in smallholder
farmers, provided that the project succeeds in setting up value chains. This will also
encourage other wholesalers to undertake similar arrangements to source
agricultural produce from smallholders. The focus on commodities, already being
produced by smallholders and of high nutritious value, will generate long-term
benefits for the health of rural people.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
38. The principal risk areas affecting project execution include:

(i) Slow start up due to limited institutional capacity may reduce the likelihood
of the project reaching its targets. This risk has been mitigated by the
preparation of a draft project implementation plan and a financial
management manual during project design. The Government will finalize the
project manuals before project start-up. IFAD will finance start-up costs up to
US$500,000 equivalent to enhance technical capacity in project management,
especially for baseline surveys, M&E and financial management.

(ii) Non-availability of project financing would lead to a reduction of the
project area from 25 to about 20 chiefdoms. IFAD and the Government are
exploring mobilizing additional funds through PBAS reallocation as well as
cofinancing from GEF under GEF-6. In the case of both financing opportunities
being realized, the GEF funds will be used to increase complementary
activities and/or scale up the geographic scope. The SMLP, with its focus on
sustainable land management and climate-sensitive design, would be an ideal
baseline project for a GEF-6 grant.

(iii) Fiduciary risks. The inherent fiduciary risk in Swaziland is medium, based on
Transparency International and Rural Sector Performance Assessment scores.
Tools for effective financial management are present in SWADE, with strong
capacities in many areas. The challenges encountered in the past pertain to
the application and implementation of the control framework: financial
reporting, budgeting, staffing, mingling of financier and government funds,
and internal audit reports not being acted upon. Close collaboration was
needed on the preceding IFAD-funded project to achieve acceptable financial
management results. Consequently SMLP’s initial fiduciary risk assessment at
design is high, but these risks will be mitigated with technical assistance and
the application of lessons learned, starting with the incorporation of internal
control mechanisms into the financing agreement. Consequently, fiduciary risk
rating is expected to drop to medium during the first year of implementation.
The Ministry of Finance has a strong oversight role in management of external
funds and participates in the PSC. During design, a financial management
manual was prepared to guide the PIU on appropriate management of the
fiduciary aspects of the project. IFAD will provide close oversight through its
supervision and implementation support.

(iv) Reliability of existing market demand has been extensively researched during
project design. The involvement of NAMBoard in a number of the market chains
with smallholders suggests a fair degree of stability. Similarly, Eswatini Kitchen is a
confirmed reliable partner. Existing market demand may also be affected by
production in South Africa and by changes in global demand. The development of a



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

9

market information system under the project will mitigate this risk by
communicating early, allowing for mitigation measures in case of falling demand.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

39. Project design is compliant with the applicable IFAD policies and strategies. Both a
strategy for gender mainstreaming and targeting mechanisms have been
incorporated in the project design in accordance with the IFAD Policy on Gender
Equality and Women’s Empowerment and the IFAD Targeting Policy. The IFAD
Policy on Improving Access to Land and Tenure Security has informed the project’s
approach to addressing issues of land tenure insecurity under traditional
authorities. Potential negative environmental impact has been analysed and
mitigation measures designed in line with IFAD’s Environment and Natural Resource
Management Policy.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
40. Aside from harmonization with the Government’s Poverty Reduction Strategy and

Action Plan and with the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development
Programme and United Nations Development Assistance Framework, the project
will complement, derive lessons from and sustain positive initiatives emerging from
the Swaziland Agricultural Development Programme cofinanced by the European
Union (EU) and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. The
project will create space for learning between similar projects, such as the recently
started High-Value Crop and Horticulture Project funded by EU and European
Development Fund.

Innovations and scaling upC.
41. SMLP is based on experiences and lessons learned from its precursors and aims to

replicate successful practices on the largest scale possible in terms of both direct
inclusion of poor rural households and policy influence. The project applies an in-
built learning loop, whereby interventions start off on a small scale, then are
assessed for effectiveness and subsequently fine-tuned for replication on a wider
scale. This applies especially to results and lessons learned on innovation in market
linkages through the innovation platforms established by NAMBoard, Business
Development Services and buyers such as Eswatini Kitchen. Once approaches have
been tested and fine-tuned, the project can help roll out the innovation to the
entire designated project area.

Policy engagementD.
42. The project will inform policymakers on three key policy aspects: (i) efficient local

planning processes for development with CDP simplification; (ii) management of
small-scale irrigation by end users; and (iii) implementation of the new land law.
The project is well positioned to engage with policymakers and other stakeholders
as it can report the needs of smallholders, bring in the farmers’ representatives and
private-sector views, and provide quantitative and qualitative assessments for
policy discussions.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
43. A financing agreement between the Kingdom of Swaziland and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

44. The Kingdom of Swaziland is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

45. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

10

VII. Recommendation
46. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Kingdom of Swaziland in an amount of eight million five hundred fifty
thousand euros (EUR 8,550,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Kingdom of
Swaziland in an amount of three hundred sixty thousand special drawing
rights (SDR 360,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





