






















































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 
 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 1 of 21  

     

 

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 25-Apr-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSA21211 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Afghanistan P160606 Afghanistan Strategic 
Grain Reserve ( SGR 
Project ) 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA 10-Apr-2017 13-Jun-2017 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Islamic Republic of 
Afghanistan - Ministry of 
Finance 

MAIL  

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The development objective of the project is “To establish a wheat strategic reserve to be available to Afghan 
households to meet their needs following emergency situations and improve the efficiency of the grain storage 
management.” 
 
Components 

Component A: Institutional Infrastructure and Capacity Building 
Component B: Physical Infrastructure 
Component C: Project Management: 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

IDA Grant   18.00  

Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund   11.45  

Total Project Cost   29.45  

 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

Afghanistan is a landlocked country, surrounded by Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, and Turkmenistan in the north, 
Iran in the west, Pakistan in the south and southwest, and China in the northeast. The country is divided 
into thirty four provinces, each province consists of a number of districts. Within these districts, most 
families live in villages. Rural households make up around 80 percent of the population, which is estimated 
to be 32.5 million (World Bank, 2015), with one of the highest growth rates of population worldwide (3 
percent / year). The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of Afghanistan is around $ 19.2 billion (World Bank, 
2015).  

 
Over the last several decades, the country went through wars, and internal conflicts, resulting in weak 
economy, and absence of some of the basic services in parts of the country. All economic activities, and the 
potential for economic growth in Afghanistan have been badly affected by the deteriorating security 
situation, and the uncertainty about its political future, with around 39 percent of the Afghans falling under 
the poverty line (World Bank, 2013). Recently, Statistics showed negative levels of consumers’ prices index 
reflecting the high unemployment rates, and the weak economic conditions. The security situation remains 
a serious challenge, it has even deteriorated recently in some areas of the country, with limited presence or 
control from the government. 
 
Agriculture is the main pillar of the Afghan economy, being the second contributor to the GDP, following 
the services sector, which primarily depends on the presence of the international community in 
Afghanistan. The agriculture sector employs around 40 percent of the working force of the country

1
, and 

provides support to approximately 80 percent of the population in their livelihood. Direct agriculture 
activities contribute 25 percent to the GDP of the country. The number would be much higher if other 
related activities such as food processing, logistic, and trade of food items, are included. Wheat and its 
related activities such as logistics, and milling represents around 6.5 percent of the national GDP on the 
country.  

 
Agriculture productivity per unit of land in Afghanistan is low compared to world standards and some of its 
neighboring countries for most of the crops. Arable land in Afghanistan is around 12 percent of its total 
area, with less than half of the cultivated land is irrigated, while the larger portion of crops is rain-fed. 
Along with the high annual growth rate of population, this makes the country import-dependent for a large 
number of major food products, including wheat.  
 
Malnutrition is another chronic challenge in Afghanistan. It is estimated that 33 percent of Afghans are 
food insecure. Access to basic food items is limited for many Afghans, with around 34.7 percent of rural 

  
households suffering from caloric deficiency in normal condition. This become even worse during times of 
shortages of supply. 
 
Given the fact that the agriculture sector in Afghanistan is not yet developed, in terms of adopting modern 
technologies, especially those related to climate resilient seeds, water management, and improved farming 
practices, this makes its agriculture production highly volatile, and vulnerable to sudden shocks, resulting 
from any unforeseen situation. 
 
Agricultural production in Afghanistan consists mainly of wheat, horticulture, nuts, and poppy

2
. Due to the 

very high level of consumption per capita, and being major part of the Afghan diet, wheat accounts for 
more than 60 percent of total areas cultivated, with a total area of around 2.4 million hectares

3
, almost 

equally split between irrigated and rain-fed cultivation, which creates high level of volatility in production 
every year. This has resulted in a fluctuating supply of wheat for households’ consumption on annual basis. 
This deficit of supply is mainly addressed by imports.  
 
Additionally, the political relations between Afghanistan and its neighbors, affects to a large extent the flow 
of goods to the country, bearing in mind its position as a landlocked country, with limited access to 
international trade and supply routes.  
 
By nature, Afghanistan is also prone to other natural disasters such as earthquakes, which adds to the 
already weak situation in the country. When such incidents occur, supply of wheat through the regular 
channels become more challenging, and many Afghans especially the poor lack access to wheat for their 
daily diet.   
 
Altogether, these factors puts Afghanistan in a very fragile situation with regard to its ability to secure basic 
food requirements specially wheat, for the need of its citizens especially at times of shortages of supply due 
to unforeseen situations, and emphasizes the need to establish a strategic reserve of wheat to be utilized 
during possible deficits of supply.     

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

Wheat is the largest crop grown in Afghanistan, covering nearly 60 percent of all cultivated lands. 

Production of wheat in Afghanistan comes mainly from the northern regions, which is mostly rain-fed 

cultivations, this increases the risk of volatility of production on annual basis. Over the last ten years (2005 

– 2015), annual production of wheat fluctuated between 2.1 million tons in 2008, to slightly above 5 million 

tons in 2014. There are several factors resulting in this large variability, mainly adverse climate conditions- 

specifically drought. Afghanistan is affected by global climate change, which is resulting in less rains, and 

increase in temperature, which accordingly have negative impact on its agricultural production in terms of 

areas cultivated and productivity per unit of land, bearing in mind that more than half of its cultivated lands 

are rain-fed. Additionally, the poor quality of seeds, and the limited adoption of modern farming practices 

adds to the situation.  

The recent significant shortages of local production were observed in 2004, 2006, 2008, and 2011, with 

 
the unfavorable weather conditions being
4
 the main reason.  During these years, supply of wheat for 

household consumption dropped sharply, it was also accompanied with ban on exports of wheat from 
some of the neighboring supplying countries facing the same unfavorable climate conditions. This 
resulted in limiting the access of many Afghans to wheat for their daily consumption.  
 
In Afghanistan, bread constitutes around 70 percent of the daily caloric intake

5
. Globally, the country 

has the highest annual rate of wheat consumption per capita (160kg)
6
. This makes the availability of the 

crop a significantly important factor for the social stability of Afghanistan. Each year large quantities of 

wheat are imported primarily by the private sector, which mainly serve the urban community, along 

with donations from other countries.  With the limited availability of data in Afghanistan, different 

sources have different estimates for the annual imports of wheat ranging between one to two million 

tons every year, which roughly represents 20 – 40 percent of the overall consumption of the country, 

depending on the size of domestic production. For the 2016 / 2017 crop season, MAIL estimates that 

import requirements will be around 1.25 million tons.  

Regularly, the government of Afghanistan receives grain donations from other countries (mainly India), 

over the period 2011 – 2014 the government received 250,000 tons from India, and in 2016 – 2017 

season only, India is planning to provide around 100,000 tons to Afghanistan. All these quantities are 

stored and distributed to the poorest in Afghanistan. Irregularly, the government purchases much 

smaller quantities from farmers for the same purpose, in 2015 MAIL purchased only 900 tons from 

Afghan farmers. 

 Imports of wheats by the private sector usually offsets the deficit of domestic production, however in 

some years, and due to various reasons including market forces, political issues, and the impact of 

climate conditions, the availability of wheat in neighboring exporting countries becomes quite limited. 

Coupled with the shortfalls of local production of wheat in the country, this results in strong shocks to 

the supply for Afghan households’ consumption, especially the poorest in the country. In 2008 with the 

global hike in price of commodities, along with the decline in production is many countries, Pakistan 

which is the main supplier of wheat and wheat flour to Afghanistan banned exports of wheat, although 

some quantities of wheat were illegally exported, Afghanistan witnessed a serious situation in this 

regard.  

In 2008, and as per the historical data from MAIL, price of one ton of wheat reached around $750 in 

Afghanistan, compared to around $250 in 2007, and around $350 in 2009, the situation was similar 

earlier in 2004, 2006, and then later again in 2011, however it was not as severe as it was in 2008. These 

hikes in wheat prices make it very hard for average households in Afghanistan to secure their needs of 

bread, considering the poverty rates in the country, and the high level of wheat consumption per capita. 

During all these circumstances the government of Afghanistan was not able to respond to these 

unforeseen situations, by providing support to its people, especially poor households, which were 

already struggling to earn their living. 

 

Productivity levels per unit of land for both irrigated and rain-fed wheat in Afghanistan remains low, 

compared to neighboring countries. Additionally, the weak post-harvest practices, and value addition 

activities, such as threshing, handling, and milling, and also the poor condition of the storage facilities, 

results in losses in the harvested crop, and deterioration of quality.  

 The World Bank through other agriculture projects in Afghanistan, specifically the ARTF funded project; 

Afghanistan Agriculture Inputs Project (AAIP) is already providing support in areas of wheat productivity 

enhancement, through introducing high quality seeds, and providing support to farmers on the adoption 

of improved agricultural practices. The government of Afghanistan have an ambitious goal to be self-

sufficient of wheat by 2020 through increased productivity, and expansion of irrigated wheat 

cultivations. This represents a real challenge at least on the medium term, considering the limited 

resources of water, arable land, and the need to 

expand beyond the high growth rate of the 

population. However, the challenge is even 

higher with the supporting activities such as 

storage and handling, which are currently weak, 

and have large impact on the quality of wheat, 

and is a direct result for high post-harvest 

losses.  

 

The government owns five large silos located in 

the provinces of Kabul, Kandahar, Heart, 

Baghlan, and Balkh as spotted on the map of Afghanistan. These silos operate as State Owned 

Enterprises (SOEs), operating under supervision of MAIL, and they charge the government for the 

quanities of wheat stored. The five silos are concrete constructions, and were built during the Soviet 

presence in Afghanistan during the 1970’s. Combined together, the silos have a total theoretical storage 

capacity of 170,000 tons. There are a number of warehouses owned by the Ministry of Agriculture, 

Irrigation, and Livestock (MAIL), adjacent to the silos with a total storage capacity of approximately 

65,000 tons, additionally, fifty two small scale warehouses are owned and operated by MAIL, and are 

distributed over 17 provinces, and all facilities are used for the storage and distribution of wheat. 

However, none of five large silos are operating at capacity, it is estimated that the utilization of the silos 

storage capacities is around 25 percent of its original capacity. This is mainly due to the lack of 

maintenance, human skills, and spare parts, accordingly the actual available storage capacity is much 

less. More importantly, the poor condition of these storage facilities, and its outdated operating 

procedures negatively affects the quality of the wheat stored. Generally, skills of the technical team 

operating these facilities are weak, and their knowledge on modern practices in managing grain stocks 

are quite limited. Although there is no specific assessment, some officials and donors estimates storage 

losses to be around 20 percent.  

Although, there is a directorate under MAIL responsible for the management of the grain reserve of the 

country. However, this directorate has limited capacities, and lacks the required set of skills to engage in 

managing such program, and due to the implementation of the standard governmental procedures and 

regulations, their ability to directly engage in the wheat market is limited. While operating in such a 

dynamic market requires certain level of flexibility, to make decisions and engage in the procurement 

process when there is a good market opportunity.  

 

These factors altogether, from the importance that wheat represents in the afghan diet, and the fact 

that the country is wheat import-dependency, along with the volatile ties with its main suppliers, make 

it significantly important to build up wheat reserve, that can be used in responding to any unforeseen 

situations that may occur similar to those which the country witnessed several times, over the last 

twelve years. This wheat reserve can also be utilized in addressing the malnutrition situation in 

Afghanistan, through including a fortification program to the wheat stored.  

However, building up such a reserve requires solid storage structures, by which wheat can be stored in 

compliance with international standards in storing, handling, and quality control of wheat. More 

importantly, there is a need to establish an entity to be responsible for managing this reserve, with the 

required highly skilled human capital. 

The government of Afghanistan represented by MAIL, have been prioritizing the establishment of a 

Strategic Grain Reserve, and have been engaged in discussion with the World Bank seeking support in 

this regard. Initially, the government was interested in developing the grain reserve to serve two 

purposes, firstly, responding to emergency situations, and secondly to be utilized in stabilizing the wheat 

market in Afghanistan for the benefit of the farmers, through setting up minimum guaranteed price. The 

Bank advice on this regard was that such a practice would result in crowding out the private sector from 

the market, and eventually harm the farmers themselves, as this would limit the market opportunities 

for them, especially that it would require the allocation of significantly large financial resources from the 

government side, which is not available. 

Recently, and following extensive discussions between the World Bank and the Government of 

Afghanistan (GoA), an agreement was reached that the objective of establishing a strategic grain reserve 

should only be to efficiently respond to emergency situations, enabling the government to be able to 

secure basic food supplies of wheat for at least two million people for one year.  

In preparation for the proposed engagement in building a grain reserve, the World Bank conducted an 
engineering assessment for the five silos and the warehouses adjacent to it. The findings of the 
assessment covered the condition of building, machinery, other equipment and supportive activities on 
site. All five facilities were found in need for extensive rehabilitation, with different level of work 
required according to the condition on each site, and accordingly different cost estimate for each 
location. The study also provided a brief cost estimate for establishing Greenfield silos using modern 
storage technologies. In parallel, MAIL, reached out to a number of international suppliers, and obtained 
tentative cost estimations for Greenfield silos.  

 

Also, during the preparation for this project, a vulnerability assessment was conducted to study the 
current status of the food security in Afghanistan, and access to basic food supplies, based on trends in 
wheat production and to identify the areas within the country that are highly vulnerable in case an 


emergency situation occurs, based on previous incidents, and the current storage capacities. The 
objective of the assessment was to advise on the suitability of the locations of the existing storage 
facilities, and provide recommendation on other locations (if any), to ensure efficient coverage, and 
ability to respond to sudden shocks.  

 

The vulnerability assessment reviewed a range of food insecurity assessments undertaken by the Bank, 
the government of Afghanistan, World Food Program, and others.  The assessment used to the most in 
depth degree was the 2013/14 Afghanistan Living Conditions Survey (ALCS) as this data resource had the 
most in depth data set on food insecurity which could be effectively used to evaluate the spatial 
distribution of vulnerability in the country.   Two of the main findings of the vulnerability assessment 
were; a) food insecurity in the country is generally widely distributed around the country, and b) the 
existing placement of the silos infrastructure, in most cases, if improved can be relatively well placed to 
address problems of food insecurity for most of the population, with one exception for a specific region 
that showed a deficit on food security in relation to the available storage capacity. 
 
The table below uses data on populations of severely and moderately food insecure populations from 
the 2013/14 ALCS survey disaggregated by region to develop an estimate of potential grain storage 
needs to respond to problems of food insecurity.  The evaluation makes the assumption that severely 
food insecure populations would be provided a 100 percent ration of wheat though the three month 
winter lean season.  On a per capita consumption rate of 170kg/annum, this would be a ration of 42kg 
of wheat grain for the period per person.  For moderately food insecure populations, a ratio of 50 
percent of consumption would be provided for the same three month lean season.  This would be 
equivalent to 21kg of wheat grain per person

7
.   

The analysis revealed that those regions near already planned large storage facilities; Kabul, Mazar-e-
Sharif, and Herat, do not have wheat requirements larger than the scale of the existing storage facilities 
if improved.  Similarly, a centralized facility in Kandahar would be able to serve the southwest of the 

                                                           
7
 Equivalent to 170kg/capita/annum x 0.25 years (3 months) x 50% 

Region 

Severe Food 
Insecurity 
Wheat 
Requirement 
(MT) 

Moderate 
Food 
Insecurity 
Wheat 
Requirement 
(MT) 

Total Est. 
Req. (MT) 

Service Point and Comments 

Central 27,058 18,920 45,977    Area effectively serviced from Kabul 

Central Region 12,168 17,950 30,118 
   Decentralized facility or met from Kabul or Herat  
(jointly) 

Eastern 4,191 4,757 8,948 Area could be serviced from Kabul 

North 17,488 21,736 39,224 Area effectively serviced from Mazar Sharif 

North-east 28,970 24,334 53,304 
Capacity in Mazar Sharif not sufficient for need.  
Would also need decentralized facility 

South-east 10,045 5,523 15,568 Serviced from Kandahar or from Kabul 

South-west 21,204 16,034 37,238 Kandahar or serviced from Heart 

West 21,490 16,046 37,536 Area effectively serviced from Herat 

     

National 142,613 125,301 267,914 
 

country, or feasibly this region could also potentially be served from Herat.  The ALCS data show 
relatively low rates of food insecurity in the east of the country (estimated food requirement in this 
region is less than 10,000MT), this region could very likely be served out of Kabul.  In the Southeast 
region total estimated food requirements are also relatively modest, estimated at roughly 15,000MT.  
This region might also be served out of Kabul or if need be, the facility in Kandahar could also contribute 
to address needs in this area.      
 
The areas that present the most substantial challenges are the Central region and the Northeast regions 
of the country.  The Northeast, according to this analysis, has a wheat requirement of 53,000MT.  At this 
requirement level it is not likely that it would be feasible to service this area from the facility in Mazar-e-
Sharif.  In addition, the facility in Pul-e-Khumri is potentially too distant to be able to effectively address 
needs in this area.  As such it seems that it would be a reasonable approach to develop smaller 
decentralized facilities in this region able to address food insecurity problems in this area.  Government 
data show that there is an estimated storage capacity of 6,000MT in Badakhshan province.  This 
infrastructure could be built on and further developed.  ALCS data by province show that in the 
northeast the large bulk of food insecure populations are in Badakhshan more so than Kunduz or 
Takhar.  As such, infrastructure would need to be developed to respond to the structure of current 
needs.   

 
The Central region are also an area where the quantity needed is relatively substantial (30,118 MT).  
According to government data, there are 5,000MT facilities in each of Central region provinces of 
Bamyan, Ghor, and Daykundi that were built in the last 10 years.  This total storage level of 15,000 MT 
for this region would be a very good start in terms of having available local storage capacity in these 
provinces.  For needs over and above this, it is likely that the balance of required foods could be 
supplied from Mazar-e Sharif and Herat.   

 

Ultimately, the assessment confirmed that the enhancement of the current storage facilities or the 

consideration of a greenfield silos at the same locations, along with the sufficient stock of wheat 

available, can help the Government of Afghanistan be in a good position to respond to emergency 

situations, and be able to supply Afghans with wheat as the basic and main food item consumed, of 

course with the presence of other factors such as solid logistics, and distribution mechanism. However, 

the study also revealed that a need exists for an additional large storage facility in the northeast region 

of the country, where productivity rates of wheat are very low since wheat cultivations in this area are 

mainly rain-fed, in addition to the absence of large storage facilities for wheat, and the fact that this 

region is generally prone to natural disasters such as earthquakes, plus the difficulty in reaching out to 

some of the areas of the region especially during winter time. 

 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

 
 
Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The development objective of the project is “To establish a wheat strategic reserve to be available to Afghan 
households to meet their post-disaster needs and improve the efficiency of the grain storage management”.  

Key Results 
The achievement of the PDO would be measured by the following PDO results indicators:  
 
Increased availability of wheat stocks.  

Increased number of households whose wheat needs can be met immediately after the occurrence of 

an emergency situation affecting their access to wheat, and  

Reduced losses in wheat stored, as a result of the upgrade of the storage facilities, relative to pre-

project intervention.  

 
D. Project Description  
 

The project aims to support the Government of Afghanistan, in building up a reserve of wheat that can 

be utilized in responding to any emergency situation the country may face, which usually leads to 

shortages of supply of wheat, which is considered the most important food item for household 

consumption in the country.    

Emergency situations occurring in Afghanistan are generally due to unforeseen weather conditions such 

as severe drought resulting in share decline in the local wheat crop, natural disaster such as 

earthquakes, which is frequent in the country, and usually results in limiting people’s access to wheat.  

Declaration of an emergency situation is assigned to a ministerial committee. The entity that will be 

established by the project to manage the reserve will coordinate with this committee as part of its tasks 

in working closely with relevant stakeholders.  In this regard, the entity will be prepared to act on up the 

declaration of an emergency situation in the country, to do so, the new entity will have its own 

operational procedures for actions to be taken to respond accordingly.    

The objective of the project will be achieved through the establishment of an autonomous entity to 

manage the grain reserve. This entity will be responsible for obtaining and receiving wheat 

internationally and locally, from aid provided by other countries, and also the purchase of wheat from 

local and international markets, and managing the handling, storage, and distribution operations of 

wheat, while ensuring that quality is maintained through the adoption of global best practices in this 

regard. In order to enable the new entity in becoming well-positioned to help in responding to 

emergency situations, the project will work on building existing capacities under MAIL, and benefit from 

those have gained the required knowledge in the activities of the new entity, in addition to adding 

additional calibers as needed.  

The objective of the project will also be achieved through the improvement of the existing storage 

capacities through rehabilitation process, and also the establishment of Greenfield facilities. On this 

regard, the project will decide on the selection between different options of silos rehabilitation versus 

the establishment of Greenfield facilities. Currently, the proposed activities includes the rehabilitation of 

the two silos located in Mazar-e-Sharif, and Pul-e-Khumri, considering that both are in relatively good 

condition, while establishing three greenfield silos in Kabul, Kandahar, and Herat considering the level of 

work required for rehabilitation is significant, and also the fact that one of these silos (Kabul), is now 

being in the center of the city, which may have negative impact on the surroundings if rehabilitated.   

The objective of establishing the grain reserve will remain only to respond to emergency situations in 

the country. However, in order to maintain the quality of the wheat stored, and as a common practices 

in managing grain stocks, a portion of the wheat will be offered for sale annually on basis of stock 

replenishment. The sale of wheat will be at the prevailing market prices, and will be in a manner that 

has no impact on market dynamics, and will not engage in price setting.  

The project will utilize new technologies in developing a wheat crop estimation tool, which will provide 

accurate forecasts for the locally grown wheat in Afghanistan, to assess the needs for imports based on 

local supply, and annual consumptions rates.  

The project will also seek to partially address the malnutrition situation in Afghanistan through the 

introduction of a fortification program for the wheat / wheat flour distributed under the project.  The 

fortification of wheat flour will be achieved in collaboration with the World Food Program, which enjoys 

solid on ground presence in Afghanistan, and have already established large network with hundreds of 

local wheat millers to ensure implementation of the fortification program during wheat milling.  

Both activities of the development of the crop estimation, and the nutrition support, will be 

subcomponents under the first component, which covers the establishment of the grain reserve 

management entity, and the related intuitional infrastructure development.  

Implementation will of project activities will be carried out by a transit Project Implementation Unit 
(PIU), until the entity that will be in charge of managing the grain reserve is established, then it will take 
over from the transit PIU.   

 
The project will be implemented over five years, and will consist of the following three main 

components: 

Component A: Institutional Infrastructure and Capacity Building: (US$ 3.9 million) 

This component will be focused on the establishment, and support the start-up activities of the 

proposed entity to be in charge of managing the grain reserve. Activities of the component will also 

include the development of the crop estimation system, and also include activities related to the 

nutrition, and wheat fortification.  

Component B: Physical Infrastructure: (US$ 23.1 million) 

The silos are located mostly in urban centers, except Kandahar. Kabul silo is located in a growing urban 

center, surrounded mostly by residential and commercial development. Pul-e-Khumri silo is also 

surrounded by residential areas on the north and south side of the facility and lies directly on the main 

road running through the town. Mazar Sharif silo is approximately 4 km from the city center, surrounded 

by residential and commercial development. Herat silo is also located in an urban area on a valuable 

land site. Kandahar silo is located on the outskirts of the city, but this silo is in a very poor condition.   


This component will finance the required physical engineering work including the rehabilitation of the 

existing 2 silos, and also the establishment of 3 Greenfield Silos and a new warehouse facility in the 

northeast region of the country considering its high vulnerability.  Activities of the component are based 

on the outcome of the field assessment conducted during the project preparation process.  

Activities under this component will be implemented through a gradual work approach, so that the 

timeframe for the rehabilitation of the existing facilities, and the construction of new facilities allows the 

utilization of each of the storage facilities once completed, while maintaining sufficient storage capacity 

available at other facilities prior undergoing an upgrading process. The work schedule will be designed 

to ensure that by end of the fourth year of the project all five silos are fully operational, and the new 

warehouse facility in the north east region is fully functioning.  

Both the physical assessment of the silos which was undertaken recently as part of project preparation, 

and also the vulnerability assessment will guide the work under this component. From the results of the 

assessment and the cost effectiveness analysis, three new Greenfield silos will be constructed in Kabul, 

Kandahar and Herat as the cost of rehabilitating these facilities is more than new Greenfield 

construction.  The facilities on Mazar Sharif and Pul-e-Khumri will be rehabilitated as this is the most 

economical way to restore these facilities to full operational capacity, and considering that both are in 

relatively good condition.  For rehabilitation, substantial repairs will need to be made to the actual 

concrete silos as these have deteriorated over time.  In most cases the grounds around the facilities also 

need to be upgraded and rehabilitated to facilitate the movement of trucks into and around the facility.  

Truck weigh scales will also have to be replaced.  The mechanical equipment such as elevators, conveyor 

belts, cleaning and drying equipment, scales, and other machinery will need to be replaced in full as it 

has deteriorated from a long period of disuse.  In most instances, replacement of this mechanical 

equipment comprises roughly 50 percent or more of the total rehabilitation expenses.  In the cases of 

new Greenfield construction, new steel silos will be constructed on the grounds of the existing storage 

facilities.  The location of the existing facilities are sufficiently large that there should be more than 

sufficient room for this new construction.  .  Finally, a new laboratory along with testing equipment will 

be installed in all storage facilities.   

In addition, as recommended a new flat warehouse will be built in Badakhshan province to address food 

insecurity problems in this region of the country as was identified by the vulnerability assessment.  The 

activities of this subcomponent will commence by assessing different plots of land owned by MAIL in 

Badakhshan province, preferably close to the capital city of Faizabad. Criteria for land selection will 

include the topography of the land being flat, with no signs of elevation or slopes, with an area of 

around 5 - 6 hectares, and are connected to main roads for ease of access.  

Design and preparation work will be carried out to establish a modern warehouse, with steel 

construction, suitable for the storage of bagged and bulk wheat. The site should include a weight bridge 

scale, ventilation system, quality control laboratory, and pest and dust control systems. The site will 

include area for trucks’ movement and maneuvering.  

Component C: Project Management: (US$ 2.46 million) 


This component will finance activities related to the establishment and operations of a Project 

Implementation Unit (PIU), to be in charge of managing all project activities. The PIU will be located at 

MAIL in Kabul, and will be responsible for all implementation activities including the finalization and 

development of the required institutional structure which will eventually be responsible for managing 

the grain reserve.  

The PIU will be transitional, so that once the new entity in charge of managing the strategic grain 

reserve is established and fully functioning, the PIU will be handing over all of its assignments and 

activities to it. It is anticipated that this step will take place by the end of the third year of the lifetime of 

the project. However, prior to the establishment of the grain reserve managing entity, the PIU will be in 

charge, and will coordinate all its activities with the SGR directorate and other units under MAIL.   

The PIU will be responsible from the start of the project for the rehabilitation of the 2 silos, and 
establishment of 3 Greenfield Silos, in addition to construction of a warehouse in the north east region, 
and in hiring of consultants, advisors, and carrying our all related procurement work. The PIU will be also 
responsible for coordination with other governmental agencies, and carrying our all related 
procurement work. The PIU will be also responsible for coordination with other governmental agencies.  
The PIU will include managerial, technical, and fiduciary staff, and will be also responsible identifying the 

areas where it will require international expertise, and will carry out all their hiring process in line with 

the World Bank guidelines.    

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

The implementing agency for this project will be the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock (MAIL). 
Implementation of all project activities will be carried out by the Project Implementation Unit (PIU), which will 
be established under MAIL, and will be located at the ministry’s premises in Kabul.    
 
The PIU will be responsible for the managerial, financial, operational, and technical aspects related to the 
implementation of all components, and will be reporting regularly on progress of project activities to MAIL and 
the World Bank in relation to all project activities. The PIU will develop the project procurement plans, identify 
requirements for international expertise, and obtain the required resources accordingly.  
 

The PIU will coordinate its activities with relevant partners, and stakeholders including donors, governmental 
agencies, consultants, and private sector.  
 

With the establishment of the proposed entity that will be dedicated to manage the grain reserve, this new 
entity will take over the full responsibility of activities, and will seek to coordinate the work with the relevant 
stakeholders. The entity will be overseen by an inter-ministerial committee chaired by MAIL.  
 
 A Project Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by H.E. Minister of MAIL (or his delegates), will oversee project 
activities, and the implementation process carried out by the PIU, the committee will provide guidance and 
support, and will facilitate the interaction with other stakeholders. 

 
 
 

 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project is rehabilitating two silos in the cities of Mazar-e-Sharif, and Pul-e-Khumri, in addition to the 
construction of three new Silos in the cities of Kabul, Kandahar, and Herat, and also constructing an 
additional Greenfield warehouse in the northeast region of the country. This may have minor potential 
environmental, health and safety issues/impacts during construction and operation on site. Therefore, the 
World Bank OP 4.01 is triggered and MAIL has prepared an ESMF to be applied during the whole project 
cycle. Site specific ESMPs were prepared for the current two sites of rehabilitation operation, similar site 
specific ESMPs will be prepared based on guidelines and check lists provided by the project ESMF. The site 
specific ESMPs will be properly implemented by the Ministry and the relevant contractors. An 
implementation level Pest Management Plan (PMP) will also be prepared to for any environment health and 
safety issues that may raise from the fumigation process for preserving the quality of the wheat stored in 
the silos. 

 
 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Mohammad Arif Rasuli,Qais Agah 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The WB OP/BP 4.01 is triggered because the project 
will rehabilitate two silos, and construct three new 
silos, and also a new storage facility at the northeast 
region. The rehabilitation and operation of the old 
facilities as well as selection, construction and 
operation of three new storage facilities may have 
minor potential environmental, health and safety 
issues and impacts on the operators and the labors 
as well as on the local environment.  Therefore, in 
order to mitigate such potential impacts an ESMF 
was prepared by MAIL and found acceptable by the 
Bank. Based on the direction and guidelines as well 
as check lists of the ESMF, two site specific ESMPs 
were also prepared for the existing silos that will 
undergo rehabilitation and will be implemented to 
avoid, minimize, and mitigate any potential impact. 
Once the location of the three new sites are 
identified, site specific ESMPs will also be prepared 
during implementation stage and will be applied on 
the new sites of the remaining three new silos. 
 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The WB Pest Management Policy (OP/BP 4.09) is 
triggered as the silos will be using fumigation for 
maintaining the quality of wheat stored as a general 
practice in managing grain reserves. Use of 
fumigants should be according to the USEPA and 
WHO guidelines . Health and Safety measures should 
strictly be followed for Operation and Maintenance 
of silos to ensure the safety of the workers at the 
site of the silos . MAIL and the project with the help 
of WB safeguards team will prepare a Pest 


Management Plan during the project 
implementation much in advance before the 
facilities are used for storing wheat which is not 
expected to be before the second year of the 
project. The plan will consider the current practices 
and knowledge about the issue, e.g., what 
technology is used for preservation of wheat and 
availability of fumigants in the market. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

OP/BP 4.12 is applicable since the project will 
support the construction of new three Silos, which 
may require land acquisition and involuntary 
resettlement. 
Since the scope and other details of all proposed 
activities, including the exact locations of the new 
silos are not yet determined, an ESMF and a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been 
prepared by the client and the executive summary 
was disclosed both in-country and at the Bank’s 
external website prior to project appraisal on 
4/11/2017. 
The ESMF and RPF will guide preparation of the 
social safeguards studies, such as limited Social 
Impact Assessment (SIA), ESMPs and RAPs (where 
needed). The RPF includes the requisite Terms of 
Reference (TORs) for the RAP.  
ESMF and RPF consultations with stakeholders have 
been conducted and minutes from public 
consultation have been included. 
 
 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
 

 
 
KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will not have significant and/or irreversible impacts and might only have minor reversible impacts as the 
civil works would only be either rehabilitation of two existing silos, and construction of three new silos. When the 
ESMF tools and the ESMPs for the two locations under rehabilitation are properly applied during the implementation, 
this potential impact will be mitigated. ESMPs will carefully chalk out the sanitation and drinking water needs and their 
interaction and will give specific mitigation measures, and will also provide directions in sites of labor camps if any, 
selection and rehabilitation of specific areas, transportation routes, and the occupational health and safety measures 
for the labors and the local relevant communities. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
The sub-projects will include rehabilitation of two silos in Mazar-e-Sharif, and Pul-e-Khumri and construction of three 
new silos in Kabul, Herat, and Kandahar in addition to the establishment of a new warehouse facility in Badakhsan. 
The project ESMF, the subprojects site specific ESMPs have been prepared, and an outline for the  Pest Management 
Plan (PMP) is also included in the project ESMF, and during project implementation, a full PMP will be developed. With 
these instruments, the project will be positioned to reduce and mitigate any potential impact. However, due to the 
nature of the Project compoentnts there will be no indirect and /or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities 
The project triggers OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, because the physical infrastructure activities under 
component B may  involve implications that could impact individuals and/or communities in different ways. Therefore, 
the preparation of the ESMF and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will guide the preparation of any Social 
Impact Assessments (SIA) or Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) that may be needed. However, it is expected that all 
new constructions will be all on lands owned by MAIL, and free from any settlers.  
 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
The project aimed to use government owned land and environmental friendly technologies for establishing and/or 
renovating the Silos, and also for the construction of the new warehouse in the northeast region. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower will address all safeguards related issues under a framework approach. A project Environmental and 
Social Management Framework(ESMF) has been developed by the borrower and a safeguards specialist will be hired 
by the project in order to implement the ESMF and to comply with the world bank safeguard policies. The borrower, 
the implementing agency, MAIL has experience with the WB safeguards implementation and will hopefully implement 
the relevant project safeguards at a satisfactory level.  
For each of the subprojects a site specific Environmental and Social Safeguards Action Plan (ESMP) would be prepared 
based on the project ESMF. Already two ESMPs for the two locations that will undergo rehabilitation have been 
developed. The borrower will mainstream relevant clauses in the relevant contract documents and will follow the 
Occupational Health and Safety as well as sanitation issues in project sites as well as in the project labor camps. During 
the implementation stage a PMP would be prepared and the outline of the proposed PMP is included as an Annex to 


5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main stakeholders are government agencies, local populations residing close to the silos facilities, donors, 
consultants, and private sector. Relevant citizen engagement tools  were used during preparation of the ESMF, and 
the ESMPs for the two already identified sites (the two silos which will be rehabilitated), once the other four locations 
have been identified during project implementation, site specific ESMPs will be developed. The ESMF and the site 
specific ESMPs as well as the PMP will all be disclosed on the Ministry Website as well as in the Bank Intranet system. 
Consultation and disclosure procedure is also illustrated in the ESMF. Already the executive summary of the ESMF 
have been translated to local language, and published. 
 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Women's Economic Empowerment Rural Development Project (P164443) 

 
 

  
Aug 29, 2018 Page 1 of 18  

     

      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 29-Aug-2018 | Report No: PIDISDSA24505 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Afghanistan P164443 Women's Economic 
Empowerment Rural 
Development Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA 31-Aug-2018 28-Sep-2018 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Rural 
Rehabilitation and 
Development 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 

To increase social and economic empowerment of poor rural women in selected communities. 

 
Components 

Community Mobilization and Institution Development 
Building Access to Finance and Linkages with Financial Institutions 
Providing Technical Assistance and Improved access to Markets 
Project Management and Knowledge Management 

 
 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 100.00 

Total Financing 100.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 25.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 25.00 


          IDA Grant 25.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Trust Funds 75.00 

          Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund 75.00 

    

Environmental Assessment Category 

B-Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

1. Despite notable progress in rebuilding the economy, strengthening institutions, and restoring 
infrastructure and basic services, Afghanistan faces tremendous challenges today. Afghanistan has relatively 
successfully managed the immediate challenges resulting from the political transition post-election of 2014.  The 
country has maintained macroeconomic stability and established the conditions for a slow recovery of the 
economy. Risks to the economy remain significant, however, and withdrawal of international security forces 
starting 2011, coupled with political uncertainties and declining aid, have resulted in deceleration of economic 
growth, while fiscal pressures increase as security threats mount. The latest numbers from the Afghanistan Living 
Conditions Survey (ALCS)1 released by the Central Statistics Organization (CSO) show that poverty in Afghanistan 
has increased from 38.3 percent in 2012-13 to 54.5 percent in 2016-17.2 With the population continuing to grow 
more than 3 percent a year, per capita GDP fell during the same period from US$ 669 to US$ 551, making it one 
of the poorest countries in the world. At the same time, private sector growth has fallen 9.4 percent in the period 
2003-2012 to only 2.1 percent between 2013 and 2016. Private sector development and diversification is 
constrained by political instability, weak institutions, inadequate infrastructure, widespread corruption, and a 
difficult business environment (Afghanistan was ranked 183rd of 190 countries in the 2017 Doing Business Survey 
and 177 out of 180 in Transparency International’s Corruption Perception Index)3. With a fresh election cycle 
approaching in 2018-19, it is vital that the Government focuses on private sector led growth and revitalization of 
the economy to fill up the void emerging from the declining donor inflows over the longer-term.  
 

2. A particularly concerning challenge is the low level of economic empowerment of Afghan women. The 
current level of women’s formal economic contribution to Afghan development is low. While women constitute 
47 percent of the estimated 34.65 million population of Afghanistan in 20164 the female labour force 
participation rate stands at only 26.8 percent (down from 29 percent in 2013-14). Among the working age 

                                                           
1 Source: ALCS 2016-17; available at https://cso-of-afghanistan.shinyapps.io/ALCS_Dashboard  
2 This is measured against a national poverty line of 2,064 AFN per person per month – approx. $1 a day in current exchange 
rate terms. 
3 Sources: www.doingbusiness.org/data and www.transparency.org/cpi  
4 Statistics in this section are taken from the ALCS 2013-2014, ALCS 2016-17, the World Bank development database; and the 
WEE-NPP Strategy paper, December 2016. 

women, only 29 percent are economically active and most are employed in the agricultural sector (70 percent) 
while 24 percent are in manufacturing. The share of women in wage employment in non-agricultural sector is 
only 10 percent. Only 19.9 percent of the female population is literate (versus 49.4 percent for men), although 
this figure nearly doubles to 38.7 percent if only the female population under 25 is counted, a significant 
testimony to the advances that have been obtained over the past decade. Women earn significantly less than 
men. For the same type of job, women earn 30 percent less than men on average. 

 

3. Women in Afghanistan face significant legal, regulatory and cultural challenges that hinder their ability 
to run businesses and access markets5.  While the Afghan Constitution clearly states that “the citizens of 
Afghanistan – whether man or woman – have equal rights and duties before the law”6 and while most commercial 
laws have no explicit gender-legal differentiations, there are implicit cultural barriers and lack of legal incentive 
mechanisms that reduce the ability of women to participate in the economy successfully. Likewise, there are 
numerous actual gender-legal differences when it comes to non-commercial laws (like the Marriage Law, Civil 
Code, Labor Law, etc.). These include differences in the legal age of marriage, mobility of women, ownership of 
property, and duration and types of work that women can undertake7. This lack of legal incentives for women to 
participate in formal business activities, has translated into very low levels of female entrepreneurship and 
women-owned businesses, although this number has increased steadily thanks to donor and Government efforts. 

 

4. Access to finance, particularly for rural women, is especially constrained. Financial inclusion is a core 
development challenge in Afghanistan – with only 10 percent of the population (and 3.8 percent of women) 
having accounts in formal financial institutions8. Microfinance has been a widely-used strategy in Afghanistan to 
address barriers to financial inclusion, with the Microfinance Investment Support Facility for Afghanistan (MISFA) 
serving as an apex institution channeling funding and technical assistance to the whole sector. While the sector 
has grown and consolidated over the last decade, the total number of clients of micro-finance institutions (MFIs) 
only stands at 0.22 million, of which only 0.13 million are active borrowers. The outreach of MFIs is limited to 80 
districts of 14 provinces, and only 12 percent of their active clients are from rural areas. Naturally, therefore, 
demand for microfinance services continues to far outstrips supply, especially in rural areas where financial 
markets have limited presence. The outreach of the banking industry is equally limited in rural areas. Currently, 
there are 15 licensed banks in Afghanistan including three state owned banks, nine private sector banks, and 
three foreign banks. The Banking sector has gradually been offering range of financial products and services but 
their services are mostly limited to urban areas. Most commercial banks have no branches outside Kabul yet, and 
a few are providing loans to local businesses, much less small rural businesses. 
 

5. There is hence tremendous potential to increase women’s participation in national development. 
Global evidence increasingly showcases that greater gender equality can enhance productivity, improve 
development outcomes for the next generation, and make institutions more representative.9 Actions to expand 
women’s economic activity in Afghanistan are constrained by a variety of cultural, institutional, and economic 
factors. Afghan women suffer discrimination that is multi-faceted, inter-related and self-reinforcing. But the 
current international perception that Afghan women are blocked from the economy is an unhelpful over-
generalization given the variation in cultural practices across the country. Furthermore, as in other parts of the 

world, cultural practices are more dynamic than often realized. As an economy grows and more opportunities 
arise, cultural beliefs about women’s ability to contribute to household income and their participation in 
economic activities will change. Moreover, addressing gender disparities and empowering women is essential 
for consolidating peace and security in fragile and conflict-affected societies. The imperative for investing in 
women’s economic empowerment (WEE) in Afghanistan can thus not be over-emphasized. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

6. Recognizing this imperative, the Government of Afghanistan (GoIRA) launched the Women’s Economic 
Empowerment National Priority Program (WEE-NPP) on March 8th, 2017. The WEE-NPP forms the third pillar of 
the GoIRA’s Gender Strategy which is encompassed in the broader Afghanistan National Peace and Development 
Framework (ANPDF) – the country’s five-year development plan. The WEE-NPP aims to build poor women’s 
capacity to strengthen the economy of their households, communities, and the entire nation. It is structured as 
an umbrella program (rather than a stand-alone project/operation) that would operate through over a dozen 
line ministries (through ongoing or pipeline projects) and coordinated through a Program Coordination Office 
(PCO) in the Ministry of Labor, Social Affairs, Martyrs and Disabled (MOLSAMD). The latter would in turn provide 
start-up technical and financial resources to support women-owned businesses, and development of job skills, 
and financial literacy. The program would further help create an enabling environment for WEE through policy 
and planning reforms that will remove legal barriers to women’s economic participation; streamline and reduce 
regulatory barriers to women’s involvement in marketing; and improve the quality and use of gender statistics 
for planning and monitoring women's economic progress.   

 

7. The WEE-NPP builds upon and complements other initiatives of the GoIRA. The WEE-NPP builds on 
previous government-led initiatives to expand women's economic empowerment, including the gender elements 
of the Afghanistan Compact, the 2008-18 National Action Plan for the Women of Afghanistan (NAPWA), and the 
2008 Afghanistan National Development Strategy (ANDS). The GoIRA has also fully committed to gender equality 
and has backed this commitment with credible reforms to increasing the role of women in government, providing 
access to property, and implementing UN Resolution 1325. The WEE-NPP compliments these efforts and links 
closely to other NPPs – notably the Citizens’ Charter National Priority Program (CCNPP), the Agriculture NPP and 
the Human Development NPP. 
 

8. The WEE-NPP is comprised of six pillars. The WEE-NPP encompasses two domains of action. Facilitating 
activities (the first two pillars) include reforms that improve the regulatory and normative environment for 
women’s economic development, and investment activities (the last four pillars) include projects and programs 
that provide resources directly to women. In this way, the six WEE-NPP pillars focus on: (i) increasing the 
availability and analysis of gender statistics; (ii) removing legal and regulatory barriers to participation; (iii) 
training in literacy, business management, and labor skills; (iv) ensuring inclusive access to finance; (v) improving 
access to agricultural inputs, extension services, and markets; and, (vi) promoting access to creative economy 
markets. The activities under each of these pillars will be implemented by different ongoing and pipeline projects 
under various line ministries. 

 
9. The proposed women’s economic empowerment rural development project (WEE-RDP) will directly 
implement the last four pillars of WEE-NPP, while contributing to the others. It offers a national framework for 
women’s economic empowerment starting at the community level and with an explicit targeting of poor rural 
women. As acknowledged in the WEE-NPP document, past efforts at women’s economic empowerment have 
often focused on better-off, urban women. WEE-RDP reverses this approach. 

10. The project builds off the lessons from the ongoing Afghanistan Rural Enterprise Development Program 
(AREDP). The AREDP was approved by the ARTF Management Committee on April 11, 2010 with the objective of 
improving employment opportunities and income of rural men and women, and sustainability of targeted local 
enterprises. The project was successful in integrating the poorest segments of the population and empowering 
women who were the main direct beneficiary groups of all Project activities. AREDP’s operational activities have 
resulted in the strengthening of about 64,328 community members (56 percent women) including marginalized 
groups, IDPs and Returnees through a community-driven savings and enterprise model for income and 
employment generation. More than 5,193 SGs (54 percent women), 1,336 EGs (841 EGs managed by women) 
and 505 VSLAs were established and supported. Community Saving Groups have saved US$4.2 million (US$2.2 
million by women), where US$4 million of loanable savings are in circulation at any given time. Additionally, the 
program supported 657 SMEs to strengthen backward/forward linkages with the rural economy and utilized 
them as business service providers for the newly established community enterprises. A recent Bank funded 
analytical study ‘Jobs from Agriculture and Rural Development Operations in Afghanistan’ found that the 
employment effects of AREDP on female beneficiaries were significant. Participation of women in program 
activities has emerged as one of key strengths of AREDP as over 60% program beneficiaries are women. The 
impact of the project on the local economy and its catalytic effect on social inclusion facilitate its transition into 
a programmatic and women-oriented operation under the WEE-NPP.  
 

11. The project will leverage the social mobilization and outreach of the Citizens’ Charter program. Most 
successful women’s empowerment programs are built on a community platform which also provides access to 
basic services and enables trust. This is why the WEE-NPP conceived the WEE-RDP to leverage the institutional 
structure of the Citizens’ Charter National Priority Program (CCNPP). The CCNPP emerged from the foundation 
of the highly successful National Solidarity Program (NSP), which introduced a community-driven development 
(CDD) approach towards rural infrastructure and service delivery and reached approximately 35,000 
communities over the past 14 years. The Citizens’ Charter Afghanistan Project (CCAP) which implements the first 
phase of the CCNPP aims to deliver core infrastructure, emergency support, and social services to participating 
communities through strengthened Community Development Councils (CDCs). By helping to improve services, 
especially for the poor and most vulnerable through the CDCs, it also ensures social inclusion. The CCAP was 
planned to be a major contributor to building strong and accountable institutions especially by strengthening the 
capacity of CDCs to plan and monitor local service delivery and hold government and service providers 
accountable. The CCAP can thus provide an umbrella body for women’s groups and help women access critical 
social infrastructure. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

12. To increase social  and economic empowerment of poor rural women in selected communities. 

 

13. The project defines “social empowerment” as participation in community level women’s institutions, with 
an implicit theory of change that such participation leads to social empowerment. These institutions will be 
provided seed capital, technical assistance, and in turn be linked to formal financial institutions and markets so 
as to enable economic empowerment. “Economic empowerment” is defined in this project as having both the 
resources to advance economically and the power to make and act on economic decisions. Economic 
empowerment starts with fair and equal access to markets and institutions, but women also need agency and 
control over resources to ensure they benefit from economic activities. Economic empowerment also 


encompasses financial inclusion, which increases women’s access to products and services to exercise control 
over money.  

 
PDO Level Indicators 

14. Following the focus of the project on social, financial, and economic inclusion and empowerment, the 
proposed PDO level indicators are as follows: 

(a) Number of direct beneficiaries (of which female)  
(b) % of women self-help group (SHG) members from poor or vulnerable households  
(c) Number of beneficiaries reached with financial services (Corporate Results Indicator) 
(d) % of women EGs/PAs showing increase in volume of sales 

 
D. Project Description  

15. Based on the rural goals outlined in the WEE-NPP, the WEE-RDP has three core intervention tracks – one 
around social mobilization to develop community institutions and federating them to higher levels; the second 
dedicated to providing inclusive access to finance, and the third focusing more on enterprise development and 
value chain/market linkages. These would be supplemented with program support that would also link back to 
both the WEE-NPP and the CCNPP. This ‘institutional approach’ to empowerment of women has proven very 
successful in rural livelihoods projects in other South Asian countries, notably in India, since it harnesses the social 
capital of poor women and uses this to develop both financial and economic capital. The overall approach and 
functions are similar to what existed under the AREDP, but the fundamental shifts would be (i) specific design 
features to promote participation of poor women; (ii)a more prominent role of social mobilization (with a goal of 
‘saturating’ as many women into savings/self-help groups as possible, of which a subset would receive enterprise 
support); and (iii) a much stronger focus on building sustainable community institutions for women’s agency and 
empowerment. Keeping this core design model in mind, each of the project components is described below.  
 

COMPONENT-1: Community Mobilization and Institution Development (est. US$ 30 million) 

16. Overall focus: The first component of the WEE-RDP aims to build sustainable community institutions 
through social and economic mobilization of rural women. This is perhaps the most critical component of the 
project, since it lays the institutional foundation on top of which the rest of the activities will depend. The 
formation of sustainable institutions would build the social capital of women in the rural areas and serve as the 
first stage of their economic empowerment. The core community institutional framework envisaged under the 
project are women’s savings groups (WSG or simply SGs) which would be federated into VLSAs. From these would 
emerge community level enterprise groups (EG) which in turn would be aggregated to producer associations (PAs). 
The project will heavily draw on the mobilization efforts undertaken by CCAP and leverage the network of CCAP 
facilitating partners (FPs) working with the program.  
 

Component 2: Building Access to Finance and Linkages with Financial Institutions (est. US$ 38 million): 

17. Overall approach: The second component will facilitate empowering of both community institutions i.e. 
SGs/VSLAs and its members to develop as sustainable financial institutions at the community level and eventually 
establish direct linkages with financial service providers including MFIs and commercial banks. Evidence from past 
experiences in Afghanistan as well as other countries demonstrates that this is a long-term process that has to be 
approached in phases. The key focus of WEE-RDP would be to strengthen the ‘demand side’ by creating an 
ecosystem of women savings groups that are built on mutual trust and respect to support their livelihoods and 


federate to VSLAs for sustainability. This would prepare the women groups to link with MFIs and make them 
bankable. In this way, there would be three stages in the access to finance:  

(a) the first stage is to develop an own savings culture through SHGs and federate them into VLSAs.  
(b) In the second stage, the project will inject seed capital, which will support transforming VSLAs to 

the next level in terms of scale as well as operational and financial sustainability.  
(c) Finally, the third stage would be to link the VSLAs to MFIs and Banks. 

 

18. The component will have a strong focus on ensuring the financial and operational sustainability of VSLAs 
and will work with MFIs and commercial banks to create an enabling environment for investment in the 
livelihoods of rural women by increasing their access to sustainable financial services. 
 
19. Financial Intermediation. Given the above, the project complies in general terms with OP 10.00 para 15 
on financial intermediation. However, there is a significant reason for concern about how loan contracts can be 
enforced, and how VSLAs will be sustainable when relying on ad hoc profit sharing arrangements (under Islamic 
finance) instead of predictable interest rates. There are also major security concerns in rural areas that could 
make the financial intermediation activities difficult to implement on the ground. An additional concern is how 
risks will be covered, including force majeure risk and credit risk (on loans to SHGs by VSLAs, and on loans from 
microfinance institutions and commercial banks to VSLAs in the future).  Given that VSLAs are supervised by the 
Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development, a new arrangement for supervision will be necessary as they 
take on a financial intermediation role. Mature VSLAs managing grants and a growing loan portfolio may be 
supervised by the Central Bank, while others will require technical assistance and supervision from another 
agency.   It would also be critical to have a certification process to insure basic practices and systems are in place 
before seed capital is provided. For VSLAs that initially meet requirements and later do not, there needs to be a 
decertification or strengthening process in place – and this would have ripple effects for groups who have 
provided their savings. As for the eventual participation of MFIs, there is no law in place yet, which might limit 
their role. However, efforts are underway to pass a law to provide clear legal status and supervision 
arrangements. 
 
20. Component 3: Providing Technical Assistance and Improved access to Markets (est. US$ 18 million):  
This component aims to finance common assets of public goods nature based on business needs and assessment 
of market failures using the ‘maximizing finance for development’ (MFD) cascade principle (see figure 6 below) 
in order to provide catalytic support for the growth of viable economic activities and leveraging more private 
sector investments. These investments are expected to be catalytic, helping individual level investments reach 
economies of scale through increased coordination. This will be supplemented with technical assistance, business 
development support, as well as market exposure and linkages.  

 

21. Approach: Groups of women with homogeneous economic activities under the project will be enabled 
and incentivized to come up with business ideas that will provide the rationale for partnership and formation of 
Enterprise Groups (EGs) and Producers Associations (PAs). 10 Any support under this component will be against 

                                                           
10 Enterprise/Producers Groups (EGs or PGs) are primary economic interest groups consisting of members from same village 
working on common enterprise/production systems. This could be in the areas of farm; non-farm or off farm activities. Members 

of an EG normally ranges from 8-20 depending upon nature of economic activities. Producer’s Association (PAs) would be a higher 

order, secondary organization i.e. Federations of EGs/PAs. EGs/PGs from multiple villages engaged in common economic or 

income generating activities could be federated at a cluster level i.e. 10 to 20 villages. While, EG and PG would be an informal 

 
robust Business Plan with a ceiling of $ 2000 per EG, which may also be aggregated for the larger assets 
/infrastructure at the PA level depending upon specific business case and project requirements. The committee 
reviewing the business plan would have members of commercial banks/MFIs and representatives from industries 
and private sector, who could also choose to co-finance the proposal. The project is also considering contracting 
an independent third party to verify and validate the Business plan in terms of feasibility, fiduciary process and 
inclusion. It is expected that this build-up process will help women to increase their productivity, 
competitiveness, which would in turn improve the job opportunities for women and contribute to their economic 
empowerment. The component builds on the existing successful framework of AREDP on enterprise 
development which has proven effective in developing women enterprises and supporting them on capacity 
building, business skills and linkage to markets. EGs will be encouraged among all SHG members engaged in 
common economic activities. Thus, the component would help both individual and collective women enterprises 
to participate in organized and competitive supply chains, which would be identified through provincial 
situational analysis and other related studies. The focus will be on pro-poor, high value commodities such as 
vegetables, horticulture, milk, poultry, ship; fish; goat; carpet; honey, handicrafts etc. where women participation 
tend to be higher. Overall, only a sub-set of total households and geography having growth potential and are 
part of either economic clusters or value chains would be specifically supported under this component. This 
component will also facilitate EGs access to credit from VSLAs to support building of a healthy portfolio for the 
VSLAs and hence contributing to their sustainability. This component will also seek to draw partnerships and 
synergy with other ARTF, bilateral donor funded, and NGO run programs and projects that work on similar 
themes11. Investments made under this component would be largely/mostly of public in nature. 
 
22. COMPONENT 4: Project Management and Knowledge Management (est. US$14 million): Under this 
Component, the project will finance salaries of project staff, consultancies, training programs, office equipment, 
and incremental operational costs of set up under MRRD and provincial units. The component will also support 
project coordination, implementation, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) at the national and provincial levels, 
Management Information System (MIS), financial management (FM), procurement, human resource 
management, knowledge management and communication systems as well as environmental and social 
safeguards management, and running of the grievance redress mechanism. The project will leverage the existing 
institutional infrastructure available in the CCAP program at the MRRD level for various project management 
activities including procurement, FM and communications. A detailed M&E plan will be prepared to align project 
activities and tasks with the key results and the related PDO level results indicators and the intermediate level 
indicators at the component level. There will be systematic internal monitoring of activities and results that will 
be fed into the preparation of Implementation Status report and Annual Progress reports. An M&E/ MIS system 
will be established to collect and process appropriate information that will enable determination of the progress 
towards the achievement of the project development objective, tracking of progress at each phase of the results 
chain, and if required, adjustments will continuously be made and at Mid-Term. Baseline information will also be 
collected as part of the project preparation activities. 
 

23. Other areas of support under the component include the following: 
(a) Technical assistance to inform implementation and policy development, and capacity building of 

some of the MRRD directorate/cell/units to mainstream and ensure long term adequate staffing 

                                                           
organization, efforts would be made to convert PAs as formal community based organization registered as co-operatives or 

companies. Membership of PAs could range from 50 to 500 depending on the value chain.  

11 In this respect, the project is exploring a formal partnership with the “Women in Economy” program run by USAID. 

as part of exit strategy; 
(b) Partnership arrangements with some of the projects in India/Pakistan e.g. JEEViKA, Bihar in India 

or PPAF, Pakistan for overall technical assistance and implementation guidance; 
(c) Overall training and capacity building of staff/community professionals; identification, 

development and deployment of CRPs; organizing study tours and field learning trips; exchange 
of knowledge etc. could be also supported as part of this component. 

 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

24. The WEE-RDP will be implemented by the Ministry of Rural Rehabilitation and Development (MRRD) 
under the overall framework of WEE-NPP. Although, MRRD is going through an structural changes, which will 
evolve during the course of 2019, as per the latest thinking, it is proposed to restructure the Ministry into three 
operational general directorates, each covering the main functional pillars of MRRD’s operations. These are – (a) 
Community Development (covering the Citizen’s Charter Afghanistan Project (CCAP) as well as supporting public 
goods/infrastructure projects such as the Afghanistan Rural Access Project (ARAP)); (b) Sustainable Economic 
Growth (covering the livelihoods/private goods related operations such as AREDP); and (c) Balanced Growth and 
Border Areas (covering specialized cross-border programs targeting these geographies as well as specific 
populations). Common functions (such as HR, procurement, finance, etc.) would be centralized at the Ministry 
level. The WEE-RDP, given its livelihoods and private sector goods focus, would be situated under the second 
pillar (Sustainable Economic Growth). However, WEE-RDP would work closely with CC General Directorate as 
well as balanced growth pillars at both the national and sub-national levels and would leverage existing 
implementation architecture set up under different programs, particularly CCAP.  
 

25. The existing WEE-NPP Steering Committee will provide overall strategic guidance and oversight. The 
High-Level Steering Committee established under the WEE-NPP will be used for the overall co-ordination, 
guidance, setting up direction for program implementation and to enable leveraging of resources and drive 
synergies among various related programs of these Ministries for the overall socio-economic empowerment of 
women in Afghanistan. The steering committee will also be an avenue to move forward with any policy reforms 
and legal provisions that may be needed to facilitate the program (e.g. registration of VSLAs, or easing the process 
of issuing national IDs to women, etc.). The WEE-RDP directorate at the national level will coordinate its activities 
with the other programs being implemented under the aegis of the WEE-NPP through other related Ministries, 
such as the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock (MAIL); Ministry of Commerce and Industries (MoCI); 
MoLSAMD; and Ministry of Women Affairs (MoWA) so as to ensure synergy and coordination.  
 

26. At the national level, the existing AREDP PIU, will be re-modelled for WEE-RDP and positioned within 
the new Sustainable Economic Growth Directorate. The Directorate/PIU will be fully staffed with technically 
competent multi-disciplinary team of senior professionals, consultants and sector specialists to implement & 
manage the enterprise development, access to finance, access to market and economic empowerment elements 
of the program. WEE-RDP will utilize MRRDs common resources/systems for program support services related 
to HR; Finance Management, Procurement, and other technical units like communication; gender; Grievance 
redressal; Governance and Accountability etc. as part of the proposed Ministry restructuring. Only a lean team 
of complementary skills set with WEE-RDP will be maintained at the WEE-RDP directorate level for overall co-
ordination; policy/guidelines formulation; and for building partnerships with various public & private 
development organizations/institutions. 


27. At the sub-national level, the WEE-RDP structure will be merged with the existing institutional 
arrangements for the CCAP to avoid duplication. The WEE-RDP would therefore piggy back on the provincial 
management units (PMUs) and District Offices that have been set up under CCAP. The latter would be 
supplemented with one District Coordinator (DC) for each of the 76 districts under WEE-RDP coverage and the 
program would also establish seven regional offices for coordination across the provinces under them. 
Additionally, a team of 3 SOs (two female and one male) would be hired for every 30 CDCs covered for the first 
two years, which would then be reduced to 3 SOs per district in the remaining three years of implementation 
once the speed and scale of the program had increased sufficiently and most of the VSLAs were formed. Likewise, 
a team of 3 VFs (again two female and one male) would be deployed for every 10 CDCs for 2 years and 
subsequently for every 20 CDCs in Years 3-5. This same implementation model would be proposed for the FPs 
(who would be asked to on board VFs as well) so that at exit there is a common implementation architecture for 
the program. Selection of the sub-national positions will be done through a competitive process managed by 
MRRD at the provincial level. 

 
 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

Based on the AREDP experiences and lessons learnt, the proposed project, WEE-RDP is designed to be a 
more women centric program that is in better alignment with the WEE-NPP objectives. It will cover a total 
of 76 districts across all 34 provinces in the country with an average of 2 districts covered per province. 
More than two thirds of these districts overlap with the ongoing CCAP and therefore the WEE-RDP will 
benefit from the community mobilization and capacity building (including a range of participatory analysis 
and tools) that have been done as part of the former. At this stage it is envisaged that, the environmental 
and social adverse impacts will be insignificant, minor and reversible in nature. The environmental impacts 
may include issues with health, safety and labor hygiene as well as concerns on handling and disposal of 
agro-based wastes. However, given the scope and scale of planned businesses, the impact are minor and 
easily manageable. The environmental and social safeguards issues will be managed through a framework 
approach, and if required the framework will include necessary provisions to spell out with additional 
safeguards tools and plans which will be used throughout the project life.  


SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 is triggered. 
The access to finance under compoent-2 and the 
provision of seed capital (revolving fund) for VSLAs 
under subcomponent 3 and  may cause some 
adverse environmental and social impacts including 
occupational health and safety issues. The 
environmental and health and safety concerns may 
arise from different enterprises including agro-
businesses, food processing machinery, chicken 
farms, carpets weaving and other handcraft 
industries etc.  
Similarly, the project has also triggered Pest 
Management OP/BP 4.09 to ensure address safe 
utilization of pesticide and other associated risks 
related to agri-business. A ToR for Pest Management 
Plan (PMP) has been prepared by the client . The 
project has adopted a framework approach, as the 
specific locations and details of activities will only be 
determined by the borrower during project 
implementation.  The Environmental and Social 
Management Framework (ESMF) prescribes 
directions and procedures that would avoid, 
mitigate, or minimize adverse environmental and 
social impacts and it will also spell out the policies, 
guidelines and procedures including mitigation plans 
to minimize and mitigate the likelihood of envisaged 
negative impacts. The ToR for preparation of the 
PMP is annexed in the project ESMF.   
The ESMF was prepared, consulted, cleared and 
disclosed before project appraisal and the required 
mitigation plans for sub-project and businesses 
activities under WEERDP will be identified during 
implementation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Performance Standards for Private Sector 
Activities OP/BP 4.03 

No 

The project is owned, designed and will be 
implemented and supervised by the MRRD, which is 
a Government Agency and therefore the OP/BP 4.03 
is not triggered. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
OP/BP 4.04 is not triggered since; the scope of the 
project will not pose any risk to the natural habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
OP/BP 4.36 is not triggered since; the scope of the 
project will not pose any risk on Forest. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

OP 4.09 (Pest Management) is triggered, since under 
component-3 the project operations will lead the 
EGs (Enterprise Groups) to use pesticides for 
Agricultural related works and agri-business related 
activities.  
 
The Client will prepare an Pest Management Plan 
(PMP) during project implementation stage. The 
PMP will be subject to review by the Bank, consulted 
and disclosed. 
 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 

OP/BP 4.11 is not triggered because there are no 
activities that will impact the quality of physical 
cultural resources as defined under the policy. 
However, the ESMF will also comprise guidelines for 
Chance Find Procedures according to national laws. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 

This policy is not triggered as there are no 
Indigenous Peoples that meet the criteria of OP/BP 
4.10 in the country that could potentially benefit or 
be adversely affected by the Project’s activities. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No 

The World Bank’s operational policy on Involuntary 
Resettlement (OP 4.12) is not triggered, since the 
project will not have land acquisition and 
resettlement, in case of land requirement, the ESMF 
will provide guidelines and provisions on land 
acquisition through willing buyer-willing seller 
approach, or the Government provides government 
land to the community for sub-project 
implementation, requiring no resettlement and/or 
compensation for losses, and the land should be free 
of squatters and any dispute.  
The RSA concurs on the proposal not to trigger OP 
4.12 given that there is no physical footprint; land 
acquisition or subsequent impacts of physical or 
economic resettlement or loss of access to resources 
are not anticipated. The ESMF includes a section on 
land acquisition through willing buyer-willing seller 

=
method, if that should occur during project 
implementation. 
 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The Project does not have any activity involving 
dams. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
The Project does not involve any activity that will 
affect international waterways. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The Project does not involve any activity in any know 
disputed area. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
OP/BP 4.01 is triggered for the project hence the project is an Environmental Safeguards Category-B. The project 
under component 2 and 3 is intended to develop WSGs/VSLAs/EGs and PAs who would be provided with access to 
funds by multiple agencies. The funding would lead to village/community level businesses in various selected 
provinces. Although, the scope and nature of these businesses are not known at appraisal stage, however it is 
predicted that such businesses may have minor health and safety issues. The environmental and social safeguards risk 
rating for WEE-RDP is thus Moderate: due to insignificant negative impact on health, safety and environmental aspect 
from the project related operations.  
 
OP/BP 4.09 on Pest Management is also triggered as agricultural activities supported under Component 3 could lead 
Enterprise Groups (EGs) and Producer Associations (PAs) to use pesticides for agriculture related works and 
agribusiness related activities. The client will prepare an Pest Management Plan (PMP) during implementation to 
mitigate the risks from this. The PMP will be subject to review by the Bank, consulted, and disclosed during 
implementation. 
 
Likewise, activities under the project are not expected to have major adverse social impacts.  Systematic involvement 
of the local community throughout the planning and implementation of sub-projects will underpin the identification of 
potential negative social impacts and corresponding mitigation measures to be included in the ESMPs. Given the 
economic activities under the EGs and PAs, there is a potential risk of child labor. The project will therefore update 
and refine the ‘child labor’ strategy that had been used under AREDP. Training on labor safety will also be part of the 
training modules for EGs/PAs. Similarly, as global evidence shows, there can potentially be an enhanced risk of gender 
based violence (GBV) when working on women's economic empowerment. Although, there hasn’t been any evidence 
of increased GBV under AREDP as a result of engaging male community members, especially village elders and 
Mullah’s, this could be a potential risk to beneficiaries given that the focus now is only on women. To mitigate this 
risk, the project as part of its mobilization activities will discuss the importance women economic empowerment from 
Islamic point of view (the fact that women are given Mahr is to ensure their access to finance and making them 
empower financially) as well as highlight the good practices in Islam (wife of prophet being a merchant). Furthermore 
as part of capacity building and training activities under each component, the project will train women on soft skills 
including their wellbeing and how to manage/resolve conflict within family and community. The VSLA and SHGs will 


also serve as a safe-space to discuss/tackle potential GBV issues. 
 
As the project is owned, designed, implemented, and supervised by the MRRD (a Government Ministry), the OP/BP 
4.03 on Performance Standards for Private Sector Activities does not apply. 
 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
The project is not expected to have any harmful indirect or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities in 
the project area. 
 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
Not applicable. 
 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
To manage the environmental and socials safeguards (ESS) issues during the project implementation stage, the client 
has adopted a framework approach and prepared an environmental and social management framework (ESMF), 
which is consulted with stakeholders. Clearance has been obtained from the WB and disclosed officially. The ESMF has 
necessary provisions to prepare required safeguards mitigation measures including an Environmental and Social 
Management Plan (ESMP) and checklist to affectively address risk related issues during project implementation. Based 
on the experience of similar projects, notably AREDP that was managed by the same Ministry and team, most of the 
communities in the selected villages have no capacity/awareness to tackle risks associated with the day to day 
businesses under planned SGs/VSLAs. However, MRRD as an implementing agency has years of experience with 
similar projects and is therefore expected to provide the required technical assistance and capacity building to ensure 
that the provisions in EMSF are implemented. The project will hire an ESS focal officer at HQ level, as well as appoint 
safeguards focal points at each provincial level, the terms of references (TOR) for whom will need to be approved by 
the Bank before recruitment. The ESMF will guide the preparation of any Social Impact Assessments (SIA) and ESMPs, 
if required. The ESMF has been translated and disclosed in-country at Ministry’s Website and the World Bank’s 
external website on August 25, 2018. The ESMF contains the terms of reference for the proposed pest management 
plan. The PMP will be prepared and disclosed during project implementation. 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The key stakeholders are the communities and rural women who will be the beneficiaries of the project. The project 
will undertake a range of training and capacity building efforts with the target groups under each of the Components 
of the project. This will include awareness raising with regards to the ESS provisions in the ESMF. The project will also 
leverage similar efforts and capacity building done for CDCs through the Citizens Charter Afghanistan Project (CCAP). 
The ESMF has been translated and disclosed in-country at Ministry’s Website and the World Bank’s external website 
on August 25, 2018. 
 
 



 

























































World Bank Document

PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENT (PID) 
APPRAISAL STAGE

Report No.:  PIDA21451

Project Name Lake Qaraoun Pollution Prevention Project (P147854)
Region MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Country Lebanon
Sector(s) Agricultural extension and research (10%), General water, 

sanitation and flood protection sector (90%)
Theme(s) Water resource management (100%)
Lending Instrument Investment Project Financing
Project ID P147854
Borrower(s) Ministry of Finance
Implementing Agency Council for Development and Reconstruction
Environmental Category B-Partial Assessment
Date PID Prepared/Updated 23-Feb-2015
Date PID Approved/Disclosed 23-Feb-2015
Estimated Date of Appraisal 
Completion

03-Apr-2015

Estimated Date of Board 
Approval

22-Jul-2015

Decision

I. Project Context
Country Context
Lebanon is an upper-middle-income country, with a population of 4.5 million people and a gross 
domestic product (GDP) of US$9,930 per capita in 2013.  The country is highly urbanized, with 
more than 85 percent of its population living in cities.  It has an open economy in which services 
and trade account for 60 percent of GDP and 73 percent of jobs.  The economy is driven by a 
dynamic private sector and is dependent on financial flows from Arab Gulf countries. The country 
is well-known for the high quality of its education system, ranking 13th out of 122 countries.   
 
The Lebanese economy expanded at a moderate pace (3.6 percent annually) during the past five 
decades. However, political instability, terrorism activities and the spillovers from regional conflicts 
made this growth erratic and unstable. Moreover, the ongoing conflict in Syria has resulted in a 
large inflow of refugees (estimated at 1.4 million  in January 2015), accounting for 30 percent of 
the country’s population. This complex political, social, and security environment put additional 
strain on the economy and public services. In fact, the GDP growth decreased from 8 percent in 
2010 to just 0.9 percent in 2013.   
 
Poverty affects nearly 28 percent of the Lebanese population (living on US$4 per day) and extreme 
poverty touches 8 percent (living on US$2.4 per day).  The highest concentration of poor is found 
in the North, followed by the South and the Beqaa. In addition, most refugees are concentrated in 
the already impoverished area of the Beqaa (35 percent) and North Lebanon (35 percent). The 
Syrian crisis is expected to have increased poverty among 170,000 Lebanese by 2014, with the 
existing poor becoming even poorer.  In light of these challenges, job creation and social protection 
are among the main development priorities in the country.  
 
Lebanon made considerable progress in shaping the legal and institutional framework and restoring 
infrastructure after the civil war (1975-89) and the more recent war with Israel (2006). However, 
the country is still at an early stage of transition to environmental sustainability. The cost of 
environmental degradation in Lebanon has been estimated at 3.2 percent of the country’s GDP in 
2005.  Water pollution stands out as the country’s major environmental problem, costing more than 
1 percent of the GDP per year. This accounts for the damages caused by the discharge of untreated 
sewage, industrial effluent, and agricultural runoff into valleys, rivers, and the Mediterranean Sea.

  

Sectoral and institutional Context
THE LITANI RIVER AND LAKE QARAOUN 
 
The Litani River is the principal artery of Lebanon. Rising from the Olleiq springs close to the city 
of Baalbeck, it flows 170 km through the Beqaa valley and the Qaraoun Lake, before it reaches the 
Mediterranean Sea. The upper Litani River catchment extends over an area of 1,500 km2 (10 
percent of the Lebanese territory) and comprises 99 towns distributed into 4 administrative districts: 
Baalbeck, Zahlé, West Beqaa, and Rachayya. The major water structure along the Litani River is 
the Qaraoun Dam, which forms the Qaraoun Lake (or resevoir).  
 
POLLUTION OF WATER RESOURCES  
 
Large stretches of the Litani River and of the Qaraoun Lake are polluted due to four sources of 
pollution.   
• Municipal wastewater. In 2013, the volume of wastewater generated in the Beqaa was 
estimated at 63 million m3 with an annual load of 21,300 tons of Biochemical Oxygen Demand 
(BOD). Most wastewater is currently discharged untreated into the Litani River.  
• Industrial wastewater. This is estimated at about 4 million m3 in the Beqaa. There are 
factories producing effluents that are conveyed to surface water through nearby tributaries. Out of 
294 industrial establishments in the region, 120 are large-scale industries located within 400 m of 
the Litani River, its tributaries, or the Qaraoun Lake. 
• Municipal solid waste. Waste generated in the upper catchment of the Qaraoun Lake is 
estimated at 650 tons per day. Because of the lack of sanitary landfills, most garbage is dumped in 
open dumps and in the Litani River along the Qaraoun catchment. Water pollution comes from 
littering and surface water runoff of solid waste. This is acute when the waste site is close to surface 
water streams. The main dump sites exerting pressure on the Litani River are Temnin El Tahta, 
Saadnayel old dump, Qabb Elias, Barr Elias, Hawch El Harimi, El Khiyara, Ghazzé, and Jeb 
Jennine.  
• Agriculture. The largest use of land in the Litani River basin is for agriculture. In 2010, 
irrigated agriculture in the Beqaa covered about 54,000 ha, primarily concentrated in three districts: 
Baalbeck (24,000 ha); Zahlé (16,000 ha); and West Beqaa (10,000 ha). Vegetables, fruit trees, and 
industrial crops are the main irrigated crops in these areas.  Agricultural water pollution originates 



mainly from irrigation overflows and seepage. A field survey conducted in 2010  concluded that 
farmers in Beqaa are over-fertilizing their crops and many pesticides are being applied at almost 
twice the recommended rates. As a result, agricultural chemicals and non-degradable pesticides end 
up in waterways with irrigation overflows.  
 
BUSINESS PLAN TO COMBAT POLLUTION IN LAKE QARAOUN   
 
The Ministry of Environment (MoE) commissioned in 2010 a Business Plan to help the government 
of Lebanon (GoL) identify the major sources of pollution in the Qaraoun Lake and to recommend 
appropriate solutions to mitigate them (detailed information is provided in annex 2). The Business 
Plan was completed in 2011 and endorsed by the Presidency of the Council of Ministers in 2012. 
The plan includes detailed prioritized investments for each polluting sector, with a financing 
requirement estimated at about US$255 million. In February 2013, the GoL requested World Bank 
assistance to fund priority activities of the Business Plan. 
 
The Business Plan identifies the largest two pressures as agriculture and municipal wastewater. 
Action on agriculture sources of pollution is needed to improve the overall surface water while 
continuing to contribute to the agriculture sector, a key sector, in the Bekaa. On municipal 
wastewater priority actions identified relate to continue to increase the volume of wastewater 
treated in Zahle, Iaat, Temninm El Tahta, Anjar, Jeb Jannine where the population and economic 
activity are most dense. 
 
INSITUTIONAL CONTEXT  
 
The Ministry of Environment. The MoE is empowered to study, propose, and implement national 
environmental policies. It is considered the only regulatory environmental agency in the country. 
The MoE is primarily responsible for environmental policy planning; setting laws, regulations, and 
environmental standards; imposing the application of the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) 
on development projects; monitoring environmental quality; and identifying permitting conditions 
for new industry, agriculture, quarrying, and mining. In relation to the proposed project, the MoE is 
responsible for regulating the collection and disposal of solid waste. 
 
The Ministry of Energy and Water (MoEW) is responsible for the strategic planning and 
management of water resources. Prior to 2000, there were 21 regional water utilities. Water Law 
221 of year 2000 and its amendments merged them into four Water and Wastewater Establishments 
and one pre-existing river authority: North Lebanon, Beirut/Mount Lebanon, Beqaa, South 
Lebanon, and the Litani River Authority (LRA). This was a major step towards consolidating the 
responsibility of these establishmen ts and clarifying their mandate as public agencies empowering 
them to better manage water and wastewater services. The ultimate role of the water establishment 
is to have full administrative and financial autonomy over the service provision of water and 
wastewater services and irrigation. The Beqaa Water and Wastewater Establishment (BWE) is the 
one responsible for the project area. The BWE inherited distribution networks in poor conditions, 
with very high levels of illegal connections and very low collection rates from those legally 
connected. LRA is a public establishment under the MoEW is primarily responsible to (a) exploit 
hydro electrical power plants; (b) construct irrigation scheme, (c) conduct preliminary studies and 
construct dams, and (d) monitor the quality of the Litani River. 
 
The Ministry of Agriculture (MoA). The MoA has overall responsibility for the development of the 



agriculture sector. While the MoEW has the overall mandate for water resources, including 
irrigation, the MoA has the prime responsibility for irrigation at the farm level. Sustainable 
management and conservation of natural resources is considered an important pillar of the MoA’s 
strategy for 2010�2014. The strategy gives high priority to enhancing the efficient use of irrigation, 
expanding the use of treated wastewater for irrigation, and reducing water pollution from 
agricultural chemicals. The MoA is also responsible for the regulation of pesticide and fertilizer 
imports, marketing, and use, and it has launched a series of measures to enhance enforcement of 
these regulations and promote awareness about the proper use, handling, and disposal of pesticides. 
 
The Council for Development and Reconstruction (CDR). The CDR, established through Decree 
no.5 of 1977 is responsible for preparing national development plans, implementing infrastructure 
project, and mobilizing external financing to lead the reconstruction and development of the 
country. The CDR is accountable to the Council of Ministers.  
 
The Qaraoun Committee. In June 2012, a committee was established  to study the pollution 
problems of the Litani River and Qaraoun Lake and to propose remedial measures. The committee 
included representation of all key stakeholders and was active in the preparation and review of the 
Business Plan for Combating Pollution of the Qaraoun Lake. Once the Business Plan and 
subsequent roadmap were agreed upon, the study committee was dissolved. In May 2014, the 
Qaraoun Committee was established  to follow up on the implementation of the roadmap to combat 
pollution in Lake Qaraoun. The committee includes 16 members representing key stakeholders and 
has assigned the secretariat responsibility to the Litani River Authority.

II. Proposed Development Objectives
The development objectives of the project are to reduce the quantity of untreated municipal sewage 
discharged into the Litani river and to improve pollution management around Qaraoun Lake.

III. Project Description
Component Name
Component 1: Improve the collection of municipal sewage
Comments (optional)
This component will finance activities that increase sewerage collection in areas where wastewater 
treatment plants have been constructed (or planned to be constructed), to maximize the use of these 
investments. The criteria used for the selection of the investments on the expansion of the network 
are the following: (i) network for a currently underserved WWTP; and (ii) network for WWTP 
completed or expected to be completed within the project implementation period.

Component Name
Component 2. Promotion of good agricultural practices including integrated pest management to 
reduce agrochemical pollution in upper Litani basin
Comments (optional)
This component will promote adoption of sustainable production systems among farmers in the 
upper Litani basin, by introducing selected IPM (for example, reduced pesticides application) and 
GAP (for example, reduced fertilizer application and other conservation practices). These practices 
are expected to provide increased quality of agricultural products (without reducing yields); farmers’ 
savings (through decreased cost of production); and reduced pollution of the Litani River.

Component Name



Component 3. Technical Studies in Solid Waste, Water Quality Monitoring, Capacity Building and 
Project ManagementComments (optional)
This component will fund technical, environmental and social studies in solid waste. It will 
strengthen LRA capacity in water quality and water resources modeling and fund awareness /clean 
up campaign around the Litan river. It will improve BWE capacity in the supervision of wastewater 
infrastructure, the improvement in water fee collection and financial administration.

IV. Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost: 50.00 Total Bank Financing: 50.00
Financing Gap: 0.00
For Loans/Credits/Others Amount
Borrower 0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 50.00
Total 50.00

V. Implementation
The Qaraoun Committee -formally established by COM decision 32 of May 2014—already includes 
a representative from each institution involved in pollution management along the Qaraoun.  The 
committee will have an oversight role in the implementation of the proposedproject. Its main role is 
to ensure coherence and consistency between the proposed project and all other ongoing and 
planned investment in the upper Litani watershed area.  
 
Given the multisectoral aspects of the project, the CDR will be the implementing agency. CDR has 
wide experience with Bank operations, and is familiar with fiduciary and safeguards aspects. A 
Project Management Unit (PMU) will be headed by a project coordinator under the CDR’s 
responsibility. The PMU will be responsible for contract management, fiduciary and safeguards 
oversight, auditing, monitoring and reporting, coordination, and so on. Line ministries will be 
associated in the preparation and implementation of the project from the onset. As such, technical 
experts will be recruited by the CDR as part of the PMU but will be assigned to the line ministries/
agencies and will report to the PMU project coordinator at the CDR and their respective sectors. 
This arrangement will facilitate and bridge the gap between the CDR and the line ministries. It will 
also contribute to raising capacity in the different sectors involved.

VI. Safeguard Policies (including public consultation)
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project Yes No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 ✖
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 ✖
Forests OP/BP 4.36 ✖
Pest Management OP 4.09 ✖
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 ✖
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 ✖
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 ✖
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 ✖
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50 ✖


Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 ✖



























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 
 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 1 of 22  

     

 
 
 
      

 

Project Information Document (PID) 
 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 31-Mar-2021 | Report No: PIDA31193 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Yemen, Republic of P176129 Yemen Food Security 
Response and Resilience 
Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH 
AFRICA 

18-Mar-2021 27-Apr-2021 Agriculture and Food 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing United Nations 
Development Programme, 
World Food Programma, 
Food and Agriculture 
Organization 

World Food Programme, 
Food and Agriculture 
Organization, United 
Nations Development 
Programme 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The Project Development Objective is to improve the availability of and access to food and nutritious diets, both in the 
short and medium term, for targeted households in the Project Area, and to enhance Yemen's capacity to respond to 
food insecurity. 

 
Components 

Improving household incomes through CFW for agricultural production infrastructure and building climate resilience 
Increasing Production and Sale of Nutritious Crop, Livestock and Fish Products 
Improving the Nutritional Status of Vulnerable Rural Households 
Capacity building for food security management and climate resilience 
Project Management and Knowledge Management 

 
OPS_TABLE_FCC The processing of this project is applying the policy requirements exceptions for situations of urgent need of 
assistance or capacity constraints that are outlined in OP 10.00, paragraph 12.     
Yes 

 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 127.00 

Total Financing 127.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 100.00 



 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 100.00 

          IDA Grant 100.00 

Non-World Bank Group Financing 

     Trust Funds 27.00 

          Global Agriculture and Food Security Program 27.00 

    

Environmental and Social Risk Classification 

Substantial 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

 
1. Violent conflict, now in its seventh year, has crippled Yemen’s economy and created an 
unprecedented humanitarian crisis. Oil exports, the main source of government revenue and foreign 
exchange, came to a virtual halt in 2015 due to repeated sabotage of vital infrastructure and increased 
insecurity. The resulting wide-scale suspension of basic public services and civil service salary payments, 
rapid currency depreciation, and shortages of imported goods weakened the non-hydrocarbon sector and 
left many Yemenis without a regular income. More than 50 percent of Yemenis between the ages of 18 
and 24 were unemployed in 2017 (United Nations Development Program 2017). A liquidity crisis hit the 
country in mid- to late-2018 with the local currency depreciating significantly and food prices rising, 
making food virtually unaffordable to many households. External assistance financed imports of food and 
other necessities and helped stabilize the economy in 2019 but was largely depleted by early 2020 and 
foreign reserves were not replenished. Some respite was provided through IMF financing in late spring 
and summer of 2020.  
 
2. The macroeconomic policy environment differs spatially due to the bifurcation of 
administration between areas of control. In the areas controlled by the internationally recognized 



 

The World Bank  
Yemen Food Security Response and Resilience Project (P176129) 

 

 

  
Mar 10, 2021 Page 4 of 22  

 

government (IRG), significant revenue underperformance and continued monetization of the fiscal deficit 
have undermined macroeconomic stability. Oil prices remain low, eroding the government’s hydrocarbon 
revenue. Non-oil economic activity has suffered significantly from COVID-19 related trade slowdown, 
desert locust outbreaks and exceptionally heavy rainfalls, which have caused intense flooding, 
infrastructure damage and human casualties in 2020. The severe revenue shortfall has led to expenditure 
compression. Since early 2020, salary payments to public sector workers have seen frequent delays. 
Payables to suppliers (mostly to energy suppliers) have continued building up, disrupting fuel imports and 
electricity supply. The complete ban on using new banknotes since December 2019[1] has resulted in two 
exchange rates, complicating trade and financial flows across Yemen. The DFA’s fiscal policy operates 
under a cash-constrained budget. The collection of corporate profit and sales taxes and customs revenue, 
the three largest revenue sources, was affected negatively by COVID-19 related trade slowdown and 
movement restrictions, and administrative disruption caused by flooding. In 2020, the DFA disbursed half-
month salaries to public sector workers under its controlled areas every other month 1. 
 
3. Over 24 million people (or 83 percent of the total estimated population) are food insecure2, 
including a staggering 16.2 million people in IPC Phase 3+ requiring urgent emergency assistance. Food 
insecurity in Yemen is driven by constrained food production, supply and distribution and households’ 
diminishing purchasing power. An estimated 4.3 million people have fled their homes since the start of 
the conflict, and 3.3 million remain internally displaced. Hunger, food insecurity and malnutrition are 
among the most pressing and overwhelming challenges Yemen now faces, at a scale that is not being fully 
met by national authorities and the international development and humanitarian communities. Low food 
access has resulted from a combination a high household dependence on food imports, high food prices 
and significantly reduced household income. It is estimated that Yemen imported 8 percent less wheat 
per month between January and May 2020 than during the same period in 2019 due to limited funds, 
which is an insufficient imported amount of wheat to meet the 2020 consumption requirement.  
 
4. Socio-economic conditions deteriorated further in 2020, significantly worsening poverty. 
Distortions created by the fragmented institutional capacity and the divergent policy decisions between 
the areas of control have compounded the economic and humanitarian crisis. This dramatic deterioration 
of conditions in Yemen means that an estimated 80 percent of the population (around 24 million) were 
living below the poverty line even before COVID-19 pandemic crisis (World Bank 2019). The likely result 
based on anecdotal evidence is a contraction of the economy from an already low base in 2020. In addition 
to monetary poverty, it is estimated that up to 80 percent of households experience overlapping monetary 
and non-monetary deprivations (World Food Program 2020). 
 
5. Multiple indices point towards a significant gender gap, with Yemeni women having a lower 
standard of living than men, and less access to education, health, productive employment and food 
security than men (World Bank 2014). The Gender Inequality Index (GII) measures Yemen’s GII value as 
0.8343 vs. the world’s average at 0.439.  Yemen ranks 153 out of 153 countries, meaning Yemen has the 
most massive gender gap in the world, in the 2020 Global Gender Gap Report4 by the World Economic 

 
[1] Notes printed after September 2016 when the Central Bank of Yemen (CBY) headquarters was moved to Aden. 
1 The Yemen Macro-Poverty Outlook, the 2020 Annual Meetings Edition. 
2 IPC Phase 2 and above.  
3 The Borgen Project, 2018. 
4  The Global Gender Gap considers the economic participation, education, health and political empowerment of all genders. 

 

Forum. International Labor Organization (ILO)- modeled estimates5 suggest that 46 percent of women 
work in agriculture (versus only 27 percent of men). Yet far fewer women participate in the labor market 
and in productive employment, with only 6 percent of women participating in the labor force compared 
to 72 percent of men. One out of four women in the labor market are unemployed (24 percent) compared 
to 12 percent of men. Vulnerable employment is high for all but especially for women; 68 percent of 
women fall in this category compared to 44 percent of men. Income inequality is stark: for every dollar a 
man makes in Yemen, a woman is estimated to make only thirty cents6. In 2011, the adult literacy rate 
was 80 percent for men and 45 percent for women, but among youth aged 15-24, these rates were 96 
and 72, respectively7 8. Finally, while men face a higher direct burden of war through fighting and battle 
deaths, women are disproportionately affected by the indirect and often lasting effects of conflict (World 
Development Report 2011, Buvinic et al. 2012, Justino 2018) that exacerbate existing gender-based 
deprivations and development shortfalls. 
 
6. Economic and social prospects for 2021 and beyond are highly uncertain. With the ongoing 
difficult political and security situation, socio-economic conditions will remain difficult. Urgent progress 
to address the current restrictions of access to supplies and fuel imports would improve public service 
provision and the operational environment for humanitarian operations. Ceasing hostilities and eventual 
political reconciliation, including the return of unitary macroeconomic policy implementation, are 
prerequisites for reconstructing the economy and rebuilding social fabric. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 

 
7. Yemen’s agriculture supplies around 15 – 20 percent of its food needs due to limited agricultural 
land and water resources and poor agricultural practices. However, agriculture—including fisheries and 
livestock—is the backbone of Yemeni livelihoods and the most important non-oil sector of the economy, 
even as its contribution to gross domestic product (GDP) has decreased during this period of severe 
economic disruption. Agriculture’s share of GDP contracted from 10.3 percent in 2010 to 4.03 percent in 
20189. Agricultural land is less than three percent (3 percent) of Yemen’s land area (FAOSTAT) and supplies 
around 15 - 20 percent of its needs for food. The principal agricultural systems are in the rainfed highlands 
characterized by terraced agriculture for coffee, fruits, grains and qat10 and extensive livestock (meat) 
production. Horticulture and field crops predominate in the plains, using groundwater for irrigation. 
Groundwater resources are very limited, fossil and non-renewable, and agriculture accounts for up to 90 
percent of groundwater use. The current annual renewable freshwater resources in Yemen are estimated 
at 80 m3 per capita versus an 8,900 m3 per capita global average. Yemen therefore falls well below the 
absolute scarcity threshold of 500 m3 per capita11. Up to 85 percent of food consumed is imported, mostly 
staples, such as wheat, rice, oil, sugar and milk. Yemen has self-sufficiency in some cereals (sorghum, 
millet, and barley), while 90 percent of wheat is imported. The agricultural sector accounts for a large 
portion of non-oil domestic exports and supports livelihoods through agricultural and livestock 
production. Over three thirds of Yemenis depend on agriculture for their livelihoods.  

 
5 World Bank Data.  
6 The Borgen Project. 
7 World Bank: data.worldbank.org/country/yemen-republic. 
8Description of Yemen’s education system is summarized in Annex 2.  
9 https://www.theglobaleconomy.com/Yemen/share_of_agriculture/ 
10 Qat is a mild stimulant leaf chewed for recreation, and for which up to 40 percent of total water resource use is dedicated 
11 Dire Straits: The Crisis Surrounding Poverty, Conflict, and Water in the Republic of Yemen, World Bank, 2017.

 
8. Agriculture is very important for job creation and food security, especially for women, yet 
women have less access to agricultural assets and higher food insecurity. Women have a major role in 
agricultural production; up to 87 percent of rural women are involved in agriculture sector activities (FAO), 
yet women rarely have land ownership rights and they commonly relinquish inherited land rights to male 
family members. It is estimated that only 13 percent of women are agricultural landholders (UNDP). 
Women working in agriculture face many constraints, such as limited access to land ownership, finance, 
markets, livelihood activities, and information, aside from legal and cultural restrictions on economic 
independence. It is estimated that only 2 percent of women have access to a formal bank account or 
mobile financial provider compared to 11 percent of men (which is also low). According to UNOCHA, 
female-headed households are more at risk of food insecurity due to scarce work opportunities for them. 
Women are generally excluded from economic transactions in the local markets. When food is scarce, 
women are the first family members to eat less as a coping mechanism, even though they continue to do 
hard work, including in the fields. Lack of official papers are an obstacle for women, boys and girls when 
registering for humanitarian assistance distribution. Restrictions in mobility (for security and cultural 
reasons) are often an obstacle for women and girls to go to humanitarian distribution points. Given the 
agriculture sector’s importance in producing food for consumption and commercialization, and 
generating incomes, it will continue playing an important role in households’ coping strategies and is 
expected to play a leading role in post-conflict recovery and reconstruction12. 
 
9. Vulnerability to climate change and pest outbreaks are exacerbating Yemen’s dire food 
insecurity, creating a crisis within a crisis. Yemen is highly vulnerable to climate change, further 
threatening food security and intensifying the development of locust swarms. By 2060, mean annual 
temperature is expected to increase by 1.2oC to 3.3oC, and the rate of warming is projected to be more 
rapid in interior regions than in coastal areas. Sea level rise will result in increased coastal flooding and 
possible damages to infrastructure and ecosystems, leading to sea-water intrusion affecting the country’s 
already fragile freshwater balance. Climate change has already triggered the strongest alterations in water 
temperature in the Indian Ocean in 60 years. Warmer seas also create more extreme rainfall as well as 
stronger and more frequent cyclones, providing ideal conditions for desert locusts to hatch, breed, and 
disperse widely. Fall Armyworm breeding areas are also increasing in Yemen as a result of ecologically 
favorable conditions, including extensive rains, with several governorates affected. 
 
10. Despite the agricultural sector’s importance, agricultural productivity remains low and the 
conflict has severely disrupted access to markets, transportation and distribution. Yemeni farmers 
operate around 1.18 million farms, with an average land holding of 1.36 ha (FAO). About 75 percent of 
agricultural production comes from the highlands, home to 60 percent of the population. While 
productivity has always been low, conflict has worsened production conditions, resulting in a shortage of 
inputs such as seeds, fertilizer and fuel, damage to agricultural machinery, irrigation systems and storage 
facilities along with a deterioration of water, sanitation and electricity services, and a breakdown of 
logistical chains. These disruptions, coupled with the relatively small and fragmented land holdings, have 
been preventing the sector from making a larger contribution to rural incomes and addressing food trade 
imbalances. The insufficient availability of inputs and post-harvest losses have been exacerbated by 

 

inadequate marketing systems, low human resource capacity, and lack of infrastructure and access to 
markets. 
 
11. Acute malnutrition is among the world’s highest, and both underlying acute and chronic 
malnutrition will adversely impact the country’s human capital outcomes in the long term. Prior to the 
2015 escalation of conflict, Yemen already had one of the world’s highest malnutrition levels. In 2021, 
over 2.25 million children under the age of five in Yemen are threatened with acute malnutrition. Of those 
children, 395,000 are expected to suffer from severe acute malnutrition and could die if without 
treatment. The projected figures in the IPC nutrition analysis13 mark a 16 percent increase in acute 
malnutrition and a 22 percent increase in severe acute malnutrition among children under five compared 
to last year’s estimate. This is the highest number on record in Yemen. An additional concern are the more 
than one million pregnant and lactating women who are projected to suffer from acute malnutrition 
during 2021 in Yemen. Acute severe malnutrition14 has immediate effects, including greater susceptibility 
to diseases like cholera, wasting and a whole range of other poor physical and mental health outcomes. 
Malnutrition impacts on children is particularly severe, as it results in long term declines in cognitive 
development, along with poorer health outcomes in both short and longer terms. This looms as a longer-
term societal issue. According to UNICEF, a shocking 46 percent of all children in Yemen are stunted. At 
this rate, malnutrition will create a lost generation. Undernutrition is particularly prevalent in rural areas, 
related to lean seasons or food security crises, and in areas remote from food aid. This suggests that 
enhanced, rural household-focused nutritional awareness, combined with improved local production can 
improve nutritional outcomes. 
 
12. Several aggravating factors that emerged in the spring and summer 2020 have been driving a 
worsening of the food security situation. Those factors include:  
 

(a) Widespread floods. In most of the governorates, the 2020 agriculture season started in March with 
strong rains, which lasted into August and led to heavy floods across the country. The floods resulted 
in substantial damage to cultivated lands and infrastructure and affected agricultural activities such 
as horticulture and livestock. Floods coincided both with harvesting and planting, resulting in damages 
to the standing crops and delayed planting activities. Destruction of water infrastructure alone (not 
including impacts on crops and livestock) is estimated at US$50 million (FAO). The estimated recovery 
and reconstruction needs for the short- and medium-term are between US$763 million and US$932 
million15. 
 

(b) Desert locust invasion. Yemen is one of the main breeding grounds of desert locust swarms, with 
swarms developing across the entire year and in multiple locations. The rains created favorable 
conditions for desert locusts to reproduce, resulting in extensive damage to cultivated crops. 
Residents and farmers in selected governorates reported a huge number of locusts invading farms, 
cities and villages, devouring important seasonal crops such as dates and causing heavy losses. The 
World Bank’s estimates put the damages and losses for the 2020 agricultural season at US$ 222 
million.  

 
13 Yemen: High levels of food insecurity persist | IPC Global Platform (ipcinfo.org)  
14 Severe acute malnutrition is defined by a very low weight for height (below -3z scores of the median WHO growth standards), 
by visible severe wasting, or by the presence of nutritional oedema (WHO). 
15 Yemen Dynamic Needs Assessment (DNA): Updated 2020 (World Bank). 

 

(c) Livestock disease incidences and prevalence in 2020. The above normal and intense rains created 
conducive environments for disease vectors to multiply and easier disease transmission of livestock 
diseases, resulting in increased outbreaks. In livestock, suspected outbreaks of Foot and Mouth 
Disease (FMD), Peste des petits ruminants (PPR), sheep and goat pox (SGP) in areas of low/absence of 
vaccination coverage, Lumpy Skin Disease (LSD) and other disease conditions have devastated 
livestock population, increasing vulnerability of livestock dependent population to food security 
shocks. 
 

(d) Well below-average cereal harvest in 2020. The total cereal production in 2020 was estimated at 
365,000 tons, almost 25 percent below the five-year average. Rural food crop production is expected 
to continue declining unless action is taken. With reduced food imports, higher food prices and for 
most households significantly reduced income earnings, the result will be lower food access. 
 

(e) The COVID-19 pandemic continues its spread across Yemen, negatively impacting food supply chains 
and food trade and contributing to sharp food price increases. By early March 2021, Yemen had 
reported 2,436 COVID-19 cases with 660 deaths, although it is likely COVID-19 cases are significantly 
under-reported. Market functionality and logistics in many areas have been hampered due to curfews 
and other COVID-19 pandemic prevention measures, greatly affecting farmers’ access to markets. 
Although farmgate prices did not change, poor market access has resulted in high post-harvest losses 
of horticulture products with only a few farmers finding alternate marketing channels to sell their 
produce, resulting in lower incomes. Movement restrictions and high input costs could further affect 
the next planting season. Negative coping strategies observed amongst pastoralists, such as selling 
herds, could continue without assistance to secure the upcoming planting season and to preserve 
productive assets in rural areas. In the coming months, localized and temporary increases in COVID-
19 control measures are expected in areas where higher numbers of cases are suspected, with further 
disruptions to trade and access to food and income. 
 

(f) Food price increases have continued through a combination of rapid currency deterioration, COVID-19 
pandemic impacts on the agri-food sector and lower food imports. Food represents a large share of 
poor households’ consumption expenditures, estimated between 60 to 70 percent. The disruptions 
to supply chains of locally produced foods are resulting in postharvest losses, and informal food flows 
across land borders are expected to continue at reduced levels relative to the pre-conflict period. 
Trade across land borders will likely remain difficult as continuing insecurity is now compounded by 
border closures due to COVID-19. As a result, the cost of the minimum food basket (MFB) increased 
by more than 20 percent during February 2020 – January 202116. For instance, wheat flour price 
gradually increased throughout 2020 and in November 2020 was 27 percent higher than at the same 
time previous year17. At the same time, incomes in the informal sector have dropped dramatically, 
remittances are also down sharply, and from December 2019 to June 2020, the local currency (Yemeni 
riyal) lost an average of 19 percent of its value against the US dollar18.  

13. The ability of Yemen’s physical food markets  to operate varies across the country. Yemen’s food 
market landscape is  fragmented and market ability to operate depends on the security situation.  In many 
areas, markets are operating reasonably well and are reasonably well stocked, however, in many food 
insecure areas poorly operating markets and dis-functional logistics are among the reasons contributing 
to the food insecurity.  The Yemen Joint Market Monitoring Initiative19 regularly monitors market 
operations in 56 districts in 16 governorates. They report that price inflation is the most commonly 
reported constraint faced by the assessed vendors when obtaining fuel, Water, Sanitation and Hygiene 
(WASH) items, food items, and water trucking services. Among the vendors interviewed, results showed 
86.2 percent saw price increases as the key constraint. Other constraints listed by respondents were 
insecurity (17.7 percent), demand shortages due to the population’s low purchasing power (14.9 percent), 
transportation difficulties (12.8 percent), with supply shortages only mentioned by 2.4 percent of 
respondents. Yet farmers report worsening access to markets due to the COVID-19 restrictions. 
Horticulture farmers, mainly women, are selling a highly perishable commodity and rely on this income to 
sustain their families. Poor market access has both, kept the farmgate prices steady, but also resulted in 
high post-harvest losses of horticulture products with only a few farmers finding alternate marketing 
channels to sell their produce, resulting in lower incomes. Another significant factor that negatively 
impacts overall private sector operations is fuel scarcity and its trading in the black market at double the 
price, which have disrupted the production process, service delivery, decreased working hours, and 
increased costs of production, transportation, storage and marketing20. 
 
14. Climate change is already worsening the existing challenges and negatively impacting all four 
dimensions of food security: availability, access, stability, and utilization of food. Food availability is 
compromised by projected yield declines due to temperature and precipitation patterns change. Climate 
change also compromises food access by affecting consumers' purchasing power through price increases 
as a result of climate change. Climate change affects food utilization primarily by reducing food safety 
through a higher incidence of food-borne diseases and the spread of novel pests and diseases. Regarding 
food stability, the risks to food and nutrition security are exacerbated by the expected increase in the 
frequency and intensity of climate-related events. Furthermore, according to the World Bank's 
Groundswell report21, climate change will scale up internal climate migration. The poorest people in rural 
areas will be forced to move due to slow-onset climate change impacts, including decreasing crop 
productivity, shortage and deterioration of water’s quantity and quality, and rising sea levels. Therefore, 
actions geared towards building improved and climate-smart agri-food systems will contribute to 
increased food security, climate change adaptation and mitigation. 
 
15. Food security situation forecasts for the first half of 2021 predict that food insecurity across the 
country will intensify due to the continued, combined effects of the aggravating factors described in 
paragraph 12 above, a warning uniformly sounded across the UN agencies working in Yemen, including 
the FAO, UNICEF and the World Food Programme (WFP)22. This includes large areas of the country 
previously in IPC Phase 2 (Stressed) moving to IPC Phase 3 (Crisis), with the share of the population in IPC 
Phases 3 and 4 significantly increasing by June 2021. The number of people likely to experience high levels 
of acute food insecurity (IPC Phase 3 or above) is estimated to be nearly 16.2 million (54 percent of the 


total population). Food insecurity is more severe both in areas with active fighting and bordering areas 
with limited access. It is particularly affecting Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) and marginalized groups 
such as the landless laborers and the Mohamasheen23. Food insecurity is also severe in areas where 
people survive on low and irregular sources of income and low access to public services. The population 
in Catastrophe (IPC Phase 5) are found in five districts of Al Jawf, Hajjah and Amran. The governorates 
with the highest proportion of IPC Phase 4 districts (>75%) are located in Al Dhale’e, Al Jawf, Hajjah, Marib 
and Rayma Governorates. Each of the governorates of Al Hudaydah, Dhamar, Hajjah, Ibb, Sana’a City and 
Taizz have more than one million people in IPC Phase 3 (Crisis) or above. The upcoming “lean” season, 
between March and June 2021 is expected to aggravate this situation. 
 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
 
16. The Project Development Objective is to improve availability and access to food and nutritious 
diets, both in the short and medium term, for targeted households in the Project Area, and to enhance 
Yemen’s capacity to respond to food insecurity. 
 

Key Results 
 

17. Progress toward the achievement of the PDO will be measured by the following outcome 
indicators:  
 

Outcome 1: Short-term access and availability of food and nutritious diets at household level 

improved  

• Percentage of households (HH) with improved Food Insecurity Experience Scale (FIES), of which 
female-headed households;  

• Percentage of women in beneficiary households with minimum dietary diversity; 

• Percentage of children (6-23 months) consuming minimum acceptable diet.  
 

Outcome 2: Medium-term access and availability of food and nutritious diets at household level 

improved 

• Increase in the volume of food/agricultural products commercialized/sold by beneficiaries, of which 
by female beneficiaries.  
 

Outcome 3: Country capacity to respond to food insecurity strengthened 

• Food security preparedness improved, through the adoption of the food security preparedness plan 
and the use of the EO monitoring tool.  

 
 

 

D. Project Description  
 

 
18. Component 1: Improving household incomes through CFW for agricultural production 
infrastructure (US$20.0 million, including US$5.0 million from GAFSP and US$15.0 million from IDA). 
UNDP will implement this component through the Social Fund for Development (SFD) and the Public 
Works Project (PWP). The  SFD will  take the lead in implementing the CFW program, which will provide 
employment opportunities directly to beneficiary laborers from the communities in the project area. The 
PWP will implement small-scale infrastructure-related works through selected locally sourced contractors 
which are also expected to create employment opportunities for the communities. Both organizations 
have extensive experience implementing their respective responsibilities under a number of other 
interventions, including under several Bank-financed projects.  It is expected that 85 percent of the 
component financing will be allocated for CFW activities, which the remaining 15 percent would be 
channeled through the PWP. Component 1 activities will be implemented in close collaboration with the 
FAO to ensure that they are closely coordinated with the productive investments made under Component 
2. Component 1 would ensure immediate access to food for an estimated 26,500 food-insecure 
households by creating temporary employment opportunities through a Cash-for-Work (CFW) program, 
focusing on restoring damaged public and collective productive assets, including those affected by the 
recent floods. The project would target youth (18 – 32 years of age) through the community outreach 
programs and encourage them to participate in the CFW program. The Component will also seek to 
support employment generation activities targeting women. 
 

19.  Component 1 activities would directly contribute to climate change adaptation and mitigate 
greenhouse gas emissions. Implementing climate-resilient irrigation and water conservation and 
management practices will restore degraded lands (including terracing) and affected water infrastructure 
for subsequent productive, climate-smart technology use in agricultural production and allow 
beneficiaries to earn much needed income from their repair and maintenance through cash-for-work. An 
estimated 15,700 farmers will have improved access to water infrastructure, irrigation networks and 
rehabilitated lands. These actions also contribute to climate change mitigation and adaptation by 
increasing carbon sequestration and improving water management. The Component will finance 
beneficiary compensation, estimated as US$660 per household per six month period, and the operating 
costs of SFD and PWP. The detailed criteria for beneficiary selection will be included in the Project 
Operations Manual (POM), and care will be taken to ensure that the beneficiaries of this Component are 
not engaged in parallel Bank-financed projects24. 
 

20. Component 2: Increasing production and sale of nutritious crop, livestock and fish products 
(US$33.0 million, including US$10.0 million from GAFSP and US$23.0 million from IDA). This Component 
will be implemented by FAO. The Component would allocate resources to provide key support for 
smallholder farmers and producers to invest in productive assets and help improve their capacity to better 
commercialize their products and enter new markets. The Component would support: (1) restoring 
climate-smart local food production to increase household access to food and food availability in local 
markets, and (2) improving farmer’s access to markets for staple and high value cash crops (such as 
horticultural crops and coffee), by strengthening value chains’ vertical and horizontal linkages, to increase 
incomes for beneficiary households. Component 2 would collaborate with IFC in developing selected high 

value agricultural value chains, building value chains between the project-supported farmers/agricultural 
producers and IFC’s advisory services and investment clients25. This component is therefore expected to 
restore climate-smart agricultural production while also stimulating the local economy and promoting the 
production of nutrient-dense foods (e.g., horticulture, pulses, meat (chicken and livestock), dairy and fish). 
This component would finance two types of support packages. Detailed criteria for beneficiary selection 
and implementation arrangements will be included in the POM. 
 

21. Sub-component 2.1: Restoring climate-smart agricultural production (US$15.0 million, including 
US$ 5.0 million from GAFSP and US$10.0 million from IDA). The Input Package for agricultural producers 
will promote climate-smart agricultural production focusing on smallholder’s re-engagement in 
horticulture, crop and livestock farming, bee-keeping and fish production. Producers would receive 
support to restart or expand production, including input starter packages for crops, animal feed, improved 
forage seeds, equipment and inputs to start fish farming, bee-keeping kits, farm equipment such as fodder 
choppers and small dairy equipment, energy efficient post-harvest handling and storage facilities. The 
Input Packages will be supported by complementary climate-smart practices supporting diversified 
production and climate resilience—for instance, by introducing improved varieties and plantings and ways 
to preserve and manage grasslands. The Sub-component will also provide extension support to producers, 
including training and advisory services through Farmer Field Schools (FFS) on good agricultural practices, 
enhanced animal husbandry and feeding practices  and climate-smart technologies. SFD, which has 
extensive prior experience in implementing the types of activities supported under this Component, will 
work alongside FAO to restoring and enhancing access to  some agriculture inputs. It would also 
strengthen access to supporting services to ensure maximum benefits from those assets, including 
extension services to be supported under Component 4, veterinary services (including vaccinations for 
animals) thought Community Animal Health Workers (CAHWS) and General Directorate for Animal Health 
and Quarantine (GDAHWQ), and mechanical services support.  
 

22. Sub-component 2.2: Promoting value addition and sale of nutritious food products (US$20.0 
million, including US$5.0 million from GAFSP and US$15.0 million from IDA). The second package of 
interventions (Value Addition Package) will provide in-kind grants to support enterprising producers, 
processors and traders to scale up, add value to their products, improve product quality and aggregation, 
consolidate production, and access local and regional markets with their products. The sub-component 
will work with the value chain participants to structure the value chain, providing both training and 
advisory support in technical aspects (aggregation, development of linkages with farmers, product quality 
and others), business skill capacity building, and provide beneficiaries with key assets (equipment, 
machinery and working capital), enabling them to increase the quality and commercialization of food 
products. In areas with high caseloads of Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs), the project will build 
capacities of farmers with agriculture techniques, value chain development and maintenance of local 
infrastructure, to improve mutual trust, understanding and collaboration between displaced and host 
populations. SFD, which has extensive prior experience in implementing the types of activities supported 
under this Sub-component, will work alongside FAO to increase the farm-gate value and nutritional 
content of some agricultural products through provision of improved technologies and practices for key 
horticulture crops. The equipment and machinery provided under the sub-component will be climate-
smart and more environmentally friendly than conventional technologies. Most of the equipment and 
machinery is expected to be procured, imported and distributed to the value chain/value addition 

 
25 One such opportunity for a black sesame value chain has already been identified. 




beneficiaries by FAO. Some of the value chain activities may also cover the beneficiaries who received 
support under the SAPREP and ECRP.  
 

23. Sub-component 2.2 will support key value chains mostly focused on the local market, including 
beans and cereals, vegetables, dairy, livestock and fish value chains. To increase production, improve 
product quality, extend shelf-life, reduce food loss, and improve energy efficiency, the component will 
complement the Input Packages by providing in-kind grants for value chain development, post-harvest 
enhancement and value addition activities. The size of in-kind grants will depend on the type of 
beneficiary financed – a group or individual, as well as on the nature of the activity. Larger-scale 
investments, such as seedling centers, post-harvest centers, hydroponics, dairy processing facilities, etc., 
will be implemented though groups of beneficiaries. For group beneficiaries, the upper value of the in-
kind grants should not exceed a maximum of US$70,000 per group. The only exception to this maximum 
size limit may be groups engaged in milk collection and dairy processing where construction of 
infrastructure is necessary. Given the high start-up costs, the maximum value of such in-kind grants should 
not exceed a maximum of US$120,000 per group. Individual beneficiaries who will receive support for 
activities such as beekeeping, poultry production, horticulture production and processing, food 
preservation, agro-logistics services and other income-generating value-addition activities, the grant shall 
not exceed US$2,000 per individual beneficiary. All in-kind grant financed by the project should be 
supported by a business idea description, description of the market, value chain arrangements and 
financial viability. The length of the business idea description should be commensurate with the size of 
the in-kind grant. Detailed description of the in-kind grants is in Annex 3. 
 

24. The component will also support investments and technical assistance in selected high-value, 
high-growth value chains (such as coffee, fruits and nuts, and poultry and eggs26), some of them in 
collaboration with IFC and aiming to generate IFC and/or private sector investments. This should generate 
higher employment and household incomes, improve access to food, and allow for higher diversification 
of household diets. To ensure that the products are delivered to the market, and to create additional jobs, 
selected small-scale agro-logistics service providers may also be supported. The component will prioritize 
the adoption of climate-smart crop and livestock practices to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and 
enhance resilience to climate change. SMEPS will be working alongside FAO and IFC to ensure knowledge 
transfer on value chain development and support to build SMEPS’s capacity to engage in similar activities 
in the future. To further review and strengthen opportunities for development of value chains, the Sub-
component will also finance studies in two areas: (1) A fisheries and coastal 
aquaculture needs assessment and a fisheries and coastal aquaculture stock assessment; and (2) agro-
logistics constraints and solutions for selected value chains. The sub-component will also support limited 
small-scale laboratory equipment for selected Universities to support the value chain development 
activities. 
 
25. Component 3: Improving the nutritional status of vulnerable rural households (US$49.3 million, 
all IDA). Sub-component 3.1 will be implemented by FAO and Sub-component 3.2 and 3.3 will be 
implemented by WFP. This component would aims at improving the nutritional security of very vulnerable 
(Sub-components 3.1 and 3.3) and moderately vulnerable (Sub-component 3.2) households through a 
variety of instruments, including: (1) targeted nutrition-sensitive agriculture activities and facilitating 

 
26 Based on the results of application of the Agricultural Investment for Development Analyzer (AIDA) model by the 
International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI).  

Uptake by poor households of appropriate dietary and nutrition practices, in particular improving nutrient 
intakes of pregnant mothers and children under two, (2) promoting women’s entrepreneurship activities 
and improving the diets of the female-led households, and (3) improving nutrition in vulnerable 
households with malnourished women and children. Component 3 beneficiaries may also include the 
Cash-for-Nutrition beneficiaries under the ECRP, to ensure that they receive support allowing them to 
start their own production of food or improve nutritious diets on a more sustainable basis.  
 
26. Sub-component 3.1: Promoting kitchen gardens and backyard production for improved diets 
(US$10.0 million, all IDA). FAO will implement this Sub-component which will target beneficiary 
households that have received malnutrition treatment and prevention services referred to under Sub-
component 3.3, former beneficiaries of the Cash-for-Nutrition programs under the ECRP, households with 
pregnant mothers and children under two, and other eligible households with a similar vulnerability level. 
The Sub-component will provide inputs (vegetable seeds, chicken, etc.) for households to establish kitchen 
gardens and backyard production of nutritious food items (vegetables, eggs, and meat). It is estimated 
that the sub-component will reach 20,000 beneficiary households. Beneficiaries would also receive two 
types of training. For improving backyard production, they will receive training on best and climate-smart 
agricultural production practices. The Sub-component will prioritize the adoption of climate-smart crop 
and livestock practices to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and enhance resilience to climate change. To 
maximize the nutritional value of available food, training sessions will be offered to beneficiaries of this 
sub-component on how to maximize the nutritional value of foods when preparing family meals. Also, the 
project will use different communication channels to spread nutrition messages to trigger behavioral 
change in target populations. Since women are the main family caretakers, mostly women beneficiaries 
are expected to partake in these activities, however, the training will be open to both women and men. 
 
27. Sub-component 3.2: Promoting women’s rural entrepreneurship for improved nutrition and 
food security (US$14.3 million, all IDA). The Sub-component will be implemented by WFP and will focus 
on promoting women’s entrepreneurship to generate higher income and improve nutritious diets and 
food security at the household level. WFP’s resilience and livelihoods interventions will mainly target 
moderately food-insecure people to prevent them from slipping into further food insecurity. WFP will 
work with national NGO partners and provide Food for Training to food-insecure women, especially 
targeting those who are heading their households in rural communities. The training will develop their 
skills, aimed at restoring or establishing their livelihoods, and starting their own businesses. The support 
in most cases will range from six to nine months (at the monthly payment of US$105), giving participants 
access to various trainings, such as skill development, business development and management, digital skills, 
entrepreneurship, improved nutrition and life-skills (e.g. health practices) while they are supported by a 
monthly allowance. Once trainings are completed and a business plan submitted, the women would 
receive a start-up grant to start diversified income generating activities (both agricultural and non-
agricultural). The grant amount per individual will not exceed US$800. Increasing the productive capacity 
and livelihoods potential of rural women, especially in agriculture and food production, will help sustain 
their food and nutritional security when the assistance period ends. Similar to 3.1, for agricultural 
activities, the Sub-component will prioritize the adoption of climate-smart crop and livestock practices to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions and enhance resilience to climate change. WFP’s comprehensive 
approach also includes training and support related to gender-based violence, awareness on preventing 
infectious disease spread, and child-care, nutrition and health practices. Participants will be encouraged 
to work together in joint business ventures with an estimated 3 participants per business, although the 
number may vary based on participant preferences and conditions for joint ventures in the targeted areas. 



It is expected that around 7,910 women will participate in the training, establishing an estimated 2,637 
businesses.  
 
28. Sub-component 3.3: Providing nutrition assistance to treat and prevent malnutrition (US$25.0 
million, all IDA) for pregnant and lactating women and girls (PLWG) and children under 5 years old. This 
Sub-component will be implemented by WFP and constitutes an integrated malnutrition prevention and 
treatment response. WFP will provide blanket supplementary feeding with specialized nutrition products 
to children aged 6–23 months and PLWG to prevent acute and chronic malnutrition in the project area 
districts prioritized for integrated famine response. Elsewhere, WFP will provide targeted supplementary 
feeding to malnourished children aged 6–59 months and PLWG girls to treat moderate and acute 
malnutrition across the country. Beneficiaries of targeted supplementary feeding will be screened in local 
health centers, through community health volunteers and screening campaigns organized by the Ministry 
of Public Health and Population (MOPHP), using mid-upper arm circumference (MUAC) and weight-for-
height measurements. This is accompanied by social behavior change communication (SBCC), designed to 
reduce barriers to adequate infant and young children feeding practices and healthy eating and hygiene 
habits. The SBCC campaign will target PLWG, health workers and caregivers, and also other decision 
makers and influencers within the community such as parents-in-law, husbands and local leaders. 
Messaging will focus on ensuring that responsibility for the care of children is shared within the household 
and not only limited to women. During the project period, around 195,000 beneficiaries are expected to 
be reached through the  Treatment Program, including 150,000 acutely malnourished children under the 
age of five and 45,000 acutely malnourished pregnant and lactating women and girls, as well as around 
277,000 beneficiaries through the Prevention Program, including 150,000 children under the age of two 
and 127,000 pregnant and lactating women and girls. 
 
29. Component 4: Capacity building for food security management (US$6.0 million, all IDA). FAO 
will lead implementation of this component in cooperation with other partner organizations as described 
below. This component includes a set of activities that are expected to significantly strengthen the 
capacity of both the private (households) and public sectors for food security crisis planning and response: 

 

(a) Developing an evidence-based Food Security Preparedness Plan (FSPP). The FSPP development 
will be co-led by the World Bank (financed under a separate budget) and the FAO, and will be 
carried out in a highly participatory manner, consulting with the main line ministries and 
Institutions involved in the agricultural sector, multilateral and bilateral organizations, the private 
sector; and civil society including international and local NGOs. This FSPP will be prepared within 
six months of project effectiveness and it will be reviewed by the World Bank’s Technical Expert 
Group on Food Security. The FSPP implementation will be monitored on a regular basis 
throughout the project period.  
 

(b) Establishing a satellite-based Earth Observation (EO) crop and pasture monitoring and early 
warning system for detecting climate-induced hazards. This tool would support monitoring 
agricultural production, providing information to the GOY for decision-making regarding food 
imports planning. The data generated by the EO Tool will also feed into the FSPP implementation. 
The EO tool will initially be housed by FAO and arrangements to transfer to the appropriate agency 
will be identified during the project Mid-Term Review (MTR). The project will be designed in a 
manner to ensure its use for the intended (civilian) purpose only.  



(c) Strengthening agriculture extension services by financing capacity building of the existing 
extension services, including current extension services staff, Community Animal Health Workers 
(CAHWs) and other extension service agents working in the communities. A significant number of 
women, enrolled on the basis of selection criteria which will be reflected in the POM, will be 
trained as extension workers, agricultural technicians, and CAHWs under this activity and 
recruited to be part of FFS.  
 

(d) Piloting alternative agricultural production technologies will introduce alternative, climate smart 
land- and water-efficient agricultural production technologies for producing nutritious crops (soil-
less technologies, such as hydroponics and aquaponics) by financing technology pilots and 
demonstrations in areas where previously, production would not have been possible, due to 
limited land resources. 

 
30. Component 5: Project Management and Knowledge Management (US$16.7 million, including 
US$3.2 million from GAFSP and US$13.5 million from IDA). This component would cover the costs 
associated with project management for all three Implementing Agencies (FAO, UNDP and WFP), 
recognizing the particularly challenging operating conditions in Yemen. Covered implementation costs 
include financial management, procurement, monitoring the project’s environmental and social 
safeguards, communication and stakeholder engagement, and overall monitoring and evaluation (M&E). 
Additionally, M&E is expected to be strengthened by using the Geo-Enabling initiative for Monitoring and 
Supervision (GEMS) and by carrying out an additional impact assessment (in collaboration with IFPRI), to 
assess the suitability and impact of project interventions. This component would also finance a third-party 
monitoring (TPM) mechanism and establishing and maintaining a grievance redress mechanism (GRM). 
 
31. For real-time data collection and analysis, the project will implement the Geo-Enabling method 
for Monitoring and Supervision (GEMS). The GEMS method enables project teams to use open-source 
tools for in-field collection of structured digital data that automatically feeds into a centralized M&E 
system and Management Information System (MIS). The integrated data can include any kind of 
indicators, based on tailor-made forms; photos, audio, videos; time and date stamps; and GPS coordinates 
that allow for automated geo-mapping of the information. Using these tools systematically allows the 
project to enhance the transparency and accuracy of project planning as well as M&E and third-party 
monitoring throughout the project cycle. Moreover, GEMS allows for establishing a digital platform for 
remote supervision, real-time safeguards monitoring, and portfolio mapping for coordination across 
project components as well as with other operations in the region.  
 
32. Integration of COVID-19 response. The project will use its resources (such as field consultants) to 
integrate COVID-19 awareness and preventive measures in the training events and awareness campaigns 
planned for beneficiaries. Awareness raising and training events will follow precautionary measures 
described in workshop/training protocols, as well as enforce and maintain adequate distancing during 
control, distribution, training, payment, and other project activities. These will also be held in locations 
and during times that are convenient for women. The project will work with local communities, female 
and male consultants, and beneficiaries to reach households with awareness and hygiene materials (such 
as masks, hand sanitizers and other relevant consumables) that will be developed to resonate with women 
and men’s different roles and behaviors at home and in society. The decision on which hygiene materials 

to procure will be made in coordination with the Bank-financed COVID-19 health emergency project in 
Yemen.  .

.  
Legal Operational Policies 

            Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50             No  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60             No  

 

Summary of Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
. 

 
Environmental Risk Rating 
 

33. The environmental risk is considered Substantial given that the project will support several 
interventions that might be associated with environmental risks and impacts and the implementation 
agencies' ESF capacity remains limited. Environmental risks and impacts are expected to be site-specific, 
reversible, and generally of low magnitude that can be mitigated following appropriate measures; 
nonetheless, based on the implementation experience of ongoing projects, particularly those involving 
labor-intensive interventions, and the identification of significant Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) 
gaps, there is a significant risk for fatal incidents or serious injuries to occur under the project, particularly 
under the interventions of component 1 (Alleviating immediate food security needs by improving 
household incomes) since the activities under this component will provide temporary work opportunities 
to a large number of local community members, with little or no knowledge or experience in applying OHS 
measures. 
 
34. Furthermore, there is a risk of COVID-19 transmission among community workers if worksites are 
not managed appropriately and injuries due to the potential explosion of a remnant of war (ERW). 
Component 1 will also support the rehabilitation of small-scale rural land and water infrastructure and 
access roads to isolated villages/communities, therefore improper management of materials that will be 
used for the rehabilitation activities might lead to the generation of waste and open dumping in the 
environment. In addition, the project might support some interventions such as rehabilitation of terraces 
and construction of hydroponics which might increase the use of pesticides (the project will not finance 
procurement of pesticides) and fertilizers which should be applied and disposed of adequately and in a 
controlled manner.  

 

35. It is mentionable that the project will have several positive impacts including through supporting 
the hydroponics and aquaponics which will enhance the economically - environmentally friendly and 
sustainable development solution for the beneficiaries and will pilot interventions which are of high 
productivity and save land and water consumption for irrigation. This may encourage other farmers to 
replicate this intervention at a larger scale and spreading scientific knowledge to other farmers 
countrywide. 
 

Social Risk Rating 
 

36. The proposed project is expected to bring significant social benefits to the targeted communities. 
It will contribute to the alleviation of food security and improvement of household income through the 
Cash for Work program, support restoration of local food production and increase the sales of crops and 
livestock and promote diversified nutrient crops.  Particular attention and efforts would be given to the 
promotion of youth and women participation and maximizing their benefits through dedicated 
subcomponents under the project.   
 
37. The project could face possible adverse social impacts and risks. The proposed interventions in 
farmland and irrigation works are of rehabilitation and maintenance nature.  They are planned to take 
place within their existing footprints and are expected to be quite small in scale. Therefore, land 
acquisition or resettlement needs are not anticipated under the project.  A negative exclusion list will be 
developed for the project. However, these activities could have potentials for labor-related impacts and 
risks, such as possible child labor, forced labor, discriminatory practices in recruitment, occupational 
health and safety issues, and GBV/SEA risks, and even possible conflicts within potential beneficiary 
communities.  The project faces a potential risk of elites or better-connected individuals or groups 
capturing project benefits, affecting poor and vulnerable groups receiving their due share of project 
benefits.  These could include the elderly, poor farmers, women, and individuals displaced by the ongoing 
conflict. The overall country security situation poses another challenge for the project and is a key risk for 
the project implementation. In addition to the general conflict and security situation the country faces, 
the project may face possible conflicts among local communities, interested groups, and factions over 
project benefits distribution. Given the above, the project's social risks are considered Substantial. 

 
E. Implementation 

 
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 

 
38. The project would be implemented by three UN Agencies, FAO, UNDP and WFP, ensuring project 
activities reach throughout both the South and the North of Yemen. Each Agency will implement part of 
the project based on their mandate and relevant experience: 
 

(i) FAO is the specialized UN agency responsible for and well positioned to respond to 
emergencies in agriculture and food security, including crop and food supply monitoring and 
needs assessments, evaluations of agricultural relief requirements, and mobilizing assistance 
and resources to restore agricultural activity. The FAO has prior experience in supporting the 
implementation of Bank-financed projects on the ground in Yemen (since 2017 it has led the 
implementation of SAPREP toward satisfactory achievement of results and more recently it 
became the Implementing Agency for the Desert Locust Response Project; P174170). SAPREP, 
implemented in collaboration with SFD,  supported a set of similar activities, including the 
CFW instrument implementation, support to agricultural production by providing input kits 
and ensuring access to associated services (such as animal health services). The project’s 
implementation performance rating is Satisfactory. Given their prior experience in 
implementing SAPREP, FAO is fully aware of the Bank’s fiduciary and safeguards 
requirements. FAO has put in place enhanced M&E mechanisms to supervise local 
implementation partners and has also been using TPM. 


(ii) UNDP is the UN’s development agency and it is committed to supporting the peacebuilding 
initiative in Yemen, political stability and enhanced local governance. UNDP has built a 
successful partnership with the World Bank in implementing the CFW activities of the ECRP. 
The project works in 317 districts out of 330 districts of Yemen. UNDP is partnering with the 
SFD and PWP and their community networks to deliver services. Given their prior experience 
in implementing the ECRP, the UNDP is fully aware of the Bank’s fiduciary and safeguards 
requirements. UNDP established an M&E system to ensure proper project management, 
assuring stakeholders and providing accountability and is also using a TPM mechanism to 
monitor project implementation. UNDP communicates with the World Bank team monthly on 
project implementation and to address  emerging challenges. UNDP had a good collaboration 
with FAO on water resource management, aimed at enhancing access to water in agriculture 
and improving the effective use and management of scarce water resources in Yemen.  

(iii) WFP is the food-assistance branch of the United Nations and is the world's largest 
humanitarian organization, the largest one focused on hunger and food security, and the 
largest provider of school meals. In Yemen, in addition to food and nutrition interventions, 
such as school feeding programs, WFP is also engaged in livelihoods development activities 
through a range of instruments, including Food-for-Assets and Food-for-Training in close 
cooperation with FAO. WFP’s vulnerability, mapping and assessment (VAM) expertise 
conducts joint nation-wide food security and livelihood assessments which inform the 
Integrated Food Security Phase Classification (IPC) for Yemen, as well as regular food security 
and price monitoring and analysis. WFP is an existing Implementing Agency under the World 
Bank-financed Restoring Education and Learning Project (P175036), engaged in school 
feeding activities, and it has therefore some exposure to the Bank’s fiduciary and safeguards 
requirements.  
 

39. The Country Representation Offices of the three UN Agencies will be responsible for the overall 
implementation of their respective activities and coordinating all relevant activities at the sub-national 
level, supported by the regional office staff who will monitor the activities in different governorates. 
The FAO will be the lead agency for the implementation of the project and will be a recipient of both IDA 
and GAFSP financing. Both UNDP and WFP will receive IDA financing. Each UN Agency will be responsible 
for the technical implementation of the relevant components and sub-components (as indicated in the 
PAD), as well as all fiduciary, environmental, and social aspects, monitoring and reporting. The UN 
Agencies will help ensure financial and technical accountability of the implementing partner organizations 
(such as SFD, SMEPS and PWP) and ensure appropriate training and capacity building of the staff of the 
implementing partner organizations. The FAO would have a Project Coordination Unit (PCU) based in 
Sana’a, and technical staff deployed in its Aden sub-office and other decentralized hubs to ensure day-to-
day project management, including all fiduciary, environmental, and social aspects, and monitoring and 
reporting. UNDP and WFP will assign dedicated staff to support project implementation and ensure timely 
and relevant contributions to the PCU work. This proposed structure would build on the experience with 
previous grants implemented by FAO in the country. Moreover, the FAO team in Sana’a is backstopped 
by a dedicated team of technical experts at Regional (Cairo) and Headquarters (Rome) level in line with 
the Level 3 fast-track procedures established due to the emergency situation in Yemen. 
 
40. Coordination. The three selected organizations are currently working in Yemen and exchanging 
information as part of their participation in partner meetings. The three UN Agencies will set up a formal 
project Coordination Committee for increased efficiency and efficacy, including to coordinate activities 


with and among the Implementing Partners. This committee will hold meetings on a regular basis 
(suggested monthly) to best coordinate their activities, evaluate progress, address bottlenecks and 
consolidate annual work plans. Frequency of meetings, attendance, communication tools, etc. will be 
developed in the POM. Collecting and reporting on indicators (including methodology, tools, devices, etc.) 
to inform the results framework and progress on implementation will be discussed and agreed among 
implementing partners with the support of the Bank. A mechanism will also be established to brief the 
authorities at various levels on regular basis on the project results and challenges of implementation.  
 
41. Local partners with prior extensive experience in implementing similar projects will have key 
implementation roles. The PWP and SFD would play a key role as the local implementing partners for 
Component 1, SFD and SMEPS would support implementation of small-scale value chain activities, 
provision of technologies and practices for some horticulture crops and restoration of agriculture inputs 
under Component 2, alongside FAO. The SFD and PWP are the key local partners in implementing the 
ongoing ECRP, SAPREP and DLRP, and they would lead the implementation of Component 1. SMEPS would 
contribute to the value chain development under Component 2. Selecting national institutions for these 
roles would contribute to building national capacity for community-based interventions. For activities that 
would be implemented by SFD, SMEPS and PWP, UNDP and FAO would provide technical guidance and 
backstopping as required. Under the CFW program of Component 1, SFD will be in charge of working with 
beneficiaries on the CFW program, while the PWP will implement the activities related to restoration of 
small-scale agricultural infrastructure in the cases it requires involvement of professional contractors, to 
ensure communities have access to good quality assets. SMEPS will ensure technical assistance to the 
value chain development activities. Additional personnel will be recruited to cover any skills or human 
capacity gaps as assessed during the project preparation. All staff are required to have satisfactory 
expertise, experience, and qualifications. All three national institutions have capacity and experience 
spanning over 20 years in undertaking participatory and community-based development activities 
involving women and men from local communities. 
 
42. Project Operational Manual (POM). A detailed POM and a separate CfW Transfer Manual will be 
prepared for all project components by effectiveness. The POM and the CfW Transfer Manual will be 
subject to the World Bank’s no objection.  
 
43. Financial Management and Procurement arrangements. The project’s financial management 
(FM) arrangements will be governed by the Financial Management Framework Agreement (FMFA) 
between the World Bank and the UN Agencies, which provides for the use of the UN’s Financial 
Regulations. For procurement, FAO will follow its own procurement procedures as Alternative 
Procurement Arrangements, as provided under the World Bank New Procurement Framework Policy 
Section III. F. This implementation arrangement is sound, since the procurement procedures of FAO were 
assessed and found acceptable to the World Bank under agreements with UN agencies. 
 
44. Implementing partners will prepare budgeted Annual Work Plans of implementation and a 
detailed procurement plan (in agreement with the World Bank). This budgeted Annual Work Plan will be 
prepared no later than four months after project effectiveness. It will highlight the activities to be 
implemented for the subsequent 12 months by component and sub-component with intended results, 
timeline, budgets and planned procurement activities. It will also identify issues / implementation 
bottlenecks and relevant remedial actions and outline key responsibilities. In the context of COVID-19 and 
virtual missions (video/audio), the budgeted Annual Work Plan will be the common communication 

interface between implementing partners and the World Bank to regularly monitor activities of each 
component, evaluate progress and discuss corrective actions or changes as needed. 
 

























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Agriculture Modernization and Competitiveness Project (P158372) 

 
 

  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 05-Feb-2019 | Report No: PIDISDSC20304 


BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Uzbekistan P158372  Agriculture 
Modernization and 
Competitiveness 
Project (P158372) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA Sep 26, 2019 Dec 16, 2019 Agriculture 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance State Investment 
Committee, Rural 
Restructuring Agency 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The proposed PDO is to strengthen generation and delivery of selected agricultural public services in Uzbekistan. Such 
services would include generation of new agricultural technologies and innovations, their dissemination through 
extension services, support to productive partnerships, and improvement of sanitary and phytosanitary and food safety 
systems. 

  
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 

        

SUMMARY-N ewFin1 
 

Total Project Cost 200.00 

Total Financing 200.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 200.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 
 

 

DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) 195.00 

     International Development Association (IDA) 5.00 

          IDA Credit 5.00 

 

Environmental and Social Risk Classification Concept Review Decision 

Substantial  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

1 Uzbekistan is currently undergoing a paradigm shift away from its state-managed economy. In 2017 and 2018, the 
Government of Uzbekistan (GoU) launched a wide range of reforms that represent a shift from a state-led economic 
system to a market economy. As noted in the 2018 Performance & Learning Review of the World Bank (WB), these entail 
four fundamental economic and social shifts: (i) from the state to the private sector; (ii) from inward-looking to outward-
looking growth and jobs drivers; (iii) from general government subsidies to targeted social programs; and (iv) from central 
government to regional and local authorities, in particular as regards responsibility and accountability for the 
implementation of the reform agenda on the ground.  

2 Important progress has been made in the reform agenda. In an especially significant move, in September 2017, 
the GoU allowed a 50 percent devaluation of the Uzbek Som and abolished many foreign exchange controls. This almost 
immediately eliminated a thriving parallel foreign exchange market and eliminated about 30 percent of the cotton 
taxation, which was depressing agricultural incentives for decades1. The GoU further boosted market incentives by 
liberalizing many import tariffs and committing to WTO accession, lifting price controls for certain raw materials and 
production inputs, and extending the use of commodity market exchanges. It eliminated the monopoly on exports of fruits 
and vegetables and has taken steps to improve safety nets for vulnerable groups, which is critical for further agricultural 
and broader economic reforms. 

3 Significant progress has also been made in reducing the use of forced labor, which has been hampering sustainable 
development of agriculture and damaging Uzbekistan’s image on the global arena. Systematic use of child labor in cotton 
harvesting has been eradicated, while overall use of forced labor has been declining over time. The use of forced labor in 
2018 was estimated by the International Labor Organization (ILO) to drop to 7 percent compared to 15 percent in 2017. 
There is the highest level political commitment in Uzbekistan to fully eradicate the use of forced labor in all sectors, and 
an increased level of transparency and dialogue on the issue, encompassing all groups of civil society, including critical 
voices. The WB’s partnership with ILO has been instrumental to this achievement. Yet, the issue remains, requiring 
continued serious attention to it in future policy dialogue and investment operations.                    

4 While the above reforms are significant, they need to be deepened to facilitate the transition from a state-led to 
a market-oriented economic system as noted in the WB’s Reform Roadmap 2.02. This requires a fundamental reevaluation 
of the state’s role in the economy, from direct involvement in production and marketing to delivery of core public goods 


and correction of market failures. In other words, the government needs to decide what to “do less” and what to “do 
more” going forward. Yet, the definition of a new role of the state and economic transition itself has only just begun.   

Sectoral and Institutional Context 

5 In the overall reform context, agriculture is a sector of the economy where ambition and investment can be 
rewarded. Reforms in the sector present an opportunity to deliver quick economic and social wins, given the large share 
of employment and other economic gains this sector generates3, on the one hand, and its heavy overregulation and a lack 
of high-quality public services on the other. Recent reforms on cotton pricing, import tariffs for inputs and liberalization 
of horticulture exports need to be complemented by a broader shift in the government’s approach to agricultural 
development. This requires putting competitiveness, farm incomes, jobs, and sustainability at the center of the reform 
agenda.  

6 During the preparation of the Concept/Strategy for Agricultural Development in Uzbekistan by 2030 during 
September-December 2018, the completion date of which was moved to October 2019 by the President’s Decree4, it was 
largely agreed that modernizing agriculture requires delivery of a wide range of quality agricultural public services, with 
many of them have been either underfinanced or even not existed in the past. This should help restore the agricultural 
growth, which dropped sharply in recent years (Figure 1)5. Public services include applied agricultural research and 
development, extension/advisory services, education, soil fertility improvement, food safety, animal disease 
control/veterinary services, phytosanitary services, support for smallholder market inclusion (associations, cooperatives, 
clusters, productive partnerships), market and statistical information, market infrastructure and logistics, and 
environment protection and climate change adaptation, among others. The global experience shows that these public 
services are key to correct some large market failures and eventually accelerate agricultural transformation.   

7 Supporting the above-mentioned agricultural public services would constitute a significant departure from current 
practice, under which only few programs receive adequate attention and funding. In 2017 about 80 percent of the 
agricultural budget was spent on irrigation (for its operation and management, pumping water, building new canals, and 
improving drainage). The largest share of the remaining 20 percent was spent on subsidizing 130,000 cotton and wheat 
farmers, who cultivate about 3 million ha or 70 percent of the irrigated area. The public spending on agricultural research 
and development was just 0.01 percent of agriculture sector’s value added, compared to the average 1.5 percent in 
middle-income countries with successful agricultural transformation and of above 2 percent in the developed countries. 
Agricultural extension services do not even exist from the market-economy’s perspectives. Food safety and sanitary and 
phytosanitary (SPS) standards are outdated, preventing Uzbek agri-food products from entering many foreign markets. As 
a result, most farmers do not receive any information and technical assistance (TA) on new technologies and farming 
practices, which leads to the large market failures. 

8 The most underserved are dehkan smallholders. There are 4.7 million of them, who cultivate 481,000 ha or 13 
percent of irrigated land arears. Even though they generate more than 75 percent of agricultural output, including more 
than 90 percent of horticulture and livestock outputs, they do not receive public services from the Ministry of Agriculture 
and other ministries. As dehkan farms are too small and often unskilled, private sector also do not provide any services to 
them either, except buying surpluses they produce. This leads to the market failure. The government has recently 
recognized the need to support this group of farmers through extension, TA, and investments6. Yet, more focus has been 

                                            
3 In 2017, the primary agriculture generated 19 percent of GDP, 20 percent of export, and 27 percent of employment. It provided inputs for 
development of food and textile industries, which accounted for 5 percent of GDP and 2 percent of employment. 
4 Decree of the President No. 5614 “On Additional Measures to Ensure Further Development of Economy and Increase Efficiency of Economic 
Policy” dated January 8, 2019.   
5 The recent decline in the growth of agricultural value added was a result of the decline in production of wheat and cotton caused by adverse 
weather and the more accurate statistical reporting in recent years.     
6 The President’s Decree No. PP-3680 “On Additional Measures to Improve Functioning of Farmers, Dehkans, and Household Plots” dated April 26, 
2018 assigned the Council of Farmers, Dehkans and Household Plots to lead engagement and delivery of services to small farms.  



so far given to their investment/credit support and less to their capacity building, voluntary cooperation, and their 
integration into modern value chains. This hampers the development of inclusive agri-food value chains as experienced 
under the ongoing WB and other donors-financed projects for horticulture and livestock development where the efforts 
to link dehkan farms to large farms and agribusinesses, who receive loans for their business development, largely fail. 

9 While the horticulture sector gets some boost from the government’s desire to increase and diversify exports, the 
livestock sector, which is oriented to domestic market, suffers from a lack of strategic approach to its development. The 
sustainability of its growth is affected by the limited fodder base,7 neglected pastural development, and the lack of 
veterinary, animal nutrition, and other TA services. The government’s attention in recent years has been more to bringing 
highly-productive cattle and upgrade dairy processing and less to addressing the above constraints. 

10 Uzbekistan’s agriculture is significantly exposed to the climate hazards. It is the most vulnerable to the decreased 
and more variable precipitation, higher temperatures, reduced river runoff, and increased frequency and severity of 
extreme events. The adaptation capacity of Uzbekistan’s agriculture is assessed to be weak8. The proposed options for 
increasing adaptation include: (i) generation of drought-and pest-resilient seeds; (ii) increasing access of farmers to 
technology and information through extension services, both generally and for adapting to climate change; (iii) optimizing 
the use of agronomic inputs, especially fertilizers, and adopting good agricultural and animal husbandry practices; (iv) 
investing in water saving technologies; and (v) encouraging farmers to efficiently adapt to climate change.      

11 Generating and delivering agricultural services in a coordinated manner is challenging due to the fragmentation 
of public institutions responsible for delivery of agricultural services. In 2018, the Ministry of Agriculture and Water 
Resources were split into the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Water Resources. Moreover, during this split the 
State Plant Quarantine Inspection and the State Veterinary Inspection were both moved to the Cabinet of Ministers. Food 
safety’s responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture is shared with the Ministry of Health. And finally, the newly created 
Ministry of Innovations is responsible for agricultural research, especially seed development. The proposed project will 
engage selectively and strategically with these institutions during the project preparation and implementation. 

Relationship to CPF 

12 The proposed operation is aligned with the Country Performance Framework (CPF) for FY19-21, which has been 
adapted to meet Uzbekistan’s growing social and economic transformation. It largely falls under the Focus Area 1 
“Sustainable transformation towards market economy,” supporting a more strategic engagement in agriculture outlined 
in the CPF. The proposed project would leverage: (i) the WB Livestock Sector Development Project (US$150 million 
approved in June 2017) and additional financing to the WB Horticulture Development Project (US$500 million approved 
in January 2018), which stimulate private investments in production, processing, storing and marketing; (ii) the WB 
Fergana Region Entrepreneurship Project (US$200 million to be approved in March 2019), which will stimulate job creation 
and regional development; (iii) Climate Adaptation for Aral Sea Project (US$14 million), which provides financing for 
climate-smart adaptation practices; (iv) additional grants from the European Union for technical assistance to the WB 
operations to support value chain organization, institutional capacity building strengthening, regulatory framework 
improvement, and small farmers’ access to higher value markets through value chain inclusion in livestock and horticulture 
subsectors; (v) the IFC’s agribusiness and agrifinance programs; and (vi) projects of other development partners such as 
the Asian Development Bank’s horticulture and livestock projects, the European Union’s agricultural budget support, the 
French Development Agency’s livestock project, and the UN Food and Agriculture Organization’s capacity building for 
agricultural institutions.     

13 The proposed project aims to add value by addressing needs that are currently unmet in the WB and other donors’ 
portfolio. The current WB projects are mainly focused on improving access to finance for larger farmers and agribusinesses 

                                            
7 The ratio of fodder area per a unit of cattle in Uzbekistan is 0.03 ha, against the global standard of 0.5 ha of irrigated area and 1.5 ha of dryland.  
8 World Bank. 2013. Reducing the Vulnerability of Uzbekistan’s Agricultural Systems to Climate Change. A World Bank Study, Washington, D.C.  




and just marginally on strengthening selected public institutions to deliver better services for horticulture and livestock 
subsectors. The situation is similar with the projects financed by other major agricultural donors. The ongoing agricultural 
projects amount US$2.5 billion, while the pipeline for the next two years is US$0.8 billion. There are limited investments 
in strengthening public institutions to deliver services to agriculture in a coherent and integrated manner, especially for 
small farms, to increase the rates of economic return of many credit line’s projects and reduce risks for agricultural credit 
borrowers. The proposed project would work with the ongoing agricultural projects to identify investment gaps and design 
activities to leverage operations of the various donors and ultimately improve the agricultural sector outcomes. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

14 The proposed PDO is to strengthen generation and delivery of selected agricultural public services in Uzbekistan. 

15 Selected services would include generation of new agricultural technologies and innovations, their dissemination 
through extension services, support for smallholder market inclusion, and improvement of sanitary and phytosanitary and 
food safety systems. 

Key Results (From PCN) 

16 The proposed project would help: (i) generate more and better innovative farm and agribusiness technologies, 
information, and other public services through applied agricultural research; (ii) make them readily available to farmers 
and agribusiness through extension and advisory services; (iii) integrate smallholders in modern food value chains; and 
(iv) reduce costs of pest invasions and animal diseases and expand export opportunities through SPS and food safety 
services. 

D. Concept Description 

17 The proposed project will be a departure from the standard Uzbekistan’s donor-financed agricultural projects of 
the recent years. The standard project consists of a credit line component, typically accounting for 80-90 percent of the 
project costs, and a component for complementary TA to farmers and public institutions, either associated or not 
associated with the credit line. The latter is usually financed by grants. In two ongoing WB projects, for example, the 
capacity building TA activities are financed by the EU grants.     

18 The proposed project will be centered around strengthening public institutions to deliver more and better services 
to farmers and agribusinesses. The efforts will be made to modernize the public institutions through capacity building and 
investment support, encourage their more strategic engagement with private sector, and pilot delivery models of public 
services through public-private-partnerships (PPPs) and using digital technologies. The geography of the project activities 
will be nationwide.    

19 The key guiding principles for designing the proposed project would be the following: 

a. Supporting agricultural reforms: The proposed project will support reforms in agriculture, helping: (i) pilot 
new approaches for public programs, including through PPP; and (ii) define a new role of the government 
in market-oriented agriculture, including improvement in sustainability of land and water use, boosting 
shared prosperity, and elimination of unsustainable labor practices in the entire agri-food industry. It will 
be aligned with the WB Development Policy Operation(s), and, where relevant, with the EU’s agricultural 
budget support program (under preparation), to complement an improved agricultural policy 
environment by investments and capacity building.  

b. Financing public goods: Agricultural programs such as agricultural R&D, extension, cooperation and 
production partnerships, good agricultural practices (including climate-smart agricultural technologies), 
integrated pest management, and food safety and SPS are globally recognized as critical to induce 
agricultural modernization by correcting market failures and providing public goods. These public 




functions have been chronically underfinanced in Uzbekistan; to make impact, these programs require 
both investment and TA to increase quantity of services and, more importantly, improve their quality and 
outreach.   

c. Selection of public goods: Priority will be given to public programs critical to increase competitiveness of 
agricultural production and trade, both domestically and internationally. Competitiveness can be 
increased through higher productivity (or lower costs), adaptivity to climate change, better quality, higher 
(food) safety, and lower transaction costs.        

d. Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD): The proposed project will seek to crowd in private 
investments by strengthening the quality of public programs, reducing transaction costs for farmers and 
agribusinesses, piloting PPP in service delivery, and encouraging private investments in entire food 
system, including from the IFC. It should seek mobilize expertise and resources of the World Bank Group 
to deliver the best services to clients.       

e. Complementary investments that do not duplicate ongoing and planned programs: Several investments 
and capacity building projects financed by the WB and other development partners already support the 
above-mentioned areas of agricultural development and several more are in the pipeline. The proposed 
project will be complementary, focusing on filling gaps and connect various activities.   

20 The following activities and components will be considered during the project preparation. This list is intentionally 
long to provide the task team with flexibility during preparation and give the authorities more options to select from it 
when defining (and narrowing down) the scope of the proposed project.  

Component 1: Generating new agricultural technologies and innovations       

21 This component would support: (i) investments in constructing and upgrading buildings, equipment, laboratories, 
machinery and irrigation/drainage for agricultural research stations; (ii) competitive research grants; (iii) capacity building 
of researchers and other stakeholders associated with operation and management of their fixed assets, knowledge and 
skills for conducting modern agricultural research; and (iv) institution strengthening. Thematically, the support will focus 
on crop and fodder seeds and good agricultural practices (GAP). Preparation of this component will be carried out in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Innovations and the Ministry of Agriculture.      

22 Seeds: Generating drought and pest-resistant seed varieties, multiplying, and making them available to farmers 
are critical to increase competitiveness of agricultural production, given the limited land and water availability in 
Uzbekistan. Yields are low even for crops, on which local agricultural research has focused in the recent decade. Thus, 
improvements are needed for a wide range of crops, from cotton and wheat to fruits and vegetables, and from seed 
genetics to seed multiplication. Seeds will need to be adjusted for different agro-ecological zones of the country. In 
addition, Uzbekistan can produce seeds for exports, which would require, among other things, to have seed laboratories 
accredited by the International Seed Quality Control Agency (ISTA). Furthermore, the proposed project can support PPPs 
in seed production, encouraged by the recent legislation9, by cofinancing the public aspects of the projects. 

23 Fodder crops and pasture management: Applied research on fodder crops and integrated pasture management 
could be supported to help increase the supply of feed to the growing livestock sector, which faces the rapidly rising feed 
cost. Feed account for 60-70 percent of meat and milk prices, so identifying suitable feed varieties and pasture 
management technologies (due to the limited irrigated areas to produce fodder) through agricultural research and 
extending this knowledge to farmers through extension services will be valuable investments. The current ratio of fodder 
area per unit of cattle in Uzbekistan is at least ten time lower than the international norms10; thus, efforts are needed to 

                                            
9 President’s Resolution No. PP-4020 “On Measures to Create Additional Incentives for Greenhouse’s Development” dated November 20, 2018. 
10 The ratio of fodder land per cattle unit in Uzbekistan is 0.03 ha, while international norms require it to be 0.5 ha for irrigated land and 1.5 ha for 




identify and promote high-productivity fodder crops suitable for production on both irrigated and dry lands to inform 
decision of farmers on selecting appropriate varieties and techniques suitable for various agro-ecological zones.     

24 Good agricultural practices: Uzbekistan does not have a code of Good Agricultural Practices (GAP) for crop and 
livestock production, which is common in other countries to promote climate-smart agricultural practices. In many 
countries the adoption of GAP is a precondition for farming or for receiving subsidies. It is also used as a precondition for 
adopting stricter Global GAPs and other standards such as organic and halal. There are many locally-tested best farming 
practices in Uzbekistan, but they are not put together in one coherent place and they are not widely disseminated and 
adopted. The project could support the preparation of the GAP code and guidelines using the best practice local and global 
knowledge; introduce pilot training courses and adjust draft code and guidelines based on experience/feedback; and 
publish final version of the code and guidelines and promote it widely through training programs for extension staff and 
farmers.  

25 The project could also support investments to update soil fertility maps, which is needed for GAP adoption. Such 
investments include upgrading soil testing laboratory infrastructure, digitalize map information with open-date access, 
developing best practice guidelines on soil monitoring and fertilizer use adjusted to different soil types and agro-ecological 
zones, making this information available to farmers through field-based advisers and extension services, and procuring 
portable field-based soil testing equipment to allow extension services and other advisers to provide immediate feedback 
to farmers on soil quality and proposed adjustments needed to enhance soil fertility.   

26 Institutional strengthening: Engagement will be required with the Ministry of Innovations, Ministry of Agriculture, 
other agencies/institutes and private sector (farmers and agribusinesses) to develop mechanisms to bring research and 
private sector together for better defining applied research priorities that would address constraints faced by farmers and 
agribusinesses in a timely and coordinated manner. The experience of the Netherlands and other countries will be used 
to foster a closer collaboration between researchers, farmers, and agribusiness companies. The proposed project could 
foster this kind of collaboration and generate knowledge and lessons to inform a roadmap for other reforms in the 
agricultural research system in Uzbekistan.                 

Component 2: Disseminating agricultural technologies and innovations and creating markets    

27 This component would support: (i) investments in infrastructure for extension/advisory activities, including 
mobility, learning campuses/facilities, demo plots close to farm fields, and creation of digital platforms for reaching out 
many farmers at low cost; (ii) capacity building of extension/advisory officers and preparation of extension materials for 
farmers and agribusinesses; and (iii) operation costs for delivering services to farmers and other clients. Preparation of 
this component will be carried out in collaboration with the Ministry of Innovations, the Ministry of Agriculture, the Council 
of Farmers, Dehkans and Household Plots (Farmers Council), and other stakeholders such as cotton-textile clusters. 

28 Currently, the work of the public agricultural extension services is limited to delivery of production-oriented advice 
to farmers producing wheat and cotton under the government production quota and to make sure that farmers have 
inputs to meet their quotas. The proposed project would help transform them into market-oriented extension and 
advisory services differentiated to the needs of dehkan smallholders, larger farms, and agribusinesses, building on the 
recent legislation11 and the strategy for agricultural extension being drafted by the Ministry of Innovations. The reformed 
extension service would extend knowledge on new technologies and farming practices generated by research locally and 
globally to farmers; promote GAP adoption; offer diversified agribusiness support services; and use digital platforms to 
design services, deliver training and information, improve responsiveness, and increase farmer outreach.  

29 For dehkan farms, extension services could be delivered as a part of establishing productive partnerships, which 
are proved globally as a potent mechanism to promote farm collective actions and reduce transaction costs for 

                  

agribusinesses to include these farm groups in their value chains.  Productive partnerships as a part of the proposed 
project would help include smallholders in modern value chains and reduce transaction costs for agribusinesses to interact 
with smallholders, through: (i) TA for dehkan smallholders; (ii) promotion of their voluntary cooperation and development 
of joint investment plans; (iii) co-financing of investment plans through grants; and (iv) linking farm groups with 
agribusiness and lead firms. The latter could be selected from the ongoing WB-financed horticulture and livestock projects. 
Preparation of this component will be carried out in collaboration with the Farmers Council and the Ministry of Agriculture.     

30 For larger farms, for example, the PPP arrangements with cotton-textile clusters could be developed to deliver 
advisory services on cotton and wheat production and develop technology and information database using digital 
platforms on GAP, crop protection, integrated pest management, decent work, water usage, soil fertility, as well as good 
manufacturing practices in textile factories, to strengthen technical capacity of clusters’ technical staff to increase 
productivity, profitability, and sustainability of agricultural production. For agribusiness, the project could support 
preparation and delivery of targeted courses on agri-food enterprise business diagnostics, business planning and 
preparation of investment applications, and pilot agro-business schools and start-ups for small and medium scale farmers 
and agri-businesses. This part will be prepared in collaboration with IFC and ILO. 

Component 3: Improving SPS and food safety standards  

31 This component would support: (i) investments in constructing and upgrading buildings, equipment, laboratories, 
and other fixed assets of selected SPS and food safety-relevant public institutions; (ii) capacity building of staff associated 
with operation and management of their fixed assets and knowledge and skills for delivering public services; and (iii) 
institution strengthening. These investments will finance and co-finance public programs and be complementary to those 
already carried out or planned under the donor-financed projects. Preparation of this component will be carried out in 
collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Health, the State Plant Quarantine Inspection, and the State 
Veterinary Committee.     

32 Veterinary services: Efficient and trustworthy veterinary services are critical to reduce risk for farmers to invest 
in livestock, reduce economic losses in case of animal diseases, and protect human health. Currently, the delivery of 
veterinary services and their outreach are unsatisfactory to deal with the growing number of animals in the country. The 
World Animal Health Organization (OIE) has recently completed the assessment of the performance of veterinary services 
and investment gap, with the support of the WB-financed livestock project and the State Veterinary Service, with the 
purpose of identifying, detailing, and costing priority activities. The Gap Analysis identified priority areas of support and 
the associated investment needs (funding requirements) in all areas of veterinary services, including trade, veterinary 
public health, animal health, veterinary laboratories, and veterinary management services for the next five years. The 
identified gaps include investments needs in fixed assets, human capital, and operational resources, which will be used to 
define the activities for the proposed project. Veterinary laboratories alone include the large network of laboratories and 
veterinarians, which could be supported by the project.12 Investments will be based on thorough assessments of the needs 
and the role of specific units in delivering public services vis-à-vis the role of private sector.     

33 Phytosanitary/quarantine services: Uzbekistan incurs significant economic losses from pest invasions and from 
difficulty to meet the SPS requirements of importers. Uzbekistan, for example, is on top of the rejection of its fresh 
horticulture exports by the EU, mainly caused by the high level of mycotoxins in dried fruits, which is very far in excess of 
the EU standards. The proposed project could support the State Plant Quarantine Inspection to improve surveillance 
capacity to prevent pest invasions, promote adoption of integrated pest management as a part of GAP adoption, and 
facilitate trade, both export and import. Among several things, the project could help the Inspection to accelerate signing 

                                            
12 The network of veterinary laboratories in Uzbekistan comprises of the State Center for Animal Diseases and Food Safety, which also manages the 
State Research Center on Quality Control of VMPs and Feed Additives; 13 Regional Veterinary Laboratories; 130 Local Veterinary Laboratories; 
1,411 Field Veterinary Stations; 265 laboratories at food markets; and 27 Border Inspection Posts and Transport Stations. Together these veterinary 
laboratories employ 2,600 veterinarians and veterinary para-professionals.   



the International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC) and develop a Pest Risk Analysis capability that is credible to IPPC 
members; establish minimum residual level standards and protocols per international norms and support an awareness-
raising program for existing and potential agri-food exporters; and establish a system of accreditation of SPS laboratories 
and where needed, reference laboratories connected to a network of public and private laboratories. 

34 Food safety standards: The WB’s CPSD analysis found that the food safety standards called GOST require 
modernization to meet the requirements of importers outside of the former Soviet Union and even to expand on 
traditional markets such as Kazakhstan and Russia, who adjust their food safety standards to internationally accepted 
norms and practices. This is especially urgent for horticulture products, for which foreign buyers are sensitive to meeting 
strict food safety requirements, as the above figure shows. The proposed project could support the process of bringing 
domestic food safety standards to the requirements of the major importing countries and provide TA to agribusinesses 
and exporters to adopt the upgraded food safety standards. 

Component 4: Project management and coordination  

35 This component will finance project management and coordination activities, as well as monitoring and 
evaluation. The scope of work under this component will be further defined as institutional and implementation 
arrangements are refined during preparation. 

    
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50 No 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60 No 

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 

Although this project intends to provide institutional strengthening, capacity building, and improved service 
delivery, the project will be working with farmers. The GoU has a history of Child and Forced Labor (CFL) 
which was inherited from Soviet times. The GoU has made tremendous strides towards eliminating the use of 
CFL for harvesting of cotton. Third party monitoring by the ILO has reported that child labor seems to have 
been eliminated, however recent reports state cases of forced labor, although at much lower scale than 
previously, still exists. The project will be working with all farmers, which may include farmers who include 
cotton in their crop rotation. Therefore, the concern of forced labor raises project risk to a moderate level. All 
project initiatives, where relevant, will include addressing CFL, as well as ensuring women and the rural poor 
are included in project initiatives. 

 

 
























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Additional Financing - Horticulture Development Project (P164226) 

 
 

 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Dec-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSA23288 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Uzbekistan P164226 Additional Financing - 
Horticulture Development 
Project 

P133703 

Parent Project Name Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date 

Horticulture Development Project EUROPE AND CENTRAL 
ASIA 

28-Nov-2017 25-Jan-2018 

Practice Area (Lead) Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Agriculture Investment Project 
Financing 

Republic of Uzbekistan Rural Restructuring 
Agency 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) Parent 
 
The project development objective is to enhance the productivity and profitability of horticulture sector in the project 
area. 
 
 
Components 

Agricultural Support Services 
Access to Credit 
Project Management 

 

Financing (in US$, millions) 

 

FIN_SRC_TBL 

Financing Source Amount  

Borrower 17.98  

Free-standing Cofinancing Trust Fund 25.00  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 500.00  

LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 98.14  

Total Project Cost  641.12  
  
 

Environmental Assessment Category 

Partial Assessment (B) 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     



 
 
 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
Uzbekistan is gradually moving away from a state driven development model towards a more diversified and 
private sector led economy. This structural change – which has accelerated significantly in the past year – is 
also taking place within the context of significant macroeconomic policy shifts, the most prominent of which 
has been the recent move towards greater currency convertibility and a significant devaluation in September 
2017. These developments play a strong role in shaping the country’s development agenda going forward. 
 
Agriculture continues to play an important part in Uzbekistan’s economy and in 2016 accounted for 17 percent 
of GDP, 15 percent of export revenues, and over one-third of employment. As noted in the May 2016 
Systematic Country Diagnostic, the agriculture sector can produce significant results in terms of economic 
growth and employment in the medium-term and diversification of outputs and exports have considerable 
space to expand.  
 
Horticulture plays an important role promoting a gradual shift away from the traditional crops (cotton and 
wheat) and public intervention towards a more liberal and diversified agricultural sector. Agriculture value 
added has grown at an average annual rate of 6.5 percent since 2003 and the strongest growth has come from 
crops other than wheat and cotton. With a growing domestic and export market, the area devoted to 
horticulture has increased steadily, primarily by displacing land used to grow cotton. The economic impact of 
the fruit and vegetables subsector is also large, accounting for 50 percent of the value of crop output and over 
35 percent of agriculture export value. Despite delayed returns and higher investment costs, horticultural 
crops generate revenues to farmers significantly higher than wheat and cotton.  The horticulture sector 
provides an important source of all-season jobs in rural areas and is a significant employer of women.   
 
The proposed Additional Financing will also contribute to Uzbekistan’s accelerating reform agenda, which is 
creating rapid structural change. Structural reforms will create both opportunities and risks – exchange rate 
depreciation has created a clear opportunity to expand exports. Price liberalization is also expected to 
contribute to the development of more competitive industries and a diversified economy. At the same time, 
the negative impacts of reform could include job losses in inefficient industries and lower overall growth while 
the economy adjusts. Significant fiscal resources may also be required to maintain currency reserves and 
address financial risks in state-owned enterprises and the banking sector. In this context, additional 
investment to increase private sector participation in the economy and finance sectors with the potential for 
growth and job creation can be an important element to mitigate the costs of structural transition. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

The Horticulture Development Project (HDP) is part of a portfolio of agricultural investments aimed at 
diversifying agriculture into higher value crops, intensifying agricultural yields and productivity, and fostering 



greater and better rural jobs. Approved in June 2014, HDP focused on addressing several constraints facing the 
horticulture sector: (i) improving access to technologies, knowledge and markets; (ii) strengthening technical 
and managerial capacity in the farming and agri-business sectors; and (iii) introducing new financial products. 
The design of HDP drew on the implementation experience of the Rural Enterprise Support Program (RESP), 
which established a successful model for long term agricultural finance through private and state owned 
banks.  
HDP’s primary project beneficiaries are farmers, farmer groups, private enterprises, agro-firms, and agro-
processing enterprises, involved in the country’s horticultural sub-sector. Secondary beneficiaries are the 
Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) through improved skills and acquisition of a more diverse menu of 
suitably adapted financial products; and the national network of private growers through training and 
technical assistance. At the same time, the project was designed to support the growth and development of 
small and medium enterprises in the rural areas, creating more and better paying jobs in the agro-processing, 
trading and export sectors, and increasing the value added of the agricultural sector. 
 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance the productivity and profitability of the horticulture 
sector in the project area. The project has three components: Component 1 (Agricultural Support Services); 
Component 2 (Access to Credit); and Component 3 (Project Management). The original Project IBRD Loan in 
the amount of US$150 million was approved by the Board of Directors on June 12, 2014 and became effective 
on October 5, 2015.  The project was restructured in 2016 to accommodate new co-financing for HDP through 
a technical assistance program by the European Union (EU). This grant will total Euro $21.0 million and replace 
IBRD financing for Component 1.   
 
To date, 92 percent of the loan (US$137.9 million) has been disbursed primarily under Component 2. Thus, 
during the first two years of implementation 97 percent of funding for the second component was disbursed 
to finance 223 sub-loans.  
 
The rapid rate of disbursement of the project’s Access to Credit Component demonstrates the significant 
demand for credit in the horticulture sector. This was anticipated, given the RESP experience, the sector 
analysis, and expressions of interest by potential PFIs. The PFIs have a pipeline of sub-project beneficiaries 
that meet the criteria in the HDP Credit Guidelines. In view of rapid credit line disbursement and significant 
unmet demand for investment in the agribusiness sector, the Government of the Republic of Uzbekistan has 
submitted a request to the World Bank for an additional loan to scale-up the investment and working capital 
sub-loans and lease financing activities. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
 
Original PDO  
The project development objective is to enhance the productivity and profitability of horticulture sector in the project 
area. 
 
Current PDO  

 



 

No change is proposed to the PDO, which will remain “to enhance the productivity and profitability of 

horticulture sector in the project area”.  The project area, however, will be expanded to all thirteen regions 

(full coverage of the country) and the closing date is proposed to be extended a further two years to 2023.  

 
Key Results 
 

PDO level results will continue to measure changes in productivity and agribusiness performance levels and 

have been adjusted to accommodate the scale up within the project. Some intermediate results indicators 

have been adjusted to reflect the increase in the volume of credit and scale out to additional beneficiaries. 

Adjustments have also been made to Component 1 indicators and technical assistance related activities.  

 
Project performance has demonstrated solid achievements and the additional financing will build on positive 
results. A preliminary beneficiary survey was carried out in July and August 2017 among fifty-five randomly 
sampled HDP beneficiaries. The survey found:  

 

 Strong job creation, with the number of permanent jobs within HDP financed enterprises increasing 
on average 78 percent after the enterprise received sub-project financing. Of these new jobs, more 
women were hired than men, with sub-loan beneficiaries reporting a doubling in permanent jobs 
held by women.  

 Enterprise sales increased on average 281 percent and enterprise profits 250 percent.  

 Increased exports with a 10 percentage point (from five to 15 percent) increase in exports after 
receiving HDP support. Several beneficiaries reported entry into entirely new export markets 
(Turkey, Ukraine, India, Great Britain, Malaysia, Turkmenistan) 

 Adoption of new crops, varieties or agronomic practices, with 15 percent of HDP loan recipients 
introducing new crops or new crop production systems.  

 
 
D. Project Description  
 

 
The project design will maintain the same three components with the additional financing supporting the 
scaling-up of the original project’s credit line for loans and leases under Component 2 - Access to Credit. This 
component will continue to focus on improving access to financial services for farmers and agribusinesses and 
will support additional financing for the purchase of new cultivars, seeds/seedlings, water-saving irrigation 
facilities (such as drip irrigation), cold storage and other cold chain facilities, and value added 
handling/processing equipment and facilities.  
 
The institutional arrangements will remain the same. The environmental safeguards category will remain “B.” 
The results monitoring framework has been revised to reflect the additional credit, introduce new sector 
indicators, and revise some target values given changes in circumstances both within and outside of the 
project. 

 
E. Implementation 
 


Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

Overall responsibility for implementation continues to rest with the Rural Restructuring Agency (RRA). The 
RRA is a specialized organization that was created for implementing investment projects in the agriculture and 
rural sector. The additional financing will use the same on-lending modality to channel resources through PFIs 
on the same lending terms and conditions used under the parent HDP. Under the original HDP, nine banks 
have been qualified as PFIs and it expected that additional banks will apply under the proposed additional 
financing. The same due diligence process will be followed new PFIs as were used in the parent HDP. Terms 
and conditions of the credit line and the associated credit line guidelines will remain largely the same with 
minor adjustments. 

 

 
  

 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

Project activities under the first component will take place as planned under the original project within the 
fields and laboratories of participating research institutes and on farm demonstrations among participating 
producers. Under the second component, the sub-projects to be supported by the Credit Line will be based 
on demand for proposed activities. Project activities will now be implemented in all 13 provinces of the 
country, expanding the project area from the original eight provinces. The main physical characteristics of 
the new provinces are as follows: (1) Bukhara province is primarily desert plain. Water resources are limited 
and agricultural production is reliant on the Zarafshan and the Amudarya rivers. The Amu-Bukhara and 
Amu-Karakul machine canals draw water from the Amudarya for the irrigated oasis located in the south 
(Gijduvan, Bukhara and Karakul). Horticulture activities are primarily located in these irrigated oasis. (2) 
Karakalpakstan includes the southern half of the Aral Sea, where significant ecological change is occurring. A 
new salt marsh desert Aralkum is being formed due to the drying out of the Aral Sea and the lower reaches 
of the Amudarya River are drying up. The desert occupies more than 13.67 million hectares (more than 80 
percent of the territory). Horticulture production is limited but does occur in irrigated areas. (3) Navoi 
province is occupied by the Kyzylkum plateau in the northwestern part of the region, the Nurata mountain 
ranges in the east, and the Zerafshan River in the south. The climate is continental, deserted, and arid. 
Horticulture production is widespread within the region with a number of processors and exporters located 
in the region. (4) Syrdarya province is located in the center on the west side of the Syr Darya river and 
immediately west of Tashkent province. The steppe occupies part of the region and the south-eastern part 
of the region is vulnerable to crop damaging dry winds and dust storms in the summer. Horticulture 
production is widespread within the province, although concentrated in higher rainfall areas. (5) 
Surkhandarya province is located in the extreme south east with flat areas in the central and southern parts 
of the region and mountains in the north, west and north-west. The climate ranges from the dry desert in 
the south, to the sub-tropical in the north (Uzun). Horticulture production is widespread in the river valley 
and the central zones of the region. 

 
 

G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Arcadii Capcelea, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Nina Kolybashkina, Social Safeguards Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 
SAFEGUARD_TBL 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The OP is triggered as the proposed project activities 
and subproject that would be supported under 
credit line, could generate a series of adverse 
impacts. Category A-type subprojects are excluded 
by the project. To address other activities the client 
has updated the parent Environment and Social 
Management Framework(ESMF) which will guide the 
EA process during the project implementation. The 
updated ESMF takes into consideration the new 
geographic locations and, in particular, the scaling-
up credit line resources and the needs for further EA 
institutional capacity building. In this regard under 
the Project AF, the RRA will hire additional 
Environmental Specialists in all participating oblasts, 
where regional RRA PIUs will be established. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
The ESMF provides screening criteria to be applied 
to exclude any projects that could have an impact on 
natural habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 

The ESMF provides screening criteria for exclusion of 
any projects that could have an impact on forests, 
rights of forest communities or traditional uses of 
forests. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

As in the case of agricultural production or agro-
processing sub-projects, there might be needed pest 
management activities if this OP is triggered. The 
ESMF has a special section specifying provisions for 
preparation of simple pest/pesticide management 
plans as part of the application process and 
supporting IPM. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
The ESMF provides screening criteria for exclusion of 
any projects that could have an impact on physical 
cultural resources. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No This OP is not applied in the country 



 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No 

The project will support construction of new 
buildings and processing, and cold storage facilities 
only in the case when land acquisition is not 
necessary and when people have not been displaced 
prior to the application for purposes of the proposed 
subproject and there are no resettlement issues. For 
such cases the investor should have the 
landownership title as well as proof that the land at 
the moment of subprojects application is not 
occupied or used illegally. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The project will not support activities which are 
dependent on an existing dam (e.g. irrigation works). 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 

Any credit investments would be limited to 
rehabilitation or modification of existing minor 
schemes in ways which would not increase the 
amount of water abstracted or have any other 
impact on the water source or local hydrological 
regime (e.g. replacing conventional irrigation with 
drip irrigation in an existing irrigation scheme would 
be still eligible). Creating a new scheme which will 
lead to increasing water abstraction from the rivers 
will not be financed under the project. This 
determination would be made in the screening 
process. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The project will not support any activities in disputed 
areas. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 OPS_SAFEGUARD_SUMMARY_TBL 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will maintain its category B classification and will not trigger any new safeguards policies. The scope and 
scale of the project’s activities will continue to be limited as they will occur through the project’s existing sub-project 
mechanism. As a result, the project’s safeguards issues can be addressed by application of the rules and procedures 
established under the HDP Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) as well as by any implementing 
mitigation and monitoring measures stipulated in any site specific Environmental and Social Management Plans 
(ESMPs).  
 
Potential environmental impacts. The project will continue supporting various types of horticulture related production 
and processing sub-projects. Subprojects will remain limited in terms of spatial scale and take place through sub-
projects of limited duration and size. HDP’s credit line guidelines prohibit financing to category A sub-projects and as a 
result, no significant environmental impacts that fall under the Category A classification and for which a full 



 

 

Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) would be required are expected. Credit guidelines also prohibit selection of 
sub-projects located in protected areas, critical habitats or culturally or socially sensitive areas.  
 
A portion of sub-projects are expected, however, to show the potential for limited adverse environmental impacts 
that would fall under the Category B under Bank OP/BP 4.01. This is primarily due to activities related to small-scale 
agro-industries; small-scale rehabilitation, maintenance, and upgrading of various premises or storage facilities; and 
plantation of new orchards and/or vineyards.  The potential adverse environmental impacts of proposed types of sub-
projects can be summarized as follows: (a) agricultural production: soil erosion, loss of soil productive capacity, soil 
compaction, soil pollution, surface and underground water pollution, loss of biodiversity; (b) agro-processing: 
contribution to surface-water pollution, wastes generation, odor; (c) small-scale construction and/or rehabilitation of 
the existing premises: soil and air pollution; acoustic, construction wastes, and potential asbestos issues, etc. All these 
impacts are expected to be easily mitigated through good project designs and best implementation practices. 
 
The sub-projects to be implemented under the Credit Line are also expected to generate a number of both direct and 
indirect positive impacts. Direct positive impacts will be generated by increased production, products and goods which 
would result in creation of new jobs and respectively, more employment and increased income. Indirect positive 
impacts will relate to overall improving of business environment, introduction of advanced agricultural technologies 
and techniques, contribution to poverty reduction and food safety.  
 
Potential social impacts. Issues related to the risks of child and forced labor in the cotton harvest have been a 
challenge in the agricultural sector in Uzbekistan and efforts to eliminate these practices have received high level 
support within Government. Production in the horticultural sector is significantly more labor intense than in cotton 
and wheat, the peaks of seasonal labor demands are more dispersed across various crops, and the profits are higher. 
To mitigate any residual risks of child and forced labor, and to ensure that the project contributes to improved labor 
relations and practices in the agricultural sector of the country, the project envisions continued close collaboration 
with the International Labor Organization (ILO). Starting from 2018, research activities to monitor labor relations in 
the horticultural sector and to provide recommendation for creating decent working conditions would be 
implemented jointly with the ILO.  The project will also participate in the Third Party Monitoring (TPM) and Grievance 
Redress Mechanism (GRM) set up by the World Bank for the agricultural portfolio in the country to focus on issues of 
child and forced  adult labor. The TPM/GRM will be funded by a separate TF.  
  
Acquisition of land. As all proposed activities are likely to be implemented within the existing agricultural land and 
settlement boundaries, the proposed project will likely not have an impact on wildlife and natural habitats and thus, 
OP/BP 4.04 (Natural habitats) is not triggered. It is also expected there will be no impact on physical cultural 
resources, which are generally not placed in the vicinity of agricultural land. Therefore OP/BP 4.11 "Physical Cultural 
Resources" is not triggered.  
    
 Private businesses will be eligible to become project beneficiaries under the condition that they have not acquired 
and/or would not acquire land for the needs of activities to be supported with the project proceeds, through a process 
which involved and/or would involve officially supported expropriation. Additionally, project funds will not support 
any sub-loans used to invest in a business which would require the involuntary displacement of existing occupants or 
economic users of any plot of land, regardless of its current ownership, or loss of, or damage to, assets including 
standing crops, kiosks, fences and other. The project operational manual will define a screening procedure to be filled 
by PFIs, and the implementing agency will closely monitor the screening procedure, with the support of the Bank task 
team. With these restrictions in place, the project does not trigger OP/BP 4.12 "Involuntary Resettlement". 
 

 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
 
The cumulative negative impact of expanded horticultural production and processing is expected to be limited, 
particularly as expansion of the horticulture sector and successful implementation of sub-project activities are 
expected to lead to more efficient use of land and water resources compared to Uzbekistan’s current dominant 
commercial crop sector (cotton and wheat). The expected cumulative impacts are expected to be mostly positive and 
includes improved knowledge on best agricultural and manufacture practices, with consequent improvements in the 
status of the environment in the country. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
Project design includes a prohibition on category A sub-projects which is expected to prevent larger scale negative 
impacts.  A "no project" scenario was considered but would result in continuation to the the current structure of 
agricultural prodution, which is dominated by cotton and wheat, which also have specific negative evnrionmental and 
social impacts. 
 
To boost employment of women, and encourage access of female entrepreneurs to loans, the project will closely 
collaborate with the Women’s Committee of Uzbekistan and the Association of Business Women of Uzbekistan for 
policy level activities for mainstreaming gender in the sector, publicizing information about female role models, as 
well as providing targeted capacity building to female entrepreneurs to enable them to access funding through the 
project. 
 
The project will have explicit focus on targeting more vulnerable farmers, both directly and indirectly. To achieve 
indirect effects, eligibility criteria for sub-loans would also consider the social impact of the project, including direct 
job creation, the multiplier effects of supporting suppliers down the value chain, as well as contributions towards 
improving community infrastructure. Trainings for the PFIs on social responsibility of business and labor rights would 
be conducted, to ensure better screening. Through Additional Financing, a share of the project resources would also 
be ring-fenced to target smaller farmers and entrepreneurs directly. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Safeguards instruments. The primary instrument for managing safeguards policy issues is the ESMF prepared for the 
initial HDP project and which remains valid for the additional financing to the project. The document has been 
updated for the AF to address the new geographic locations and any other relevant changes from the parent project, 
including in terms of Environmental Assessment  (EA) capacity building activities (see below). The ESMF document 
outlines environmental assessment procedures and mitigation requirements for first component’s activities and the 
sub-projects which is supported by the second component’s Credit Line and, it provides details on procedures, criteria 
and responsibilities for subprojects preparing, screening, appraisal, implementing and monitoring. The document also 
includes Environmental Guidelines and Best Practices for different types of proposed sub-projects providing analysis of 
potential impacts and generic mitigation measures to be undertaken for subprojects in agricultural production, agro-
processing and storage and cooling manufacturing sectors at all stages - from identification and selection, through the 
design and implementation phase, to the monitoring and evaluation of results.  Furthermore, the ESMF provides a 
monitoring plan format which considers monitoring indicators, timing, methods, institutional responsibilities, etc. in all 
phases of the project's implementation.  
 
The project's original social assessment, prepared in 2014, was updated to cover the new regions, as well as provide a 



summary of more up to date analysis of the key issues. Issues related to labor rights and working conditions in 
horticulture sector, as well as access of women entrepreneurs to credit were flagged up. To address these, additional 
capacity building measures to be implemented in collaboration with the ILO, the Farmers Council and the Association 
of Business Women were designed for implementation under the additional financing. The project also participates in 
the Third Party Monitoring (TPM) and Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) set up by the World Bank for the 
agricultural portfolio in the country to focus on issues of child and forced  adult labor. To date RRA has been found in 
compliance and the GRM is actively receiving and responding to inquiries, however no complaints issued thus far.  
 
Institutional capacity. The project will continue be managed and implemented by the Rural Restructuring Agency 
(RRA), an institution that is currently implementing the Second Rural Enterprise Support Project, GEF Climate Change 
and Land Degradation Project, and other donors' projects. The RRA's capacity for implementation of the ESMF and of 
the participating Financial Intermediaries (PFIs) are adequate, based on the Bank supervision missions in 2016-2017. 
All sub-projects have been subject to screening and assessment and for those classified as Category B separate 
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) have been prepared. Supervision has confirmed these are being 
implemented in a satisfactory manner and no outstanding issues have been identified.   
 
Further capacity building is anticipated with respect to several technical asepcts of horticulture production, as 
identified during the initial project implementation which are related to Integrated Pest Management (IPM), soil and 
water conservation, including field demonstrations. New training on EA is also required for Participating Financial 
Intermediaries (PFIs) which should strengthen the ability of their representatives to identify potential environmental 
and social impacts as well as their knowledge on the EA rules and procedures. The revised ESMF proposes necessary 
activities in this regard.  
 
To accommodate the scaling up of activities for the project, it was agreed the RRA will hire additional Environmental 
Specialists in all participating oblasts, where regional PIUs will be established for all WB and other IFIs RRA projects will 
be implementing (including for Livestock Development Project which was recently approved by the Board). While the 
RRA ES will have the major coordinating role on EA, the PIU ESs will be responsible for assisting the PFIs in 
implementation of the Credit Component of the project, including reviewing environmental EIA studies and/or 
environmental management plans, monitoring their implementation, advising and guiding PFIs on specific 
environmental issues and management options and ensuring that potential cumulative impacts are addressed. One of 
the major area of their responsibility will be inspection of environmental compliance at worksites, ensuring the ESMP 
provisions are fully implemented. The PIUs ESs will advise PFIs in terms of integrating environmental requirements 
into bidding documents, and analyzing contracts and their implementation in terms of environmental management 
and mitigation issues. ESs will be responsible also for analyzing the environmental conditions of the subprojects’ area 
and identify main environmental parameters. On a quarterly basis PIUs ESs will prepare short reports on implementing 
ESMF and site specific ESMPs for supported sub-projects. They will also identify the status of environmental 
compliance of sub-projects implementation, and, when needed will undertake relevant measures and agree with the 
sub-project beneficiaries on corrective measures and/or proposing to the PFIs and RRA canceling sub-project 
financing. 
 
The project will also support a series of activities on human capacity building. This would include: (a) capacity building 
in collaboration with the ILO to increase compliance with national legislation and ILO conventions on child and forced 
labor, and broader labor issues, ratified by Uzbekistan; (b) training on strengthening project environmental 
management capacity for sub-projects environmental assessment; (c) training and information dissemination for sub-
project beneficiaries and farmers on several important horticulture sector development issues, identified during the 
initial project implementation which are related to Integrated Pest Management, soil and water conservation, 


including field demonstrations; and (d) training EA practitioners in the country that are working on preparing EA 
documents as well as familiarizing representatives from State Ecological Expertise on WB EA rules and procedures and 
proposing relevant recommendations on harmonizing the National EA requirements with the WB ones. 
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
As part of the initial project preparation RRA disclosed and consulted the ESMF with all interested stakeholders. This 
process involved submission of the draft summary of the ESMF to the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources 
and other relevant ministries for their review and comments. The Executive Summary of the original document in 
Russian was posted on websites of MAWR for its access to the public on January 17th, 2014. On February 13, 2014, 
the RRA organized a consultation on the draft document. After the consultation, the draft ESMF was revised to 
consider inputs from consulted parties. The final version for the parent project was posted on the website of the 
Ministry of Agriculture on February 14, 2014 and submitted to the World Bank's external website on March 10, 2014. 
For the HDP AF the updated ESMF was posted by RRA on its website for further virtual public consultation in the 
provinces which have been already included in the parent project. Face to face public consultations with the 
participation of main stakeholders and farmers were organized in the new project provinces by RRA in October 2017. 
For that purpose RRA has provided to key stakeholders (oblast agriculture, environmental and sanitary authorities and 
environmental NGOs) hard copies of the draft ESMF.  During the consultations overall the draft ESMF was supported 
by the participants, the few received comments were related to clarifying the EA roles and responsibilities and  
simplifying the EA rules and procedures and providing awareness activities for the potential subprojects beneficiaries 
in this regard. The minutes of consultations have been shared with the Bank. 
 
  OPS_SAFEGUARD_DISCLOSURE_TBL 


