

















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the People’s Republic of
Bangladesh for the National Agricultural
Technology Programme – Phase II Project


People’s Republic of Bangladesh

National Agricultural Technology Programme – Phase II
Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: World Bank

Borrower: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total programme cost: US$214 million (net of beneficiary contributions)

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 17 million (equivalent to approximately US$23.8
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinancier(s): Government of Bangladesh, World Bank, United States
Agency for International Development (USAID)

Amount of cofinancing: World Bank loan: US$176 million
USAID grant: US$7.4 million

Contribution of borrower: US$6.7 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$6.5 million

Appraising institution: World Bank

Cooperating institution: World Bank



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the People’s Republic of Bangladesh for the National Agricultural Technology
Programme – Phase II Project, as contained in paragraph 55.

Proposed loan to the National Agricultural Technology
Programme – Phase II Project for the People’s Republic
of Bangladesh

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Building on its remarkable social and economic performance over the past 20

years, the People’s Republic of Bangladesh aims to become a middle-income
country by 2021; achieving this will require that the Government of Bangladesh
overcome considerable challenges in agricultural development and rural economic
growth. The country’s annual GDP growth averaged about 6 per cent between 2000
and 2013, accompanied by a decline in the national poverty headcount rate from
48.9 to 31.5 per cent over the first decade of the century, effectively lifting some
16 million people out of poverty.

2. Bangladesh, a country of over 160 million inhabitants, has also made noteworthy
gains in education and health, and is well set to achieve most of the Millennium
Development Goals. Despite these gains, it remains a poor country, with a 2013
GDP per capita of about US$1,000. Bangladesh is regularly hit by natural disasters
that severely impact the economy, disproportionally affecting the infrastructure
and agriculture sectors, as well as vulnerable groups. Nutrition outcomes have not
kept pace with the progress achieved with most social and economic indicators.

3. Agriculture covers about three quarters of the country’s scarce land and supports
the majority of the population’s livelihoods. While overall poverty has significantly
declined over the last decade, the poverty headcount in rural areas (still around 35
per cent) has not declined as fast as in urban settings; and the proportion of
people living in extreme poverty in rural areas is still three times higher than in
urban areas.

4. Agriculture’s contribution to the country’s economic output has declined over the
past decade, but crops, livestock, forestry and fisheries still account for 17 per cent
of GDP. Some 67 per cent of the population live in rural areas and over 43 per cent
of the country’s total labour force are engaged in agriculture. Therefore, achieving
further socially and environmentally sustainable economic growth and poverty
reduction will require policies and investments conducive to lasting
transformational changes in rural areas – including through technological
innovation in agriculture.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

5. While the performance of the National Agricultural Research System (NARS) has
been impressive in contributing to food security (particularly with rice), research in
some key subsectors (e.g. livestock, fisheries) has yet to reach its potential
productivity in terms of releasing a sufficient stream of useful innovations
(including a range of new climate-smart technologies for production and post-
harvest). The proposed National Agricultural Technology Programme (NATP) – the
second phase of three projects initially planned – will seek to overcome some of



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

the key constraints still holding back the NARS, and to add greater value to the
output of the agricultural sector.

6. The NATP phase two (NATP-II) project is fully aligned with the government’s
priorities, in particular with: (i) the Perspective Plan 2010-2021 outlining the
strategy for achieving food security, making adequate infrastructure available and
pursuing environmentally friendly development; (ii) the Sixth Five-Year Plan (6th
FYP) identifying focal sectors for pro-poor growth, including agriculture, livestock,
community-based fisheries and rural finance; (iii) the policy framework of the
National Agricultural Extension Policy (NAEP, 2012); and (iv) the Bangladesh
Agricultural Research Council (BARC, 2011).

7. Being agriculture-centric, the NATP-II project will complement the ongoing IFAD-
funded portfolio in Bangladesh and is fully aligned with the country strategic
opportunities programme’s (COSOP) objectives of achieving: (i) better adapted
livelihoods of poor people in vulnerable areas to climate change; (ii) greater
market access and improved value chains for small producers and entrepreneurs;
and (iii) economic and social empowerment for marginalized groups, including poor
rural women.

II. Programme description
A. Project area and target group
8. Project area. The three-phase programme will cover all of the 64 districts by the

third phase. In this context, NATP-II will cover 57 districts (including the 25
covered by NATP-I) and span a broad range of agroecological zones across
Bangladesh. The project will be implemented over a six-year period in up to 270
subdistricts (or upazillas); this includes 120 already covered under NATP-I, plus up
to 150 new upazillas. New upazillas will be selected following the multicriteria
approach successfully applied under NATP-I (including poverty incidence, high
prevalence of marginal farmers and agroecologically stressed areas).

9. Target group. In compliance with government policies and strategies, the primary
target group for NATP-II will be smallholder farmers: particularly small, marginal
and landless farmers. Special emphasis will be placed on targeting women.

B. Programme development objective
10. The development objective of this project is to increase agricultural productivity of

smallholder farms and improve smallholder farmers’ access to markets in selected
districts. This will be achieved by: (i) strengthening the capacity of the NARS and
the extension services to generate and diffuse agricultural technologies aimed at
increasing farm productivity and reducing post-harvest losses; and (ii) promoting
the sustainability of existing and newly created farmer groups and producer
organizations by facilitating their linkages with markets.

C. Components/outcomes
11. Component 1: Enhancing agricultural technology generation. Component 1

will improve the performance of NARS through the support to agricultural
technology development, and the strengthening of agricultural research institutions
(institutional and human capacity). Research will be funded through competitive
grants. The component will also finance a number of activities (including specific
studies, policy notes, training, research-extension linkages, and others) in support
of the implementation of the 2012 BARC Act approved under NATP.

12. To scale up NATP achievements, the project design includes – embedded in the
different project components – an agricultural innovation fund (AIF). The AIF is at
the core of the NATP-II scale-up strategy; it aims to provide grant funding for
eligible research and microproject proposals to be implemented by potential project
beneficiaries. The AIF is fully aligned with the holistic approach to agricultural
innovation promoted by the project. In order to effectively contribute to achieving



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

the project development objective, the AIF includes the following three funding
windows: (i) AIF-1 (US$26.2 million) will promote agricultural technology
generation through a programme-based research initiative (AIF-1 PBRG) and a
competitive research grant programme (AIF-1 CRG); (ii) AIF-2 (US$17 million),
through matching grants, will promote farmers’ adoption of innovative technologies
generated by the research community; and (iii) AIF-3 (US$4.6 million),
through matching grants, will support private operators in developing business and
market opportunities for farmers, as well as in providing relevant private services
to farmers. NATP-II will use calls for proposals, scientific and technical peer-
reviewing and transparent selection mechanisms for the allocation of all grants
under the AIF; disbursement against the AIF is subject to the Bank’s approval of an
AIF Manual of Operational Guidelines and Procedures. NATP-II will explore
synergies between its AIF and the access to rural financial services promoted under
IFAD’s new project for Promoting Agricultural Commercialization and Enterprises
(PACE).1

13. Component 2: Supporting crop development. Component 2 will increase farm
yields, diversify agricultural production, and improve market linkages for
smallholder farmers by: (i) improving the outreach and quality of crop extension
and advisory services by strengthening the skills of public extension workers from
the Department of Agricultural Extension; (ii) promoting information and
communication technology (ICT) in agricultural extension services and supporting
farmer-to-farmer extension; (iii) developing farmers’ skills to scale up the
dissemination of good agricultural practices including those developed under NATP,
as well as identifying technologies for a sustainable production of safer food;
(iv) promoting farm and off-farm mechanization to increase crop productivity, farm
output and diversification, as well as to increase efficiency in crop handling, reduce
post-harvest losses and support processing; (v) facilitating stronger collaboration
with the private sector for agribusiness development on agroprocessing, market
access for smallholders, as well as for the establishment of machinery hire-
services; and (vi) strengthening institutions involved in the crop sector, through
capacity development and selected investments in infrastructure.

14. Component 3: Supporting fisheries development. Component 3 will promote
productivity, quality and output increases through technology transfer, as well as a
better access to market opportunities for fish farmers. NATP-II will provide support
for the sustainable development of inland culture fisheries (small-scale aquaculture
ponds) and inland capture fisheries (open water fisheries in beels [a lake-like
wetland with static water] and haors [a hoar may host several beels]) by (i) scaling
up NATP good aquaculture practices for the production systems prevailing in the
project area; (ii) promoting community-based fisheries management; (iii)
supporting the participation of fisheries common interest groups (CIGs) and
partner organizations (POs) in value chains; (iv) reinforcing research-extension-
farmer linkages; and (v) strengthening the capacity of fisheries institutions. NATP-
II will explore linkages with fishery activities under the ongoing IFAD-supported
operations in the haors.

15. Component 4: Supporting livestock development. Component 4 will promote
productivity and output increases through enhanced technology transfer, service
delivery, as well as better access for livestock farmers to markets. Activities under
this component will cover dairy farming, goat rearing, beef fattening, and poultry
farming, and focus on: (i) strengthening livestock institutions, improving livestock
extension services, and reinforcing the linkages between research, extension and
livestock farmers; (ii) scaling up outreach programmes to a larger number of

1 PACE aims to enhance the livelihoods of rural women and men by improving profitable business opportunities for
microentrepreneurs, and creating wage employment for extreme and moderatly poor people. PACE will provide NATP-II
finance groups with business planning/development services to prepare business plans for funding through PACE's
microenterprise loan programme. In addition, crop, fisheries and livestock farmers unable to access NATP-II matching
grants could be referred to PACE loan schemes.



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

farmers; and (iii) facilitating the participation of smallholder farmers in selected
livestock markets.

16. Component 5: Project management. Activities under this component will:
(i) ensure that the project is carried out in line with the provisions in the official
project documents, in particular all fiduciary and governance aspects; (ii) establish
liaison mechanisms between the World Bank and the project, and between the
project and the Government of Bangladesh, and (iii) coordinate the implementation
of selected overarching project activities with the support of external technical
assistance.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
17. NATP-II will build on and scale up successful interventions and address important

lessons learned from NATP-I. The integrated approach to reaching the project
development objectives will include a foundational component that contributes
towards decentralized, demand-driven agricultural research, as the basis for an
enhanced agricultural technology system. The project will include a further three
subsector components (crops, livestock and fisheries) to address a range of
constraints to technology generation, technology transfer and adoption at farm
level, and farmers’ access to markets. This approach is expected to lead to an
enhanced linkage between agricultural research, extension, and production – an
area regularly reported under NATP as requiring further improvement.

B. Organizational framework
18. The representative of the borrower is the Ministry of Finance. NATP-II will be

implemented under the responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture (lead
implementing agency) and the Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock. It will be fully
integrated into the Government of Bangladesh administration, and project
implementation is designed to promote the use of existing government structures
at the central level and, when available, at decentralized levels.

19. A joint steering committee, composed of senior representatives from the
agencies under the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock
involved in project implementation, as well as representatives from the farmers
and private sector, who will provide strategic guidance, approve annual budget and
activity plans, monitor overall implementation progress, facilitate interagency
coordination and resolve any outstanding issues requiring high-level decisions.

20. Project management unit. A small project management unit (PMU) will be set up
to oversee implementation of project activities, carry out day-to-day project
management functions, facilitate coordination among components, and liaise with
the World Bank on all project implementation-related aspects. The PMU will also be
in charge of project monitoring and evaluation, producing a project implementation
manual (PIM) that is acceptable to the development partners, detailing the
operational, financial and administrative procedures of NATP-II. The PMU will also
be responsible for the implementation of component 5.

21. Project implementation units. All other project components will be integrated in
the corresponding line department (or agency); each department/agency will set
up a component-specific project implementation unit (PIU). Under the Ministry of
Agriculture, BARC and the Department of Agricultural Extension will each set up a
PIU; BARC for the implementation of component 1 (agricultural technology
generation) and the Department of Agricultural Extension for component 2 (crops).
Under the Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock, the Department of Fisheries will set
up a PIU for the implementation of component 3 (fisheries) and the Department of
Livestock Services will set up a PIU for component 4 (livestock). Using project
funds, the Department of Fisheries, Department of Livestock Services and BARC
will recruit service providers (e.g. international institutions, agro-consulting firms,



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

academia or others) to deliver the technical assistance needed for strengthening
their institutional capacity and supporting their PIUs with the implementation of
component-specific activities.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

22. Planning. The PMU will be responsible for preparing the annual work plan and
budget, getting it approved by the Ministry of Finance and cleared by the World
Bank. The plan will include planned activities along with targets and expenditures
and will reflect the general project targets and activities.

23. Monitoring and evaluation. NATP-II will have a multi-tier results monitoring and
impact evaluation system that will inform on the progress made towards achieving
the development objective. Results will be sex-disaggregated reported as much as
possible to capture the gender dimension of NATP-II.

24. Learning and knowledge management. Knowledge sharing and learning is a
key activity throughout all of NATP-II’s components. The project will utilize ICT for
extension and capacity-building purposes, and further aims to build an agriculture
knowledge repository and a knowledge platform under its ICT initiative. Another
important tool will be the farmers information and advisory centres that will serve
as fully equipped agricultural technology and knowledge-sharing centres.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
25. A fiduciary assessment of NATP-II was carried out during design, and follows World

Bank procedures. The fiduciary assessment rated the risk in financial management
(FM) as “substantial”, due to (i) the involvement of multiple PIUs and accounting
centres; (ii) the timeliness of consolidation of FM reports; and (iii) compliance with
the requirements of multiple donors. Risk-mitigating measures have been
incorporated into the design of the FM implementation arrangements, and a
number of additional measures will be taken to ensure overall FM capacity and
performance.

26. NATP-II will hire an experienced consultant for the PMU (a senior financial
management specialist), with qualifications acceptable to the Bank and IFAD, to
lead and coordinate FM activities. The consultant will support the project in
strengthening budgeting practices, internal controls, fund reconciliations, and other
relevant financial functions, including coordination with the FM staff at the PIUs.
The current manual system of accounting will be enhanced within 12 months of
project effectiveness by a computerized FM information system to facilitate easy
and timely access to financial information and its consolidation. In order to ensure
that clear practices are harmonized across the project, the PIM will include all the
relevant parts of FM operations, donors’ compliance and financial disclosure. Prior
to effectiveness, the project will also adopt an online, off-the-shelf, web-enabled
accounting software. Annual external audits of all project components will be
conducted by the Foreign Aided Project Audit Directorate and will be supplemented
by additional internal audits from an independent audit firm (twice in the project
lifetime).

27. Flow of funds. Financing from the International Development Association (IDA),
IFAD and a USAID trust fund will be disbursed through three separate designated
accounts. These will be opened and operated by the PMU. All PIUs will maintain a
designated operating account to receive funds from the PMU. The IFAD loan will be
administered by the World Bank under a cooperation agreement with IFAD. An
initial advance will be provided and will be replenished based on regular statements
of expenditure. The same method will be applied between the PMU and PIUs. After
the first year of implementation, the Bank will review the FM performance and, in
consultation with IFAD, may recommend converting the disbursement modality to



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

one based on interim unaudited financial reports, including a six-monthly forecast
of fund requirements.

28. Project-related transactions relating to all funding sources (IDA, USAID, IFAD and
the Government of Bangladesh) will be accounted for separately in the PMU
following double-entry bookkeeping principles and on a cash basis. The key project
accounting functions for which the PMU will be responsible are as follows:
(i) budget preparation and monitoring; (ii) payments for eligible project
expenditure to third parties; (iii) disbursement of project funds to various agencies,
as per approved work plan; (iv) maintenance of books and bank accounts; (v) cash
flow management; (vi) financial reporting to the Government of Bangladesh, the
World Bank, IFAD and other stakeholders; (vii) preparation of withdrawal
applications to claim funds from the World Bank and IFAD; and (viii) assistance to
the external auditor and ensuring appropriate follow-up of audit. Details on the
proposed FM and disbursement arrangements can be found in annex 3 of the World
Bank’s Project Appraisal Document.

29. Procurement. Procurement financed under the project will be carried out in
accordance with the World Bank’s “Guidelines: Procurement of Goods, Works and
Non-Consulting Services under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants by World
Bank Borrowers” dated July 2014 (Procurement Guidelines) and “Guidelines:
Selection and Employment of Consulting Services under IBRD Loans and IDA
Credits and Grants by World Bank Borrowers” dated July 2014 (Consultant
Guidelines), and the provisions stipulated in the financing agreement. The
procurement method will depend on the nature of the expenditure and the value of
the contract. The PMU and all PIUs will preserve all procurement records and
documents in accordance with provisions of the Public Procurement Act 2006 (PPA
2006).

30. Procurement under NATP-II will be guided by the World Bank-approved
procurement plan and processed through pooled procurement by the PMU for
selected goods and services (e.g. ICT equipment and peripherals, furniture and
office equipment, consultant services to be provided across various components,
and others) under component 5, and by the four PIUs and the PMU for all other
component-specific goods, works and services. To mitigate procurement risks from
low in-house capacity, the project will contract six procurement specialists
(consultants): two for the PMU and one for each PIU. An acceptable procurement
plan covering the first 18 months of project implementation is available.
Institutional procurement approval will be provided by the respective Head of
Procurement Entities (HOPE) or his/her delegate as per delegation of financial
powers of the four agencies (departments’ Director General and BARC Chairman);
the HOPE for the PMU is the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture (lead
implementing agency).

31. Audit. The Foreign Aided Projects Audit Directorate of the Comptroller and Auditor
General will conduct an audit of the project’s annual financial statements within six
months from the end of the fiscal year. The project director will be responsible for
audit follow-up and taking remedial actions. Internal audits will include prepayment
audits and independent appraisals of the financial, operational and control activities
in the sector. The responsibilities of the internal auditors will further include
reporting on the adequacy of internal controls, the accuracy and propriety of
transactions, the extent to which assets are accounted for and safeguarded, and
the level of compliance with financial procedures and government laws and
regulations. The first audit will be due by the end of the second year of
implementation.

32. Governance. Lessons learned over the last five years to improve project
implementation and safeguard against potential governance issues have been
incorporated in the project design, implementation arrangements and monitoring



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

procedures. The project design allows for full and distinct accountability with a
single line agency (BARC, Department of Fisheries and Department of Livestock
Services) for each component. Project monitoring and impact evaluation will be
carried out in collaboration with the PMU and the PIUs by an independent entity
recruited competitively and operating with national and international consultants.
An independent assessment (technical and financial audit) of the AIF will be carried
out for project midterm review to improve the grant system’s performance
accordingly. Beneficiaries’ feedback will be obtained through IT apps tailored to the
project’s needs and channelled directly to the NATP-II management information
system’s area coordinated by the third-party monitoring firm. The project will also
set up project-level grievance redress mechanisms with local communities being
consulted early in the process. In addition, in line with the Bank’s Disclosure Policy
and the country’s Right to Information Act, all information in the project shall be
made public.

33. Several risks and risks mitigation measures related to procurement, financial
management, and environmental and social safeguards compliance have already
been described in the corresponding parts of the project appraisal document. In
order to further minimize governance and corruption risks, NATP-II will follow a
Governance and Accountability Action Plan (GAAP). This plan outlines a framework
for action, institutional arrangements, specific responsibilities, and additional
measures to facilitate effective and appropriate use of project funds. It is based on
the Bank’s and IFAD’s experiences in addressing governance and anticorruption
issues. The GAAP will be adjusted as necessary during implementation to reflect
governance issues that may emerge and/or to strengthen or add actions.

E. Supervision
34. The IFAD loan will be administered and supervised by the World Bank.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
35. The total estimated cost of NATP-II amounts to US$214 million (net of beneficiary

contribution), inclusive of contingencies and taxes.

B. Programme financing
36. Of the total cost of US$214 million, US$23.8 million will be financed through an

IFAD loan on highly concessional terms. The World Bank will be providing a loan of
US$176 million and USAID will contribute a grant of US$7.4 million. The
contribution of the Government of Bangladesh, in the form of parallel cofinancing,
will cover all vehicles purchased for NATP-II, as well as the salaries of civil servants
assigned to work full-time on the project, and other expenses.2 The financing of
taxes on eligible expenditures will be permitted with IFAD funds, to harmonize with
IDA practice and simplify the project’s accounting and disbursement procedures.

2 As per the table, the Government of Bangladesh contribution reported amounts to US$6.65 million (or 3 per cent of
project costs). This is likely to be underestimated, as it does not include the hiring by DOF and DLS of upazilla-level
extension staff. However, since this process is underway and has not yet been submitted to the Manpower Committee
(Finance Division/Ministry of Finance), the final number of staff that actually will be recruited is not yet known. Hence, the
exact amount to be added to the reported government contribution is not yet available.



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table
Programme/project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Millions of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan World Bank loan
USAID Gov't of

Bangladesh Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Goods, works,
services and
operating costs

19.0 11.5 140.0 84.5 6.7 4.0 165.7

2. AIF-13 2.3 8.8 16.5 63.0 7.4 28.2 26.2
3. AIF-2 2.0 11.8 15.0 88.2 17.0
4. AIF-3 0.5 10.9 4.0 87.0 4.6
5. Project
preparation
advance (World
Bank)

0.5 100.0 0.5

Total 23.8 11.1 176.0 82.2 7.4 3.5 6.7 3.1 214

37. In addition, beneficiaries will be required to provide cash contributions towards the
matching grants. Beneficiary contribution is expected to amount to US$6.5 million.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
38. Project benefits. It is estimated that over one million farming households will

directly benefit from project activities, including from improved extension services,
stronger linkages with research, on-farm demonstrations of new technologies,
capacity enhancement through training and skills development, as well as
cofunding productive assets. Based on previous experience, significant spillover
effects and knowledge transfer to farmers who are not members of groups
supported by NATP (the CIGs) can be anticipated. Therefore, all members of the
supported farming communities will potentially benefit from the technologies
generated, the improved extension services provided, as well as from the market
linkages developed. Up to three million farmers in the project area are expected to
benefit from NATP-II. The project will promote gender mainstreaming and women’s
empowerment to ensure that a significant proportion of direct beneficiaries is
female.

39. Economic analysis. The parameters used in making these projections were based
on the NATP-I experience and impact. On this basis, the NATP-II internal rate of
return is calculated at 28 per cent, the project’s economic rate of return (ERR) at
31 per cent, and the corresponding net present value at US$49.9 million. This ERR
remains robust under hypothetical scenarios of a 10 per cent decrease in expected
net revenues and/or a 10 per cent increase in project costs.

D. Sustainability
40. To ensure the durability of the model for technology transfer and delivery of

advisory services to farmers, NATP-II will promote a pluralistic extension system
that supports various complementary elements (e.g. public extension staff, local
private extension agents, lead farmers, Farmers’ Information and Advice Centres,
ICT connectivity, gender focus).

41. Improved access to knowledge, markets, market and price information and
financial services will help contribute to the sustainability of CIGs and POs
supported by the project. To further increase smallholders’ voices and economic
strength in the selected value chains, NATP-II will establish producer organizations
for farmers. In addition, bankable CIGs and POs will be linked up with financing
institutions involved in other programmes/projects supporting access to finances.

3 For explanation of AIF-1, AIF-2 and AIF-3 see para. 12.



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

42. The sustainability of NATP-II outcomes will further be supported by the institutional
capacity and skills development agenda of the project.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
43. The overall risks of NATP-II not achieving the project development objectives and

targets, and for NATP-II activities to have a negative impact on the people and the
environment are considered substantial.

44. The substantial risks identified with regard to policies and sector strategies refer to
the potential for lack of operationalization of the Bangladesh Agricultural Research
Council Act; delays in hiring public extension workers by the Ministry of Fisheries
and Livestock; and the lengthy approval process for the validation of the NAEP.
Under NATP-II, these will be addressed through: (i) strengthening the BARC
institutional capacity in the area of research management by hiring an international
service provider; (ii) expanding the use of private community-based extension
agents for livestock and fisheries with the aim of developing sustainable models for
private extension (e.g. scaling up fee-based services for livestock, promoting
additional sources of revenues for local extension agents for fisheries; and
(iii) adopting in NATP-II some of the core pillars of the NAEP (e.g. promoting a
group approach, complementary farmer-to-farmer extension; promoting private
extension services, etc.).

45. The substantial risk identified with respect to institutional capacity for
implementation refers to the challenges in coordinating four line agencies from two
different ministries and their capacity to implement the respective components. As
shown in the previous project, the coordination challenge can be adequately
addressed through a neutral PMU that has strong leadership. The recruitment of a
senior project director and a team of technical experts (consultants only, no civil
servants) at the PMU level will be a key factor for the successful coordination
across line agencies. An important mitigation measure in the implementation
arrangements for NATP-II (different from the previous project) is the support from
service providers recruited internationally for each line agency.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
46. NATP-2 is fully aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and with the

current RB-COSOP for Bangladesh, focusing on market access and value chains,
and on the economic empowerment of marginalized people. The project design
adheres to IFAD policies on private sector participation, environment, targeting and
gender. It further complies with the World Bank’s safeguards on indigenous people.
In terms of environmental impacts, the project is classified as “B”.

B. Alignment and harmonization
47. The project, whose design has seen the close involvement of the Government of

Bangladesh, will support the Government’s strategic priorities in agriculture, i.e.
increasing production, achieving food security, supporting adaptation to climate
change, and enhancing nutrition through safer and more diversified food. NATP-II
will support the decentralization process already under way for agricultural
research and extension services.

48. Project implementation will be done through existing government structures at
central level and, when available, at decentralized levels.

49. NATP-II will be cofinanced by the World Bank and USAID. It benefits from the
experience of all three partners and will link up with existing and relevant projects,
such as the IFAD-supported PACE project and the Haor Infrastructure and
Livelihood Improvement Project.



EB 2015/LOT/P.15

10

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

C. Innovations and scaling up
50. With the Agricultural Innovation Fund, NATP-II offers a tool to promote research

efforts for new and innovative technologies. The AIF is at the core of the NATP-II
scaling-up strategy; it aims at providing grant funding for eligible research and
microproject proposals to be implemented by potential project beneficiaries. The
AIF promotes a competitive research grant programme; farmers’ adoption of
innovative technologies generated by the research community; and will support
private operators in developing business and market opportunities for farmers and
by providing relevant private services to farmers (through matching grants).

D. Policy engagement
51. With its contributions to the agricultural technology development, NATP-II is

expected to support policies that create an enabling environment for smallholder
farmers. This work will include commodity-specific market and value chain
analyses, and the preparation of sector policy notes for senior decision makers.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
52. A programme financing agreement between the People’s Republic of Bangladesh

and IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing
to the borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

53. The People’s Republic of Bangladesh is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

54. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
55. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms
to the People’s Republic of Bangladesh in an amount equivalent to seventeen
million special drawing rights (SDR 17,000,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President
























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to Nepal for
Samriddhi – Rural Enterprises and
Remittances Project

Republic of Nepal

Samriddhi – Rural Enterprises and Remittances Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Nepal

Executing agency: Ministry of Industry

Total project cost: US$68.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 15.50 million (equivalent to approximately
US$21.8 million)

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability
Framework grant:

SDR 11.95 million (equivalent to approximately
US$16.8 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with a
service charge of three fourths of one per cent
(0.75 per cent) per annum

Amount of cofinancing: US$13.7 million

Terms of cofinancing: The private-sector contribution will mostly consist of
cost-sharing of capacity-building and outreach
promotion by financial institutions

Contribution of borrower: US$9 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$6.6 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/114/R.13

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Nepal for Samriddhi – Rural Enterprises and
Remittances Project, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Nepal for
Samriddhi – Rural Enterprises and Remittances Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Nepal has a population of 26.6 million people, of whom 56 per cent are 20-40

years of age. It is a low-income country with a per capita GDP of US$642, which is
the second lowest in South Asia. Since the end of the decade-long internal conflict
in 2006, insecurity and political instability have contributed to relatively slow GDP
growth. The majority of the population still lives on low-input/low-output
agriculture that provides limited income. Thus wage labour and widespread
migration have obligated 3 million Nepalese, mostly from rural areas, to be
employed abroad. The development of the service sector is partly due to a boom in
migration remittances, which have multiplied by a factor of six since 2003-2004,
now reaching 25 per cent of GDP, to about 55 per cent of rural households and still
increasing. Additionally, the poverty incidence decreased from 42 per cent in 1996
to 25 per cent in 2010, primarily due to the impact of remittances.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

2. Samriddhi1 – Rural Enterprises and Remittances Project has been developed in line
with the 2013-2018 results-based COSOP (RB-COSOP) and the Government of
Nepal’s request to harness remittances in support of entrepreneurship.

3. In line with Nepal’s National Development Plan, Industry Policy and Agriculture
Development Strategy, the project will diversify the range of economic activities
accessible to poor rural households and unemployed young men and women
through two main avenues. First, it will promote self-employment and small
businesses and microenterprises that can generate better incomes and jobs –
through both on farm and off-farm activities. Second, it will promote vocational
training and apprenticeship in direct connection with gainful job placement. In
addition, the approach to rural enterprises and remittances (RER) will develop
mechanisms specifically targeting migrant households and returnees, so they can
make the best possible use of their remittances.

4. Samriddhi will contribute to all three RB-COSOP strategic objectives. It will be the
first IFAD project to scale up Financing Facility for Remittances good practices into
an investment project, as well as the first to promote a comprehensive set of
mechanisms fostering remittance investment in livelihood development in Nepal.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project will be implemented in 16 districts of the Eastern and Central

Development Regions. It will use a corridor approach that links districts along the
main roads running south to north to facilitate the connection of hill districts to
larger markets in the terai (plains). Samriddhi will target a total of some 179,000

1 ‘Samriddhi’ is a Nepali word meaning prosperous or economically well-off.



EB 2015/114/R.13

2

primary beneficiaries, which will include existing rural micro/cottage and small
enterprises (RMSEs), poor households, returnee migrants and small enterprises.
The secondary target group will include medium and large enterprises as well as
service providers, who will be harnessed to provide support to the primary target
group through the development of business partnerships, vocational training,
apprenticeship packages and job placement. The project will also provide financial
education to 244,800 people to support financial inclusion.

6. Samriddhi will adopt an inclusive approach in which all existing micro-cottage and
small enterprises and all potential entrepreneurs – involved in both farming and
non-farming activities – will be eligible to access project-sponsored services in the
target districts. However, project support will vary according to the size of
enterprises, with a higher proportion of project grant funding provided to family-
based enterprises and the poorest groups, and a lesser proportion extended to
small enterprises. In addition, the project will ensure that poorer households,
women and other disadvantaged groups have access to project services and that
these are adapted to their needs.

B. Project development objective
7. The project goal is to contribute to reducing poverty and achieving sustainable

peace through employment-focused, equitable and inclusive economic
development. The development objective is that viable RMSEs, in both farm and
off-farm sectors, provide sustainable sources of income to poor households,
migrant families and returnees. Main indicators are: (i) 57,500 rural entrepreneurs
expand their existing business or create a new one; (ii) 30,000 rural youth access
job placement services; (iii) 34,500 enterprises are supported by Samriddhi
(22,500 new and 12,000 existing); and (iv) 21,000 vocational trainees and
apprentices are supported by Samriddhi, of which no less than 33 per cent are
women.

C. Components/outcomes
8. The project has three components: Component 1 – Promotion of RMSEs aims to

(i) provide micro and small entrepreneurs with sustainable access to adapted
business development services, so they can expand existing businesses or create
new ones; and (ii) assist members of poor households in building their skills and
securing gainful wage employment in RMSEs. Activities will be driven by an
assessment of markets, business opportunities and available services and by an
inventory and classification of existing RMSEs through a validation process.
Enterprise Service Centres (ESCs)2 will facilitate RMSE linkages with financial and
non-financial service providers, provide counselling services and information,
promote business partnerships and manage a system for the qualification,
capacity-building and quality monitoring of service providers.

9. Component 2 – Productive investment aims to (i) support the access of
RMSEs, migrants and remittance recipient households to responsive and suitable
financial services; and (ii) facilitate the financial inclusion of migrants and their
families, support their access to reintegration and peer-counselling services and
harness remittances for productive investment in rural enterprises. It will develop
innovative financial instruments designed to offset major constraints faced by
RMSEs in affordably accessing investment loans and to stimulate migrants’ savings
and investment in small business development. This will include: a risk-sharing
scheme to address RMSEs lack of collateral; a performance-based matching grant
scheme for family and microenterprises with insufficient cash flow to borrow money
in the initial stages of microenterprise development; and a departure loan buy-
back scheme targeting migrants. Capacity-building will be provided to financial
institutions in target districts, and in particular to savings and credit cooperatives

2 In Nepali: ‘samriddhi ko dhoka’ – the door to well-being.



EB 2015/114/R.13

3

(SCCs) and to Small Farmers Cooperatives Limited, to deliver responsive services
to the target population.

10. Component 3 – Institutional support and project management aims to
promote a favourable policy and institutional environment supporting the
development of RMSEs and the contribution of migration to sustainable
development. To this effect, Samriddhi will finance policy studies and research, as
well as activities enabling selected stakeholders representing the interests of
RMSEs or of migration stakeholders to participate in policy dialogue with the
Government. Additionally, Samriddhi will support capacity-building of institutions
that play a key role in creating a conducive environment for small businesses and
microenterprises and for migrants’ reintegration. Finally, it will assist in setting up
a multi-stakeholder platform on migration and development (MPMD), which will
provide a venue for policy dialogue on the integration of migration into the
development agenda and for developing policy measures to facilitate migrant
reintegration and to promote their economic initiatives in the country.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
11. The project strategy is driven by a primary concern that existing RMSEs need

support at national and local levels to develop, increase family income, generate
economic activities and improve employment. In addition, the promotion of RMSEs
must rest on sustainable structures and on mechanisms allowing continued access
of entrepreneurs to commercially-oriented services even beyond project
completion. Thus the project is designed as a temporary intervention aiming to
prepare public and private stakeholders to take over the responsibilities and costs
of securing continued RMSEs access to financial and non-financial services.

B. Organizational framework
12. The set-up of Samriddhi is based on public/private partnerships geared to support

inclusive and sustainable rural economic growth. While the Government retains
overall implementation and facilitation responsibility, non-governmental players will
have a key role in providing business development and financial services to target
groups for the creation and expansion of RMSEs and for maximizing the
development impact of migrant remittances through business investment.
Implementation arrangements also take stock of the long-lasting and strong
partnership between the Government and the Federation of Nepal Chambers of
Commerce and Industry, which is already implementing several initiatives
supporting RMSEs and rural producers.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

13. The integrated monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and knowledge management (KM)
system will be developed in accordance with government frameworks and with
IFAD guidelines. It will have three main objectives: steer project implementation;
support economic decisions and policymaking; and share knowledge and scale up
good practices.

14. The M&E/KM cycle will start with the preparation of the annual workplan and
budget (AWP/B). All Samriddhi stakeholders will have an active and important role
in identifying and reporting data. M&E officers at all levels will ensure that women
are adequately represented in this process and that they are supported in voicing
their specific concerns. To guarantee an inclusive M&E/KM system, Samriddhi will
provide capacity-building to the project management team (PMT), corridor teams
and ESC staff.

15. The purpose of knowledge management is to ensure that knowledge generated
within the project is systematically identified, analysed, documented and shared.



EB 2015/114/R.13

4

Particular attention will be given to documenting: innovative models; information
to be shared with and discussed by the MPMD with a view to assessing progress
and discussing measures to improve performance; and Learning Routes, which will
be organized to support the exchange of knowledge and good practices among
ESCs.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
16. Financial management will be governed by Ministry of Finance regulations and

will be in line with IFAD guidelines on financial management. The financial
management system will be under the overall responsibility of the Samriddhi
project manager and the accounts officer. A finance and administrative officer will
also be competitively hired from the open market. The draft project
implementation manual (PIM) – established at final design and to be approved by
IFAD – includes a financial management section describing IFAD procedures for the
withdrawal application process, flow of funds, accounting and financial reporting
and audit requirements. A complete financial management assessment was
undertaken and the residual risk was found to be ‘medium’, to be mitigated
efficiently through the following measures: professional software-based
accounting; stringent reporting requirements; accountability; internal audit
provision; and a detailed finance manual. Two designated accounts in United States
dollars will be opened at the Nepal Rastra Bank (central bank), through which
advance resources from the loan and grant will be channelled respectively. The
Government’s Financial Administration Regulations will be used as the basis for
accounting and appropriate controls over financial transactions, and will be
supplemented by separate ledgers, registers and reporting formats to record and
report IFAD expenditures by categories, components, subcomponents and
activities. Consolidated project financial statements will be prepared in accordance
with internationally recognized accounting standards.

17. Internal control and audit. The PMT accounts officer will be responsible for
tracking project expenditure, managing assets and procurement and monitoring
fiduciary aspects of district- and corridor-level project activities. The project will
continue the existing practice of internal audit by the District Treasury Control
Office, in line with government financial rules and regulations. With regard to
external audit, the Office of the Auditor General is considered an independent body
under the respective government offices and is responsible for final project audit.
Audits shall be carried out in accordance with International Standards on Auditing
and IFAD’s Guidelines on Project Audits.

18. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and services financed from
resources provided or administered by IFAD will be undertaken in accordance with
the provision of the Public Procurement Act and associated regulations, Public
Procurement Rules and the provisions of IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and
Handbook. Goods and services (non-consulting) procured using national
competitive bidding, national shopping and direct contracting will follow the
procedures and processes defined in the PIM to be approved by the project
steering committee (PSC) and IFAD. The selection of individual consultants and
individual service providers will also be defined in the PIM, which will provide
details of the selection method to be applied.

E. Supervision
19. Annual supervision missions will be organized by IFAD jointly with the Government,

in close collaboration with field-level implementers and project stakeholders.
Supervision will not be conducted as an inspection, but will rather offer an
opportunity to assess achievements and lessons jointly, to review innovations and
to reflect on improvement measures.



EB 2015/114/R.13

5

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
20. Total project investment and recurrent costs are estimated at US$68.2 million over

seven years, including physical and price contingencies. Total baseline costs are
US$57.60 million.

Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries

Private
sector -

financing
institutions

The
Government Total

Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount

A. Promotion of rural micro-cottage and small
enterprises

Mapping and setting up capacities at district and
regional levels

2 266 4 257 - 364 1 124 8 012

Services for RMSE promotion and development 10 314 758 1 836 - 1 929 14 837

Vocational training and apprenticeships 3 931 1 342 - 209 3 489 8 972

Subtotal promotion of rural micro-cottage and
small enterprises

16 511 6 357 1 836 573 6 542 31 821

B. Productive investment

Rural finance 1 534 5 258 4 800 13 175 219 24 987

Mobilizing migrant resources and skills 367 514 - - 1 476 2 356

Subtotal productive investment 1 901 5 772 4 800 13 175 1 695 27 343

C. Institutional support and project management

Policy and institutional development 404 1 942 - 1 410 2 757

Project management 2 979 2 744 - - 501 6 224

Subtotal institutional support and project
management

3 383 4 686 - 1 911 8 981

Total costs 21 795 16 815 6 636 13 749 9 148 68 145

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier*
(Thousands of United States dollars)

* Final disbursement categories will be decided during negotiations based on IFAD’s procedures, which will include a
maximum of five cost categories for reasons of efficiency.



EB 2015/114/R.13

6

B. Project financing
21. The Government of Nepal, IFAD, the private sector and beneficiaries will finance

the project. IFAD total financing amounts to US$38.61 million, equivalent to
56.7 per cent of total project financing (24.7 per cent under the form of a Debt
Sustainability Framework grant and 32 per cent through a highly concessional
loan). The Government would finance taxes, duties and salaries, and is further
expected to contribute to the cost of the salary of one staff member for each ESC
and to vocational training, for a total of US$9.1 million. The private sector
contribution is estimated at US$13.7 million. Overall beneficiaries’ contributions are
estimated at US$6.6 million.

22. Taxes and duties will not be financed by IFAD.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
23. Samriddhi will target a total of some 179,660 primary beneficiaries:

60,000 entrepreneurs; 89,660 people who will access jobs generated by the newly
created and expanded RMSEs; and about 30,000 people, mostly youth, who will
benefit from vocational training and apprenticeship.

24. Additionally, the project will provide financial education in-country and abroad to
213,100 people, mostly migrants and migrants’ households. An estimated
10 per cent of these will access other project services.

25. The secondary target group will include: (i) medium and large enterprises and
service providers, who will extend support to the primary target group; and
(ii) 22,500 enterprises (from category B to medium and large), who will benefit
from capacity-building to make the best use of apprenticeships.

26. Furthermore, project investments will lead to indirect benefits for RMSEs and poor
households beyond the target area.

27. The base-case scenario for a 20-year period of analysis shows an economic rate of
return of 26 per cent and a net present value of US$37.7 million.

D. Sustainability
28. Samriddhi strategy and activities are driven by the primary concern that, by the

end of project implementation, sustainable mechanisms will ensure continued
RMSE access to financial and non-financial services. This will be attained through:
(i) public/private partnerships that provide target groups with sufficient returns and
include capacity-building and expansion opportunities; (ii) financial sustainability of
RMSEs and ESCs through sound business plans, with incentives to support start-
up, cost-recovery mechanisms, capacity-building of key players, linkages to
performing financial service providers (SPs) and resource mobilization; (iii) use of
local resources to develop entrepreneurship, expand the range of business
development services SPs and generate jobs; and (iv) promotion of business
partnerships between the smallest enterprises and value chain aggregators, which
will facilitate continued RMSEs access to services and markets and promote their
growth beyond initial project-financed support.

29. The second interim review, planned for the end of the fifth year, will make
recommendations with regard to key measures required to secure the sustainability
of project achievements, based on which the PMT will prepare a detailed exit
strategy.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
30. Most risks associated with this project remain medium or low, and mitigation

measures have been identified for all risks. The three risks remaining high are
given below.



EB 2015/114/R.13

7

31. Risks associated with the project related to the Government or other development
organizations paying protracted subsidies and in-kind support to entrepreneurs to
establish their businesses, which will be mitigated by sharing implementation
modalities and successful achievements with the MPMD and government partners
to foster harmonization. In addition, Samriddhi and ESCs will negotiate
coordination agreements at the district level to ensure that subsidies do not
undermine the Samriddhi approach to sustainability.

32. The risk that the volume of service business will not be sufficient to generate an
adequate income for full-time SPs will be mitigated by project support to several
mechanisms facilitating sustainable SP access.

33. The risk that public/private migration stakeholders fail to take responsibility for the
operation and financing of the MPMD will be mitigated by project interventions to:
(i) set up the platform and develop plans and tools; (ii) finance the MPMD
secretariat and operations; (iii) draft a law to institutionalize the platform; and
(iv) support migrant organizations in developing advocacy skills.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

34. The design of Samriddhi was guided by IFAD’s policies and strategies on: targeting,
gender and private-sector engagement. The project is in line with IFAD’s specific
objectives on remittances, which aim to: enhance market development and
financial access through the identification, replication and scaling up of innovative
remittance transfer systems; promote financial inclusion among migrants and
remittance-recipient families in rural areas through better use of remittances; and
create an enabling environment that promotes public/private partnerships for
effective remittance development strategies.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
35. A PSC will be set up at the national level to: provide overall guidance and

oversight; ensure that Samriddhi programming is aligned with national-sector
priorities; and offer a venue for sharing Samriddhi good practices and for
channelling policy issues to the appropriate policymaking bodies. The PSC will also
approve annual AWP/Bs and annual progress and financial reports.

36. Samriddhi will rely on existing district industry promotion committees to: develop a
dialogue among stakeholders involved in RMSE development; discuss RMSE
constraints and value chain bottlenecks; agree on measures required to free them;
and identify policy gaps and provide guidance to ESCs. It will ensure that ESC
activities are inclusive of women and poor people, and that gender equality and
social inclusion issues are addressed as part of their regular agenda.

Innovations and scaling upC.
37. The PMT and business development services technical assistance will assist ESCs in

developing innovative modalities for service delivery, such as: (i) developing
systems alternative to price (commissions or mark-ups) that link payment to actual
results/impact on business; (ii) promoting SPs that have an existing business and
do not rely solely on service provision to make a living, including cooperatives or
producers’ associations; and (iii) assisting SPs in developing businesses in
conjunction with RMSEs promotion (for example, large farmers buying agricultural
products from serviced farmers). Innovative models will be thoroughly documented
with support from corridor teams and will be shared across target regions and
through multistakeholder platforms at the district industry promotion committee
level, regional (Eastern Business Forum) and national levels (National Business
Forum, the project steering committee).



EB 2015/114/R.13

8

Policy engagementD.
38. The project will support selected stakeholders representing the interests of RMSEs

or of migrants to participate in policy dialogue with the Government. Samriddhi will
finance studies and research enabling such stakeholders to: (i) develop policy
positions; (ii) organize policy consultations of members at regional and national
levels; and (iii) acquire advocacy skills.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
39. A financing agreement between the Republic of Nepal and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

40. The Republic of Nepal is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of Nepal in an amount equivalent to fifteen million five hundred
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 15,500,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Nepal in an amount equivalent to eleven million nine hundred and fifty
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 11,950,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



















































President’s report

Proposed grant to the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic
Strategic Support for Food Security and
Nutrition Project – Global Agriculture and
Food Security Program (GAFSP) funds


Lao People’s Democratic Republic

Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project
– Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP)
funds

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry

Total project cost: US$38.8 million

Amount of Global Agriculture and Food
Security Program (GAFSP) grant funds:

US$24 million
(supervised by IFAD)

US$6 million
(supervised by the World Food Programme [WFP])

Amount of cofinancing: Private sector: US$459,000

Contribution of recipient: US$5.4 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.9 million

Appraising institutions: IFAD and the GAFSP steering committee

Cooperating institutions: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic for the Strategic Support for Food
Security and Nutrition Project, as contained in paragraph 37.

Proposed grant to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
for the Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition
Project – Global Agriculture and Food Security Program
(GAFSP) funds

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Over the last two decades, the economy of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic

has experienced an average annual growth rate of 7 per cent, sustained by
macroeconomic liberalization, market-based reforms and large flows of foreign
direct investment into natural resource-based industries (such as mining and
hydroelectricity) and agriculture.

2. While the gross domestic product (GDP) share of agriculture declined from
53 per cent to 27.5 per cent between 2000 and 2014, this sector remains the
largest source of employment, with more than 70 per cent of the population
deriving its livelihoods from agriculture. This indicates that economic growth has
created few jobs in other sectors. The agriculture sector’s annual growth rate
averaged nearly 5 per cent at the end of the 1990s, but declined to just 2 per cent
in 2012. Much of the country’s growth has resulted from the expansion of
cultivation areas to accommodate a rural workforce that is growing by 2.5 per cent
per year. But overall productivity is still low in the farming sector and per capita
income is less than half the national average. Most of the country’s
650,000 farming households are engaged in subsistence and low-productivity
agriculture.

3. Economic growth has resulted in a steady decline of the national poverty index,
which dropped from 46 per cent of the population in the mid-1990s to 23 per cent
in 2012. Poverty and extreme poverty are most common in mountainous regions,
where the majority of the country’s indigenous peoples live. In upland areas, the
national poverty rate is as high as 43 per cent, compared with 28 per cent in the
lowlands. The country moved from a rice deficit in 1996 to surplus production in
2006. However, accessibility to rice and protein sources is highly contingent upon
geography and income. Malnutrition is high, with 44 per cent of children under 5 in
rural areas suffering from stunting (chronic undernutrition). The communities most
prone to undernutrition live in upland areas, where household economic activities
are increasingly constrained by unsustainable farming practices, large-scale land
concessions, limited adaptation to climate change and a lack of financing, access to
markets and support services.

4. In June 2015, the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP) – a multi-
donor financing facility – approved a US$30 million proposal presented by the
Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in support of food security and
nutrition. IFAD was selected as the supervising entity for the investment and the
World Food Programme (WFP) was chosen as the supervising entity for technical
assistance.



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

2

5. According to the provisions of the GAFSP Trust Fund transfer agreement entered
into by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) (as
trustee) and IFAD, IBRD shall transfer to IFAD the funds approved by the GAFSP
steering committee for project implementation. These funds shall be used by IFAD
in accordance with its policies and procedures, and in line with the decisions of the
GAFSP steering committee as specified in the approved project document.

6. In line with the transfer agreement, IFAD shall enter into an agreement with the
Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in accordance with the policies
and procedures of the Fund.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
results-based COSOP

7. The GAFSP grant for the Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project
(SSFSNP) is designed to pilot new approaches and technologies, and scale up
existing technologies and systems to accelerate the Government’s progress towards
national food security and improved nutrition. The SSFSNP is one of the first
development projects in the country to comprehensively address the agricultural
constraints to improved nutrition within the framework of the convergence
approach, as stipulated in the National Nutrition Strategy to 2025 and Plan of
Action 2016-2020 (NNSPA).

8. Project interventions will focus on the implementation of four nutrition-sensitive
agricultural activities among the NNSPA’s 22 priority interventions. Other
development partners’ projects and government programmes are addressing the
remaining interventions. The project will focus on building an enabling environment
for sustainable market-led improvements in nutrition-rich and diverse agricultural
production, and rural employment through: (i) participatory, bottom-up
village-level public investment planning and implementation; (ii) the empowerment
of women to improve family diets, especially during the first 1,000 days of life;
(iii) the development of farmer organizations linking men and women farmers to
markets; (iv) the application of a demand-driven extension approach emphasizing
decentralized farmer-to-farmer and enterprise-to-farmer extension; and (v) support
for private agribusiness investment, seeking business models that are clearly
aligned with both development and growth objectives. In addition, the project will
promote “green technology”, with all interventions having a neutral or positive
impact on communities’ ability to adapt to climate change.

9. The financing for SSFSNP is in line with the country strategic opportunities
programme (COSOP) 2011–2016, which comprises three strategic objectives:
(i) community-based access to and management of land and natural resources;
(ii) access to advisory services and inputs for sustainable, adaptive and integrated
farming systems; and (iii) access to markets.

II. Project Description
A. Project area and target group
10. Project area: The project will be implemented in 12 districts and approximately

400 villages in the four provinces of Oudomxay, Phongsali, Xiangkhouang and
Houaphan in the northern part of the country. The villages will be selected based
on: (i) poverty data; (ii) potential for agriculture-led growth, including expansion of
the agriculture and forest resource base, irrigation development and market
access; (iii) commitment of village leadership; (iv) an assessment of climate
change vulnerability; and (v) opportunities for convergence with other ongoing or
planned projects.

11. Target population: The target group will comprise poor rural households in the
400 selected villages. To ensure that women have equal and priority access to
project benefits, SSFSNP will include measures to increase women’s participation



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

3

and influence in their communities, including equal gender representation in
SSFSNP village development committees.

B. Project development objective
12. The goal of the project is to reduce extreme poverty and malnutrition in the poorest

communities. The development objective is to ensure that improved and diversified
agricultural production and household nutrition enhance livelihoods and well-being.

C. Components/outcomes
13. The project has three main components as well as a component for project

management:

Component 1: Strengthened public services. This component will underpin the
development of government capacities, procedures and technical skills to support –
and converge – community implementation of selected national nutrition strategy
interventions. It comprises: (i) the establishment of a tiered project planning,
supervision, monitoring and knowledge management system within the Ministry of
Agriculture and Forestry; and (ii) strengthening the capacities of district
departments of agricultural extension, district technical service centres and the
National Agriculture and Forestry Research Institute to deliver sustainable
climate-adapted and nutrition-sensitive agriculture and natural resource
management technologies and training.

Component 2: Community-driven agriculture-based nutrition interventions.
This component will be supervised by WFP. It has two subcomponents:

(i) Planning for improved nutritional outcomes. This comprises support for
multi-sector convergence planning at the district level to accelerate the
implementation of the NNSPA. It includes the mapping of various
stakeholders’ programmes and infrastructure assets to identify development
gaps at the village level. Simultaneously, the project will support improved
village development planning by building the capacity of village stakeholders
to lead the development process in their communities. The preparation of
three-year multi-sector, nutrition-sensitive village development plans (VDPs)
will be supported by experienced community planning service providers.

(ii) Women-led improvement in household nutrition. This encompasses the
rollout of a social behavioural change communication programme jointly
supported by SSFSNP and the World Bank-financed Health Governance and
Nutrition Development Project in all project villages. It aims to encourage
nutrition-enhancing behaviours that maximize the benefit of the project’s
investments in the four NNSPA agriculture interventions. The project will
support the establishment of monthly village-level “farmer nutrition schools”
to balance agricultural production, wild food collection and food purchase
throughout all seasons of the year. It will enable villages to increase the
availability of food for improved dietary diversity.

Component 3: Sustainable and inclusive market-driven partnerships. This
component includes two subcomponents:

(i) Profitable investment in nutrient-sensitive, climate-adapted
agriculture. The project will identify commodities that have investment
potential and that comply with the provincial socioeconomic development
plans. Commodities will be selected based on: their potential for commercial
production of nutritious food for export or import substitution; and the
likelihood of poor rural households to invest in increasing their production and
expanding employment. Strategic investment plans will be prepared in all
selected communities. These plans will inform the VDP process and provide a
framework for forming agriculture production groups and inviting
entrepreneurs to invest in the project area. Based on this exercise, the project



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

4

will co-finance VDP-identified communities’ and farmer organizations’
investments in profitable and sustainable, nutrient-sensitive agricultural
production through a village development fund.

(ii) Linking Farmers to markets. With support from the Ministry of Planning
and Investment, and the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, the project will
include a review of the current contract farming programme in the project
area and propose amendments to government legislation, regulations and
implementation procedures underpinning contract farming agreements. The
aim is to establish more equitable and productive agreements that benefit
farmers and investors alike. This will include technical assistance in support
of improved contract farming policies. Based on this experience, the project
will pilot the use of public-private partnership funding to promote investments
and job opportunities among rural enterprises and households.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
14. The SSFSNP will be implemented over a six-year period. Nutrition has been

mainstreamed into all three project components, and each activity will contribute to
improved nutrition. Simultaneous actions on food, childcare and feeding practices,
access to quality health care and water and sanitation will be undertaken for
greatest impact. The management structure will be based on the lessons learned
through previous IFAD projects in the country and the region, and will avoid parallel
management systems while implementing transparent mechanisms for financial
management and fund transfer.

B. Organizational framework
15. A national project steering committee will be responsible for overall direction of the

project and for the convergence of SSFSNP activities with those of other
development partners. This committee will comprise representatives from the
Ministries of Agriculture and Forestry; Finance; Planning and Investment; and
Health and from the National Chamber of Commerce and Industry, in addition to
the four provincial governors or vice-governors. It will be co-chaired by the Vice-
Ministers of Agriculture and Forestry, and Health. Steering committees will also be
established at the provincial level. Through its Department of Planning and
Cooperation, the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry will be the lead agency, with
overall responsibility for project implementation. This ministry will delegate
responsibilities to district administrations and to the national project coordination
office (NPCO) based in Vientiane. The NPCO will be supported by an internationally
recruited chief technical advisor.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

16. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. The project’s monitoring and evaluation
system will: (i) guide project implementation through the assessment and analysis
of project outputs, outcomes and impacts on poor households’ nutrition and
livelihoods; and (ii) share knowledge by capturing lessons learned, good practices
and successful innovations, and publishing them on knowledge platforms. The
system will monitor both operational and financial aspects of the project.

17. Learning and knowledge management. The project’s knowledge management
and learning processes will: identify, analyse, document and share knowledge,
support innovation dissemination; identify issues for advocacy with policymakers;
and provide information to support scaling up. This will include: (i) study tours,
discussions and workshops for project and ministry staff at the national and district
levels to promote nutrition-rich upland agriculture initiatives; and (ii) various



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

5

formats for dissemination of results, including farmer-to-farmer and enterprise-to-
farmer extension.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
18. Financial Management. As custodian of funds in the project account, the NPCO

will be responsible for project financial management. The NPCO will also be
accountable to the Government and IFAD for the proper use of funds in line with
the legal agreements and contractual arrangements for service providers. It will
provide detailed financial statements of project operations, resources and
expenditures for each fiscal year in accordance with standards and procedures
acceptable to IFAD. The financial management assessment of the project rated the
fiduciary risk as high. Mitigation measures will include close supervision, support
and oversight from the IFAD subregional office for: (i) the installation of
professional accounting software; (ii) the recruitment  of competent and qualified
financial management staff; (iii) the development of a financial manual integrating
controls linked to operations; (iv) bi-annual supervision missions from the
subregional office; and (vi) a control framework integrating periodic internal audits
and independent external audits.

19. Flow of funds. Project funding will flow from the GAFSP account to IFAD and WFP
in accordance with their assigned roles and established legal agreements. For
IFAD-managed funds (GAFSP grant), the Ministry of Finance shall open a
designated account denominated in United States dollars in the Central Bank of the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic. The designated account will be maintained and
managed by the Ministry of Finance. IFAD will advance funds to the designated
account in accordance with imprest account modalities.

20. The NPCO shall open and maintain a designated account denominated in Lao kips
(LAK) for project operations. The NPCO will submit replenishment requests to IFAD
through the Ministry of Finance with appropriate supporting documentation.

21. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and consulting services financed
through this project will be carried out in accordance with IFAD Procurement
Guidelines. For component 2, WFP’s procurement rules will apply. National
procurement procedures and regulations will be applied provided that they are
consistent with IFAD’s guidelines.

22. Governance. The NPCO will prepare a project framework for investment
transparency and publicity. This framework will include provisions to ensure that
procurement (whether carried out by the districts or by the NPCO) is carried out in
accordance with IFAD rules and specifications. Measures will include: (i) the
publication of all procurements, calls for proposals, contract awards and business
partnership details in local newspapers and at district and provincial offices;
(ii) participation of end user representatives in bid assessments; and (iii) prompt
communication with bidders. The framework will also include an internal code of
conduct to be signed by all staff engaged in project implementation.

E. Supervision
23. The project will be jointly supervised by IFAD and WFP. WFP will focus on

component 2 while IFAD will supervise the remaining components and provide
overall financial management. A joint midterm review will be organized by the
government, IFAD and WFP before the end of 2018.



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

6

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
24. The total cost for the project is estimated at US$38.8 million as indicated in Table 1.

Table 1
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(In thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

GAFSP
IFAD

GAFSP
WFP

Government–
parallel

investment Private sector Beneficiaries Government Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 318 86.1 - - - - - - 51 13.9 370
2. Vehicles 1 089 100 - - - - - - - - 1 089
3. Equipment 477 100 - - - - - - - - 477
4. Agricultural inputs 865 58.9 73 5 - - - - - - 531 36.1 1 469
5. Matching grant 13 881 72.9 1 800 9.5 459 2.4 2 900 15.2 - - 19 040
6. National technical

assistance 2 176 47.2 1 775 38.5 - - - - - - 658 14.3 4 608
7. International technical

assistance 362 26.5 1 003 73.5 - - - - - - - - 1 364
8. Capacity-building and

learning 1 714 35.2 3 150 64.8 - - - - - - - - 4 864
9. Salaries and

allowances 1 292 42.0 - - - - -- - 1 787 58.0 3 078
10. Other operating costs 1 827 75.0 - - - - - - 609 25.0 2 435

Total 24 000 61.9 6 000 15.5 1 800 4.6 459 1.2 2 900 7.5 3 635 9.4 38 794

B. Project financing
25. The project will be financed by a GAFSP grant of US$30 million. The private sector

is expected to contribute US$459,000 and beneficiaries will provide US$2.9 million.
The Government’s contribution is estimated at US$5.4 million comprising taxes,
duties, infrastructure, land use registration and project management staff costs. Of
the total US$30 million in GAFSP funding, IFAD will manage US$24 million
(components 1 and 3) and WFP will manage US$6 million (component 2 and
technical assistance under component 1). See table 2 for costs by component and
financier.
Table 2
Project costs by component and financier
(In thousands of United States dollars)

GAFSP
IFAD

GAFSP
WFP

Government
– parallel

investment
Private
sector Beneficiaries Government Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount
1. Strengthened public

services 3 285 1 003 -- -- - 265 4 552
2. Community-driven

agriculture-based
nutrition interventions - 4 997 - - - 444 5 441

3. Sustainable and
inclusive market-
driven partnerships 16 167 - 1 800 459 2 900 525 21 851

4. Project
management 4 548 - - - - 2 402 6 950

Total 24 000 6 000 1 800 459 2 900 3 635 38 794

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
26. The cost-benefit analysis of the project is based upon the connections among

nutrition, education and income. The analysis compares the discounted stream of
incremental expected lifetime income to the discounted stream of SSFSNP costs. It
is assumed that the project interventions will impact beneficiary children’s ability to
complete school and earn higher wages in their adult lives. The overall project



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

7

economic rate of return is 8.7 per cent. The cost-benefit ratio of 2.92 indicates a
return of approximately US$3 for every US$1 invested. The sensitivity analysis
indicates a robust economic internal rate of return.

27. The project will target at least 400 villages – or 34,000 households. Assuming a
60 per cent success rate, the SSFSNP will lift approximately 20,400 households out
of poverty by project end. Direct benefits are expected to include diversification of
homestead food production, investments in agricultural production infrastructure,
and improved farming system productivity. These improvements will include: the
introduction of small and micro-irrigation; the introduction of forage and cash crops
into crop rotations; improved upland and lowland rice production; the introduction
of livestock enterprises such as fish and pigs; and expanded harvesting and
processing activities.

D. Sustainability
28. The project emphasizes capacity-building of public institutions from the village to

the national levels. This investment in public capacity will enable sustainable food
and nutrition security activities to remain embedded within the country’s civil
service and the society it serves. Once developed, public-sector capacity can be
expanded throughout the country as systems improve in the target provinces and
districts. The project will also emphasize the development of self-sustaining
community-based organizations and village users’ groups, which will play an
important role in the implementation and ongoing management of project activities.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
29. The main risks to this project’s success are in the areas of institutions, markets and

policy. Institutional risks include the prolonged approval processes and weak
technical capacities of public agencies. Mitigation measures include the
establishment of clear criteria and formats for all planning processes, and the
rollout of annual capacity-assessment and capacity-development plans. Market
risks include volatile commodity prices and difficulties in forging public-private
partnerships because of the dispersed and small-scale nature of poor farmers’
production. To mitigate these risks, the project will promote diversified production
and the delivery of market information at the local level, and provide training for
communities and farmer groups in order to aggregate production and improve
quality. Policy risks include the limited application of national contract-farming
frameworks and limited awareness of climate-change policies. Mitigation comprises
continuous policy dialogue at the national and provincial levels, with an emphasis
on practical approaches for contract farming arrangements and climate-change
adaptation.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
30. The project design is guided by the IFAD’s policies and strategies on targeting,

gender, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management, and
private sector engagement. In terms of environmental impact, the majority of
activities fall under Category C, while a limited number are classified under
Category B. The project is also in line with the 2011-2015 COSOP for the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic.

B. Alignment and harmonization
31. As noted above, the SSFSNP will be fully aligned with government priorities and

GAFSP targets, and implemented in the context of IFAD’s COSOP for the country. In
addition, the project will be aligned with regional and national development projects
including: the Lao People's Democratic Republic – Upland Food Security
Improvement Project; the Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice; the
Poverty Reduction Fund Project and the Health Governance and Nutrition



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

8

Development Project, all supported by the World Bank; and the IFAD-supported
Food and Nutrition Security and Market Linkages Programme and Soum Son Seun
Jai Programme; the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA)-supported
Project for Enhancing Capacity in PIP Management; the European Union-supported
Global Climate Change Alliance programme; WFP’s Mother and Child Health and
Nutrition project, and Food Assistance for Assets programme; and several NGO-led
initiatives.

C. Innovations and scaling up
32. The most important innovation promoted by the SSFSNP is the convergence

approach, which aims to consolidate the impacts of complementary government
and development partner-implemented programmes for improved nutrition. This
approach, which addresses all 22 interventions in the Government’s nutrition
strategy, can be replicated and scaled up throughout the country. Good practices
will be identified and shared within the SSFSNP and with other projects by
developing linguistically and culturally appropriate learning approaches that take
into account beneficiaries’ low literacy.

D. Policy engagement
33. IFAD is the co-chair on the Agriculture and Rural Development Sector Donor Group.

While the investment made through this project is unlikely to influence national
policy, IFAD’s collective project experience will form the basis for ongoing policy
engagement by the IFAD Country Office and the subregional hub. Focus areas of
policy dialogue will include participatory decentralized planning, public-private
partnership frameworks, contract farming and mainstreaming of nutrition into
agricultural production. The Sector Group is one important platform where these
issues will be raised.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
34. A project financing agreement between the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in appendix I.

35. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

36. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
37. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the Global Agriculture
and Food Security Program to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in the
amount of twenty-four million United States dollars (US$24,000,000) upon
such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the
terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




































President’s report on a proposed loan and
grant to the Lebanese Republic for
Harmonized Actions to Enhance Livestock
Production and Processing

Lebanese Republic

Harmonized Actions to Enhance Livestock Production and
Processing

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Lebanese Republic

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$12.5 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$4.9 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$0.6 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary terms: 18 years, including a grace
period of 3 years, with an interest rate equal to
the reference interest rate per annum as
determined by the Fund semi-annually.

Amount of financing gap: Facility for Refugees, Migrants, Forced
Displacement and Rural Stability: US$5 million

Contribution of borrower: US$1.8 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.2 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Lebanese Republic for Harmonized Actions to Enhance Livestock
Production and Processing, as specified in paragraph 64.

Proposed loan and grant to the Lebanese Republic for
Harmonized Actions to Enhance Livestock Production
and Processing

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country rural development and poverty context
1. Real GDP growth in Lebanon for 2016 was estimated at 1.8 per cent, reflecting the

impact of regional turmoil.

2. According to the Ministry of Social Affairs and the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), Syrian refugees are concentrated in specific
pockets: 87 per cent of persons displaced from the Syrian Arab Republic and
67 per cent of the poorest Lebanese live in 251 out of a total of 1,653 cadastral
zones in the country.

3. Nearly 95 per cent of Syrian refugees are food insecure, 71 per cent are living
below the minimum poverty line of US$2.4 per day, and 41 per cent have
inadequate shelter.

4. Using these poverty lines, 28.6 per cent of Lebanese households were found to be
poor; and, of these, 8 per cent were considered extremely poor or below the lower
poverty threshold.

5. Currently, the Ministry of Social Affairs claims that the highest poverty rates are in
Mount Lebanon, North Lebanon and Bekaa; and these zones account for about
77 per cent of all poor people in the country. In 2014, 12 per cent of Lebanon's
population was estimated to be rural.

6. Compared to Lebanon's overall poverty rate of 8 per cent, over 20 per cent of
households engaged in agriculture are living below the low poverty threshold.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

7. The IFAD country strategy note for Lebanon (October 2016) identified the following
two strategic objectives (SOs) for IFAD’s short-term engagement: (i) SO1:
increase opportunities and improve living conditions for communities that depend
on dairy livestock, through improved production, capacity development, access to
veterinary services, and policy dialogue; and (ii) SO2: support rural enterprise
development for dairy processing through small and medium-sized enterprises and
community-based organizations, including cooperatives, producer associations and
private-sector entities.

8. On this basis, IFAD’s short-term engagement in Lebanon includes contributions
towards: (i) assisting the Government of Lebanon to strengthen the livestock
sector; (ii) supporting rural communities hosting Syrian refugees by promoting
initiatives that generate income and employment opportunities; and (iii) triggering
grant resources upon government request to urgently respond to the influx of
refugees into the region.



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

2

9. The priorities of the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) strategy match those of the IFAD
Strategic Framework 2016-2025, as well as IFAD’s strategic partnership with
Lebanon. Both frameworks relate to supporting smallholder agriculture and rural
development programmes, thus building the capacity, productivity and market
participation of poor rural people.

10. Theory of change. There is strong demand for good-quality dairy products
obtained through small-scale processing of fresh milk. Consumers are willing to pay
a premium price for quality. Small dairy producers are currently unable to
penetrate this rewarding market, however. Not only do they pay a high price for
animal feed, but they also produce and process low-quality milk and dairy
products. Reducing the cost of animal feed and improving animal health, together
with higher productivity per head and hygienic processing to add value to good-
quality raw milk, would sustainably increase incomes among smallholder dairy
producers and processors and enhance food security both at the household level
and countrywide. This would make the Lebanese dairy sector far more profitable at
the smallholder level and lift smallholder dairy farmers and processors out of
poverty. The same theory of change would apply to the Syrian refugees engaged in
dairy production and on-farm processing, whether now as refugees in Lebanon or
when they eventually return to the Syrian Arab Republic.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
11. The Harmonized Actions to Enhance Livestock Production and Processing (HALEPP)

project would be national in scope and cover seven governorates: Mount Lebanon,
North Lebanon, Akkar, Bekaa, Baalbek-Hermel, Nabatieh and South Lebanon. It
would mainly target the Lebanese communities who are among the poorest and the
most affected by the influx of Syrian refugees, as well as the refugees themselves,
by implementing its actions in the 251 poorest of a total of 1,653 cadastral zones
in the country. The 251 cadastral zones are home to 67 per cent of the poorest
Lebanese people and 87 per cent of the Syrian refugees.

12. The project would target about: (i) 2,400 smallholder cattle farmers and 1,600
small ruminant farmers. It is estimated that this would encompass nearly
30 per cent of all farmers owning up to seven cows, and 21 per cent of all small
ruminant farmers with herds of up to 200; (ii) 1,500 smallholder on-farm
processors, mostly women; (iii) 80 small-to-medium off-farm processors; and
(iv) 500 young Lebanese in host communities affected by the Syrian crisis, and
Syrian refugees, seeking employment in agriculture and agroprocessing and rural
infrastructure. All project interventions would have a strong focus on women, who
represent a specific IFAD target given their traditional importance in livestock
production, their growing social and economic responsibility, and their vulnerable
position in societies. Up to 30 per cent of the project target population would be
Syrian refugees.

B. Project development objective
13. The project’s overall goal is to contribute to the reduction of rural poverty among

resource-poor Lebanese rural households, including Lebanese host communities
affected by the Syrian crisis and the Syrian refugees living in these areas.

14. The development objectives are to: (i) increase the income of smallholder dairy
producers and processors; and (ii) increase employment opportunities for young
Lebanese in communities affected by the Syrian crisis and for young Syrian
refugees living in these communities.

C. Components/outcomes
15. The project will have three core components that display a number of

complementarities between initiatives and subcomponents.



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

3

16. Component 1: Enhancing the competitiveness of smallholder dairy
producers. The expected outcomes of this component are enhanced smallholder
dairy farming productivity and an increased supply of quality milk; this will be
achieved through outputs delivered under two activities:

(i) Improving the capacities of targeted smallholder dairy farmers; and

(ii) Improving animal management and productivity in cattle dairy herds and
small ruminant flocks.

17. Component 2: Improving small-scale value addition and market access.
The expected outcome of this component is better nutrition, resulting from higher
consumption of dairy products, better-quality dairy products at the household level,
strengthened and competitive small and mid-size dairy processors, and reduced
post-harvest milk losses. This will be achieved mainly by training producers and
processors in best practices. The outputs will be structured under three
subcomponents:

(i) Supporting aggregation and value addition. A training program will be
designed to raise awareness on issues of milk hygiene, handling and
processing, targeting women household members in charge of milking
animals and milk processing at home. The focus will be on the introduction
and use of simple innovations and technologies that result in higher yields
and better-quality products;

(ii) Improving access to finance. Subcomponent outcomes include increased
formal financial-sector lending to the smallholder dairy sector. The objective
of the subcomponent is to demonstrate the viability of sustainable inclusive
finance in the rural smallholder dairy market; and

(iii) Supporting a dairy stakeholder platform for inclusive policy dialogue.
This activity will have three main outcomes: [a] an inclusive national policy
dialogue platform is established/strengthened and plays an active advocacy
role on behalf of the smallholder dairy sector; [b] seven regional innovations
platforms are established, addressing technical constraints at the local level
and ensuring an upward flow of information; and [c] consensus based
self-regulation mechanisms (for quality, price, etc.) are established.

18. The third component involves project management and support.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
19. Based on previous and ongoing experience with the implementation of

IFAD-supported projects, and given the limited capacity in the MoA, HALEPP
implementation would combine making use of relevant MoA directorates and
outsourcing to qualified institutions (universities and international organizations,
NGOs and private service providers). The latters’ involvement would be arranged
through calls for proposals and performance-based memoranda of understanding.
Many NGOs have been active in supporting smallholder farmers and rural women in
technology transfer, agricultural extension and access to markets.

B. Organizational framework
20. A specially created project management unit (PMU) with competitively recruited

and qualified staff will coordinate the project. The PMU office will be physically
located in the MoA, reporting directly to the Office of the Minister. The PMU’s core
staff will include a full-time project director and full-time professional and support
staff to oversee the day-to-day operations of the project, namely: financial
manager, procurement officer, accountant, monitoring and knowledge management
and community mobilization-targeting/gender officer, administrative assistant, and
two drivers. In addition, the relevant staff from the Animal Resources Directorate



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

4

and Education and Extension Service will be involved in management of the project
part-time.

21. In line with the practice for IFAD-funded projects in Lebanon, a project steering
committee (PSC) will be set up to provide policy direction for the project; review
and approve annual workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs); and oversee the project
management team to ensure its effectiveness. Membership of the PSC will include:
representatives of MoA, the General Directorate of Cooperatives, Ministry of Social
Affairs, Office of the Ministry of State for Displaced Persons’ Affairs, microfinance
institutions, etc.

C. Planning, M&E, learning and knowledge management
22. A key planning instrument will be the AWP/B, the first of which will be prepared as

part of the final design report, together with the procurement plan for the first 18
months of the project; and it will be presented for discussion during the start-up
workshop for submission for IFAD’s no objection. The subsequent AWP/Bs should
be prepared, discussed and approved no later than sixty days before the fiscal
year-end. If required, the PMU, through the PSC, can propose adjustments in the
AWP/B during the relevant project year, which will become effective upon IFAD
clearance.

23. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system is designed to offer comprehensive
and reliable information to improve planning and decision-making for results-based
management. The monitoring and evaluation of HALEPP achievements and
knowledge management will be the responsibility of the PMU. An M&E specialist will
be responsible for collecting relevant data on activities, outputs and outcomes.

24. The logical framework will be used for results-based M&E and will include an initial
list of indicators to track progress and achievements. This will be done through
accounting for progress against AWP/B targets, routine and periodic assessments
of movement towards beneficiary impact. The project’s draft M&E matrix will be
prepared in a participatory manner as part of the start-up activities in line with the
logical framework. Several studies/surveys will be conducted as part of the M&E
system.

25. Baseline study. The project’s baseline is a critical element in its M&E system. It
will include the target group and a control group which will be essential for
attributing results to project activities. At the start of implementation, a baseline
survey will be conducted in selected locations to assess the physical and
socioeconomic status of the target group and define its benchmark status.

26. Midterm review. An external evaluation will be performed towards the middle of
the HALEPP implementation period, i.e. in year 3. It will assess operational aspects
such as project management and the implementation of activities, as well as the
extent to which the objectives are being fulfilled. It will also identify the corrective
actions needed for the project to achieve its impact.

27. Project completion survey (impact evaluation). This will include the same set
of questionnaires used for the baseline, to enable comparison against baseline
results. In addition, a panel of households will be interviewed to provide a thorough
analysis of the project’s impact. Analysis will also be conducted by type of
beneficiary, region and gender of household head.

28. The Results and Impact Management System (RIMS), developed by IFAD
since 2004, will be fully incorporated into the project’s M&E system. A systematic
methodology will be used, together with a set of common indicators across
programmes and regions, to measure and report on the performance and impact of
projects. The RIMS report for the level 1 and level 2 indicators will be prepared at
each fiscal year-end and reported to IFAD before 31 January.



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

5

29. Georeferencing. All HALEPP activities will be georeferenced at the village level.
This will permit monitoring of the coverage of project actions and the concentration
of certain activities in specific areas. All extension sites, processing facilities
supported by HALEPP and microfinance institutions participating in the project will
be georeferenced.

30. Beneficiary database. The database will be developed for all project
beneficiaries. Details on each beneficiary to be contained in the database include:
physical address, national identification, age, sex, and activities participated in. The
database will make it possible to track beneficiaries and activities, and provide a
sampling vehicle for data collection and visits during supervision missions.

31. The learning process will be part of the regular M&E activities. Lessons learned will
be prepared and reported for all component activities. The learning and knowledge
management activities will include regular monitoring mechanisms, progress
reports, midterm review, and an impact assessment evaluation at the end of the
project. There will be a special focus on preparing a learning note on dairy
extension and dairy product labelling, which are innovations in the Lebanese
context.

32. As part of the preparation of the IFAD-required project completion report/impact
assessment during the final year of HALEPP implementation, the M&E data
collected over the implementation period will be used to make a thorough
assessment of its achievements. In particular, it will compare changes in the
livelihoods of beneficiaries, which are attributed to HALEPP, relative to the baseline
situation. Innovations and best practices at the village level will be documented for
future replication and scaling up.

33. The Facility for Refugees, Migrants, Forced Displacement and Rural Stability
(FARMS) specific results and achievements will be mainstreamed into IFAD's M&E
systems. The results achieved by the Facility will be reported as per current IFAD
reporting practice, coupled with a separate annual meeting on FARMS results and
progress to be organized for donors and key stakeholders. Knowledge management
and learning will aim to generate lessons learned and best practices, which can
feed back into the activities of the Facility and IFAD's broader portfolio.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
34. The PMU, under the MoA, will assume overall responsibility for managing the

projects' fiduciary performance and all financial management activities.

35. A financial management assessment has been made as part of the project design.
The country’s inherent risk is rated as high, as also is the project’s initial risk
rating. However, following implementation of the identified mitigation actions, the
risk rating is expected to drop to medium during the first or second year of
implementation.

36. The PMU will conduct a competitive selection process to hire a qualified finance
manager and a project accountant. The PMU will keep its accounts in accordance
with International Public-Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS) cash-based
accounting. The project transactions will be recorded in an accounting software to
be procured as part of the project start-up and kept by the PMU.

37. As regards the flow of funds, government procedures will be applied to IFAD
funding in the same way as to other donors including the World Bank. Accordingly,
IFAD financing will be disbursed against duly certified withdrawal applications,
through the Borrower's treasury accounts to two separate designated accounts,
denominated in US dollars and held at the Central Bank of Lebanon. There will also
be a separate counterparty account for the government contribution. The Ministry
of Agriculture, through the PMU, will appoint an independent private audit firm,
acceptable to IFAD and under terms of reference cleared by it, to audit the project
in accordance with International Standards on Auditing and IFAD Guidelines for



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

6

Project Audits. An audited annual consolidated financial statement for the entire
project, together with a management letter setting out audit observations on
internal controls, will be submitted to the Fund within six months of the fiscal
year-end.

38. The assessment undertaken by IFAD showed that the Ministry is observing the
procurement rules and regulations currently applicable in the country. Nonetheless,
due to the aforementioned weaknesses in the current system, goods, works and
services procurement financed by the IFAD loan and grant and FARMS funds will
abide by IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines. Any changes that may occur during
implementation will be agreed upon with IFAD.

39. Appropriate thresholds that can maximize procurement efficiency will be specified
in the letter to the borrower and in the approved procurement plan. Whenever
possible, goods and works procurement will be bulked into sizeable bid packages to
attract adequate competition, thus resulting in cost-effective and efficient
procurement. The procurement packages that are envisaged vary between low and
high value items with procedures to be implemented using international or
competitive bidding and a large number of requests for quotations.

40. As part of the PMU, a Procurement Officer will be recruited competitively and hired
on a performance-based contract. In order to establish a sound procurement
management system in the project, and given the current country experience,
intensive capacity development will be needed for PMU staff. Two Procurement
Assistants seconded by the Government will join the PMU during the first two years
of the project, to assist in the daily procurement activities which are expected to be
enormous, based on the initial 18-month procurement plan developed for the
project.

E. Supervision
41. IFAD will directly supervise the project at least once a year and focus on fiduciary

and implementation support functions in collaboration with the country programme
management team. A financial management specialist will participate in annual
missions to supervise and provide implementation support to the project and follow
up the identified risks and mitigation actions. In addition, and given the difficult
political situation currently prevailing, compounded by institutions with limited
capacity and the heavy presence of Syrian refugees, close technical supervision
and implementation support missions will be jointly carried out by IFAD and the
donor of the FARMS grant, at least once a year but also on demand.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
42. The total cost of the project, over a six-year period, is estimated at

US$12.5 million. All costs have been estimated on the basis of prices prevailing in
Lebanon in April 2017. The base cost amounts to US$11.8 million (90 per cent of
total costs). Investment costs represent 76 per cent of total costs and recurrent
costs 24 per cent. Physical and price contingencies account for about 9.5 per cent
of total costs.



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

7

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Financing gap

FARMS Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Enhancing the
competitiveness of
smallholder dairy producers 1 800 30.8 - - 3 100 55.1 - - 800 14.1 5 700

2. Improving small-scale value
addition and market access 1 900 52.1 300 8.4 1 300 35.4 200 4.1 - - 3 700

3. Project management and
support 1 200 40.2 300 8.7 600 19.2 - - 1 000 31.9 3 000

Total 4 900 39.4 600 4.6 5 000 40.5 200 1.2 1 800 14.2 12 500

B. Project financing
43. The project will be financed by an IFAD loan of US$4.9 million (covering

39.4 per cent of total costs), an IFAD grant of US$600,000 (4.6 per cent). It is
anticipated that a FARMS grant of US$5 million (40.5. per cent) will also be
provided from supplementary funds. The Government will contribute US$1.8 million
(14.2 per cent) and beneficiaries US$200,000.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Financing gap

FARMS Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Vehicles 300 65.2 - - - - - 200 34.8 500
2. Equipment and

materials 700 28.8 - 1 500 64.8 200 6.4 - - 2 400
3. Technical

assistance 1 200 29.6 - 2 700 70.4 - - - - 3 900
5. Studies and

workshops 600 49.0 600 51.0 - - - - - - 1 100

6. Training 800 53.0 - 700 47.0 - - - - 1 600

7. Salaries 900 40.6 - - - - - 1 400 59.4 2 300

8. Incentives 200 100.0 - -- - - - - 200
9. Operation and

maintenance 300 53.4 - - - - 200 46.6 500

Total 4 900 39.4 600 4.6 5 000 40.5 200 1.2 1 800 14.2 12 500

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
44. The economic internal rate of return (EIRR) on the investments made in the

HALEPP project area over a 15-year period is estimated at 15.6 per cent. The
project’s net present value (NPV) is positive (US$27.9 million) and the benefit-cost
ratio is 3.7. The economic analysis suggests that the HALEPP project is feasible.
With an opportunity cost of capital of 9 per cent, these indicators establish the
project’s economic feasibility. Profitability sensitivity tests suggest that the project
is robust and worthwhile.

45. Eleven models relating to dairy farming and support for dairy value-chain activity
models have been considered in the analysis. The livestock models included
encompass sheep, goat, and cow models, as well as models combining cattle and
small ruminants.

46. Eleven models reflecting different agroecological conditions in Lebanon are
analysed. Six models deal specifically with producers who pay a rent for accessing
rangelands and sell milk directly to Hallab (milk collectors) while four are
processing unit models.



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

8

47. The models show an increase in net annual income per animal of around
50 per cent from production and processing. Good financial performances in terms
of financial internal rate of return (FIRR) and financial net present value (FNPV) are
achieved despite the relatively high cost of inputs, including the feed cost per
animal and labour costs.

48. The IRRs for the two small ruminant models are 14.7 per cent and 19.8 per cent
respectively; and the dairy processing models report an average FIRR of
15.2 per cent. Employment opportunities created in the livestock and processing
unit models show that around 12,600 jobs will be created with 85 per cent in the
livestock farming system (models M1 to M7), while 25 per cent will be created
through processing models (models M8 to 11).

49. Models M2, M3, M5, and M10 are the most influential models in HALEPP. Livestock
fertility and lactation are the most influential parameters in the project; and
greater attention should be paid to them to ensure its profitability.

D. Sustainability
50. The various vocational and extension training activities for dairy production and

processing and for other skill improvement will be designed to be relevant for
women, youth and smallholders for job creation, self-employment and upgrading
agriculture and dairy production and processing. All investments in dairy
processing will be based on a clear plan for their ownership, operation and
management.

51. The creation of a stakeholder platform with participation by smallholder dairy
producers and processors will provide a good opportunity for this group to voice
their concerns vis-à-vis the dairy industry and regulatory processes.

52. The project will seek to connect the target group to the formal financial sector for
dairy sector financing. A product will be developed and tested by three to five
competitively selected financial institutions, with technical support from the
project.

53. Project support to innovative renewable energy sources and dairy farm waste
treatment (biogas production) will contribute to lower production costs and
pollution abatement.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
54. The main risks include the possibility that Syrians may lose their refugee status

(which allows them to work in the agricultural sector) and “fall out” of ongoing
project activities; potential delays in project implementation, uncontrolled dairy
imports from the Syrian Arab Republic; a continuation of the influx of Syrian
refugees into rural communities thereby forcing up dairy product prices, leading to
unregulated importation of cheaper milk products; disease outbreaks
(foot-and-mouth disease and ovine rinderpest, etc.); and the effect of climate
change on natural resources.

55. HALEPP will adopt mitigation measures starting with policy dialogue with
government authorities to prevent beneficiaries from dropping out; avert delays in
project implementation and ensure intensive training for PMU staff and the use of
NGOs and service providers. The project will assist the Government of Lebanon to
improve rural infrastructure and increase milk productivity. The project will partner
with international and national institutions and NGOs to leverage support for the
communities hosting Syrian refugees and control the unregulated importation of
cheaper milk products. The project will support the MoA's initiative to ensure
regular frequency in the organization of fora for smallholder farmers and
small-scale processors, and facilitate participation by targeted stakeholders. The
project will assist in building national capacity to mitigate disease risks. The project
will educate participating dairy farmers on forage conservation techniques, as well



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

9

as investment in pasture improvement and conservation at farm level. The project
is expected to promote investments in climate-resilient and low-carbon
post-harvesting procedures, drying/cooling, processing and value addition, to
reduce product losses and increase incomes among farmers and rural laborers.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
56. The project is aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2016-2025, the country

strategic note for Lebanon, and IFAD policies. The project’s activities,
implementation arrangements and M&E system have been designed in compliance
with the IFAD Targeting Policy and IFAD Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment; and they are aligned with the approaches outlined in the
Framework for Gender Mainstreaming in IFAD’s operations. The project is designed
to be consistent with IFAD’s Private Sector Development and Partnership Strategy,
its Rural Finance Policy and the associated Decision Tools for Rural Finance. The
Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures (SECAP) report
confirmed the project’s environmental and social classification as B; and it rated
climate risk as “Moderate”, given that the project approach will promote the use of
climate-resilient technologies (e.g. solar energy and biogas technologies), along
with improved management of animal husbandry and dairy processing. Last but
not least, the HALEPP project is fully aligned to the FARMS policy.

B. Alignment and harmonization
57. HALEPP is consistent with the Government’s 2015–2019 agricultural development

strategy (ADS), the National Poverty Targeting Programme (2011) (NPTP) and the
Lebanon Crisis Response Plan (LCRP). The ADS aims to develop institutional
capacities and increase MoA preparedness to meet agricultural-sector challenges
through partnerships and collaboration between relevant stakeholders. It defines
eight courses of action: improve food safety and enhance the quality of locally
produced and imported products; increase the productivity and competitiveness of
Lebanese agricultural products; improve governance and the sustainable use of
resources; strengthen agricultural extension and education; strengthen agricultural
research and laboratories; develop the cooperative sector and mutual funds;
develop MoA capacities; and mitigate the impacts of climate change. The strategy
identifies several targets, including: increasing the share of agriculture to 6 per
cent of GDP from the existing 4 per cent; reducing the current agriculture trade
deficit by 15 percentage points; raising the value of agricultural production by
30 percentage points: in addition to increasing public spending in the sector,
raising farming household incomes and creating jobs in agriculture.

58. The development objective of the NPTP for Lebanon is to expand the coverage and
enhance the NPTP social assistance package for Lebanese people affected by the
Syrian crisis and all Lebanese households living below the extreme poverty line.
Actions in the LCRP are aligned to national policies and strategies, and seek to
complement and build on other international assistance in the country. The LCRP is
organized around seven strategic sectors, including one on food security. The MoA
leads the food security sector along with the Food and Agriculture Organization and
the World Food Programme.

C. Innovations and scaling up
59. To assist the target group in reducing energy costs and explore opportunities for

private-sector engagement in renewable energy, the project will support three pilot
models using renewable energy in the dairy sector, for later scaling up:
(i) solar-powered on-farm milk cooling technology; (ii) solar-powered water
heating for milk processing; and (iii) biogas production from dairy cattle dung.



EB 2017/LOT/P.11

10

D. Policy engagement
60. The project will have three main outcomes in terms of policy dialogue and

engagement: (i) an inclusive national policy dialogue platform is
established/strengthened and plays an active advocacy role on behalf of the
smallholder dairy sector; (ii) seven regional innovation platforms are set up, to
address technical constraints at the local level and ensure an upward flow of
information; and (iii) consensus-based self-regulation mechanisms (for quality,
price, etc.) are established.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
61. A project financing agreement between the Lebanese Republic and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

62. The Lebanese Republic is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

63. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
64. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Lebanese Republic in an amount equivalent to four million nine hundred
thousand United States dollars (US$4,900,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Lebanese
Republic in an amount equivalent to six hundred thousand United States
dollars (US$600,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President
















































President’s report

Proposed Loan and Grant to the
Republic of the Union of Myanmar for the
Western States Agribusiness Project


Republic of the Union of Myanmar

Western States Agribusiness Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation

Total project cost: US$20.26 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$8.98 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: 40 years, including a 10-year
grace period and a service charge of three quarters
of one per cent (0.75 per cent) per annum

Amount of IFAD grant: US$3.98 million

Financing gap

Cofinancier(s):

US$4.47 million

Implementing partners

Amount of cofinancing: US$1.05 million

Terms of cofinancing: Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$0.99 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.78 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to Republic of the Union of Myanmar for the Western States Agribusiness
Project, as contained in paragraph 54.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of the Union of
Myanmar for the Western States Agribusiness Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context

1. Emerging from 50 years of isolation, Myanmar has embarked on a comprehensive
path of political and economic reforms since 2011. These aim to introduce elements
of popular representation into the political sphere, foster economic growth and
inclusive social development, improve the business environment, attract foreign
investment and reduce poverty.

2. Myanmar’s population was estimated at 53.9 million in 2015, of which some
66 per cent is rural. Myanmar is ethnically diverse, with eight major ethnic groups
and 135 subgroups.

3. Despite being resource-rich, Myanmar is one of the poorest nations in South-East
Asia. An estimated one third of the population were living below the poverty line in
2005, but this proportion had dropped to one fourth by 2014. The 2015 Human
Development Report ranked the country 148th among the 188 nations rated, with a
human development index of 0.536. Myanmar’s per capita gross national income
was estimated at US$1,160 in 2015. The annual growth rate of gross domestic
product accelerated from 4.8 per cent in 2011 to 7.2 per cent in 2015, while
inflation was reported at 8.4 per cent at the end of that year.

4. The agriculture sector is the core of the economy, generating 37 per cent of GDP
and employing about 70 per cent of the working population in 2015. There is a
strong association between agriculture and poverty; and there is significantly
greater poverty in rural areas. The incidence of poverty is also higher among ethnic
groups compared to the majority population.

5. Disparities exist among and within states and within communities. Rural poverty is
largely a function of poor resource endowments. The rural poor are typically
landless people and small and marginal farmers, usually owning between less than
one and five acres of land. They lack access to adequate food and to essential non-
food items and services. Many of the poorest live in isolated hill tracts and upland
areas of ethnic states, which were previously ravaged by decades of civil conflict
that left them isolated and without development investment.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

6. IFAD’s strategy in Myanmar is to support the Government in creating a model for
agricultural modernization and rural transformation in each agroecological zone of
the country. The first investment – the Fostering Agricultural Revitalization in
Myanmar (FARM project) – created the model for agricultural development, service
delivery and enterprise growth in the central dry zone. This model is now being
scaled up by development partners and the Government across the entire dry zone.
The second investment – the Eastern States Agribusiness Project – establishes the



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

2

model for agribusiness development and community agroforestry, and will create
farming and employment opportunities across the eastern hilly zone for ethnic
groups, indigenous people, ex-combatants, and returning migrants. The third
investment – the Western States Agribusiness Project – to be financed under the
2016-2018 performance-based allocation system (PBAS) cycle – creates the model
for climate-resilient agricultural transformation from subsistence to commercial
livelihoods, to be implemented across the western upland areas and forests. With
these projects, IFAD is fulfilling its strategic objective of helping the Government
create optimal models for modernizing agriculture across agroecological zones, with
a strong focus on the ethnic states.

7. The project’s rationale is anchored in the Government’s policies to reduce economic
and social disparities in rural areas. It is consistent with the National
Comprehensive Development Plan, the Framework for Economic and Social
Reforms, and the Poverty Alleviation and Rural Development Action Plan. The
project’s rationale has four dimensions: (i) to provide a systemic structural
response to the challenges of, and opportunities for, rural transformation in
southern Chin and northern Magway; (ii) to create a model for the environmentally
sustainable modernization of agriculture in degraded sloping areas, which generates
economic benefits for poor households; (iii) to rehabilitate productive infrastructure
in ways that optimize sustainable use of the natural resource base; and (iv) to
forge pathways for communities to transition from subsistence to commercial
livelihoods through better access to inputs, knowledge and services. Activities for
livelihood-support and nutrition-sensitive agriculture have also been included, to
address important needs among local communities.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. The project is located in southern Chin State and the northern Magway Region,

which share a common river basin. These areas have among the highest
concentrations of poverty in Myanmar. Chin State is located in the hilly western
border area. Its people belong to the Chin ethnic group and its 53 officially
recognized subgroups. Southern Chin is home to some of the most remote and
isolated communities in the country. Magway Region is situated in the central dry
zone, and its population is mostly of the Bamar ethnic group. The region is poor
and food-insecure, and has suffered a series of natural calamities and major
harvest losses in recent years.

9. The project’s target groups consist of: (i) small and medium-scale farming
households in upland and lowland areas; (ii) livestock producers; and
(iii) non-farming and landless households. Women and women-led households will
be prioritized; and youth, as the primary agents of change at the community level,
will be the focus of activities involving technological innovation and
commercialization.

B. Project development objective
10. The project’s goal is to improve the social and economic status of rural households

in a climate-resilient manner in the northern Magway Region and southern
Chin State. Its objective is to increase household incomes and enhance food
security and nutrition quality. Its investments focus on commodities and services
that have comparative advantage, market demand and growth potential.

C. Components/outcomes
11. The project’s two expected outcomes are: (i) access to productive and social

infrastructure is improved; and (ii) technological, financial and policy environment
for small farmers and agribusinesses is enhanced.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

3

12. Component 1: Infrastructure. The project will finance strategic investments in
productive and social infrastructure.

13. Subcomponent 1.1: Productive infrastructure. The project will finance:
(i) rehabilitation of irrigation schemes to ensure an adequate and reliable supply of
water to farms; (ii) rural access roads linking farms to markets; (iii) irrigation
technology for home gardens to ensure food security and nutritional diversity; and,
(iv) land consolidation on a pilot basis. These investments will generate
opportunities for increased incomes, reduce on-farm and off-farm production costs,
and improve food security for communities and households. They will also improve
water management, reduce water conveyance and application losses by
30-40 per cent, improve drainage and reduce siltation, and conserve groundwater.

14. Subcomponent 1.2: Social infrastructure. The project will invest in social
infrastructure facilities mainly at the household level, particularly targeting the
needs of women and the poorest households. Domestic water supply, rainwater
harvesting, and renewable energy solutions will be eligible for support. Scheme
selection will be participatory, sensitive to cultural considerations, and subject to
social, technical, financial and environmental feasibility. The ownership,
management, operation and maintenance of all facilities constructed will be
optimized to ensure sustainability.

15. Subcomponent 1.3: Capacity-building. The project will build capacities in the
Irrigation and Water Utilization Management Department and the Department of
Rural Development of the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Irrigation (MoALI) –
responsible for productive and social infrastructure respectively. This will be done
through the provision of technical assistance; strengthening of staffing and office
facilities; awareness of water, sanitation and hygiene issues; awareness of
nutritional diversity; and capacity development for social mobilization.

16. Component 2: Services. The project will invest in agricultural modernization and
enabling services to optimize resource management, productivity and benefits in
areas of infrastructure investment.

17. Subcomponent 2.1: Agricultural modernization. The project will invest in a
range of agriculture, livestock and technical services to modernize production and
trigger improvements in food security and nutrition, livelihoods, and economic
returns. Services delivered to farming households will include land titling,
technology transfer, skill development, access to inputs and supplies, access to
markets and information, contractual linkages, and access to financial resources.
Climate-resilient sloping agricultural land technology will be promoted. Services
delivered to the landless will focus on technical and business management skills,
microenterprise development and private-sector linkages.

18. Subcomponent 2.2: Financial services. Building on FARM experiences, the
project will support financial inclusion for small farmers, livestock owners and the
landless, ensuring equal access for ethnic groups and women. It will invest in:
(i) savings and credit groups, promoting financial literacy; (ii) a rural business fund
to support microenterprises; (iii) an agribusiness fund to help agribusinesses set up
processing facilities in the project area; and (iv) a line of credit to refinance project-
related agriculture, livestock and enterprise-lending operations by licensed financial
institutions.

19. Subcomponent 2.3: Policy engagement. The project will contribute to an
inclusive and evidence-based policy framework for rural development in Myanmar,
specifically related to the project’s implementation experiences. It will focus on:
(i) transition from shifting to sedentary agriculture and associated customary land
laws; (ii) re-categorization of high-value commercial crops from non-timber forest
products to agricultural or industrial crops; and (iii) agricultural service delivery and
market linkages.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

4

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

20. Based on an institutional assessment at the state level, experience in similar
contexts and the country strategy, the project’s implementation approach is to:
(i) strengthen MoALI and other relevant agencies at the state level, and increase
their responsibilities for implementing activities in a sequenced manner; (ii) engage
with reputable implementing partners to serve as lead technical agencies and to
gradually devolve responsibilities to public agencies as their capacities mature;
(iii) establish small state-level project implementation offices (PIOs) for
coordinating implementation at state level and for monitoring and reporting on
progress ; and (iv) establish a project management unit (PMU) in the Department
of Rural Development (DRD) that will be integrated within DRD structures. The PMU
will be responsible for project implementation, fiduciary management, work
planning and budgeting, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and policy interface
functions. It will manage contracts with implementing partners and public and
private entities.

B. Organizational framework
21. MoALI, in its capacity as lead project agency, will be responsible and accountable

for the project. The DRD of MoALI will be the project's focal department. The
Ministry of Planning and Finance will enter into subsidiary financing agreements
(SFA) with selected licensed financial institutions for administration of the credit
line.

22. The project will be governed by a National Project Steering Committee and two
project coordination committees (one in each location). It will be managed by the
central PMU established within DRD and the two decentralized PIOs (one in each
location).

23. The project will be executed by implementing partners, MoALI at the state level,
and the private sector. They will lead social mobilization, community interfacing and
policy engagement. Infrastructure will be implemented by the Irrigation and Water
Utilization Management Department (IWUMD) and DRD, in collaboration with
private-sector engineering firms and contractors, as required. Agricultural
modernization will be implemented by MoALI knowledge centres (KCs), brokering
services and markets for the target groups, in collaboration with producer
associations and community organizations. Financial services will be provided by
licensed financial institutions.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

24. Planning. The annual work plan and budget will be the key management tool for
planning, monitoring and reporting on the implementation of activities. It will be
based on project design, cost tables and the implementation manual; and it will be
informed by operational experiences and challenges. The logical framework will
constitute the main reference for framing annual work plan and budgets, to create
clear linkages among proposed activities, budget requirements and expected
outputs, outcomes and impacts. A participatory planning approach will be applied,
to ensure that project investments reflect the target groups’ needs and aspirations.

25. Monitoring and evaluation. The project’s M&E system will be designed to provide
reliable information to facilitate results-based management. It will be aligned with
the M&E system developed under the FARM, and will help strengthen MoALI’s
system for monitoring the effectiveness of official development assistance. The M&E
system will have a three-tier structure: (i) output monitoring, focusing on physical
and financial inputs, activities and outputs; (ii) outcome monitoring, focusing on the
use of outputs and measurement of benefits at the household and community



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

5

levels; and (iii) impact assessment, evaluating impacts against objectives. All M&E
data, analysis, and reporting will be disaggregated by poverty status, gender, and
ethnicity.

26. Learning and knowledge management. The project’s learning system will be
structured at the state, region and central levels. It will capture information on
progress, lessons and solutions to implementation constraints. A consolidated
annual project review will be performed towards the end of each fiscal year, to
assess physical and financial progress against the targets and towards the
objectives.

27. Knowledge management will be a systematic feature throughout the project. To
enable effective knowledge management and sharing, results and lessons from the
project will be systematically documented through specific studies and knowledge
products commissioned by the PMU and/or the PIOs. The M&E system will be a key
knowledge source. Innovations observed during implementation will be documented
for possible scaling up. The MoALI and PMU will be responsible for sharing
knowledge documents through dedicated websites, workshops and seminars.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
28. As fiduciary risks are high in Myanmar, the project will apply a number of mitigating

measures: (i) financial reporting based on automated systems; (ii) competitive
recruitment of qualified staff; (iii) use of a financial management manual
integrating controls with operations; (iv) technical assistance and external
oversight; (v) a control framework integrating periodic internal audits and
independent external audits; and (vi) a good governance framework to ensure
accountability and transparency.

29. Financial management. The PMU will be responsible for all aspects of project
financial management, including budgeting, financial statements and reporting,
withdrawal applications for IFAD disbursements, and the coordination of audit
processes.

30. Flow of funds. Designated accounts in United States dollars will be opened for the
IFAD loan and the IFAD grant, and will be operated using the imprest method. Bank
accounts denominated in local currency will be opened at the PMU level, with
signatories at appropriate level for operational efficiency.

31. Financial reporting. The PMU will maintain separate accounts for the project, in
accordance with the cash basis of accounting. The financial statements prepared for
the project will be supplemented with additional data as necessary, so as to provide
minimum disclosures under international accounting standards.

32. Project expenditure will be recorded using the accounting software currently used
by the PMU of another ongoing project in MoALI. Further customization is foreseen
to enhance the software’s reporting capability.

33. Taxes. IFAD’s General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, adopted
in 2009 and amended in 2014, allow IFAD financing to be used to pay taxes. The
payment of taxes with IFAD funding is foreseen for the project. The Ministry of
Planning and Finance has formally requested IFAD to cover taxes on the basis that
tax exemption is impractical and the tax burden is low.

34. Audit. The project will be audited by the Office of the Auditor General of the Union
(OAG), which has adopted INTOSAI audit standards. OAG conducts mostly financial
audits, with some procurement and performance audits.

35. Procurement. IFAD procurement guidelines will apply to the project. The
programme implementation manual will specify detailed procurement requirements
and procedures. The procurement methods, prior review arrangements, cost and
time estimates, and risk mitigation measures will be defined in the Letter to the



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

6

Borrower and reflected in the procurement plan. Technical assistance will be
provided to develop PMU and PIO procurement capacities.

E. Supervision
36. The project will be supervised by IFAD. A supervision and implementation support

mission will be undertaken annually; and MoALI offices at the central, state and
regional levels will participate in these missions. A midterm review mission will be
undertaken jointly by IFAD and the Government at the end of the third year of
implementation, to assess the progress, achievements, constraints, emerging
impact and likely sustainability of project activities, and to make recommendations
and any adjustments for the remaining project period.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
37. The total project cost, including duties, taxes and contingencies, is estimated at

US$20.26 million over a six-year implementation period. Indicative costs for each
component are detailed in table 1. Indicative costs by expenditure categories are
provided in table 2.

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Implementing

partners Financing gap
Beneficiaries/
private sector

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Infrastructure 4 065 58.6 1 124 16.2 963 13.9 780 11.2 6 932
1.1 Productive
infrastructure 3 573 83.2 278 6.5 117 2.7 327 7.6 4 294
1.2 Social
infrastructure 146 9.1 627 39.0 383 23.8 453 28.1 1 610
1.3 Capacity-building 346 33.7 219 21.3 463 45.0 1 028

2. Services 3 938 32.4 2 854 23.5 1 050 8.6 3 509 28.9 796 6.6 12 146
2.1 Agricultural
modernization 1 148 12.4 2 854 30.8 1 050 11.3 3 427 37.0 796 8.6 9 275
2.2 Financial services 2 708 100.0 2 708
2.3 Policy engagement 81 50.0 81 50.0 163

3. Project management 981 83.2 198 16.8 1 179
Total 8 984 44.4 3 978 19.6 1 050 5.2 4 471 22.1 780 3.8 994 4.9 20 257

B. Project financing
38. The project will be financed by an IFAD loan of US$8.98 million, an IFAD grant of

US$3.98 million, a government contribution of US$0.99 million, a
beneficiary/private-sector contribution of US$0.78 million, and implementing
partners’ cost-sharing of US$1.05 million. The financing gap of US 4.47 million may
be sourced through cofinancing identified during implementation or through a
subsequent PBAS cycle.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

7

Table 2
Programme/project costs by expenditure category and financier*
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan IFAD grant
Implementing

partners Financing gap
Beneficiaries/
private sector

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Civil works 3 256 91.9 44 1.2 117 3.3 127 3.6 3 554
2. Vehicles 255 100 255
3. Equipment 24 100 24
4. Consulting

services 633 21.2 1 489 52.5 861 30.3 2 984
5. Training 661 38.0 303 17.4 777 44.6 1 741
6. Goods,

services
and inputs 1 615 23.0 2 141 30.5 1 050 15.0 1 528 21.8 652 9.3 29 0.4 7 015

7. Credit 2 276 100 2 276
8. Salaries

and
allowances 152 8.6 1 189 67.7 416 23.7 1 757

9. Operating
costs 104 15.9 549 84.1 652

Total 8 984 44.4 3 978 19.6 1 050 5.2 4 471 22.1 780 3.8 994 4.9 20 257
*

Disbursement categories will be specified in schedule 2 of the negotiated financing agreement. A maximum of six disbursement categories is
envisaged to allow sufficient flexibility during implementation.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
39. The project is expected to directly benefit 76,810 households, of which 10,190 in

Chin and 66,620 in Magway, encompassing a total of 390,410 rural women and
men. Many additional households will indirectly benefit from project activities. The
estimated project cost per beneficiary household is US$327.

40. Project benefits will be generated from improved infrastructure, land tenure,
agricultural technology, market access, enterprise growth and financial services.
The main beneficiaries will be small farming households, landless/tenant
households, and off-farm households. The key results will be higher incomes,
additional jobs, better food security and nutrition, and secured climate resilience.

41. The project’s economic internal rate of return over 20 years is estimated at
32 per cent.

D. Sustainability
42. The sustainability of project investments is based on the underlying business

relationships that the project will generate between small farmers and markets, and
between enterprises and markets. Global development experiences have shown
that profitable business relationships are an optimal instrument for making
investments sustainable and for breaking the cycle of dependency and poverty.

43. Project sustainability is also based on: (i) access to knowledge: KCs will be low-cost
facilities that will eventually operate on a cost recovery basis; (ii) access to
markets: upgraded commodity chains, contract farming and outgrower schemes
will ensure smallholder access to markets; (iii) access to land: the project will
invest in securing land tenure and ownership, particularly in Chin State; (iv) access
to water: irrigation and drainage improvement, combined with participatory water
management, will improve water distribution and operation and maintenance;
(v) access to basic needs: social infrastructure will cover underlying needs related
to food security, nutrition, and domestic water supply; (vi) access to finance:
financial inclusion activities will link smallholders and landless microentrepreneurs
to the formal financial sector; and (vii) access to extension: use of MoALI extension
officers as KC managers trained by the project will ensure continuity in service
delivery.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

8

44. Exit strategy. The project’s exit strategy is to strengthen public institutions at the
central and state levels, to rely on a range of institutional service providers for
implementation, to foster profitable business relationships among producers and
markets, and to improve the capabilities of poor rural women and men.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
45. The project’s main risks are in the governance, expropriation, fiduciary and capacity

areas. They will be mitigated by a robust project governance framework, a set of
legal assurances to be negotiated with the Government, substantial technical
assistance and capacity-building, and the underlying business relationships to be
fostered.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

46. The project’s goal and objectives are aligned with the Strategic Framework
2016-2025 in terms of market-driven smallholder development and rural business
growth. It is compliant with all relevant IFAD policies, strategies and guidelines,
and in particular with the Fund’s policies on targeting, rural finance, land tenure,
Engagement with Indigenous Peoples, and Gender Equality and Women’s
Empowerment, as well as with the partnership and climate change strategies, and
the Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
47. The project’s rationale is anchored in IFAD’s poverty reduction mandate and the

Government’s policy for reducing economic and social disparities in rural areas. It is
consistent with Myanmar’s National Comprehensive Development Plan, the
Framework for Economic and Social Reforms, and the Poverty Alleviation and Rural
Development Action Plan. It is closely coordinated with the emerging agriculture
sector investments of multilateral and bilateral development partners, and with the
Agriculture and Rural Development Sector Working Group.

Innovations and scaling upC.
48. Innovation. The project is the first substantial investment in Myanmar’s western

states to address the climate change challenges posed by erratic rainfall, intra- and
inter-annual drought, and record high temperatures that are undermining farm
productivity and the livelihood options of the rural poor. It introduces several
innovations in its model for climate-smart agricultural development in the
upland/lowland areas of the western states. Key innovations in the Myanmar
context include: (i) introduction of sloping agricultural land technology;
(ii) promotion of climate-smart agricultural practices and technologies;
(iii) livelihood diversification, with potential for greater value-added; (iv) promotion
of smallholder-driven small businesses and microenterprises; and (v) support for
adapted rural finance products and services.

49. Scaling up potential. Given the transient nature of the current agriculture sector
regulatory framework in Myanmar, particularly in view of the major political
changes that occurred in 2015, there is an important window of opportunity for
scaling up the methodologies and results pioneered by IFAD-financed operations in
Myanmar. The country programme is engaging in this in two ways: (i) successful
service delivery models are already being replicated and brought to scale in other
parts of the country by the Government, partners, and the private sector; and
(ii) policy engagement opens avenues for scaling up investments based on
implementation experiences, the fostering of stakeholder alliances to capture policy
proposals, capacity-building for policy development, and the promotion of policy
advocacy within national processes.



EB 2018/LOT/P.6/Rev.1

9

Policy engagementD.
50. The project will contribute to an inclusive and evidence-based policy framework for

rural development in Myanmar, specifically related to the project’s implementation
experiences. It will support formulation of the policies and regulations needed to
enhance and sustain project investments, and to contribute to the ongoing policy
discussions on broader agricultural modernization and rural transformation. Policy
engagement will also aim at scaling up successful approaches in other states and
regions of the country, and will contribute to the project’s exit strategy.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
51. A project financing agreement between the Republic of the Union of Myanmar and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in
appendix I.

52. The Republic of the Union of Myanmar is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

53. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
54. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of the Union of Myanmar in an amount equivalent to eight million
nine hundred and eighty four thousand United States dollars (US$8,984,000)
and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance
with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
the Union of Myanmar in an amount equivalent to three million nine hundred
and seventy eight  thousand United States dollars (US$3,978,000) and upon
such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the
terms and conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Kingdom of Bhutan for the
Commercial Agriculture and Resilient
Livelihoods Enhancement Programme


Kingdom of Bhutan

Commercial Agriculture and Resilient Livelihoods
Enhancement Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Kingdom of Bhutan

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Forests

Total programme cost: US$31.59 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 5.89 million (equivalent to approximately
US$8.27 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.76 million (equivalent to approximately
US$1.06 million)

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant:

SDR 3.58 million (equivalent to approximately
US$5.02 million)

Financing gap:1 US$6 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: Maturity period of 25 years, including a grace
period of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of 1.25 per
cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinancier: Food Corporation of Bhutan Ltd. (FCBL)

Amount of cofinancing: US$4.81 million

Contribution of borrower: US$5.77 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.66 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD

1 Subject to country selection and applicable and available additional financing from the 2016-2018 or 2019-2021
performance-based allocation system (PBAS) allocation or cofinancing.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Kingdom of Bhutan for the Commercial Agriculture and Resilient
Livelihoods Enhancement Programme, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Kingdom of Bhutan for
the Commercial Agriculture and Resilient Livelihoods
Enhancement Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Located on the southern slopes of the Eastern Himalayas, Bhutan is mostly

mountainous and heavily forested, with 70 per cent of its geographical area
covered in forests, 10 per cent with shrubs and only 3 per cent cultivated.
Elevations range from 160 to 7,000 metres above sea level, with 31 per cent of the
agricultural land on steep slopes – greater than 50 degrees.

2. Bhutan’s economy has experienced growth averaging 7 per cent per year, with
GDP per capita increasing from US$1,387 in 2006 to US$2,363 in 2013, and
poverty declining from 23 per cent in 2007 to 12 per cent in 2012. While
approximately 62 per cent of the population depends on agriculture (mostly
subsistence farming) for their livelihoods (95 per cent of the rural poor are
employed in agriculture), the share of agriculture in real GDP declined by more than
half, from 25 per cent in 2002 to 12 per cent in 2012. The share of spending on
agriculture also declined from 22.5 per cent in 1982 to 9.8 per cent in 2013.

3. Poverty in Bhutan is a distinctly rural phenomenon. Poverty also varies by region,
with the eastern parts of Bhutan significantly poorer than the rest of the country.
Many villages are still isolated: those with limited roads and market access tend to
have higher poverty rates. Lack of access to technology, business development
services, fair markets and suitable financial products constrain rural enterprise.

4. The challenges affecting agricultural production include natural disasters, declining
productivity, human-wildlife conflict, a shortage of farm labour, insufficient
irrigation and limited post-harvest management.

5. In addition, climate change is projected to have a major impact on agricultural
productivity as a result of changes in water availability, soil fertility and incidence of
pests and disease. Considering that the nation’s socio-economic well-being depends
largely on agriculture, water resources and forests, the impacts of climate change
have the potential to undermine development efforts.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
results-based country strategic opportunities programme (RB-
COSOP)

6. Bhutan’s Government has accorded highest priority to agricultural development in
its Eleventh Five Year Plan (2013-2018) in order to: (i) stimulate climate-resilient
production; (ii) build value chain systems for vegetables and dairy, and a
comprehensive marketing system to enhance the commercial viability of other
agricultural products; and (iii) facilitate institutional linkages and policy dialogue
towards the commercialization of agriculture.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

2

7. The programme is therefore designed in alignment with the Eleventh Five Year Plan
as a strategic value chain programme with focused product interventions, taking
into consideration the Government’s priorities and gaps left by previous projects.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
8. The programme will initially be implemented in the six poorest eastern districts of

Lhuentse, Mongar, Pemagatshel, Samdrup Jongkhar, Trashigang and
Trashiyangtse. Upon midterm review, it will be scaled up to include districts in
central and south-western Bhutan.

9. The programme will follow an inclusive approach to reach all households living in
target communities. It will involve 21,860 households in six districts in establishing
sustainable agriculture production and an additional 7,115 households in building
vegetable and dairy value chains. Within the target districts, the programme will
work in areas that have been identified based upon: (i) demonstrated production
potential in select commodities; (ii) relative accessibility to roads and marketing
channels; and (iii) demonstrated interest and commitment of communities and
farmers’ organizations. Targeting will also focus on the inclusion of women and
youth.

B. Programme development objective
10. The goal of the programme is to sustainably increase smallholder producers’

incomes and reduce poverty through commercialization of production by
programme households. The objective is increased returns to smallholder farmers
through climate-resilient production of crops and livestock products in nationally
organized value chains and marketing systems. The goal and objective are both in
line with Bhutan’s poverty strategy.

C. Components/outcomes
11. The programme’s three main components are: (i) market-led sustainable

agricultural production; (ii) value chain development and marketing; and
(iii) institutional support and policy development. There will also be a management
component.

12. Component 1: Market–led sustainable agricultural production. This
component aims to bring about a sustainable increase in agricultural production by
rural households and enhance the resilience of agricultural production systems to
climate-induced shocks. It consists of three subcomponents:

(i) Increased production resilience and diversification in agriculture. This
subcomponent will promote integrated agricultural production and
management through: (a) strengthening existing farmers’ groups and
establishing new groups; (b) strengthening extension services, including the
lead farmers outreach model, and increasing their reach; (c) supporting
agricultural inputs, including seeds and seedlings; (d) developing efficient
irrigation; (e) promoting agricultural system innovations; and (f) piloting an
initiative on strengthening local institutions for increased climate resilience.

(ii) Intensification and expansion of vegetable production. In order to
ensure an adequate volume of acceptable quality produce and planned and
timely production, the programme aims to: (a) expand and intensify
vegetable production by rural households; (b) strengthen existing vegetable
producers’ groups and promote new groups; (c) provide vegetable production
inputs; and (d) promote vegetable seed research.

(iii) Intensification and expansion of dairy production. To ensure that an
adequate volume of high-quality milk is produced by smallholder dairy
farmers, the programme will: (a) strengthen existing smallholder dairy farmer



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

3

groups and establish new groups; (b) improve outreach services for livestock;
(c) support fodder and feed production; (d) provide dairy production inputs;
and (e) install bio-gas units.

13. Component 2: Value chain development and marketing. By building value
chains and marketing systems for vegetable and dairy products, the programme
will increase the incomes of smallholder farmers through their participation in
commercial farm production through three subcomponents:

(i) Development of resilient vegetable and dairy value chains. The
programme will support the design and implementation of vegetable and dairy
value chains, increasing climate resilience and strengthening the capacity of
the Food Corporation of Bhutan Ltd. (FCBL) for value chain development and
business plan design and implementation.

(ii) Strengthening agricultural commercialization and enterprise
development. Support will be provided for: (a) agriculture enterprise
development; (b) facilitating access to finance, including a social inclusion
fund and production support fund; and (c) development of multi-stakeholder
platforms and networks.

(iii) Development of community-driven market infrastructure. The
programme will support the creation of value chain infrastructure at the local
level, with ownership and management by communities, farmers’ groups,
cooperatives and small-scale entrepreneurs. Support will include the design
and construction of necessary infrastructure and equipment for vegetable and
dairy value chains.

14. Component 3: Institutional support and policy development. This component
aims to build an institutional and policy environment that fosters the collaboration
necessary for climate-resilient, market-led production and value chain development
in the renewable natural resources (RNR) sector for addressing structural
development constraints. The subcomponents include:

(i) Strengthened value chain and marketing knowledge and
communication. The programme will capture and document knowledge and
best practices from programme implementation, especially related to climate
resilience and value chain and market development by: (a) strengthening
market information systems; and (b) developing a curriculum for RNR training
institutes.

(ii) Mainstreaming climate change resilience and value chain lessons into
agricultural policies and sector strategies. This subcomponent will
involve: (a) participatory policy development and monitoring; (b) support to
Bhutan’s Ministry of Agriculture and Forests (MoAF) in mainstreaming
agricultural policy; and (c) developing a regulatory framework that is
conducive to private-sector development and public-private partnership (PPP).

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

15. The programme will be implemented over seven years, from 2015-2022. It will
adopt a flexible, non-prescriptive, process-oriented approach that enables
stakeholders to determine the scope of activities aimed at agricultural and livestock
diversification for climate-resilient livelihoods. Vegetable and dairy intensification
activities will follow a more selective approach to value chain and marketing
development.

Organizational frameworkB.
16. Programme implementation responsibility. MoAF will be the lead agency, with

overall responsibility for the programme and specific responsibility for achieving



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

4

outcomes 1 and 3 (see the logical framework in appendix II). FCBL is the
implementing partner responsible for achieving outcome 2. The national
programme steering committee and regional programme implementation
committee will advise the office of the programme management (OPM), which will
be responsible for the delivery of results. A liaison office under the direction of the
OPM will be established within the MoAF secretariat.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

17. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. Programme activities will be reflected in
the Government’s planning and monitoring system. The OPM will establish a
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) unit to ensure that all outputs, outcomes and
impact indicators are included in the planning and monitoring system, and will
design tools to capture critical field-level data not included in the planning and
monitoring system. The annual workplan and budget will be the main planning tool,
and will be used to review programme performance and progress.

18. Learning and knowledge management. A knowledge management strategy will
be prepared to facilitate engagement in policy development related to resilient
agriculture and dairy production, and marketing support. It will include strategies
for strengthening market information systems and developing RNR training
curricula. A strong knowledge-sharing and learning culture will be built through the
use of participatory tools and knowledge from M&E, and the development of
knowledge products.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
19. Financial management. The financial management assessment for this

programme concluded that the arrangements made by the MoAF are adequate. In
view of the low fiduciary risk, the country’s public financial management systems
will be utilized provided they are consistent with IFAD guidelines and procedures.
Qualified finance staff will be in place at the OPM and liaison office. Financial
reporting will follow national accounting standards on cash-basis accounting in line
with the International Public Sector Accounting Standards. The programme’s
financial accounts will be maintained with computerized accounting software and
customized to generate financial reports.

20. Fund flow mechanism. IFAD will make funds available to the Government under
the terms and conditions of the financing agreement. Programme funds will flow
from IFAD via designated accounts established in the Royal Monetary Authority, or
another commercial bank acceptable to IFAD. The designated accounts will be
administered following imprest account arrangements. Advances from the IFAD
loan must be segregated from other funds for the programme.

21. Internal controls and external audit. Internal controls will be established to
ensure operational efficiency, reliability of reporting and compliance with IFAD’s
requirements. The Government’s Royal Audit Authority has been mandated to audit
all foreign-funded loan programmes following standards set by the International
Organization of Supreme Audit Institutions. External auditing arrangements will be
established by the Royal Audit Authority.

22. Start-up costs. Expenditures for programme start-up that are inccured after the
entry into force of the financing agreement but before the satisfaction of the
conditions precedent to withdrawal, shall not exceed an aggregate amount of
SDR 25,000.

23. Procurement of goods, works and services. Procurement of goods, works and
services financed by IFAD under components 1 and 3 will be carried out in
accordance with the provisions of the Government’s Procurement Rules and
Regulations (revised June 2014). Under component 2, procurement will be carried



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

5

out according to FCBL Procurement Rules and Regulations, provided they are
consistent with IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines.

24. Governance. A national programme steering committee will provide policy
direction to facilitate implementation and guide programme management. A
regional programme implementation committee will steer design and
implementation of the annual workplan and budget at the local, district and regional
levels. The national programme steering committee will resolve all programme
management issues and disputes concerning implementation; unresolved issues
may be referred to the Minister of Agriculture and Forests. The governance
framework will ensure that the programme includes: (i) mechanisms for regular
internal audits at the OPM and implementing offices; (ii) annual independent
audits; (iii) verification of fiduciary compliance during supervision; (iv) independent
impact assessments; (v) efficient public financial management systems and efforts
to ensure transparency by strengthening state oversight institutions; and
(vi) community involvement in decision-making, planning, implementation and
monitoring.

SupervisionE.
25. The programme will be directly supervised by IFAD. A midterm review will be

conducted halfway through the implementation period and will provide
opportunities for programme realignment and scaling up based on the availability of
funds.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
26. The total programme cost is estimated at US$31.59 million over seven years,

including contingencies. The total base costs equal US$24.18 million and physical
and price contingencies account for US$1.86 million and US$5.55 million
respectively (8 per cent and 23 per cent respectively of total base costs).
Investment costs are estimated at US$26.18 million (83 per cent of the total cost)
while recurrent costs are estimated at US$5.41 million (17 per cent of the total
cost).

Table 1
Indicative programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Recipient IFAD loan Financing gap* IFAD grant
ASAP
grant Beneficiaries FCBL Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount
1. Market-led
agricultural
production 4 196.0 4 808.7 4 268.6 399.8 3 024.6 658.8 - 17 356.7
2. Value chain
development and
marketing 598.5 3 150.1 1 662.3 173.9 1 729.1 - 4 281.0 11 594.9
3. Institutional
support and policy
development 13.6 144.0 65.7 34.0 268.9 - - 526.1
4. Programme
management,
coordination, M&E 965.7 170.6 - 452.9 - - 521.5 2 110.7

Total programme
cost

5 773.8 8 273.4 5 996.6 1 060.6 5 022.6 658.8 4 802.4 31 588.3

* Subject to country selection and applicable and available additional financing from the 2016-2018 or 2019-2021 performance-
based allocation system (PBAS) allocations or cofinancing.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

6

B. Programme financing
27. The programme will be financed by: (i) an IFAD loan of approximately

US$8.27 million (26.2 per cent of the total programme cost); (ii) an IFAD grant of
approximately US$1.06 million (3.4 per cent of the total cost); (iii) an ASAP grant
of approximately US$5.02 million (15.9 per cent of the total cost); (iv) a mainly
in-kind beneficiary contribution estimated at US$0.66 million (2.1 per cent of the
total cost); (v) a contribution by the Government of approximately US$5.77 million
(18.3 per cent of the total cost); (vi) cofinancing from FCBL of US$4.81 million,
mainly through recurrent costs (15.2 per cent of the total cost); and (vii) a
financing gap of approximately US$6 million (19 per cent of the total cost) subject
to country selection and applicable and available additional financing from the
2016-2018 or 2019-2021 PBAS allocations or cofinancing. The Government will
finance taxes and duties, most of the recurrent costs, re-training (in line with the
mandate of the MoAF) and dairy inputs.



E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.1

6

7

Table 2 a

Indicative programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Recipient IFAD loan Financing gap b IFAD grant ASAP grant Beneficiaries FCBL Total

Expenditure category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Works 580.2 10.0 2 952.1 50.9 2 046.0 35.3 - - 185.2 3.2 38.6 0.7 - - 5 802.1

2. Equipment and
materials 675.1 10.0 2 298.5 34.0 2 587.6 38.3 204.4 3.0 90.2 1.3 432.7 6.4 462.3 6.8 6 750.7

3. Vehicles 7.3 10.0 - - - - 65.8 90.0 - - - - - - 73.1

4. Goods, services and
inputs 1 241.7 34.8 826.4 23.2 727.3 20.4 47.1 1.3 533.4 15.0 187.5 5.3 - - 3 563.4

5. Consultancies 13.2 0.5 761.4 28.7 206.8 7.8 260.3 9.8 1 413.9 53.2 - - - - 2 655.6

6. Workshops 0.0 - 192.6 34.1 190.5 33.8 166.2 29.5 14.9 2.6 - - - - 564.1

7. Training 2 238.5 34.7 969.9 15.0 238.3 3.7 215.9 3.3 2 785.0 43.2 - - - - 6 447.6

8. Fund - - 272.7 83.3 - - 54.5 16.7 - - - - - - 327.3

9. Operating costs 446.7 29.0 - - - - - - - - - - 1 091.1 71.0 1 537.8

10. Salaries and
allowances 571.2 14.8 - - - - 46.3 1.2 - - - - 3 249.0 84.0 3 866.5

Total programme costs 5 773.8 18.3 8 273.4 26.2 5 996.6 19.0 1 060.6 3.4 5 022.6 15.9 658.8 2.1 4 802.4 15.2 31 588.3
a The final disbursement categories will be decided based on IFAD procedures and will include a maximum of five cost categories to maximize efficiency.
b Subject to country selection and applicable and available additional financing from the 2016-2018 or 2019-2021 PBAS allocations or cofinancing.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

8

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
28. All crop and farm models analysed are profitable, yielding positive net present

value. Economic analysis of the programme based on financial models and using
economic prices shows it to be profitable, with an estimated net present value of
404 million Bhutanese ngultrums or US$7.3 million, and an internal rate of return
of 16 per cent at a discount rate of 10 per cent.

29. The programme will directly benefit 28,975 households.

30. Immediate benefits include: (i) increased vegetable and dairy production;
(ii) greater use of sustainable agricultural practices; (iii) increased access to
extension and market information; (iv) sustainable extension services; (v) market
access through consolidation of production; (vi) enterprise establishment; and
(vii) greater employment opportunities. Indirect benefits include enhanced rural
employment, strengthened climate resilience and improved household nutrition.

D. Sustainability
31. The programme incorporates many features designed to promote long-term

sustainability. By selecting a limited number of value chains, production support is
area-specific and tailored to value chain planning needs, allowing subsequent
chains to be established. The programme will also build target communities’
ownership through village-level planning and implementation, including
investments in the development of operation and maintenance groups for assets.
Links between production, marketing and enterprise development will be forged to
promote the sharing of benefits between farmers and the private sector.
Accountability and ownership by farmers will be built to allow for demand-driven
services. Finally, the programme will strengthen grass-roots institutions and their
support services.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
32. A major risk relates to the limited capacity of the implementing partner, FCBL, for

value chain and enterprise development, and PPPs. This has been mitigated by the
allocation of additional resources for strategy development, capacity development
support and targeted technical assistance. Strengthening climate change resilience
will be a challenge at the farm and community levels, and within value chains,
where risks, interests and values are diverse; success depends upon joint action
from an understanding of interdependent relationships. This risk has been mitigated
by strengthening climate-smart agriculture and farm management practices
through targeted technical assistance.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

33. The programme conforms to IFAD’s policies and strategies on targeting, gender,
environmental and natural resource management, and knowledge and innovation.
In terms of its environmental impact, the programme falls under Category B.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
34. The programme is in line with the Government’s Eleventh Five Year Plan

(2013-2018) and will specifically contribute to expanding agriculture service
outreach to remote and vulnerable populations, and increasing smallholders’
resilience to climate change and shocks. The MoAF has developed a market-led
agriculture development strategy to facilitate the transition from subsistence to
commercial agriculture; the programme supports this strategy.

35. To enhance efficiency and reduce redundancies among government stakeholders,
the programme will aim to achieve complementarities among partners. Synergies
with the World Food Programme and the World Bank have already been identified.



EB 2015/LOT/P.16

9

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.

Innovations and scaling upC.
36. The programme will support the following innovations: (i) the lead farmer model for

agricultural development; (ii) animal health service models; (iii) an e-agriculture
platform; (iv) permaculture approaches; and (v) linking smallholder market
development to the Bhutan commodity exchange. Although none of these
innovations is new, their integrated application in Bhutan through the proposed
programme is innovative. In addition, efforts to strengthen local institutions’
capacity for improved outreach and sustainability in collaboration with government
service networks have not previously been undertaken in Bhutan in an integrated
manner. Linking technical innovation with the development of new models is a
significant innovation in Bhutan.

37. In its second phase, the programme will also include areas with high production
and marketing potential for vegetable value chains in the south-central and
south-western districts, adding 7,500 direct beneficiaries (1,500 households).

Policy engagementD.
38. The programme will facilitate government linkages and policy dialogue towards the

commercialization of agriculture. This includes addressing RNR institutions and
policy issues to build strong agricultural institutions and sound policies for improved
and sustainable agricultural and marketing practices.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
39. A programme financing agreement between the Kingdom of Bhutan and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

40. The Kingdom of Bhutan is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the Kingdom
of Bhutan in an amount equivalent to five million eight hundred ninety
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 5,890,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Kingdom of
Bhutan in an amount equivalent to seven hundred sixty thousand special
drawing rights (SDR 760,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide an ASAP grant to the
Kingdom of Bhutan in an amount equivalent to three million five hundred
eighty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 3,580,000) and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Kingdom of Cambodia
for the Accelerating Inclusive Markets for
Smallholders Project



Kingdom of Cambodia

Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholders Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Kingdom of Cambodia

Executing agency: Ministry of Commerce

Total project cost: US$61.6 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$36.3 million

Terms of IFAD loan Highly concessional: Maturity period of 40 years,
including a grace period of 10 years, with a service
charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Cofinanciers: Private businesses

Amount of cofinancing: US$8.6 million

Terms of cofinancing: Private investment through value chain innovation fund

Contribution of borrower: US$8.65 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$8.1 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Kingdom of Cambodia for the Accelerating Inclusive Markets for
Smallholders Project as contained in paragraph 39.

Proposed loan to the Kingdom of Cambodia for the
Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholders Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Cambodia has made dramatic progress in reducing poverty over the last decade.

Between 2004 and 2012, poverty was reduced from 53 per cent to 17.5 per cent,
surpassing all expectations and exceeding the Millennium Development Goal
poverty target. More than 4.3 million people have moved out of poverty during this
period – mostly in rural areas – with the number of poor people dropping from
almost 7 million in 2004 to below 2.5 million in 2012 (World Bank, 2015). The
country’s vibrant and pro-poor agricultural growth was the key driver of this
dramatic reduction in poverty. More than 60 per cent of Cambodia’s poverty
reduction was attributed to the agriculture sector: higher rice prices stimulated
greater rice production, which helped to increase farm wages (World Bank, 2013).
Between 2004 and 2012, the annual growth in gross agricultural production was
8.7 per cent and agricultural value added grew by 5.3 per cent during this period.

2. Despite this significant reduction in poverty, many of the 4.3 million people that
have moved out of poverty are still vulnerable. This is because the majority of
them are still "near-poor" and are therefore extremely susceptible to slipping back
into poverty if shocks occur. Indeed, almost all of the gains of the last decade
could be reversed by an average loss of KHR 1,200 per day (US$0.30), which
would return 3 million near-poor people into poverty and raise Cambodia’s poverty
rate to 40 per cent (based on 2011 poverty data; World Bank, 2013).

3. Additional poverty reduction will depend on the success of agriculture in the
coming years since this sector involves a large share of the labour force and has a
major role in exports. Farmers are among the country’s poorest and most
vulnerable people, and the factors that drove Cambodia’s growth – especially
higher rice prices and expansion of production – are unlikely to drive significant
further growth. Continued poverty reduction will depend on finding new ways to
expand Cambodia's agricultural sector in terms of overall agricultural growth,
higher returns (especially returns on labour) and inclusiveness of growth.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. Since Cambodia’s dramatic poverty reduction was largely driven by agriculture,
most poverty reduction occurred in rural areas. Given the importance of agriculture
in the rural economy, continued agricultural growth is crucial to promote further
poverty reduction and economic growth in rural communities. If farm incomes are
to keep pace with non-farm wages, returns on agricultural labour need to rise
dramatically; however agricultural growth has stalled. In order to continue
Cambodia’s poverty reduction and inclusive growth, there is a need to restart
agricultural growth through intensification, diversification and commercialization.

5. Fortunately, there are currently market opportunities for higher-return agricultural
growth and a number of important developments are enabling Cambodian farmers
and agribusinesses to capitalize on these opportunities. These include a rapidly
improving rural finance sector, promising market-support and production



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

initiatives, and farmers’ increasing interest in market opportunities for
agribusiness. However: many smallholders still cannot access financing for
investments in their farms; value chains are highly fragmented, leading to high
transaction costs; many small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) are informal,
which limits their capacity to invest and their understanding of new markets; many
agribusinesses struggle to aggregate supply from several smallholder farmers; and
major capacity gaps exist in competitive on-farm production and post-harvest
management. Tackling these challenges is vital if Cambodian agriculture is to
compete in both export markets and against imports from neighbouring countries.

6. The rationale for the Accelerating Inclusive Markets for Smallholders (AIMS) Project
is to: (i) identify a portfolio of promising growth opportunities; and (ii) work with
actors in the value chain to identify and address bottlenecks to faster growth. This
requires filling gaps in networks, skills and resources to forge a practical pathway
to growth.

7. The project design is consistent with the strategic objectives of the 2013-2018
country strategic opportunities programme (COSOP), specifically its first strategic
objective to enable poor smallholders to take advantage of market opportunities. It
is closely aligned with the Government’s policies for rural development, including
the Rectangular Strategy’s resolve to make agriculture a leading sector in the
nation’s economy and source of sustainable economic growth, and to increase food
security and reduce poverty. The project is also aligned with the Cambodia Trade
Integration Strategy 2014-2018, which addresses issues of trade-sector
competitiveness, job and income creation, and sustainable human development.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
8. Project area. The project will be implemented in all parts of the country, with

actual locations determined by the selection of priority value chains. AIMS will
initially work in 15 provinces based on the section of five flagship commodities to
be supported by five multistakeholder platforms and three inter-regional technical
hubs.

9. The project’s primary beneficiaries will be smallholder farm households, including
poor and near-poor farmers, and women-headed households participating in the
supported value chains and voluntarily collaborating in project activities. Secondary
target groups include other value-chain actors such as agricultural cooperatives,
farmer organizations, SMEs, agribusinesses, service enterprises and industry
associations. The project will aim to make agriculture and value-chain integration
more attractive to the younger generation as a profitable business.

B. Project development objective
10. The project’s development objective is to increase returns from farming for

smallholders, including poor farmers and youth, through efficient public-sector
investment. There are expected to be 75,000 direct household beneficiaries of the
project with increased assets of at least 25 per cent.

C. Components/outcomes
11. The project will have two technical components and one project management

component:

 Component 1: Value chain development will focus on brokering,
facilitation, innovation and capacity-building to support the inclusive growth
of five high-value product value chains covering crops and livestock. Value
chain brokering and facilitation through a cluster approach will form the core
of the component’s approach. This cluster approach will geographically group
key actors along the value chain in the same geographic areas. For AIMS,
value-chain actors will typically be defined by zones of production, which form
discrete buying zones that include a number of competing buyers and
traders.



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

IFAD’s public-private-producer partnership models will be drawn upon for the
supported contract farming arrangements. Building on both existing and
emerging production clusters, the project will: (i) follow a consistent process
to develop and promote links between buyers, producers and service
providers through multistakeholder platforms and contract farming
mechanisms; (ii) give priority to innovation in local value chains, especially
through a value chain innovation fund (VCIF) and; (iii) promote the
development of local markets for private-sector support services.

 Component 2: Value chain financing will aim to increase private
investment in priority value chains by farmers, SMEs, agricultural
cooperatives, agribusinesses, service providers and others. Priorities for the
investment agenda in each value chain will be driven by the private
value-chain actors via the brokerage and facilitation process supported
through component 1. The value chain financing component will employ a
two-pronged approach to stimulate private investment in priority value
chains. This approach will be implemented through two sub-components:

(i) 2.1 Value chain investment support. AIMS will provide direct financial
support to stimulate private investment through the VCIF and a credit
line for policy-based financing to be administered by the Rural
Development Bank or a third-party fund administrator. The total value of
investment support will be approximately US$18 million. The total value
of support grants and loans available to each value chain through the
VCIF and line of credit should be broadly proportionate to the expected
development outcomes of that value chain (including the number of
farmers benefiting and each farmer’s increased profit). Only investments
assessed as commercially feasible will be eligible.

(ii) 2.2 Financial service provider partnerships. Private investment in
high-value agriculture can only be accelerated with significantly increased
financing from banks and microfinance institutions to farmers,
agricultural cooperatives, SMEs, agribusinesses and service providers.
AIMS will initially partner with three major microfinance institutions with
substantial agricultural portfolios and the internal capacity to lend for
agriculture (for example having dedicated agricultural finance officers).

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

12. The project design is based on the following principles:

(a) Only commercially viable value chains and investments will be supported.
This is essential for supported value chains to sustain long-term
competitiveness and self-sufficiency after project implementation without
public subsidies.

(b) To attract IFAD support, value chains must have real potential for inclusive
growth and involve significant numbers of poor farmers who are able to earn
profits from the growing value chains along with other enterprises.

(c) From the start, AIMS will promote the development of critical business-
support services and input markets, which are a vital to sustaining a
competitive industry that strengthens the primary value chain.

(d) AIMS will build the capacity of individuals, institutions, networks and systems
while delivering project results.

(e) The project will promote learning from best practices elsewhere, refining and
adapting approaches that work well in the Cambodian context.

B. Organizational framework
13. Project implementation will be primarily decentralized, with overall project

coordination provided by the Ministry of Commerce (MOC) as lead implementation



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

agency (LIA). MOC will support project activities through three regional hubs and
the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) will collaborate with the contracted
fund administrator for the VCIF and the Rural Development Bank or a qualified
private bank for the line of credit.

14. MOC will be the lead executing agency for the project and will lead component 1,
with the responsibility of coordinating business development and agriculture
marketing. This ministry will host a project management office (PMO), which will
include the component 1 management team led by the AIMS project director. The
PMO will be responsible for overall financial management, reporting and
administration in collaboration with the MOC Directorate General for Domestic
Trade. The Department for International Cooperation of MOC will be responsible for
financial management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation (M&E),
communication and reporting.

15. MEF will be the implementing agency for component 2 (value chain financing). The
component 2 team will establish a management office within this ministry, which
will supervise the appointed VCIF fund administrator and Rural Development Bank
or a qualified private bank in relation to the line of credit. Overall, as per its
borrower’s representative role, MEF will also be responsible for: (i) inter-agency
coordination; (ii) providing government fiduciary oversight and management;
(iii) providing sufficient and timely counterpart contributions to finance project
activities, including payment of government staff salaries; and (iv) timely
processing of withdrawal applications, procurement approvals and other necessary
documents according to standard operating procedures.

C. Planning, M&E, and learning and knowledge management
16. Planning and M&E. Planning processes and schedules within AIMS will be

harmonized with the regular planning processes of MEF and MOC. A major focus for
M&E will be the establishment of a highly effective management information
system (including online and offline, Internet and mobile devices) to provide
project managers and value chain teams with timely and reliable information on
developments in each priority value chain. This will allow intervention plans to be
assessed and information and networks from neighboring provinces and countries
to be integrated.

17. The M&E system will utilize regularly updated results chains and M&E frameworks
for each priority value chain to compliment IFAD’s Results and Impact Management
System (RIMS), and the project logframe. The use of results chains for individual
value chains will enable the identification and tracking of change indicators for each
value chain and cluster. The results chains will also be powerful tools for
communication among value-chain stakeholders regarding opportunities,
bottlenecks and joint action

18. Learning and knowledge management. Effective and efficient learning,
knowledge management and communication are central to meeting the project’s
objective through communities of practice, social networks and online systems.
AIMS will invest in high-quality, evidence-based knowledge management in order
to contribute to policy development. The project will also seek to strengthen
institutional capacity related to policy-based financing for sector development,
trade research and facilitation. In this context, AIMS will support targeted
institutional strengthening activities and project management will integrate
effective knowledge management and communication. The knowledge
management and communication strategy will play an important role in ensuring
that the project achieves its indented outcomes. This strategy will be coordinated
by the Department for International Cooperation on behalf of the PMO and will
include a full-time knowledge management and communications officer from this
department.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. Financial management. The project’s financial management will be in line with

the standard operating procedures for externally funded projects (used by all



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

donor-funded programmes in Cambodia) and supervised by IFAD to ensure that:
(i) funds are used efficiently and for intended purposes; (ii) disbursements of
project funds facilitate rapid implementation; (iii) funds are well managed and flow
smoothly; (iv) accurate financial reports are issued in a timely manner; (v) a
robust flow of reliable information on project activities ensures accountability; and
(vi) project assets and resources are safeguarded. The Ministries of Commerce and
Economy and Finance will be authorized to manage all project-related bank
accounts, including those utilized for government counterpart funding.

20. Flow of funds. As lead executing agency, MOC shall open and maintain a
designated account in United States dollars at the National Bank of Cambodia to
receive the loan proceeds from the account maintained by IFAD and an account in
United States dollars to receive and manage the government counterpart funds for
the project. MOC shall open a project bank account for the implementation of
component 1. MEF shall open a project bank account for the implementation of
component 2 and coordination activities.

21. Procurement. Procurement shall be carried out in accordance with the updated
standard operating procedures promulgated under the law on public procurement
for implementing all externally funded projects. The standard operating procedures
detail the procedures, processes, good governance framework and controls as
established in the procurement manual. Government rules and procedures will be
applied and as long they are consistent with IFAD’s procurement guidelines.

22. Internal control and external audit. All procedures for project implementation
and management will be documented in the project implementation manual and
consistently applied. The manual shall include provisions regulating the
establishment of internal controls, monitoring and review of transactions, and
accounting software requirements. An independent private auditor will be hired for
the annual audit of consolidated financial statements (including those prepared by
both MEF and MOC). Proper terms of reference for audits will be an important
safeguard for all stakeholders. These terms of reference will include visits to
implementing partners and service providers, and field visits when appropriate. The
audited financial statements and audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within the
six months following the close of each fiscal year.

23. Governance. A project level good governance framework will cover procurement,
financial management, disclosure, civil society participation, ethical conduct,
sanctions and project-specific issues. The project will support the strengthening of
national financial management and procurement capacity.

E. Supervision
24. AIMS will be jointly supervised by the Government and IFAD. Joint supervision

missions will be conducted at least once per financial year with additional
implementation support missions mobilized as necessary. A mid-term review shall
be conducted jointly by the borrower and IFAD at the end of the third project year
to: assess the progress, achievements, constraints, emerging impacts and
sustainability of the project, and make recommendations and necessary
adjustments for the remainder of the disbursement period.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
25. The total project cost is estimated at US$62.1 million. Indicative costs for each

component are detailed in table 1. Indicative project costs by expenditure category
and financier are provided in table 2.



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Value Chain
development 13 994 66.4 - - 273 1.3 6 810 32.3 21 077
2. Value Chain financing 20 721 54.9 8 586 22.7 7 843 20.8 602 1.6 37 751
3. Project Coordination
and knowledge
management 1 542 55.4 - - - - 1 243 44.6 2 785

Total 36 257 58.8 8 586 13.9 8 116 13.2 8 654 14 61 613

B. Project financing
26. AIMS is to be financed by an IFAD loan, a private-sector contribution (by

beneficiaries and businesses) and the Government. IFAD will finance
US$36.3 million (58.8 per cent) of project costs as a loan to the Government. The
Government will finance US$8.65 million (14 per cent of total costs). Project
beneficiaries are expected to contribute US$8.1 million (13.2 per cent) and private
businesses are expected to contribute US$8.6 million (13.9 per cent).
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiaries
Government
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Consultancies 2 284 60 - 0 - 0 1 522 40 3 806
2. Equipment and
material - 0 - 0 - 0 721 100 721
3. Training 3 544 50 - 0 - 0 3 544 50 7 088
4. Credit and guarantee
funds 8 967 100 - 0 - 0 - 0 8 967
5. Grants and subsidies 18 594 52.7 8 586 24.3 8 116 23 - 0 35 296
6. Salaries and
allowances 2 867 50 - 0 - 0 2 867 50 5 734

Total 36 257 58.8 8 586 13.9 8 116 13.2 8 654 14 61 613

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
27. AIMS will generate financial and social benefits by introducing improved

agricultural practices, commercial farming of high-value crops and improved post-
harvest management in rain-fed and irrigated crop and livestock production.
Financial benefits will include greater incomes for households targeted by the
project. Social benefits will include reduced poverty in the targeted project areas as
a result of increased household income and improved employment opportunities in
the agriculture sector.

28. The economic rationale for AIMS is based on: (i) improved agricultural productivity
and reduction of post-harvest losses as a result of the introduction of improved
technologies; and (ii) increased cropping intensity and cultivation of high-value
crop varieties and livestock with drip irrigation to expand dry-season production.
With a potential increase in yields of between 50 per cent and 100 per cent from
drip-irrigation, these improved production practices and integrated soil fertility
measures are expected to significantly improve household incomes.

29. The economic analysis of the project indicates that AIMS is robust in economic
terms. The overall economic internal rate of return is estimated at 31.9 per cent,
which is above the opportunity cost of capital in Cambodia. The economic internal
rate of return was estimated based on the assumption that 70 per cent of target



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

farmers will adopt the improved technology promoted by the project, and will
expand the use of drip-irrigation cultivation.

D. Sustainability
30. Financial sustainability is at the core of the AIMS approach, which seeks to catalyze

profitable private-led investments by farmers and businesses into value chains and
associated private service enterprises. The project is expected to facilitate the
successful operation of farmer groups, agribusinesses and other enterprises in each
value chain. Institutional sustainability of critical value-chain facilitation activities
will be achieved by building strong and mutually beneficial relationships among
farmers, private businesses and government agencies, especially via
multistakeholder platforms and regional hub teams.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The main identified risks include: (i) ineffective targeting of poor smallholders;

(ii) a lack of market opportunities, which may limit the scale of impact;
(iii) unfamiliar approaches to market-oriented agriculture development;
(iv) insufficient flexibility in resource allocation and action plans; and (v) a lack of
coordination between national and sub-national agencies, and the private sector.
To mitigate these risks, the project will: (i) ensure rigorous and objective value
chain assessment and selection; (ii) select and screen five initial products targeted
to the domestic and export markets for market demand and profitability;
(iii) provide intensive and sustained technical assistance (including social
mobilization) and mainstream value chain activities, taking into account previous
experiences in the region; and (iv) ensure that managers have up-to-date
information on each value chain through M&E systems based on current best
practices (e.g. the Donor Committee for Enterprise Development Standard). In
addition, MEF will: (i) ensure overall coordination; (ii) implement the project
through field-based hub offices; and (iii) directly involve stakeholders in project
delivery as members of regional hub teams and in project governance via the
project steering committee.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

32. The design of AIMS complies with IFAD policies and strategies on targeting,
gender, indigenous peoples, environmental and natural resource management, and
private-sector engagement. Consideration has been given in project design to
gender in the division of labour within selected value chains and to the barriers
women face in project participation. Most of the activities related to environmental
impact fall under category B.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
33. The multistakeholder platform that will be implemented by AIMS in each value

chain cluster will provide a sub-national forum for all stakeholders to harmonize
their support of local value chains, including other development actors. AIMS will
be harmonized with other major projects including the Agriculture Services
Programme for Innovation, Resilience and Extension implemented by the Ministry
of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, which will strengthen public and private
extension services and decentralize investment budgets through programme-based
budgeting. This will enable provincial departments of agriculture to respond to local
priorities identified through multistakeholder platforms. AIMS will also be
harmonized with the Boosting Food Production Project, implemented by the
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries General Directorate of Agriculture,
which will complement AIMS activities in the rice sector and share joint
multistakeholder platforms for vegetables in common provinces. In addition, AIMS
will build on the progress of a project supported by the French Development
Agency in the rice sector and planned value chain infrastructure investments in the
forthcoming Asian Development Bank Value Chain Project, which will also support
value chains and provinces targeted by AIMS.



EB 2016/119/R.23/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Innovations and scaling upC.
34. The review of the 2008-2012 COSOP identified the need for a more pragmatic

approach to maximize synergies between projects, improve knowledge
management, harmonize with development partners and ensure sustained
improvements in the capacity of public extension services. The scaling up study
also emphasized the importance of improved knowledge management and the
identification of opportunities. AIMS responds to the recommendation of this study
that IFAD [in Cambodia] rebalance its operational goals with more of an emphasis
on becoming truly a learning and scaling-up organization. This will be
operationalized through the project’s multistakeholder value chain initiatives and
its explicit focus on learning, knowledge management and communication.

Policy engagementD.
35. AIMS will invest in high-quality, evidence-based knowledge management in order

to contribute to policy development. The project also seeks to strengthen
institutional capacity related to policy-based financing for sector development and
trade research and facilitation. In this context, AIMS will support targeted
institutional strengthening activities. The knowledge management and
communication strategy will ensure that evidence-based policy analysis reaches
key decision makers in a useable form while facilitating broad-based stakeholder
engagement policy dialogue.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
36. A project financing agreement between the Kingdom of Cambodia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

37. The Kingdom of Cambodia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

38. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
39. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms
to the Kingdom of Cambodia in the amount of thirty-six million three hundred
thousand United States Dollars (US$36,300,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


































































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of India
for the Odisha Particularly Vulnerable Tribal
Groups Empowerment and Livelihoods
Improvement Programme

Republic of India

Odisha Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups
Empowerment and Livelihoods Improvement Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of India

Executing agency: Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes Development
Department, Government of Odisha

Total programme cost: US$130.39 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 36.4 million (equivalent to approximately
US$51.20 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 25 years, including a grace period of five years, with
interest on the principal amount outstanding at a fixed
rate of 1.25 per cent per annum plus a service charge
of 0.75 per cent

Contribution of borrower: US$76.18 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.00 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/114/R.11

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of India for the Odisha Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups
Empowerment and Livelihoods Improvement Programme, as contained in
paragraph 48.

Proposed loan to the Republic of India for the Odisha
Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups Empowerment and
Livelihoods Improvement Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Despite its middle-income status, poverty reduction remains an important

challenge for India: 33 per cent of the world’s poor live in the country and poverty
has not fallen at the same pace as economic growth. Nutritional levels are
unacceptably low, with 42.5 per cent of children underweight for their age, being
one of the highest rates globally. Prevailing social inequality and the low
nutritional, educational and social status of women are considered key factors
contributing to the prevalence of malnutrition in children below the age of five.

2. India’s population is composed of several ethnic groups, speaking diverse
languages and more than 1,000 dialects. Poverty is particularly severe among
tribal populations. These groups identify themselves in more than 5,400 castes and
tribes and follow five major religions. India’s tribal populations are officially
registered as Scheduled Tribes (STs) according to distinct cultural and ethnic
features. STs, numbering 104.3 million in the 2011 census, constitute
approximately 8.6 per cent of India’s population. Unlike Scheduled Castes (SCs),
which are dispersed throughout the country, STs have traditionally been
concentrated in specific parts of the country characterized by forests, hills and
undulating inaccessible areas. This results in reduced access to basic services and
fewer opportunities for economic development. The decline in the poverty rate is
much slower for ST populations than for the general population. Of the total ST
populations, approximately 2.6 million (2.5 per cent) belong to Particularly
Vulnerable Tribal Groups (PTGs). This classification is reserved for the most
disadvantaged of all ST communities. Currently, 75 identified PTGs are spread
across 17 Indian states and union territories.

3. The proposed Odisha Particularly Vulnerable Tribal Groups Empowerment and
Livelihood Improvement Programme (OPELIP) will work in Odisha State, which has
one of the highest number of PTGs. Odisha is geographically the 8th largest state
and the 11th most populous among Indian states. Poverty rates of rural populations
are double those of their urban counterparts.

4. Odisha is home to 62 STs including 13 PTGs, which are concentrated in the Eastern
Ghats and the Northern Plateau. Both these regions are characterized by rugged
hilly terrain and high rainfall. Together they account for most of the state’s forests.
PTGs living in Odisha derive their livelihood mainly from shifting cultivation, rainfed
agriculture and the gathering of non-timber forest products (NTFPs). The incidence
of landlessness is high and farming practices have remained primitive, with rainfed
paddy and millets being the main crops.



EB 2015/114/R.11

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. Several provisions in the Indian Constitution seek to ensure better quality of life for
PTGs. Yet their economic status has not improved. They rank poorly on all
development indicators, such as food and nutrition security, literacy and health.
Given their high dependence on an ecologically complex natural resource base,
they are also highly vulnerable to variability in weather and climate shocks. Owing
to poor farming systems and a lack of focus on the development of rainfed areas,
PTG areas have suffered widespread land degradation. Efforts are thus needed to
reverse this downward spiral of low productivity and a declining resource base.

6. To deliver services to the 17 PTG areas, the Government of India has established
microproject agencies (MPAs). However, a consolidated high-intensity, integrated
programme of support through these institutions – with clear targets and time
frames – is still missing. The OPELIP will deliver this by capitalizing on institutional
development that has already taken place, and will provide a range of services to
PTGs through appropriate development initiatives.

7. The OPELIP will build on the experience of the IFAD-supported Orissa Tribal
Empowerment and Livelihoods Programme (OTELP), which has successfully
demonstrated an integrated development package in tribal areas. OTELP set up
village-level bodies and involved tribal groups in planning and implementation of
various development initiatives, especially development of the natural resources.
Encouraged by the success of OTELP, the Government of Odisha has requested
IFAD to scale up the approach into PTG areas. This is the first time an external
development partner has been asked to work in these most remote and difficult
areas of the state.

8. The programme is closely aligned with the priorities and strategies of both the
Government of India and the State Government of Odisha and will particularly
support the objective of achieving “faster and more inclusive growth”. It is
compatible with and supportive of other donor initiatives and will directly address
the strategic objectives of IFAD’s results-based country strategic opportunities
programme (RB-COSOP). The current RB-COSOP became effective in April 2011
and is jointly reviewed by IFAD and the Government of India annually to ensure full
alignment with national priorities and policies.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
9. OPELIP interventions will be implemented in 17 MPA areas located in 12 districts of

Odisha (Angul, Deogarh, Gajapati, Ganjam, Kalahandi, Kandhamal, Keojhar,
Malkanagiri, Mayurbhanj, Nuapada, Rayagada,and Sundergarh). This will cover
13 PTGs living in some 1,019 villages and hamlets and 84 gram panchayats (the
local self-governing institution at the village level). Overall, the programme will
cover 62,356 households.

10. In line with IFAD’s policy on targeting, the OPELIP will target marginalized groups:
women, children, unemployed youth, hill-area cultivators, the landless among
PTGs, and other tribal peoples. Based on geographical targeting, it will work in a
predefined number of MPA gram panchayats. Some programme interventions –
such as village development planning and the associated village institutions, and
infrastructure such as rural roads – will benefit 100 per cent of the population living
in these gram panchayats. To ensure precise targeting of marginalized groups, a
specific targeting strategy has been developed for each component.

B. Programme development objective
11. The overall goal of the OPELIP is to achieve enhanced living conditions and reduced

poverty in target group households. It will support improved livelihoods and food



EB 2015/114/R.11

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and nutrition security for 32,090 PTG households, 13,970 other tribal households
and 10,810 other poor and 5,486 SC households. This will be achieved, in turn, by
building the capacity of target households, securing their entitlements to land and
forest, improving their agricultural practices to enhance production, promoting
income-generating microenterprises for alternate livelihoods, ensuring access to
services such as education and health, and improving community infrastructure. To
achieve the objective of empowerment, the programme will promote women’s self-
help groups (SHGs), organize village development committees (VDCs) for the
planning and implementation of programme interventions and train community
resource people (CRPs) to provide needed services in production, marketing and
legal assistance.

C. Components/outcomes
12. The OPELIP will have four components: community empowerment; natural

resource management (NRM) and livelihood improvement; community
infrastructure and drudgery reduction; and programme management.

13. Component 1: Community empowerment. Empowerment is the key
prerequisite to developing PTGs. It will be addressed through a series of capacity-
building initiatives, entry point activities and mobilization of community-based
organizations. Accordingly, the component will have two subcomponents:

(i) Community institutions. Promotion of village development associations
(VDAs) for the planning and execution of need-based community activities
that cover natural resource management, community-based paralegal
services, community-based health, hygiene and nutrition education, and
community infrastructure. Major activities will include: (a) engaging the
services of 17 NGOs supported by about 360 CRPs; (b) training of trainers
and capacity-building of CRPs; (c) mobilization of VDCs and capacity-building
of VDC members; (d) implementation of entry point activities in all 1,019
villages, as identified by VDCs; and (e) preparation of village development
plans (VDPs) and facilitation of VDCs in implementing activities identified in
VDPs.

(ii) Strengthening SHGs and rural finance. Promotion of SHGs and rural finance
services to enable social development of SHG members through facilitating
group savings and credit, and through building capacity. Key interventions
will include formation and strengthening of 3,800 SHGs, training of
microfinance CRPs, formation of 84 gram panchayat cluster-level forums
(GPLFs), provision of pro-poor and vulnerability reduction funds to SHGs and
community investment funds to GPLFs, and piloting of two cooperative
societies.

14. Component 2: Natural resource management and livelihood improvement.
Historically, PTGs have lived deeper inside forests than other STs, and some PTGs,
such as the Birhor and Mankirdia, were nomadic until recently. To support the
transition from hunting-gathering to shifting cultivation and eventually to settled
farming, this component will have three subcomponents:

(i) Natural resource management. Key interventions will include: (a) services of
an NGO specialized in land surveys and the issuing of land titles to PTGs;
(b) treatment of 20,000 hectares of arable land and construction of
900 irrigation structures; (c) capacity-building of 18,000 farmers in crop
development and horticulture; and (d) support to horticulture development
and cereal food crops, including oilseeds, pulses and tubers, in all villages.

(ii) Food and nutrition security. This will include: (a) training of school children
and SHG members in malnutrition, locally available nutritious foods,
preparation of nutritious food using local materials, sanitation and
alcoholism; (b) focus on cultivating locally available traditional food crops;



EB 2015/114/R.11

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

(c) nutrition-intensive interventions such as kitchen gardens, backyard
poultry- and goat-rearing; and (d) promotion of “convergence” to address
gaps in the areas of food availability, health, water and sanitation.

(iii) Livelihood improvement. The programme will support: (a) selection and
training of community service providers (CSPs); (b) household production
support; (c) market access support for producer collectives; (d) support for
NTFP marketing; and (e) vocational training and strengthening of PTG culture
and traditions.

15. Component 3: Community infrastructure and drudgery reduction. PTG
villages are characterized by poor housing, limited or no access to potable water
year round, absence of sanitation facilities, limited or no access to electricity and
limited or no road infrastructure. Some villages in the programme area have no
school buildings and, in those that do, in many cases the buildings are dilapidated
and without drinking water and sanitation facilities. Many villages do not have
paved roads or drainage inside the settlements, and children play in extremely
unhygienic conditions, especially during the rainy season. Though NTFPs constitute
a major livelihood source for PTGs, there are no platforms for drying and sorting
these commodities or for storage to facilitate collective marketing. This will be
addressed through two subcomponents:

(i) Community infrastructure. The programme will support construction of:
(a) 300 drinking water schemes and 542 school toilets; (b) 4,000 housing
units and habitat development; (c) 500 km of roads and 50 km of
electrification; and (d) infrastructure for 542 drying yards, 84 market yards,
250 aggregation centres and 250 SHG worksheds; and will provide power
tiller units, 2,000 irrigation pump sets and 84 hydram units. Operation and
maintenance of these facilities will be through VDCs, and village volunteers
will be trained as community mechanics.

(ii) Drudgery reduction. Under this subcomponent, the programme will support:
(a) construction of 35,000 smokeless wood stoves; (b) installation of
20,000 solar lanterns; (c) maintenance of fuelwood reserves in 540 villages;
and (d) construction of 84 milling units for hulling rice, millet, etc.

16. Component 4: Programme management. This component will have three
subcomponents: (i) a programme management unit (PMU) will be set up within the
lead programme agency; (ii) the programme will strengthen the 17 existing MPAs
through staffing and facilities; and (iii) a programme monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) and knowledge management (KM) unit will be set up within the PMU. The
programme will make an effort to strengthen existing systems within the MPAs,
rather than creating parallel ones.

17. Major outcomes of the OPELIP will include: 1,019 VDCs organized and functional;
3,800 SHGs and 84 GPLFs organized and functional; at least a 50 per cent
reduction in rural indebtedness; 100 per cent of PTG households holding
homestead titles and 75 per cent of them land titles; 43,000 households receiving
land and water management treatment measures; 19,000 households accessing
irrigation and an almost equal number of households planting fruit and spice crops;
31,000 households increasing cereal, millet, pulse and oilseed production;
9,000 households starting an income-generating activity; all households accessing
a water supply, and market and road connectivity; and 32,000 PTG households
having kitchen gardens, smokeless wood stoves and access to community fuelwood
reserves.



EB 2015/114/R.11

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
18. The OPELIP has been designed to follow the successful bottom-up planning

approach of OTELP. Success under OTELP was attributed to the fact that the
implementation process was owned by tribal peoples. With local community
institutions at the heart of the programme, the new design focuses on scaling up
activities that have already been tested and proven successful in Odisha. The
programme will adopt an integrated approach involving support for improved
access to land, natural resources, agricultural technologies, financial services,
markets, productive and social infrastructure, and essential social services. Gender
empowerment will be mainstreamed in all activities. Given the extremely severe
malnutrition situation in PTG villages, the design has also piloted an approach to
mainstreaming nutrition-sensitive agricultural activities across all components.

B. Organizational framework
19. At the national level, the Department of Economic Affairs of the Ministry of Finance

will be the nodal agency for the programme. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs will be
involved in overall policy guidance.

20. At the state level, the Scheduled Tribes and Scheduled Castes Development
Department (STSCDD) will be the lead programme agency. Overall policy guidance
will be provided through a programme steering committee under the Chief
Secretary. A PMU set up within STSCDD will have overall responsibility for day-to-
day management of the programme and the functions relating to planning, funds
flow, M&E, gender mainstreaming, policy dialogue and KM.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

21. Planning. The programme will follow the planning process undertaken by the
respective MPA, taking the specific objectives and purposes of the OPELIP into
account. A draft annual workplan and budget (AWP/B) will be drawn up by the
PMU, consolidating all microplans, in consultation with the respective MPAs and
partner NGOs.

22. Monitoring and evaluation. The M&E system will measure progress and
performance, and will be a learning and decision-making tool at various levels. The
PMU will establish an M&E unit, which will support progress monitoring by
programme field implementation units and partner NGOs. The M&E unit will also
monitor programme outcomes and impacts through, among other tools, annual
outcome surveys and by applying the Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS) in accordance with IFAD guidelines. Semi-annual and annual reports will
also contain sections on analysis, interpretation and recommendations from
process monitoring, lessons learned and best practices.

23. Learning and knowledge management. Information generated by the
programme will be disseminated through IFAD websites, newsletters, thematic
reports and at learning events. The programme will develop a KM strategy and
appropriate action plans. KM will be used as a tool for internal learning by
programme stakeholders such as the staff of various implementing agencies, and
participating villagers and farmers, both women and men. Activities will include
regular review meetings at village/cluster, MPA and state levels and the production
of knowledge products such as newsletters (in local languages), briefs, training
materials, technical manuals, booklets, posters, videos, etc.

24. The OPELIP will also use audio/video systems to disseminate information from
farmer to farmer and village to village. It will build on the KM culture and practices
of OTELP and on the Digital Green programme to amplify knowledge through
combining technology and social organizations for community transformation.



EB 2015/114/R.11

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
25. Financial management. The OPELIP will build on the experience of the ongoing

OTELP. During implementation, the PMU will consolidate the AWP/B, including the
annual action plan for conservation-cum-development1 of microprojects, and
submit the consolidated AWP/B to the programme management committee for
approval. Financial accounting for the OPELIP will be done through computerized
accounting software at all levels. The software will be customized to generate
financial reports for the national and state governments and for IFAD according to
specific requirements. After programme start-up, the PMU will enter into a
subsidiary agreement with each MPA. Each MPA will submit a monthly progress
report to the PMU electronically. Strong internal control procedures will be
introduced, including adequate segregation of duties, especially at the MPA level.
Detailed procedures for recording, management and safeguarding of fixed
programme assets will be detailed in the programme implementation manual. An
internal auditor will be hired to provide continuous monitoring and review of
financial systems and procedures.

26. Flow of funds. IFAD financing of the programme will be routed through an
account designated to receive funds in advance (designated account), denominated
in United States dollars and maintained at the Reserve Bank of India. The
Controller, Aid, Accounts and Audit, Department of Economic Affairs (Ministry of
Finance, Government of India), will administer the designated account. Funds will
flow from STSCDD to the PMU bank account as non-lapsable funds in one or two
tranches, and funds from the PMU will be transferred to MPAs as grants-in-aid.
IFAD’s share of funds reimbursed to the Government of Odisha will flow to that
Government through the prescribed national procedures for budgetary support to
state governments. The PMU will release funds to the microprojects based on the
approved AWP/B for implementation of programme activities. The PMU will open a
separate bank account in a bank mutually acceptable to IFAD and STSCDD. Each
MPA will open a separate bank account, in any bank mutually acceptable to the
Government of Odisha and IFAD, to receive funds from the PMU and carry out
eligible expenditures.

27. Audit. The external auditing arrangements for the OPELIP will be established in
two tiers: (i) independent external audit; and (ii) compliance and performance
audit by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India. As the
OPELIP PMU will be a part of STSCDD, CAG will undertake compliance and
performance audit of the department, in addition to the independent external
audit.

28. Procurement. Procurement of goods, works and services financed from resources
provided or administered by IFAD will be undertaken in accordance with IFAD’s
project procurement guidelines and procurement handbook, 2010. Procurement
will be undertaken in accordance with a consolidated procurement plan submitted
by the PMU and approved by the programme management committee and IFAD.

29. Governance. An intregrated framework for good governance has been developed
to ensure: (i) information transparency in the public domain; (ii) accountability in
the use of resources; and (iii) participation of the communities in decisions that
may affect them. The involvement of affected communities at all stages of
programme implementation can simultaneously improve development of outcomes
and reduce the scope for fraud and corruption. Key features of this governance
framework include, among others, use of a computerized financial management
system; setting up of a complaints and remedies mechanism; rotation of group
leaders of VDC, SHG, GPLF and social audit of group programme accounts; and
regular IFAD implementation support and supervision missions.

1 From the “Conservation-cum-Development Plan for PTGs” (Ministry of Tribal Affairs, Government of India).



EB 2015/114/R.11

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

E. Supervision
30. The OPELIP will be directly supervised by IFAD. During the programme’s start-up

phase, IFAD will attend the state-level start-up workshop and participate in
discussions on the programme’s approach and strategy. It will field annual
supervision missions, which will review progress with regard to physical targets,
compliance with fiduciary responsibilities and follow-up on audit recommendations,
and will result in agreed actions to further enhance progress and performance.
Government of Odisha representatives will participate in these supervision
missions. IFAD will also field implementation support missions on specific technical
issues.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
31. Total programme costs are estimated at 7,954.15 million Indian rupees (Rs)

(US$130.39 million), including contingencies (US$6.30 million), over an eight-year
period. Key assumptions used in estimating programme costs include: (i) price
contingencies assumed at 5 per cent and applied on all items, except for grant and
subsidies categories and staff salaries financed by IFAD; (ii) an exchange rate of
Rs 61 per United States dollar; (iii) taxes and duties of 5 per cent on training, staff
and operating costs, of 15 per cent on service provider contracts and civil works,
and of 10 per cent on goods and equipment; (iv) all unit costs input in the local
currency unit (i.e. Rs); and (v) taxes excluded from IFAD financing.
Table 1
Indicative programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component
Borrower/

counterpart IFAD Beneficiaries Total

1. Community empowerment
Community institutions 6 449 9 653 - 16 102
Strengthening SHGs and rural finance 602 5 654 - 6 256

Subtotal community empowerment 7 051 15 307 - 22 357

2. Natural resource management and livelihood improvement
Natural resource management 13 718 8 584 2 116 24 418
Food and nutrition security 961 4 574 - 5 534
Livelihood improvement 1 313 7 565 559 9 437

Subtotal natural resource management and livelihood
improvement

15 991 20 723 2 676 39 390

3. Community infrastructure and drudgery reduction
Community infrastructure 40 641 1 126 69 41 836
Drudgery reduction 826 4 333 257 5 416

Subtotal community infrastructure and drudgery reduction 41 467 5 459 327 47 253

4. Programme management
Programme management unit 1 861 2 547 - 4 408
Microproject agency unit 9 615 6 369 - 15 984
M&E and KM 201 803 - 1 004

Subtotal programme management 11 677 9 719 - 21 396

Total cost 76 185 51 209 3 002 130 396

B. Programme financing
32. The programme will be funded through IFAD financing and Government of Odisha

counterpart financing from state budgetary resources, from funds under article
275(1) Special Central Assistance to Tribal Peoples Sub Plan, from the
conservation-cum-development fund and through beneficiary contributions. IFAD
will provide a loan of about US$51.20 million. The Government will provide



EB 2015/114/R.11

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

US$76.18 million, including staff costs, operating costs and the annual budget
allocation for development of PTGs and other STs. Beneficiaries are expected to
make an in kind contribution of labour equivalent to US$3.00 million.
Table 2
Indicative programme costs by expenditure, category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category
Borrower /

counterpart Percentage IFAD Percentage Beneficiaries Percentage Total

1. Civil work 47 043 84.9 7 131 12.9 1 246 2.2 55 420
2. Traininga 2 423 16.4 11 761 79.8 559 3.8 14 744
3. Goods, services
and inputs 15 978 43.9 19 187 52.8 1 197 3.3 36 362
4. Grants - - 7 149 100.0 - - 7 149
5. Operating costsb 10 741 64.2 5 981 35.8 - - 16 721

Total programme
costs

76 185 58.4 51 209 39.3 3 002 2.3 130 396

a Training and capacity-building.
b Includes staff salaries.

33. Retroactive financing. With a view to ensuring that the OPELIP start-up proceeds
smoothly, preparatory activities related to the NRM and livelihood improvement
component, certain staff costs, and preparation of a baseline survey and manuals
are proposed to be undertaken from April 2014 to entry-into-force of the financing
agreement. Accordingly, as an exception to the General Conditions for Agricultural
Development Financing, approval for IFAD retroactive financing for expenditures up
to US$406,240 is recommended. These proposed expenditures will fall under two
expenditure categories: (i) goods, services and inputs; and (ii) training and
capacity-building (table 3). The expenditures incurred will be reimbursed to the
borrower after the programme enters into force.
Table 3
Indicative retroactive financing by component, cost category and financier
(United States dollars)

Component
Disbursement account
category

Estimated
expenditure

Amount to be
reimbursed by IFAD

1. Community empowerment
Wages to multipurpose workers Goods, services and inputs 72 000 36 000

2. NRM and livelihood improvement
Engaging the services of a rural
organization

Training and capacity-building 320 000 256 000

4. Programme management
Baseline survey Training and capacity-building 134 400 107 520
Preparation of finance manual Training and capacity-building 8 400 6 720

Total 534 800 406 240

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. Programme investments have an overall internal rate of return of 23 per cent, with

a net present value of Rs 7,840 million and a cost-benefit ratio of 1.85. The
programme remains viable if costs increase and/or benefits decrease by
25 per cent. Farm model analysis shows significant increases in food production
from 510 kg to 1,020 kg per household, with net incomes increasing several fold
over existing levels.

35. A total of 62,356 households (comprising 32,090 PTGs; 13,970 other ST
households; 5,486 SC households; and 10,810 others) would benefit directly from
the programme.



EB 2015/114/R.11

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

36. Immediate benefits from the OPELIP include: (i) increased productivity through the
introduction of better management practices and improved farming practices;
(ii) minimized soil erosion; (iii) reduced runoff and increased infiltration;
(iv) enhancement of organic content of the soil; (v) greater social cohesion among
target group communities due to greater interaction with VDAs and SHGs;
(vi) security of land tenure due to recognition of the usufruct rights of PTGs and
restoration of alienated land; and (vii) increased recognition of and participation by
women.

D. Sustainability
37. The land survey and land allocation, with land title rights, provided to PTGs is

expected to trigger sustained improvements in land use and overall productivity.
Quality of the produce will be ensured through provision of quality seed and
seedlings by the programme and through capacity-building. Marketing could be a
constraint in the initial years, but would be overcome through the operations of
producers’ collectives and the provision of market infrastructure, as demand is
increasing for produce from the programme area. Increased capacity of the target
groups to undertake intercropping and other small enterprises through programme
support will enhance the sustainability of livelihoods.

38. The programme will contribute to environmental and NRM sustainability. Planting of
fruit trees in the current shifting cultivation areas will help protect soils and
improve productivity. The fruit trees and spice crops will provide PTGs and other
STs a regular and more reliable source of income and will reduce the temptation to
encroach on forest lands. In addition, programme participants will receive technical
training in good agricultural practices, improved soil fertility and soil health
management, eco-restoration techniques, planting along contour lines to prevent
erosion, and organic farming.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
39. There are a number of risks associated with the programme as detailed in the

logical framework. The goal-level risk of lack of support by the Government is
reduced by the Government commitment to continue tribal development
programmes and to enhance investment. The development-objective-level risk of
social instability is addressed by promoting and supporting local governments and
community institutions in building a coalition facilitating stability and economic
growth. The risk of a complex, challenging institutional setting involving 17 MPAs
will be reduced by additional, qualified staffing and staff incentives. Output-level
risks, such as crop production adversely affected by changing weather patterns,
will be reduced through a number of measures to mitigate the impacts of climate
change. Other risk mitigation measures include: (i) promoting interventions that
are profitable for PTGs; (ii) enhancing communication links for better access to
markets and services; and (iii) ensuring community participation in programme
planning and implementation to ensure community support for the programme and
insulation from the left-wing insurgency.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
40. The OPELIP is fully aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015 and

supports both strategic objectives of the IFAD RB-COSOP for India. It is also
directed to one of the main target groups identified in the COSOP – indigenous
tribal groups. The programme design adheres to IFAD policies for poverty,
targeting and gender, indigenous peoples, climate change, scaling up, good
governance and the environment. The programme is classified as a category B
operation; thus no further environmental assessment is considered necessary.



EB 2015/114/R.11

10

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Alignment and harmonization
41. The State Government has been actively involved in formulation and appraisal of

the OPELIP. The programme is built on the success of OTELP as well as on lessons
learned from other IFAD-supported projects in India. The OPELIP is aligned with
the India COSOP 2010-2015 and is compatible with and supportive of other state
government initiatives. It is also in line with strategies and policies of the
Governments of India and Odisha for the development of tribal and vulnerable
communities. The programme goal and objective are aligned with the objective of
“faster and more inclusive growth” of the Governments of Odisha and India.

C. Innovations and scaling up
42. The OPELIP represents a scaling up of the successful interventions of OTELP, and it

is expected that the OPELIP, itself, will be scaled up in time. As this is the first
externally funded development intervention targeted to PTGs, it offers an
opportunity to refine a model for PTG areas, which can then be scaled up to PTG
areas in other states with large PTG populations, such as Jharkhand and
Chhattisgarh.

43. The OPELIP will undertake case studies of innovations and success stories on a
regular basis and will report on them through annual progress reports and in the
India country newsletters.

D. Policy engagement
44. The policy engagement of the programme will support the Government of Odisha’s

efforts to address a number of policy issues relating to the development of tribal
populations. The programme will also provide funding for studies on key policy
issues and dissemination of the findings, and will engage in dialogue with the State
Government on other unresolved policy areas.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
45. A financing agreement between the Republic of India and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower. A copy of
the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

46. The Republic of India is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

47. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
48. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the Republic
of India in an amount equivalent to thirty-six million four hundred thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 36,400,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of India
for the Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation
Project


Republic of India

Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of India

Executing agency: Directorate of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$148.8 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$75.5 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: Maturity period of 25 years, including a grace
period of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of 1.25 per
cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum.

Cofinancier(s): Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF)
Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS)
Rashtriya Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY)

Amount of cofinancing: RIDF: US$6.2 million
MGNREGS: US$42 million
RKVY: US$2.4 million

Contribution of borrower: US$13.9 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$8.8 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Republic of India for the Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project, as
contained in paragraph 48.

Proposed loan to the Republic of India for the Andhra
Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. India is now the third largest economy in the world, having grown at a robust

7.5 per cent per year between 2004 and 2013. Poverty declined significantly over
the last decade, from 39 per cent in 2005 to 22 percent in 2014. Despite India’s
strong economic growth, poverty remains a major issue, with 23.6 per cent of the
population living on less than US$1.25 per day. India has 33 per cent of the world’s
poor people, and nutritional levels are unacceptably low, with 29.4 per cent of
children underweight.

2. India’s extremely strong agricultural performance in recent decades transformed
the nation from chronic dependence on grain imports into a net exporter of food.
However, as growth in other sectors outstripped that in the agricultural sector, the
latter's share of the national economy declined, now accounting for less than17 per
cent. Still, structural transformation has been slow; agriculture remains the main
livelihood for just over half of the population, and nearly three-quarters of India’s
population depend on rural incomes.

3. In the state of Andhra Pradesh, agriculture is the principal source of livelihood for
over 62 per cent of the population and accounted for 27 per cent of state GDP in
2014/2015. Annual average rainfall is 966 mm. Canals and groundwater are the
major sources of irrigation. Small and marginal farmers account for approximately
80 per cent of agricultural landholders, together cultivating 54 per cent of the
farmland. Rainfed agriculture is practiced on nearly 57 per cent of the net sown
area.

4. In the five districts of the project – Anantapur, Chittoor, Kadapa, Kurnool and
Prakasam – there are approximately 3 million farmers, 80 per cent of whom are
small and marginal farmers cultivating less than 2 hectares. Agricultural production
is largely based on cash crops – primarily oilseeds (groundnuts) followed by pulses
and cotton. Furthermore, the cattle and buffalo number are declining due to their
replacement by tractors and to increasing shortages of fodder and water. However,
the number of small ruminants is on the rise as they are well adapted to survive
drought. The five project districts have the highest number (12 million) of such
small ruminants in the state. Sheep outnumber goats. However, animal productivity
is low and mortality rates high due to poor access to support services and inputs,
delivery of support being made more difficult by flock migration in search of
seasonal grazing.

5. Less than one fifth of the predominantly rainfed area is irrigated, mainly by
groundwater, with irrigation used for commercial horticulture and some paddy and
dry-season crops, along with supplementary irrigation for rainfed crops.
Groundwater is also used for commercial purposes (e.g. packaged drinking water
and beverages). As a result, groundwater levels are declining and no longer a
reliable source of irrigation for many small farmers. In the districts of Chittoor and
Anantapur, for example, groundwater levels have reached a critical point where
well failure is a common occurrence. Drilling in these districts has become



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

expensive, as average depths reach up to 1,000 feet. As many as 95 per cent of
drilled wells fail or do not yield any water. It is estimated that groundwater
depletion now affects 30 per cent of all mandals/blocks (administrative subdivision of
districts in Andhra Pradesh) in the project area.

6. Soils over most of the project area are thin and have weak water-holding capacity.
Uncertain rainfall means crop areas and yields vary significantly from year to year.
Over the past 20 years in Anantapur district, the area of groundnuts has varied by
a factor of two and yields by a factor of 20 (between 1,310 kg/ha and 67 kg/ha).
Low and unreliable rainfall is an overriding constraint, and irrigation resources are
limited.

7. The risks involved in farming – relating to both rainfall and irrigation – mean that
farmers are finding themselves increasingly in debt. In particular, they are unable
to repay the loans they took to pay for sinking boreholes that produce no water.
This has caused considerable distress, with an increase in suicide among farmers,
especially those who made large investments in commercial horticulture. In the
project area, a wealth-ranking exercise conducted during project design showed
that 51 per cent of rural households were in the poor and poorest categories.

8. The state of Andhra Pradesh is responding to the challenge of drought and
depletion of groundwater by experimenting with a demand-side approach to water
management. Such an approach piloted from 2004 to 2009 the Andhra Pradesh
Farmer Managed Groundwater Systems Project (APFAMGS), implemented by the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) in approximately
640 villages demonstrated the following main results: reduction in groundwater
draft; replacement of bananas, rice and cotton by other crops that need less water,
such as peanuts and a locally bred variety of green lentils; replicable as no
authoritative leadership is required for enforcement of water management rules.
Andhra Pradesh authorities decided to replicate demand-side water management in
all drought-prone mandals in the project area through a saturation approach
covering all villages, and both rainfed farmers and farmers using borewells for
irrigation.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

9. The overarching problem the project will address is the low productivity and high
risk of farming in the drought-prone districts of Andhra Pradesh it covers. The
situation is further aggravated by poor access among farmers to information,
especially relating to weather and weather-related decisions (e.g. crop choices,
planting dates, pest and disease control), by the lack of any governance or
management system for water resources specifically limiting new borewell drilling,
by poor farming practices, and by suboptimal use of technology. Hence, the project
will make a concerted and coordinated effort to mitigate the problems of cyclical
drought and enable farmers to increase their incomes despite this very difficult
farming environment. This will be achieved through the adoption of resilient and
better-adapted agriculture; the integration of livestock (sheep and backyard
poultry) to improve the drought resilience of the farming system; better
management of water resources through groundwater-demand management at the
community level and its embedding in local government structures; and rainwater
harvesting and storage, and improved recharge of groundwater aquifers, to make
more water available.

10. The Andhra Pradesh Drought Mitigation Project (APDMP) is closely aligned with the
priorities and strategies of the state government of Andhra Pradesh. The Andhra
Pradesh state Strategy Paper for the Primary Sector, produced in 2014 with
assistance from the International Centre for Research in the Semi-Arid Tropics,
places priority on harvesting more rainwater in dry districts and managing scarce
groundwater resources. The Strategy Paper also supports soil health mapping and
increasing organic soil matter, organic farming and the development of horticulture.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

The project objective and outcomes are fully aligned with the Andhra Pradesh state
strategy.

11. With regard to the results-based country strategic opportunities programmes
(COSOP) (extended until 2016), APDMP is fully aligned with the first strategic
objective, increased access to agricultural technologies and natural resources. It is
noteworthy that the 2015 country programme evaluation assessed the relevance of
the COSOP as satisfactory.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
12. The project area will be located in Anantapur, Chittoor, Kadapa, Kurnool (the

Rayalaseema region) and Prakasam, the five driest districts of the state of Andhra
Pradesh. The project will be implemented in village clusters that equate to gram
panchayats (GPs), the lowest level of local government in India. The project will
aim to cover 330 GPs, covering a total of 165,000 farming households. The project
will adopt a saturation approach in these GPs by targeting all farmers. In addition,
APDMP will engage with clusters of GPs that belong to the same drainage basin: the
river drainage basin together with the underlying groundwater define hydrological
units (HUs). Each HU includes on average five GPs.

13. The project target group will include all categories of farmers and landless people,
including Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and vulnerable households, such
as women-headed households. Gender equity will be mainstreamed in project
activities. The project will adopt a two-step targeting strategy. First, the project will
adopt geographic targeting by focusing on the worst drought-affected villages in
the poorest mandals. Secondly, the project will adopt a social targeting approach.
Andhra Pradesh state has requested that the project ensure support is provided to
the 100 poorest households in each GP.

B. Project development objective
14. The overall project goal is to improve the incomes of approximately 165,000

farming households and strengthen their resilience to drought. This goal will be
achieved through the development objective of strengthening the adaptive capacity
and productivity of agriculture in the rainfed zones of five districts in southern
Andhra Pradesh state.

C. Components/outcomes
15. The project will comprise three components: (i) climate-resilient production

systems; (ii) drought-proofing through natural resource management and
governance; and (iii) project management and lesson learning.

16. Component 1: Climate-resilient production systems aims to increase the
resilience of crop and livestock production systems to climate change (specifically
drought) and provide farmers (individuals and small groups) with information to
make informed decisions on how to invest in protective irrigation, improve soil
fertility practices, diversify cropping systems and improve their livestock
productivity. Accordingly, component 1 will involve three subcomponents:

(i) Improved crop production systems through support to farmer information
centres, farmer field schools and the promotion of integrated soil fertility
management and protective irrigation.

(ii) Improved livestock production systems through support to community
livestock facilitators providing fee-based services to sheep producers
(improved housing, feeding and breeding) and a backyard poultry scheme
targeted at the poorest women.

(iii) Strengthened farmers’ organizations through a flexible approach, working
with existing organizations where possible and forming new organizations
where needed to support farmers through input supply, seed multiplication,
production services, machinery-hire centres and marketing support.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

17. Component 2: Drought-proofing through natural resource management
and governance aims to mitigate drought and make agriculture more productive
by managing and investing in common property resources. Component 2’s
objective will be achieved through the following three subcomponents:

(i) Water governance will support water planning and supply and demand
management through water subcommittees at the GP level, which will form
hydrological unit networks (HUNs) that will operate at the drainage basin level
to further optimize investments in the conservation of surface water and
groundwater. Training and workshops will build local capacity and support the
development of surface water and groundwater planning and monitoring.

(ii) Water monitoring and conservation will cover local hydrological and
meteorological monitoring to support local decision-making and planning for
water resources as well as collaboration between GP water subcommittees
and HUNs and relevant administrations involved in water supply and demand
monitoring. A pilot hydrological mapping of aquifers is proposed to
complement available knowledge and information on groundwater. Soil and
water conservation activities will support the recharge of soil moisture and
groundwater, and geographically targeted water-harvesting activities will
complement local water supply management.

(iii) Regeneration of common property rangeland will support vegetative methods
for water conservation and strengthen community management of grazing,
rainwater harvesting and other environmental services.

18. Component 3: Management and lesson learning will see the establishment of a
state project management unit (SPMU) at the Andhra Pradesh state level and of a
district project management unit (DPMU) in each of the five districts. Lesson
learning will cover water resource planning and management, drought-resilient
agriculture and climate change adaptation, and the development of policies for the
crop and livestock sectors, especially for small ruminants.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

19. The project will build on and scale up a number of current and recent initiatives for
farming in a drought-prone environment. These include the APFAMGS, mentioned
above, and state-led soil and water conservation works with the objective of
harvesting rainfall and recharging aquifers. In addition, APDMP will incorporate
aspects of a number of programmes of the Andhra Pradesh state Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation (DAC), including community seed multiplication, millet
production, groundwater sharing, rainfed farming, and farmer producer
organizations (FPOs). APDMP will also capitalize on innovations in plant breeding for
drought tolerance, soil fertility management, farm ponds to store water for
protective irrigation, and community management of common property rangeland.

B. Organizational framework
20. At the Andhra Pradesh state level, the DAC will be the nodal agency, the

Directorate of Agriculture will be the lead project agency and host the SPMU. The
Director of Agriculture will serve as ex officio project director. The Agricultural
Technology Management Agency (ATMA) will implement the project at the district
level. ATMA is an autonomous government agency responsible for extension
services with a mandate for multisectoral support including livestock and
horticulture. To implement APDMP, the capacity of ATMA will be strengthened
through PMUs with additional staff. A lead technical agency (LTA) will be contracted
to advise the SPMU on planning, capacity-building, monitoring, documentation and
information technology services. To support implementation at the field level,
facilitating agencies (FAs) will be hired to: (i) carry out participatory planning at the
community level; (ii) form and support FPOs and the GP water subcommittees and
HUNs; (iii) organize farmer field schools and other extension provision capacity-



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

building; and (iv) monitor implementation, including oversight of financial
expenditure by FPOs.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

21. Planning. A draft annual workplan and budget (AWPB) will be consolidated by the
SPMU with inputs from the DPMUs and other entities such as LTA and FAs. Each
DPMU will consolidate proposals made by project GPs or FPOs. The AWPB will then
be approved by the project steering committee and submitted to IFAD for approval
by 31 January every year.

22. Monitoring and evaluation. The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system, guided
by an M&E framework set out in the project implementation manual (PIM), will
collect data and information to measure performance and progress towards
objectives; serve as a learning tool to provide information for critical reflection on
project strategies and operations; support decision-making at various levels; and
serve as a basis for results-based management. Responsibility for overall M&E and
reporting will lie with the additional project director and the planning and
monitoring manager in the SPMU. The LTA M&E unit will assist in conducting
outcome and impact monitoring, and preparing consolidated reports on project
progress and results.

23. Learning and knowledge management. In line with IFAD policy, learning and
knowledge management will be key elements of APDMP, through an integrated
approach whereby M&E will feed in to generating learning for the project and from
the project. The LTA will prepare a knowledge management strategy, building on
IFAD’s knowledge management strategy, during the first year of project
implementation.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
24. Financial management. In order to ensure the effective and efficient financial

management of APDMP, in addition to finance staff seconded by the state
government of Andhra Pradesh in charge of the management of all disbursements
via the Single Treasury Account (STS) and the personal deposit accounts, the SPMU
will recruit a finance officer and a finance support officer locally. The finance officer
will be responsible for the preparation of consolidated interim financial reports
(IFRs), the preparation of project's financial statements, the review of financial
reports and audits of FAs, and a number of internal control and administrative
organizational activities. The PIM will detail sound internal control procedures to be
followed in the daily administration of the project, at the central and district levels
alike. The financial management assessment of the project rated the fiduciary risk
as high, and the measures described above would mitigate this risk.

25. At the district level, in each ATMA district office, an accounting officer will be
recruited locally to manage financial resources received from the SPMU and prepare
the related financial reports. S/he will be supported by an accounts assistant
seconded from DAC or other another government department.

26. Flow of funds. IFAD financing will be channelled through a designated account
denominated in United States dollars to be opened at the Reserve Bank of India
and administered by the Office of Controller of Aid Accounts and Audit. IFAD will
establish an authorized allocation for initial advance in a maximum amount of US$3
million. The SPMU will use the State Treasury System for all its disbursements.
Funds flow arrangements foresee an extensive use of the state/country systems;
transfers from the state to the districts shall be done using the STS and Personal
Deposit (PD) accounts. Additional PD accounts shall be opened for each ATMA as
authorized by the State. Disbursements to the LTA and to all other FAs will be
managed at the SPMU level, while procedures for district office disbursements will
be detailed in the PIM.

27. The ATMA DPMUs will submit monthly financial reports to the SPMU based on the
actual expenditures incurred. The SPMU will consolidate the district expenditures



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and its own and report quarterly consolidated IFRs, subject to audit certification at
the end of each financial year.

28. For the preparation of IFRs, withdrawal applications and financial reports, the STS
reporting facility will be supplemented by an accounting software procured on the
market and deployed in the SPMU and all district offices.

29. Audit. The State shall request the Accountant General of Andhra Pradesh (AG-AP)
to conduct annual audits of APDMP. The AG-AP will perform a “certification audit”
for externally financed projects, including a number of specific activities such as
audits of the project’s financial statements, of the IFRs submitted to IFAD, of
APDMP treasury transactions and the District ATMA Societies. AG-AP will issue
separate opinions covering each of the financial statements, IFRs and the use of the
STS and commercial banking system. The audited financial statements and audit
report, including the management letter, will be submitted to IFAD within six
months following the end of each financial year. Simultaneously, the statutory
annual audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor, empanelled with AG-AP.
The State confirmed that empanelled auditors will have full access to STS for
auditing purposes.

30. Retroactive financing. With a view to ensuring APDMP preparatory activities
proceed smoothly, activities related to baseline and land surveys, and to the
preparation of the PIM, manuals and guidelines are proposed between September
2016 and the date of entry into force of the financing agreement. Accordingly, as
an exception to the General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing, it is
recommended that IFAD retroactive financing be approved for expenditures
totalling up to US$1 million. These proposed expenditures will fall under three
expenditure categories: (i) consultancies; (ii) goods services and inputs; and
(iii) salaries and allowances. The expenditures incurred will be reimbursed to the
borrower after the project enters into force.

31. Procurement. Procurement of goods, works and services under APDMP financed
from resources provided or administered by IFAD will be conducted in accordance
with IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and Handbook, 2010. Procurement will be
undertaken in accordance with a consolidated procurement plan submitted by the
SPMU, approved by the Project Steering Committee and acceptable to IFAD.

32. Governance. As part of the robust e-governance policy and framework of the state
government of Andhra Pradesh, the SPMU will disclose the following minimum
documents either via the project web site or that of the Directorate of Agriculture:
(i) a procurement plan any revisions thereto; (ii) a procurement manual;
(iii) invitations for bids for goods and works for all national competitive bidding
contracts; (iv) request for expression of interest for selection/recruitment of
consulting services; iv) contract awards of goods, works and all consultancy
services; (v) list of contracts following direct contracting or single source selection;
(vi) shortlist of consultants, (vii) contract award of all consultancy services; and
(viii) reports of action taken on any complaints received. In addition, the SPMU will
disclose relevant information related to government funds as specified by the Right
to Information Act and the decisions of the State Information Commissioner
applicable to project implementation.

E. Supervision
33. IFAD will directly supervise the project, supporting project start-up and conducting

annual field supervision missions to review progress towards physical targets,
compliance with fiduciary responsibilities and follow-up on audit recommendations
and produce agreed actions to further enhance performance. IFAD and the Andhra
Pradesh state government will undertake a first main review no later than 24
months following the date of entry into force of the financing agreement, to be
followed by a midterm review within the subsequent 18 months.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
34. Total project costs are estimated at US$148.8 million over a five-year period,

including overall physical and price contingencies. Key assumptions in this estimate
include: (i) price contingencies of 5 per cent applied on all items; (ii) an exchange
rate of 70 Indian Rupees to one United States dollar; and (iii) taxes and duties of
12.5 per cent on works and 5 per cent on goods, inputs and services.

B. Project financing
35. Project financing will comprise, approximately: US$75.5 million, or 50.7 per cent of

total project costs, from IFAD; US$6.2 million from the Rural Infrastructure
Development Fund (RIDF); US$42 million from the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural
Employment Guarantee Scheme (MGNREGS); US$2.4 million from the Rashtriya
Krishi Vikas Yojana (RKVY); US$13.9 million equivalents in government counterpart
financcing, including taxes and duties and salaries of seconded staff; and US$8.8
million equivalents from beneficiaries. Taxes and duties account for US$5.4 million
equivalents.

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component
IFAD loan GoAP* NREGS RIDF RKVY Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Climate-resilient
production systems 65 583 59 10 814 9.7 18 915 17 5 463 5 2 447 2.2 8 363 7.1 111 584
2. Drought-proofing
through natural
resource
management and
governance 5 809 19 835 2.7 23 108 74.8 717 2 - 455 1.5 30 925
3. Management and
lesson learning 4 108 65 2 225 35 - - - - 6 333

Total 75 500 50.7 13 875 9.3 42 022 28.5 6 180 4 2 447 1.6 8 818 5.9 14 842

* GoAP - State Government of Andhra Pradesh.

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
Category

IFAD loan GoAP NREGS RIDF RKVY Beneficiaries Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

Works 2 386 6.9 2 325 6.7 28 790 83.1 611 2 - - 541 1.3 34 653
Training 5 253 99.9 6 0.1 - - - - - 5 259
Consultancies 18 690 85.6 3 132 14.4 - - - - - 21 821
Goods, services
and inputs 45 084 56.1 6 363 7.9 13 233 16.5 4 938 6 2 447 3 8 276 10.5 80 341
Grants and
subsidies 1 921 73.3 70 2.7 - - 631 24 - - - - 2 621
Salaries and
allowances 2 166 52.2 1980 47.8 - - - - - - - - 4 146

Total 75 500 50.7 13 875 9.3 42 022 28.5 6 180 4 2 447 1.6 8 818 5.9 148 842

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
36. Investments under the project will have an overall economic internal rate of return

of 19 per cent and the net present value (discount rate at 10 per cent) remains
over 10 per cent if costs increase by 20 per cent or benefits decrease by 20 per
cent. Benefits have been calculated based on two cropping system farm models
(red soils and black soils, each for an average farm size of 1.62 ha), reflecting the
different cropping patterns on these soil types. Sensitivity analysis confirms that
the project would remain moderately robust to decreases in benefits and increases
in costs alike.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

37. The project is expected to benefit a total of approximately 643,500 people through
165,000 farming households.

D. Sustainability
38. Project interventions will be sustainable. Improved agricultural practices, if found

by farmers to be useful and profitable, will be sustained, provided inputs and
markets are available. Many of the support services that the project will establish
can be operated as businesses by individuals or small informal groups.

39. Groundwater demand management will be sustained as water subcommittees are
embedded in the GP local government structure. It will also be important to sustain
groundwater-sharing networks, and provision has been made to establish a user
maintenance fund. Likewise, farm ponds will need require maintenance (desilting
and linings repairs), and entrusting the responsibility for this to the pond owner(s)
directly will contribute to strengthening their sense of ownership.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
40. There are a number of risks associated with the project, as detailed in the logical

framework. A significant risk at the development objective level is that of climate
change and increasing labour costs, further hindering the capacity of farming in the
rainfed areas of southern Andhra Pradesh to compete with other parts of India with
higher rainfall. This relates to the high climate change risk rating for the project,
which will be mitigated by increasing the productivity and the resilience to climate
change of rainfed agriculture. Should rainfed agriculture continues to face
difficulties in competing, then activities can be refocused towards more resilient
livestock and limited areas of irrigated horticulture. The risks associated with
drought-proofing via natural resource management and governance will be
mitigated by, among other support, building strong community ownership for local
groundwater demand management, reinforced by legal sanctions. The financial
management assessment of the project rated the fiduciary risk as high.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

41. The project is fully aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework (2016-2025) and
adheres to IFAD policies for targeting and gender mainstreaming, environment and
natural resource management, climate change and social, environmental and
climate assessment. Since the project is classified as a category B operation, no
further environmental assessment is considered necessary. The climate risk
classification is deemed to be high.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
42. The state Government has been actively involved in the formulation and appraisal

of the APDMP. The project, built on the alignment with existing government
structures of DAC and ATMA, will be dynamic and flexible. The proposed
arrangement is based on the current assessment of project needs and may be
modified should further requirements arise during implementation.

Innovations and scaling upC.
43. The project will seek to scale up and improve on experience in Andhra Pradesh

state of groundwater management in order to provide a holistic and integrated
response to the multifaceted and complex acute drought situation facing many
districts. The project will expand and adapt the participatory hydrological
monitoring programme of APFAMGS, implemented with the assistance of FAO, and
combine it with groundwater water-sharing and water supply investments from
public and private funds. Comprehensive M&E, together with special studies, will
generate detailed information on the process and results of project implementation.
These will bring together lessons learned and collect more information to help
formulate future strategies and support additional convergence.



EB 2016/119/R.24/Rev.1

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Policy engagementD.
44. The project will generate knowledge on water management and water use

efficiency that will inform future policies at state level. The proposed hydrological
survey under component 2 will contribute to decisions regarding groundwater
exploitation, recharge and management, and the findings will be reflected in the GP
and HU management plans and shared with the concerned line departments. The
experience of community water management involving GPs and water resource
planning at the GP and HU levels will also inform state strategies regarding water
resource planning and management, and conservation of groundwater resources.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
45. A project financing agreement between the Republic of India and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A project agreement will be entered into between the state of Andhra
Pradesh and IFAD. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in
appendix I.

46. The Republic of India is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

47. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
48. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the Republic
of India in an amount equivalent to seventy-five million five hundred
thousand United States dollars (US$75,500,000), and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Indonesia for the
Integrated Participatory Development and
Management of the Irrigation Project

Republic of Indonesia

Integrated Participatory Development and Management
of the Irrigation Project

Financing summary

Initiating institutions: International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD)
and Asian Development Bank (ADB)

Borrower: Republic of Indonesia

Executing agency: Directorate General of Water Resources (DGWR),
Ministry of Public Works and Housing (MoPWH)

Total project cost: US$802.4 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 93.15 million
(equivalent to approximately US$98.5 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: EUR 1.41 million
(equivalent to approximately US$1.5 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of 6 years, with an interest rate per annum equal
to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Cofinancier(s): Asian Development Bank (ADB)

Amount of cofinancing: ADB: US$600 million

Terms of cofinancing: Loan

Contribution of borrower: US$102.4 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Indonesia for the Integrated Participatory Development
and Management of the Irrigation Project, as contained in paragraph 44.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Indonesia for
the Integrated Participatory Development and
Management of the Irrigation Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Indonesia has made significant progress in reducing poverty and promoting

economic growth. Agriculture remains an important sector as a pathway for rural
transformation and poverty reduction. Yet Indonesian farmers face new threats
from volatile food prices, erratic agricultural markets and policies, growing
insecurity of access to land, degradation of natural resources and the worsening
effects of climate change. Ensuring inclusive economic development through
strengthened agriculture-sector performance is a key priority for the Government of
Indonesia, which has recently prioritized issues of food sovereignty and rural
development. Food security is challenged by a declining rural infrastructure – a
consequence of inadequate financing and delivery of operations and maintenance
(O&M) that limits increased productivity for rice and other high-value crops. High
transport and logistics costs are a serious constraint on business operations and
undermine the competitiveness of agricultural value chains. In addition, increased
higher-value cropping and commercialized agriculture are needed to improve rural
livelihoods. Technical and administrative capacity constraints hamper effective
planning, management and development as Indonesia’s decentralized government
structure heightens capacity challenges. Climate change is expected to further
worsen water scarcity in some areas, result in more-frequent extreme weather
events and less-favourable rainfall patterns for agriculture. It is recognized that
improved integration of irrigation management and agricultural development is
needed if the country is to achieve the desired impact on food security and rural
livelihoods.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

2. As part of its National Medium-Term Development Plan 2015-2019, the
Government aims at self-sufficiency in key staple foods, including rice, by 2017. In
support of this target, it has committed to rehabilitating 3.2 million hectares (ha) of
degraded irrigation systems to enhance rice and other food production. This has
placed considerable focus on agriculture and water, with calls for both the public
and private sectors to consider comprehensive and collaborative responses to
national development targets. Earlier attempts to enhance the productivity of
irrigated agriculture through a largely infrastructural focus have achieved
suboptimal longer-term results, mainly owing to: (i) failure to empower farmers
and strengthen a farming system response that maximized their opportunities to
capture sustainable economic benefits from infrastructure investments; and (ii)
failure to ensure that all parts of the new or rehabilitated irrigated schemes were
well maintained.



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

2

3. The project builds on these lessons and on learning from previous and ongoing
investments in irrigated agriculture. It is strongly aligned with government policies
and expenditure plans.

4. The Integrated Participatory Development and Management of the Irrigation Project
(IPDMIP) will significantly contribute to achievement of government priorities to: (i)
increase rice production for food security; (ii) develop higher-value cropping to
improve rural nutrition and livelihoods; and (iii) promote more productive irrigation
infrastructure and its sustainable management through the delivery of an
integrated package of infrastructure, institutional reforms and capacity
development to catalyse sector advances. Importantly, the project will complement
– and provide a robust framework for promoting – more-effective public and private
investment in irrigated agriculture.

5. By integrating a focus on irrigation rehabilitation into strengthened support for
agricultural and farmer livelihood development, the project provides an innovative
approach to investing in irrigated agriculture. It will introduce strengthened
mechanisms to promote more-effective cross-sectoral coordination and institutional
and policy development.

6. IPDMIP is fully aligned with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015, the current
interim country strategy and the forthcoming results-based country strategic
opportunities programme (RB-COSOP) for Indonesia (April 2016), which will focus
on productivity enhancement, market access and institution- and capacity-building
for rural women and men.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
7. Project area. The proposed project area will cover an initial 16 provinces

(5 in Sumatra, 4 in Java, 2 in Kalimantan, 3 in Sulawesi and 2 in Nusa Tenggara),
comprising 74 districts and up to 1,800 irrigation schemes, covering a total area of
some 450,000 ha (approximately 14 per cent of the 3.2 million ha national target).
Importantly, it will pursue a scaling-up strategy to promote the replication of
project activities in other villages in the targeted districts and in other districts and
provinces. It is estimated that the project model could be replicated in
approximately 10,000 subprojects covering some 2.2 million ha. This would
increase potential coverage to 6 million households or some 24 million individuals.

8. Target group. The project design adopts an inclusive targeting approach at the
irrigation scheme level to benefit all active farmers in the scheme. Within targeted
communities, categories of poor rural people consist of poor, near-poor and
better-off people. An explicit poverty and targeting strategy will be employed to
reach the most marginal households, including ‘poor people’ (i.e. moderately poor,
poor and very poor people), women, youth and those farmers at the tail end of the
irrigation schemes, who are normally the most vulnerable. The total number of
project beneficiaries is estimated at 900,000 households or 4 million individuals, of
whom approximately 50 per cent are women.

B. Project development objective
9. The goal of the project is to improve food security and livelihoods in rural

Indonesia. Its outcome objective is to increase the value and sustainability of
irrigated agriculture.

C. Components
10. Component 1. Increased irrigated agriculture incomes will focus on improving

farm and market systems and on providing appropriate service support, including
financial services, mainly for rice and high-value irrigated crops.



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

3

(a) Subcomponent 1.1. Improved farm productivity and services focuses
on on-farm activities and comprises: support to improved farmer extension
services available to smallholder farmers; farmer-to-farmer knowledge
dissemination; access to and storage of sufficient good-quality seed and other
inputs; and mechanization, including support for enhancing on-farm systems
for crop intensification and diversification and ensuring that farmers acquire
the necessary knowledge, skills and confidence to adopt improved agronomy
and better risk-management practices.

(b) Subcomponent 1.2. Improved market access and services focuses on
promoting better value addition and post-harvest activities and comprises
facilitating public and private investment through combined funding
instruments, supported by consultation platforms and capacity development
initiatives for rice, vegetables and technology access. For rice, support will be
provided to improve post-harvest activities and value addition. For
vegetables, support will build on existing and emerging production clusters,
following an iterative process to facilitate and develop links between buyers,
producers and service providers. It will prioritize innovation in local value
chains and actively promote development of local private-sector markets. As
with subcomponent 1.1, initiatives will be taken to encourage partnership
with private input suppliers.

(c) Subcomponent 1.3. Improved financial access and use of services is
based on facilitating better access to and leveraging mainstream financial
services. It will include savings, credit and, subsequently, other innovative
rural financial services (e.g. digital financial services and agriculture
microinsurance) by sustainable financial service providers, enabling seasonal
finance needs to be met through inclusive and pro-poor services. The
approach will build on existing structures and will develop partnerships with a
small number of existing financial service providers that demonstrate a clear
social inclusion performance and business strategy in expanding their
smallholder agricultural portfolio, and that have existing, proven financial
service schemes broadly aligned with the project’s objectives and aspirations
for rural financial services.

11. Component 2. Improved irrigation systems infrastructure will focus on
support to rehabilitation or upgrading of primary and secondary irrigation systems
and drainage infrastructure, and will include modernization of these systems for
one or several larger schemes.

(a) Subcomponent 2.1. Preparatory assessments comprises: activities to
provide reliable information regarding water availability in the basin, in
relation to the needs of the irrigation scheme – to be taken into account to
ensure that the scheme has adequate water to meet irrigation requirements;
and participatory rapid rural assessments, pre-design and drafting of overall
scheme intervention plans. Hydrological assessments will also take into
account the possible impacts of climate change.

(b) Subcomponent 2.2. Irrigation systems rehabilitation, upgrading
and/or modernization comprises activities to design and implement civil
works with respect to irrigation and drainage infrastructure. Detailed
engineering designs for civil works will cover primary and secondary irrigation
infrastructure, tertiary irrigation infrastructure and drainage works. To
address the water/food/energy nexus, the project will equip irrigation canals
with hydropower turbines – on a pilot basis – for management by WUAs
where technically, economically and institutionally feasible.

12. Component 3. Improved irrigation systems management will focus on
strengthening irrigation water delivery at the scheme level.



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

4

(a) Subcomponent 3.1. Empowerment of WUAs comprises activities to
facilitate the organization of irrigating farmers into empowered WUAs/WUAFs
capable of investing in and managing tertiary irrigation infrastructure, to
ensure adequate water supply and access to all farmers in the tertiary
irrigation scheme. Specifically, this will support training and capacity-building
of WUAs/WUAFs at the institutional level. Institutional support activities will
establish, reorganize and complete the WUA organizational structures in the
targeted irrigation systems, following government policy and procedure and
introducing the lessons of international experiences. This will also include
legal registration of WUAs/WUAFs, development of by-laws by their members,
appointment of board members and assignment of roles and responsibilities
in agreement with all involved farmers.

(b) Subcomponent 3.2. Improvement of irrigation systems field
management comprises activities to support central, provincial and district
governments in improving the efficiency and effectiveness of irrigation water
management through activities such as: irrigation system performance
assessments; preparation of irrigation management plans and irrigation
service plans; volumetric discharge measurement and water accounting;
improvement of irrigation service performance; needs-based planning and
budgeting; and refurbishment of existing offices, equipment and facilities
within the context of the preparation of O&M. To achieve sustainable
improvement of irrigation system performance, this will include establishment
and start-up assistance to irrigation management units (IMUs) for selected
irrigation schemes under the project.

(c) Subcomponent 3.3. Operationalization of a national asset
management system comprises activities in support of operationalizing
such a system, including aerial surveys – using remote sensing technology –
of primary, secondary, tertiary and other infrastructure, as well as
hydrological and agricultural data. These data will also be used to further
inform hydrological assessments under subcomponent 2.1 and to assist
project management and implementation under subcomponent 4.4.

13. Component 4. Strengthened policy and institutional frameworks for
irrigated agriculture will focus on: (a) strengthening the capacity of government
institutions and staff; and (b) supporting executing and implementing institutions at
national and provincial levels in undertaking overall project supervision. Improving
coordination among the different government institutions will be an important
element of these aspects.

(a) Subcomponent 4.1. Strengthened local-level policy, regulatory and
institutional framework comprises: supporting government line agencies
at provincial and district levels in identifying specific policy issues and
reflecting on how these could be tackled; supporting Badan Perencanaan
Pembangunan Daerah (BAPPEDA), the provincial and district planning agency,
in undertaking analysis and synthesis of knowledge from various sources and
in informing policy dialogue; and supporting both the line agencies and
BAPPEDAs in identifying policy options and actions.

(b) Subcomponent 4.2. Establishment of water resource management
and knowledge centres. Sixteen such centres will be established or
strengthened at the provincial level – including through recruitment of
personnel and procurement of office and training equipment and facilities –
for training on technical and institutional aspects of irrigation planning,
development and management.

(c) Subcomponent 4.3. Improved policy coordination for irrigated
agriculture comprises support for establishing and supporting a knowledge
management centre (KMC) in the National Development Planning Agency



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

5

(BAPPENAS), which will coordinate support for smallholder irrigated
agriculture, promote policy dialogue among domestic stakeholders and
strengthen national and local policy processes. The KMC’s remit would be
related to knowledge management and policy development, enabling the
Government to: foster continuity between development projects and policies
for smallholder irrigated agriculture by drawing out lessons; unify knowledge
from diverse initiatives; promote coordinated approaches to policy dialogue
among domestic stakeholders; and support national and local policy
processes.

(d) Subcomponent 4.4. Project management and implementation support
comprises support to executing and implementing agencies (EA and IAs) at
national and provincial levels in undertaking overall project supervision and
strengthening the planning, implementation and management capacities of
IAs.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

14. The project adopts a menu-based programmatic approach: identifying and
packaging a strategic set of interventions in order to achieve the desired outcomes
and development objectives. Menu items will essentially consist of the
subcomponents and activities attributed to each output.

15. The implementation approach builds on the recently completed Asian Development
Bank (ADB) supported Participatory Irrigation Sector Project. Adjustments have
been made based on lessons learned from ADB’s and IFAD’s project implementation
experiences in Indonesia. These seek to strengthen linkages between agriculture
and the irrigation rehabilitation interventions, to strengthen poverty targeting, and
to respond to the need to expedite project implementation, with a view towards
contributing to national development targets for agriculture and for irrigation
rehabilitation.

B. Organizational framework
16. The National Steering Committee on Water Resources (NSCWR), chaired by the

Deputy Minister of Maritime and Natural Resources, Ministry of National
Development Planning/BAPPENAS, will be responsible for the overall coordination of
the project. The Directorate General of Water Resources (DGWR) in the Ministry of
Public Works and Housing (MoPWH) will be the executing agency. A national project
management unit (NPMU) will be established under the Directorate of Irrigation and
Lowland in DGWR to ensure overall coordination of implementation of the project. A
total of four national project implementation units (NPIUs) will be established: one
in the Directorate of Irrigation and Swamps (DoIS) in DGWR, responsible for
implementation of the irrigation infrastructure systems and related activities; one in
DoIS, responsible for implementation of O&M-related activities; one in the
Directorate General of Regional Development in the Ministry of Home Affairs
(MoHA), responsible for overall guidance of the BAPPEDAs; and one in the Agency
for Agricultural Extension and Human Resources Development (AAEHRD) in the
Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), responsible for implementation of agricultural and
related activities, in cooperation with provincial and district agriculture agencies.
The IFAD grant will be administered by the Ministry of National Development
Planning/BAPPENAS.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

17. Planning. The NPMU, in consultation with the NPIUs, will prepare and submit an
overall annual workplan, showing supporting (general) and subproject activities, to



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

6

ADB and IFAD for review and no objection. In addition, each participating district
and province will prepare an overall work plan and budget.

18. Monitoring and evaluation. Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) will serve three
distinct functions strengthening management, accountability and learning. A project
performance monitoring system will consolidate the M&E functions into a unified
system. Building on lessons learned under the IFAD-supported Coastal Community
Development Project (CCDP), it will comprise both a comprehensive list of
performance indicators at impact, outcome, output and suboutput levels, derived
from the project Design and Monitoring Framework (appendix II), and impact and
post-completion performance data. Data will be disaggregated by component and,
where possible, by district, gender and other dimensions. The indicators used will
include those contributing to IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System
(RIMS). The project will undertake baseline, midterm and impact studies and
conduct annual outcome surveys.

19. Learning. The M&E system will also seek to inform on issues that can improve the
relevance, effectiveness and efficiency of the project. The M&E unit, in collaboration
with the NPMU and other key project stakeholders, will identify specific topics that
need particular analysis – technical, institutional and policy-derived – and will
conduct snapshot studies. For each study topic, a learning plan will be developed to
ensure that the study feeds into a larger process of reflection at the project level
and, where appropriate, beyond.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. The NPMU will be responsible for the overall consolidation

and coordination of project financial reporting and audit. The four NPIUs will be
responsible for financial management of expenditures under the respective project
components and/or activities. The roles and responsibilities of the implementing
entities will be clearly defined in the project implementation manual.

21. Financial management implementation arrangements will be aligned to national
public financial management (PFM) systems, which have been strengthened in
recent years. PFM modernization initiatives include an integrated financial
management information system, consolidation of the Treasury single account,
government accounting and reporting, strengthened audit institutions, accrual
accounting and adoption of international accounting and auditing standards. A
financial management assessment of the project has been prepared in accordance
with IFAD and ADB’s guidelines for financial management of projects. This
assessment finds that the overall project financial management risk is moderate,
and identifies mitigating actions, including strengthening financial management
capacity at all levels (EA, IAs and PIUs) in terms of staff training and technical
assistance, automated accounting systems, and internal and external audits.

22. Flow of funds. Donor funding will flow through three designated accounts
managed by the Ministry of Finance for the IFAD loan, IFAD grant and ADB loan
respectively. Three types of disbursement mechanisms will be adopted for the
project, consisting of: (i) replenishments of both the IFAD and ADB designated
accounts; (ii) reimbursement of prefinanced expenditures by both IFAD and ADB;
and (iii) direct payments.

23. Flow of funds for the project will be determined by the implementation strategies
adopted by IAs. These will consist of a combination of: (i) reimbursement from
Anggaran Pendapatan dan Belanja Negara (the national revenue and budget
agency) funded activities, which would then be passed on to local governments
through the deconcentration mechanism (Dekonsentrasi/Tugas Pembantuan); and
(ii) reimbursement for activities implemented under prefinancing agreements.

24. Audit. Internal audits will be conducted by the internal audit units of IAs, in
accordance with their mandate and annual workplans. As regards external audit



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

7

arrangements, the consolidated project accounts, prepared by the NPMU, will be
audited by the national auditor, in accordance with international standards for
these institutions. Audited project financial statements will be submitted to IFAD
and ADB within six months of the end of each fiscal year, in line with IFAD and ADB
audit guidelines. The audit reports will provide opinions, for IFAD and ADB funding
respectively, on the financial statements, use of designated accounts, statements of
expenditure and financing agreement covenants. The audit report will include a
management letter assessing the project’s internal control framework at diverse
implementing levels and making recommendations for improvement. The resolution
of audit observations will be monitored by the NPMU, the NPIUs and the national
auditor.

25. Procurement. The procurement of goods and works for IFAD financing will be
undertaken in accordance with the borrower/recipient procurement regulations to
the extent they are consistent with IFAD's Procurement Guidelines.

26. Governance. In line with their respective policies, IFAD and ADB will investigate,
directly or through their agents, any violations of the anticorruption policy relating
to the project. All contracts shall include provisions specifying the right of ADB and
IFAD to audit and examine the records and accounts of the EA and all project
contractors, suppliers, consultants and other service providers.

27. In addition, ADB’s accountability mechanism and IFAD's complaints procedure
provide independent processes through which people adversely affected by
ADB- and IFAD-assisted projects can voice and seek resolution of their problems,
as well as report alleged violations of ADB’s and IFAD's operational policies and
procedures.

28. Supervision. Supervision will be undertaken by IFAD in collaboration with ADB. A
formal supervision plan covering the period up to the midterm review will be agreed
upon at project start-up. In addition, IFAD will adopt a continuous supervision and
implementation support approach through the newly opened country office. An
extensive review will be carried out after two years of project implementation.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
29. The project is estimated to cost US$802.4 million, including physical and price

contingencies of US$49.17 million.
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component IFAD loan IFAD grant ADB Borrower Total

1. Increased irrigated agriculture
incomes 97 473 97 473

2. Improved irrigation systems
infrastructure 434 592 434 592

3. Improved irrigation systems
management 1 038 85 448 156 86 642

4. Strengthened policy and institutional
frameworks for irrigated agriculture 1 489 79 960 102 265 183 714

Total project cost 98 511 1 489 600 000 102 421 802 421

Interest during implementation 49 917 49 917

Commitment charges 524 524

Total disbursement 98 511 1 489 600 000 152 862 852 862



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

8

B. Project financing
30. The Government has requested financing of US$100 million from IFAD, consisting

of a loan of US$98.5 million and a grant of US$1.5 million. The IFAD loan and grant
will finance component 1 and some activities under components 3 and 4. The
Government has further requested a loan of US$600 million from ADB’s ordinary
capital resources. The ADB loan will finance components 2, 3 and 4. The
Government contribution to project costs is estimated at US$102.4 million.

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant ADB Borrower Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 362 805 100 362 805
2. Vehicles and equipment 4 663 5 150 10 14 991 3 19 804
3. Consulting services - international 2 709 3 3 798 1 6 374
4. Consulting services - national 18 154 19 361 24 44 586 7 63 231
5. Term staff 5 342 5 5 342
6. Service contract 1 038 1 10 141 2 11 179
7. Workshop, training, socialization 29 014 30 271 18 36 956 6 66 243
8. Survey and studies 777 1 327 22 101 032 17 102 136
9. Institutional capacity-building 13 293 2 13 293
10. Safeguard/land

acquisition/resettlement 1 260 0.2 1 260
11. Incremental administration cost 380 26 11 139 2 102 421 100 113 940
12. Materials 15 297 16 15 297
13. Finance and credit 21 516 22 21 516

Total project cost 98 511 12 1 489 0.2 600 000 75 102 421 13 802 421
Interest during implementation 49 917 100 49 917
Commitment charges 524 100 524

Total disbursement 98 511 12 1 489 0.2 600 000 70 152 862 18 852 862

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
31. Benefits. Benefits would accrue from: (i) improved extension delivery; (ii) use of

improved seed; (iii) adoption of better water management techniques; (iv) access
to mechanization; (v) access to finance; (vi) enhanced access to and more-reliable
irrigation; and (vii) enhanced productivity in agriculture. Yet, in addition to on-farm
investments, higher returns are also generated by other important factors,
including: (i) an improved tertiary irrigation system; (ii) more-functional WUAs;
(iii) improved access to farm roads; and (iv) farmer training in water budgeting and
in financial literacy.

32. Economic analysis. The overall economic internal rate of return (EIRR) of the
project is estimated at 17 per cent for the base case. The net present value of the
net benefit stream, discounted at 10 per cent, is 4,944 billion Indonesian rupiah.
The EIRR was subject to sensitivity analysis to measure the impact variations in key
variables due to unforeseen factors. The results indicate that the most significant of
these risks would be overestimation of the achievable with-project rice yields or a
two-year (or more) delay in achieving project benefits. The former is considered a
low risk, as the yield potential is well known for available rice varieties genetically
superior to the varieties normally used by farmers at present. The latter will only be
a risk if there are delays once the project has started, and mitigation measures are
already being implemented to ensure a timely achievement of project benefits.

D. Sustainability
33. Sustainability of the project’s results is based on: (i) impact of capacity-building

activities on the formation of social and human capital among the identified target



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

9

groups (farmer groups and government officials); (ii) impact on relevant policy
frameworks and compilation of knowledge stock within the Government; (iii) the
demand-driven nature of the intervention; and (iv) linkages built among different
actors within the value chain.

34. Moreover, the project has an explicit scaling-up strategy to enhance the impact and
sustainability of achieved results.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
35. Although this is a very large and geographically dispersed project, its overall

premise is simple. The main risk of lack of support by the Government is reduced,
given the close alignment of project activities with national development priorities.
Already, prior to implementation, stakeholders across government agencies are
collaborating closely in preparing project implementation. The risk of lack of
coordination among stakeholders and limited understanding of project activities is
thus considered manageable. Assessments with regard to risks related to financial
management and procurement have been conducted and mitigation measures
identified. Environmental risks have been identified as manageable. The project
approach includes an additional mechanism to assess and mitigate risks at the
localized, subproject level.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

36. The project design adheres to relevant IFAD policies for microfinance,
private-sector participation, the environment, targeting and gender. The project is
categorized as environmental category B, in accordance with ADB‘s Safeguard
Policy Statement 2009.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
37. The project is set within a number of key government policy documents. The

National Long-Term Development Plan 2005-2025 and the related National
Medium-Term Development Plan 2015-2019 give prominence to: agriculture-sector
development, in particular ensuring food security, self-sufficiency and food
sovereignty through increased domestic production capacity; and the improved
provision of food which is sufficient in quantity and diversity, and which meets the
requirements of food safety, quality and nutrient content at an affordable price. The
project will support implementation of the participating ministries’ strategic plans
and priorities.

38. The project will complement and provide a robust framework for government
expenditure plans: MoPWH will invest almost US$25 billion over the period
2015-2019, including more than US$5 billion for irrigation rehabilitation works. MoA
has allocated US$219 million in 2015 through UPSUS for nationwide investments in
priority areas (i.e. agricultural infrastructure, seed, fertilizer, agricultural machinery
and extension services). Overall investments of almost US$15 billion are foreseen
for 2015-2019, including more than US$3 billion for improvements in agricultural
irrigation infrastructure and almost US$3 billion for improvements in productivity
and production. Both investments are for rice and food crops and are intended to
contribute to achieving food self-sufficiency by 2017. Thus the project enables more
effective and more efficient coordination of public investment in irrigated
agriculture.

Innovations and scaling upC.
39. The project adopts an innovation and scaling-up agenda responding to the

Government’s expectation that externally financed projects offer innovative
solutions that can be scaled up and that they assist learning through
implementation experience and the development of new policies, institutional
arrangements and programmes at the national level. The project will: (i) facilitate



EB 2015/116/R.19/Rev.1

10

piloting of innovations through subprojects, as well as at the overall project
management level; (ii) conduct evaluations or studies to review experiences gained
with the innovations promoted; (iii) analyse evidence, discuss findings with
stakeholders and synthesize conclusions; and (iv) support the scaling up of
successful approaches, methods and technologies – both within the project and
beyond it, through public policies, institutions and practices.

Policy engagementD.
40. In response to the Government’s request for strengthened policy-level support for

irrigated agriculture, the project will focus on strengthening the capacity of
government institutions and staff at national, provincial and district levels to
conduct consultative policy dialogue and design and to implement evidence-based
policies, regulations and strategies for participatory irrigation management and
irrigated smallholder agriculture. It will strengthen the local-level policy and
regulatory framework for supporting smallholder irrigated agriculture, building on
the participatory irrigation principles of the Government and ensuring that these
are operationalized. It will also strengthen the capacity of those institutions
responsible for coordinating irrigation development and delivering services, and will
build farmers’ understanding of their rights and responsibilities under national/local
policies. Moreover, the project will support the establishment and initial operation
of irrigation knowledge and training centres at the provincial level and will establish
a KMC within BAPPENAS to coordinate support for irrigated agriculture, promote
policy dialogue among domestic stakeholders and strengthen national and local
policy processes.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
41. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Indonesia and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is included as
appendix I.

42. The Republic of Indonesia is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

43. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
44. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Indonesia in an amount equivalent to ninety-three million one
hundred and fifty thousand euros (EUR 93,150,000), and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Indonesia in an amount equivalent to one million four hundred and ten
thousand euros (EUR 1,410,000), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President


















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic for the Northern Smallholder
Livestock Commercialization Project: Rural
Financial Services Programme


Lao People’s Democratic Republic

Northern Smallholder Livestock Commercialization
Project: Rural Financial Services Programme

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Lao People's Democratic Republic

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry

Total programme cost: US$19.7 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 7.3 million (equivalent to approximately
US$10.0 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional: 40 years, including a grace period
of 10 years, with a service charge of three fourths of
one per cent (0.75 per cent) per annum

Cofinancier(s): Asian Development Bank (ADB)

Bilateral development partner(s) to be identified

Amount of cofinancing: ADB: US$2.9 million

Bilateral development partner(s) US$1.9 million

Terms of cofinancing: ADB: 1 per cent interest charge for grace period and
thereafter 1.5 per cent

Bilateral development partner(s): Grant

Contribution of borrower: US$4.34 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.6 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

1

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic for the Northern Smallholder Livestock
Commercialization Project: Rural Financial Services Programme, as contained in
paragraph 40.

Proposed loan to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
for the Northern Smallholder Livestock
Commercialization Project: Rural Financial Services
Programme

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Over the past decade, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic has experienced rapid

economic growth and poverty reduction. Although the national poverty rate declined
steadily by 40 per cent over the last 15 years, 26 per cent of the population still lives
below the poverty line. Poverty is predominantly rural, with high concentrations in
remote and mountainous areas adjacent to the north-eastern and eastern borders
with Viet Nam.

2. Agriculture and natural resources accounted for 24.8 per cent of gross domestic
product (GDP) and over 70 per cent of employment in 2014. More than 80 per cent
of the population depends on agriculture for their livelihood, while more than
50 per cent of households are subsistence farmers with annual incomes below
US$300. While GDP grew at 7.6 per cent in 2013, the agricultural sector grew by
just 2.7 per cent due to low productivity and inadequate links to opportunities arising
from rapid growth elsewhere in the economy. The livestock subsector is an
important source of income and store of wealth for rural smallholders, with
89 per cent of smallholders owning one or more types of livestock – buffaloes,
cattle, pigs, goats, poultry or other small livestock.

3. The expanding demand for livestock products in the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic and neighbouring countries is generating new income opportunities for
households in rural areas. The capacity of rural households to benefit from such
demand, however, remains limited. The productivity of traditional livestock
production systems is low and livestock is still primarily kept as a means of storing
wealth. There is a need to improve production methods to reduce costs and improve
off-take if rural livestock production systems are to provide expanded and
sustainable sources of income for smallholders.

4. The Government’s overarching long-term development goal is to graduate from the
status of least-developed country by 2020. The National Socio-Economic
Development Plan (NSEDP) and the National Growth and Poverty Eradication
Strategy are the main policy documents outlining the country’s strategy to eradicate
poverty. Poverty reduction efforts are focused on the 72 poorest districts, which will
benefit from community-driven access-oriented rural development. Ten of the 12
districts selected to benefit under the Northern Smallholder Livestock
Commercialization Project (NSLCP) are high-priority poor districts. IFAD supports the
Government in implementing its eighth NSEDP and, under the country strategic
opportunities programme (COSOP) 2011-2016, pursued the objectives of promoting
economic growth, sustainable livelihoods and food and nutrition security of poor
rural people.



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

2

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. The demand for meat in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic is forecast to increase
significantly over the next decade, as is demand for exports to neighbouring China
and Viet Nam. The Government has set the target of increasing livestock production
from the current 210,000 tons per year to 365,000 tons per year by 2020. The
information available suggests current exports meet less than 10 per cent of
potential demand, while domestic demand is rising at 4.5 per cent per year.

6. Against this backdrop, the Government requested IFAD and the Asian Development
Bank (ADB) to finance a programme supporting the commercialization of livestock
smallholders through the lateral scaling up of the recently completed Northern
Region Sustainable Livelihoods through Livestock Development Project (LDP),
cofinanced by ADB, IFAD and the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation
from June 2007 to March 2014. LDP reached approximately 13,000 smallholders
with the potential advantages of more intensive, commercially oriented livestock
practices. Overall, the LDP initiated a long-term process of modernizing and
commercializing smallholder livestock production. Given the respective organizations’
comparative advantages, IFAD will support improving smallholder livelihoods
through access to rural financial services and strengthened farmers’ groups, while
ADB will invest in critical infrastructure and technical support. The ADB investment
became operational in the first quarter of 2015.

7. The Northern Smallholder Livestock Commercialization Project: Rural Financial
Services Programme (NSLCP-RFSP) supports the Government’s policy of expanding
domestic livestock production through improved productivity and value addition,
including through sanitary measures, to enable commercial smallholder farmers to
compete more effectively in regional markets and in import substitution.
Furthermore, the rural financial services component of LDP showed a high unmet
demand for rural financial services in the programme districts. Microfinance
institutions (MFIs) registered with the Bank of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
(BoL) are expanding in the country, both lending to agriculture and providing
financial management and brokerage services to the rapidly expanding
savings-financed village funds (VFs). Private banks, however, are not yet significant
agriculture-sector financiers. In this environment, the NSLCP-RFSP will adopt a
two-pronged approach: to deliver NSLCP livestock credit at market terms on the
short term; and, on the longer term, to develop a strategy to: (i) build VFs into
sustainable financial institutions able to meet local immediate-term needs for rural
financial service; and (ii) improve the incentive structure for private banks and MFIs
to provide medium-to-long term agricultural rural financial services.

8. The financing for NSLCP-RFSP is in line with the COSOP 2011–2016, which
comprises three strategic objectives: (i) community-based access to and
management of land and natural resources; (ii) access to advisory services and
inputs for sustainable, adaptive and integrated farming systems; and (iii) access to
markets.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
9. Programme area. Programme implementation will focus on approximately 200

villages located in 12 districts in the northern Houapanh, Luang Namtha, Luang
Prabang and Xiengkhouang provinces, where poverty rates range from 28 per cent
to 43 per cent, with rural areas worst off. In each district, priority animal types will
be selected for support with due attention to potential production capacity for
support of market-oriented livestock value chains.

10. Target group. In each district, the programme will work with rural
livestock-farming households that are members of smallholder livestock production



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

3

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

and marketing groups (SLPMGs) to be formed under the programme. The
programme aims to work with a total of 300 SLPMGs in the 12 districts, extending
livestock-production and -marketing support to approximately 5,400 households and
their 32,000 members. Related community-based livestock infrastructure
investments will target an estimated additional 10,000 livestock-owning households
in the programme area. Access to rural financial services through village-based
saving and credit schemes will benefit approximately 20,000 households, including
non-livestock farming households. The programme will tailor its overall technical and
rural financial service support to ensure the inclusion of marginalized and poor
villagers in the programme activities through VFs.

11. The NSLCP will strengthen support for women and ethnic groups through intensive
training programmes. In collaboration with Lao Women’s Union (LWU), the
programme will promote gender equality and women’s participation in
village-development planning, SLPMGs and market-linkage programmes, assisting
women to gain equal access to agricultural support and investment opportunities.
Women’s empowerment and gender mainstreaming will be implemented and
monitored through a gender action plan. Farmer-to-farmer extension programmes to
improve livestock husbandry will specifically target ethnic groups.

B. Programme development objective
12. The goal of the NSLCP-RFSP is to establish a sustainable and scalable rural financial

and technical services model that supports the reduction of rural poverty and
increased livestock productivity. The development objective is to increase livestock
production through expanded financial and technical services.

C. Components/outcomes
13. Within the larger framework of the NSLCP, the IFAD-supported part of the

programme will have two main components:

14. Component 1. Increased productivity of smallholder livestock producers.
This component comprises two subcomponents:

(i) Smallholder livestock production and marketing groups. The
programme will work with 300 existing livestock production groups formed
under LDP that have made good progress along the commercialization
trajectory, to further build their capacities and expand their membership base
to form SLPMGs. SLPMGs will progress beyond the basic production
improvements achieved under LDP to: (i) access input supplies and services
needed for commercial production; (ii) produce higher-quality livestock for
sale at provincial markets; and (iii) market as a producer group. The provision
of services and technical assistance will assist SLPMGs in building their
capacities in livestock production and farm financial management so as to
profitably boost livestock production and income. Working with the Lao
Farmers’ Network, the programme will promote farmer-to-farmer extension.
The programme will identify lead farmers at the village cluster level for further
training in animal husbandry, who will subsequently mentor livestock
production programmes through interested SLPMGs.

(ii) Technology development. Under this subcomponent, four primary activities
will be implemented:

(a) Livestock market studies will evaluate livestock marketing in target
provinces and assess opportunities at the national level for value chain
development and livestock product export.

(b) Forage production will develop selected leguminous forages as profitable
farmer-produced seed crops for free distribution in small amounts to
new households, while also promoting the purchase and distribution of



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

4

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

grass splits to support the vegetative development of productive forage
grasses.

(c) As animal husbandry skills improve, various combinations of technical
and financial services will enable interested SLPMG members to become
livestock-breeding households and procure improved sires to sell
breeding services to villagers.

(d) Land use planning and allocation activities will enable villages to prepare
or update their land management plans to designate resources such as
water sources and suitable land for communal livestock production,
including planting forage and animal housing; where land use titles have
not yet been allocated, the programme will support participatory and
systematic individual and community land use titling.

15. Component 2. Sustainable and scalable rural finance services. This
component comprises three subcomponents to articulate a sequential three-pronged
approach to develop rural financial services.

(i) Financial services to NSLCP beneficiaries. The programme will provide
additional financing to former LDP village livelihood funds for one round of
lending to SLPMG members for viable livestock investments through
amortized loans at market rates. This project-driven credit scheme will be
phased out midterm and replaced by a longer-term sustainable financial
services system established under the programme (see points (ii) and (iii)
below). To support livestock credit delivery, technical assistance will be
provided to establish new guidelines for credit schemes and to empower
district LWUs to responsibly manage livestock development credit to SLPMG
members.

(ii) Networked village funds. The programme, in partnership with the BoL and
a bilateral development partner, will support the development of at least 200
community-based, savings-driven VFs. Such BoL-based schemes have
functioned successfully for more than five years in other provinces. The
programme will develop a systematic approach to expanding and
strengthening VFs, based on the establishment of VF-owned, second-tier
support organizations – Network Support Organizations (NSOs) – at the
provincial level. NSOs operate as management agents for their member VFs,
who also own the NSOs.

(iii) National agriculture-refinancing facility. At the request of the
Government, the programme will provide medium-term assistance to
establish a national agriculture refinancing facility (NARF), to be located within
the BoL. The NARF will receive funding from existing grants held by the
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) as well as from the programme,
which it will apply to refinance a portion of the lending made by commercial
banks and MFIs to targeted agricultural sectors, in line with the national
agriculture development strategy, at rates that would significantly increase
margins for lending institutions. The NARF will thereby provide a powerful
incentive for the expansion of financial services in rural areas. Reflows from
the one-off project credit operations (described under (i) above) will be
channelled into the NARF. In the medium term, the NARF will also capitalize
NSOs (described under (ii)) once they reach a certain level of maturity.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
16. Programme implementation will span five years and support the Government’s policy

of expanding domestic livestock through improved productivity and value addition.
The approach also supports the Government’s sam sang (decentralization) policy,



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

5

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

whereby the province serves as the strategic unit, the district as the planning and
budgetary unit, and the village as the implementing unit. The programme
exemplifies such an approach through bottom-up planning, support to farmer-led
technical service delivery, the establishment of private and communal land use
rights, and the catalysis of private investments in rural and agricultural sectors. The
management structure will build on lessons learned through previous IFAD projects
in the country and the region, avoid parallel management systems and implement
transparent mechanisms for financial management and fund transfers.

B. Organizational framework
17. MAF, through its Department of Livestock and Fisheries, will be the lead agency with

overall responsibility for programme implementation, which it will delegate to district
administrations and to the National Programme Management Office (NPMO), based
in Vientiane. The heads of the Provincial Agriculture and Forestry Office and the
District Agriculture and Forestry Office will serve as programme focal points at the
provincial and district levels, respectively. The National Project Steering Committee
(NPSC), chaired by the MAF Vice-Minister, will be responsible for the overall direction
of the programme. It will provide guidance and oversight to participating provinces
and districts. The NPSC will include representatives of MAF, the Ministry of Finance,
the Ministry of Planning and Investment, the Chamber of Commerce and Industry
and the four provincial Governors/Vice-Governors. Provincial Project Steering
Committees, headed by provincial governors, will be responsible for their respective
annual work plans and budgets (AWPBs) and the financial and physical progress of
the programme.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

18. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. The AWPB will be the key management
tool for planning, monitoring and reporting on the implementation of activities. The
programme will follow a participatory planning approach in the target areas. The
monitoring and evaluation system will: (i) guide implementation through the
assessment and analysis of outputs, outcomes and impacts on poor households’
nutrition and livelihoods; and (ii) provide the Government information to measure
programme contributions to the implementation of MAF national strategies, and data
and analysis for evidence-based policymaking. A management information system
will be established to monitor operational and financial progress alike. Furthermore,
special studies will be undertaken at midterm and upon programme completion to
evaluate: (i) improvements in production and productivity; (ii) the use and benefits
of VFs and NSOs; and (iii) the implementation methodology/approaches adopted by
the programme. Other studies will be undertaken as deemed necessary by the
NPMO.

19. Learning and knowledge management. The programme’s knowledge
management and learning processes will: identify, analyse, document and share
knowledge; support the dissemination of innovations; and identify issues for
advocacy with policymakers, the broader donor community and other relevant
stakeholders. The programme’s learning systems will include: (i) study tours,
discussions and workshops for project and ministry staff at the national and district
levels to promote agricultural and financial services initiatives; and (ii) various
formats for the dissemination of results, including farmer-to-farmer extension.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. Financial management. As custodian of the funds in the programme account, the

NPMO will be responsible for programme financial management. The NPMO will also
be accountable to the Government and to IFAD for the proper use of funds in line
with applicable legal agreements and with contractual arrangements with service
providers. It will provide detailed financial statements of programme operations,
resources and expenditures for each fiscal year in accordance with standards and



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

6

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

procedures acceptable to IFAD. The financial management assessment of the
programme rated the fiduciary risk as high. Mitigation measures will include close
supervision, support and oversight from IFAD through: (i) the installation of
professional accounting software; (ii) the development of a financial manual
integrating controls linked to operations; (iii) biannual supervision and
implementation support missions; and (iv) a control framework integrating periodic
internal audits and independent external audits.

21. Flow of funds. The Government will open a designated account, denominated in
United States dollars, in the BoL to receive and hold the proceeds of the IFAD loan.
The NPMO will open and maintain an operational programme account, denominated
in Laotian kip, which will be funded and replenished as necessary from the
designated account upon NPMO request and in accordance with expenditures
incurred under approved AWPBs. The Ministry of Finance will ensure the timely
transfer of funds required by the NPMO. The NPMO will ensure the compliance of
replenishment requests from implementing agencies and that timely withdrawal
applications are submitted to IFAD with appropriate supporting documentation.

22. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and consulting services financed by
IFAD will be carried out in compliance with the IFAD’s Project Procurement
Guidelines. National procurement procedures, processes and regulations will be
applied to the extent that they are consistent with those Guidelines.

23. Internal control and external audit. Internal control systems will be established
at the NPMO level. An external audit will be carried out in compliance with the
International Standards on Auditing and the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits.
Independent external auditors will be appointed on a timely basis. The audited
financial statements and audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months
following the close of each fiscal year.

24. Governance. The NPMO will prepare a programme framework for investment
transparency and publicity. This framework will include provisions to ensure that
procurement is carried out, whether by the districts or by the NPMO, in accordance
with IFAD rules and specifications. Measures will include: (i) the publication of all
procurements, calls for proposals, contract awards and business partnership details
in local newspapers and at district and provincial offices; (ii) the participation of
end-user representatives in bid assessments; and (iii) prompt communication with
bidders. The framework will also include an internal code of conduct to be signed by
all staff involved in programme implementation.

E. Supervision
25. IFAD and ADB will jointly supervise the programme. Annual supervision missions will

be organized jointly with the Government and include the main implementing
agencies and stakeholders. Implementation support missions will be dispatched on
the basis of specific needs from the Hanoi subregional office. Supervision and
implementation support missions will jointly assess achievements and lessons,
review innovations and advise on corrective actions as required. A midterm review
will be organized by the Government and IFAD after 30 months, in mid-2019, in
close collaboration with relevant stakeholders, including the cofinanciers.

IV. Programme costs, financing, and benefits
A. Programme costs
26. The total cost of the IFAD-supported part of NSLCP-RFSP is estimated at

US$19.7 million, including contingencies, as indicated in table 1. The NSLCP-RFSP is
part of the larger IFAD-ADB financed NSLCP, which has a total value of
US$38.3 million, including US$21 million of ADB financing.



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

7

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

B. Programme financing
27. The IFAD-supported part of the NSLCP will be financed by a highly concessional loan

in the amount of US$10.0 million (50.9 per cent), while ADB will provide
US$2.9 million (14.7 per cent) and the bilateral development partner
US$1.85 million (9.4 per cent). The LDP carry-over in terms of reflows from rural
finance schemes is expected to provide US$2.4 million (12.2 per cent), while the
Government will directly contribute an estimated US$1.91 million (9.7 per cent) and
beneficiaries US$0.6 million (3.1 per cent). While the LDP carry-over is, in principle,
part of the government contribution, this amount is shown separately in table 1 and
table 2 for the convenience of monitoring.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
28. It is estimated that the programme will benefit a minimum of 200 villages,

comprising 20,000 poor smallholder households, through access to livestock
production technology, support for livestock management infrastructure and
improved rural financial services. The direct beneficiaries include households
receiving programme-managed SLPMG livestock credit; borrowers from
NARF-refinanced NSOs/VFs investing in agricultural production; and households and
small agribusinesses borrowing from approved MFIs and commercial banks
refinanced through the NARF. In programme districts, villages and households not
directly targeted by the NSLCP-RFSP will benefit indirectly through the improved
capacities, services, systems and technologies adopted in their communities,
kum bans (village clusters) and districts.



/R
ev.1

8

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan

Bilateral
development

partner ADB loan
LDP

Carry-over Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount %t Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Smallholder Livestock producers adopt productive technology 1 787 30.8 2 796 48.2 600 10.3 619 10.7 5 803
(i) Smallholder livestock production and marketing groups 897 22.9 2 400 61.2 600 15.3 22 0.6 3 919
(ii) Technology development 890 47.3 396 21.0 597 31.7 1 883

2. Farmers access sustainable and scalable rural financial
services 7 756 58.6 1 850 14.0 2 400 18.1 1 238 9.3 13 244
(i). Financial services to SLPMG 3 154 56.6 2 400 43.0 23 0.4 5 577
(ii) Networked village funds in NSLCP districts 3 265 62.1 1 850 35.2 145 2.8 5 260
(ii) Agriculture refinancing facility 1 337 55.5 1070 44.5 2 407

3. Effective project management 456 89.2 55 10.8 512
Interest during implementation 98 100 98

Total 10 000 50.9 1 850 9.4 2 895 14.7 2 400 12.2 600 3.1 1 912 9.7 19 657

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan

Bilateral
development

partner ADB loan
LDP

Carry-over Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

A. Vehicles 32 100 32
B. Credit 3 750 52.4 2 400 33.6 1 000 14.0 7 150
1. Agriculture refinancing facility 1 000 50.0 1 000 50.0 2 000
2. NSLCP financial services 2 750 53.4 2 400 46.6 5 150

C. Operating costs 395 97.7 9 2.3 404
D. Training 1 081 100 1 081
E. Good, Services and Inputs 2 111 63.0 396 11.8 845 25.2 3 352
F. Consultancies 1 679 46.9 1 850 51.7 47 1.3 3 576
G. Equipment and Materials 561 98.0 12 2.0 573
H. Grants and subsidies 343 10.3 2 400 71.8 600 17.9 3 343
I. Salaries 49 100 49
Interest during implementation 98 100 98

Total 10 000 50.9 1 850 9.4 2 895 14.7 2 400 12.2 600 3.1 1 912 9.7 19 657

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/LO

T
/P.2

0
/R

ev.1



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

9

E
B

2
0
1
6
/1

1
9
/LO

T
[C

lick h
ere an

d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

29. The overall economic internal rate of return is 11.9 per cent, against a social
discount rate in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic currently estimated at 6 per
cent. The cost-benefit ratio of 2.16 indicates a return of approximately US$2.16 for
every dollar invested. The sensitivity analysis indicates the internal rate of return to
be robust.

D. Sustainability
30. The NSLCP-RFSP design approach placed central importance on sustainability. In

terms of rural financial services, the programme-implemented livestock credit
scheme will be phased out and reflows channelled into the NARF. In addition, a
significant number or rural finance operations are expected to be conducted through
the strengthened VFs, which, due to their operational mode, tend to reach full
sustainability at very low operational volumes. If successfully implemented under the
NSLCP-RFSP, it will be possible to expand and scale up the VF-support approach,
based on the services of the NSOs, in other parts of the country. As for the NARF,
the refinancing activities would be conducted only with banks and registered MFIs
that have passed due diligence tests and reached full institutional sustainability. The
programme also places emphasis on activities related to land use allocation and
titling, which are imperative for ensuring the sustainability of any investments in
technology and knowledge transfer, and their adoption by livestock farmers. Finally,
the programme will promote the capacity-building of public institutions from the
district to the national levels. Such investments in public capacity will enable the
establishment of a sustainable technical advisory services system.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The main risks identified relate to institutional issues, including: (i) a lack of

technical coordination at the grassroots level; (ii) ineffective inter-institutional
cooperation and dialogue and consequent delays in disbursement for field
implementation; and (iii) a lack of interest in rural expansion among formal banks
and registered MFIs. To mitigate these risks, the programme will: (i) develop a
thorough coordination mechanism in the implementation guidelines; (ii) ensure the
involvement of affected kum bans and farmers’ groups at all steps in the
preparation, implementation and supervision of programme activities; and (iii) raise
awareness regarding value chain financing possibilities.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
32. The programme design is guided by IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025 and the

COSOP 2011-2016 for the Lao People’s Democratic Republic. The programme
complies with IFAD’s policies and strategies on gender equality and women’s
empowerment, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management,
access to land and security of land tenure, and knowledge management. While the
programme’s design and implementation activities may have some environmental
and social impacts on human populations or environmentally significant areas, these
will be small in scale, dispersed, largely site-specific and reversible. In terms of
environmental impact, the programme is classified as Category B.

B. Alignment and harmonization
33. The Programme is consistent with the Government’s development objectives, which

promote the expansion of market-oriented agricultural production. The programme
objectives are consistent with IFAD’s COSOP, with their focus on agriculture and
pro-poor trade, sustainable growth through private sector development, regional
integration and transforming agriculture from subsistence farming into a diversified
commercialized sector.

34. The programme will complement other IFAD, ADB and bilateral initiatives to improve
food security and income in the Greater Mekong subregion, including: (i) the



EB 2016/LOT/P.20/Rev.1

10

E
B

2
0
1
6
/1

1
9
/LO

T
[C

lick h
ere an

d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project; (ii) the Microfinance in
Rural Areas – Access to Finance Programme; (iii) the Land Management and
Decentralized Planning Project; (iv) the planned New Zealand Aid
Programme-financed Lao People’s Democratic Republic Beef Industry and
Veterinary Training Project; and (v) the Core Agricultural Support Project Phase II
(for food safety, linkages to cross-border value chains and livestock management).

C. Innovations and scaling up
35. The establishment of an innovative rural financial services model, at the explicit

request of the Government, is at the core of programme design. The most significant
innovation is the expansion of VFs and NSOs. Establishing new VFs and improving
the functioning of existing community-based operators are important steps forward
for financial inclusion and the provision of financial services in rural areas. The
proposed VF- and NSO-based approach provides an opportunity to test options for
further developing such community-based approaches and to link them more closely
to formal financial sector operations. The programme will support the Government in
developing innovative methods to promote rural and agricultural finance throughout
the country.

D. Policy engagement
36. The Programme will contribute to the analysis of policy issues related to

implementation experiences, in particular in rural finance. It will also foster
stakeholder alliances to generate policy proposals, build capacity for policy
development and promote policy advocacy within national processes. In addition, the
Programme is expected to provide evidence-based inputs to policy discussions on
issues such as the regulatory framework of the livestock subsector, and land use
planning. The Programme will use platforms such as the Agricultural and Rural
Development Sector Working Group to identify policy gaps and raise policy issues
related to implementation experiences.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
37. A financing agreement between Lao People’s Democratic Republic and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

38. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

39. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
40. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in in the amount of seven million three
hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 7,300,000) (equivalent to
approximately US$10.0 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President




















































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of the
Union of Myanmar for the Eastern States
Agribusiness Project

Eastern States Agribusiness Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation

Total project cost: US$65.2 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 20 million (equivalent to approximately US$27.6
million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 1.1 million (equivalent to approximately US$1.5
million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 40 years, including a grace period of 10 years, with a
service charge of three fourths of one per cent (0.75 per
cent) per annum

Cofinancier(s): Export-Import Bank of Korea (KEXIM)1

Amount of cofinancing: US$29.2 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be confirmed

Contribution of borrower: US$4.9 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.0 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD

1 Subject to successful negotiations between the Government of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar and KEXIM.



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

1

11

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendations for the proposed
financing to the Republic of the Union of Myanmar for the Eastern States
Agribusiness Project, as contained in paragraph 57.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of the Union of
Myanmar for the Eastern States Agribusiness Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Emerging from 50 years of isolation, Myanmar has embarked on a comprehensive

path of political and economic reforms. These aim to introduce elements of popular
representation into the political sphere, foster economic growth and inclusive social
development, improve the business environment, attract foreign investment and
reduce poverty.

2. Myanmar is the largest country in South-East Asia, with rich endowments of land
and water, and favourable conditions for agriculture. Its population was estimated
at 51.5 million in 2014, with an annual growth rate of 1 per cent. Some 67 per cent
of the population is rural. Myanmar is ethnically diverse, with eight major ethnic
groups and 135 subgroups.

3. Despite being rich in resources, Myanmar is one of the poorest nations in South-
East Asia. An estimated one third of the population lived below the poverty line in
2005, decreasing to one fourth in 2010. The 2014 Human Development Report
ranked the country 150th among 186 nations rated, with a human development
index of 0.524. In 2013, Myanmar's GDP amounted to US$53 billion, with an annual
growth rate of 6.8 per cent.

4. The agriculture sector constitutes the core of the economy, representing 38 per
cent of GDP and employing about 70 per cent of the working population. There is a
strong association between agriculture and poverty in Myanmar, and there is
significantly greater poverty in rural areas. The incidence of poverty is also greater
among diverse ethnic groups compared with the majority ethnic population.

5. While, in aggregate terms, Myanmar produces a surplus of food, many rural areas
suffer from chronic food insecurity. Disparities exist among and within states and
within communities, where household food insecurity and poverty are closely
linked. Rural poverty is largely a function of lack of resource endowments. Poor
rural people typically consist of landless people and small and marginal farmers,
usually owning less than an acre to up to five acres of land. They lack access to
adequate and nutritious food, as well as to essential non-food items. Many of the
poorest live in isolated hill tracts of ethnic states in the eastern regions. These
states were previously affected by decades of civil conflict that left them isolated
and without development investment.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

6. As requested by the Government, the 2013-2015 PBAS allocation for Myanmar is
being applied to two loan-financed projects to develop scalable models in diverse
agroecological zones. The first, Fostering Agricultural Revitalization in Myanmar,
focuses on creating a sustainable agricultural development model for the central
dry zone. The second, the Eastern States Agribusiness Project (ESAP), focuses on



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

2

22

creating a smallholder agriculture and community agroforestry model for the
upland/highland zone, with potential for scaling up across the eastern states.

7. The project's rational is anchored in IFAD’s mandate of poverty reduction and the
Government's policies to reduce economic and social disparities in rural areas. It is
consistent with the National Comprehensive Development Plan, the Framework for
Economic and Social Reforms, and the Poverty Alleviation and Rural Development
Action Plan. Specifically, the rationale has four dimensions: (i) to create a model at
the state level for post-conflict economic reintegration that lays the foundation for
sustained peace; (ii) to create a model for environmentally sustainable agricultural
modernization in degraded areas; (iii) to forge pathways for supporting poor
communities in the transition from subsistence to commercial agriculture; and
(iv) to better link Myanmar's eastern states with regional markets and technology
flows.

8. The project is consistent with the 2014-2018 country strategic opportunities
programme (COSOP) for Myanmar, which aims to contribute to reducing rural
poverty, specifically of smallholders, landless people, and ethnic and other
marginalized groups. The COSOP defines three strategic objectives for IFAD’s
engagement: (i) empower rural women and men to access agricultural resources,
technologies, services and markets; (ii) create business and employment
opportunities for rural women and men; and (iii) promote the social and economic
empowerment of marginalized groups, particularly ethnic groups. The project
addresses all three strategic objectives.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
9. The project will be implemented in selected areas of Kayin and Shan (South) States

in the eastern part of Myanmar. These two states were affected by decades of civil
conflict and insecurity, which adversely affected their socio-economic development.
With recent peace-building efforts, the two states have been selected for
agribusiness development due to their good security, relatively stable political
context and economic potential.

10. In Kayin State, the project encompasses 12 irrigation schemes covering three
townships (Hpa-an, Hlain Bwe, Kaukarate) and the forest communities of
Thandaunggyi township in the northern mountains, for an aggregate area of some
108,000 acres. In Shan State, the project covers the Ho-Pong irrigation scheme
and its upland watershed areas (Ho-pong, Taunggyi, Siseine townships) as well as
the Hekke irrigation scheme (Taunggyi, Kyauk Talon Gyi townships), for an
aggregate area of about 79,000 acres.

11. The target group consists of poor rural women and men in the project areas.
Specifically, it covers: (i) farmers in irrigated lowlands with marginal, small and
medium-sized landholdings ranging from less than an acre to up to 10 acres each;
(ii) farmers in the rainfed uplands with marginal, small and medium landholdings
ranging from less than an acre to up to 10 acres each; (iii) agroforestry households
in mountainous areas of northern Kayin; and (iv) landless households, which will
have access to job opportunities as agricultural labourers or as workers in
agribusiness. The project will ensure that employment opportunities facilitate the
economic reintegration of returning migrants, ex-combatants and displaced people.

12. An inclusive targeting approach will be applied that encompasses geographical, self-
and direct targeting, and social and gender inclusion. The project is expected to
benefit 62,400 households or 315,000 rural men and women.

B. Project development objective
13. The project will develop an inclusive, sustainable and scalable model for smallholder

agriculture and community agroforestry in the eastern states of Kayin and Shan



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

3

33

(South). It will promote commercialized smallholder agriculture linked to
agribusiness, improve living standards in forest communities, and reverse
environmental degradation in sloping areas. It will generate substantial benefits for
households belonging to the Karen, Shan, Paoh, Intha and Mon ethnic groups.

14. The project’s goal is to improve the economic status of poor rural women and men
in selected areas of Kayin and Shan States. Its objective is to increase the incomes
of smallholder and agroforestry households in these areas in an environmentally
sustainable manner.

C. Components/outcomes
15. The project has two components. Component 1. Strategic investments. This

component will finance strategic investments in land development and community
agroforestry (approximately US$42.6 million, 65 per cent of total project costs).

16. Subcomponent 1.1: Land development. The project will contribute to the
expansion of irrigated areas served by primary and secondary canals, with
complementary investments in land development identified through a participatory
process. The objectives are to improve drainage networks, irrigation water delivery
and field access, and to create opportunities for crop diversification in response to
market signals. A participatory land-use planning approach will be applied, and
free, prior and informed consent will be introduced. Farmer empowerment and
participatory water management will be strengthened in all irrigation works.

17. Subcomponent 1.2: Community agroforestry. Project investment in
agroforestry will improve living conditions, generate economic benefits for forest
and upland villages and reduce encroachment on primary forest. The introduction of
sloping agricultural land technology (SALT) will protect ecosystems, increase soil
water infiltration and reduce soil erosion. In particular, SALT will generate
substantial positive environmental impact by reducing sedimentation in Inle Lake
and the Ho-Pong valley drainage system. Upland and agroforestry activities will be
defined and implemented on the basis of a participatory and culturally sensitive
approach.

18. Component 2. Enabling investments. This component will improve target group
access to knowledge, technology and services, and will maximize the benefits
generated from strategic investments (approximately US$15.7 million, 24 per cent
of total project costs).

19. Subcomponent 2.1: Knowledge and technology. The project will improve
farmer access to the technologies, inputs and services required to improve the
productivity of staple, fodder and high-value crops. It will promote a pluralistic
participatory extension platform in support of smallholder households. A network of
knowledge centres (KCs) will be established to broker service delivery to farm and
forest households through linkages with public institutions and the private sector.
These centres will operate on the basis of: a decentralized and bottom-up
approach; pluralism of actors in service delivery; promotion of public/private
partnerships (PPPs); and a clear market orientation comprising cost recovery and
sustainability.

20. Subcomponent 2.2: Services. Smallholders and entrepreneurs will be provided
access to markets and to adapted and affordable financial products. Contractual
arrangements among farmers and agribusinesses, such as contract farming or
outgrower schemes, will be promoted for commodities with a comparative
advantage, market demand and growth potential. A competitive grant scheme will
attract processors to the project area, and a credit guarantee mechanism will
improve smallholder access to bank financing. Financial inclusion will be promoted
by fostering savings and credit groups and providing financial literacy training.



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

4

44

21. The remaining project financing (US$6.9 million, 11 per cent of total project costs)
is allocated to central project coordination and decentralized project management,
described below.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

22. Based on institutional assessment at the state level, experience in similar contexts
and the country strategy, the ESAP implementation approach is to: (i) strengthen
state-level Ministry of Agriculture and Irrigation (MOAI) departments and other
agencies involved in agricultural and rural development; (ii) increase the
responsibility of state-level MOAI departments in phased implementation of
activities; (iii) establish a small, state-level project implementation office (PIO) in
each state to manage activities; (iv) organize implementation through contracts
with public and private service providers; and (v) implement project activities in
phases.

23. Project activities will be implemented through contracts with service providers such
as ministries/departments, NGOs and the private sector. Service providers will
enter into performance-based contracts, and their performance will be assessed by
project management and by community representatives where applicable.

B. Organizational framework
24. The project's governance framework will consist of: (i) a national project steering

committee composed of representatives of relevant central-level ministries, to
provide policy and strategic guidance; (ii) state project coordination committees
composed of directors of relevant state-level departments and representatives of
community organizations, to oversee project coordination at the state level; and
(iii) village groups, composed of representatives of community organizations,
partner NGOs and service providers, to monitor and ensure effective participation,
poverty targeting and gender mainstreaming.

25. In alignment with the Government's decentralization policy, project management
and implementation are decentralized to the state level. A PIO will be established in
each state – responsible and accountable for state-level management of the project
and achievement of its results. PIOs will be structured around project components
and investments, and will have a certain level of financial autonomy. Their staff will
be recruited on a competitive basis in compliance with IFAD guidelines. PIOs will be
supported by a central project coordination unit (PCU), established in Nay Pyi Taw
for all IFAD-financed projects. The PCU will support PIOs in planning, financial
management, procurement, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E).

C. Planning, M&E, and learning and knowledge management
26. The state-level annual workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs), supplemented by activity

calendars, will be the key planning instruments for the project. They will identify
annual targets and activities, set implementation priorities, forecast procurement
requirements and facilitate the mobilization of staff and financial resources. These
AWP/Bs will be prepared through a consultative approach involving community
organizations, KCs and stakeholders. The planning process will be coordinated with
national planning procedures, as the project budget is being incorporated into the
national budget.

27. The M&E system is designed to offer comprehensive and reliable information for
results-based management. The system will be participatory and decentralized, and
compliant with the Results and Impact Management System (RIMS) framework. It
will have a three-tier structure: (i) output monitoring – focusing on physical and
financial inputs, activities and outputs; (ii) outcome monitoring of the use of
outputs and measurement of benefits at household and community levels; and
(iii) impact assessment – evaluating project impact on target groups. All M&E data,



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

5

55

analysis, and reporting will be disaggregated by gender and ethnic group.
Considering the well-known problems with data availability and quality in Myanmar,
a data acquisition plan for the project area will be developed at the outset of
implementation.

28. The project will use locally adapted RIMS surveys as the main quantitative survey
tools at baseline, midterm and completion. Ad hoc surveys, qualitative case studies
and thematic reviews will be outsourced to independent institutions to verify results
and draw lessons on themes such as: food security, cropping patterns, climate
resilience; small and micro-business sustainability; participatory water
management; and impact on incomes. An external independent third party (such as
a national university or NGO) will be engaged to assess project impact periodically.

29. Learning and knowledge management. The project’s operational experiences
will create valuable knowledge, which will be captured by the PIO and PCU and
used to generate lessons and best practices. Once documented, the project’s model
of upland/highland agricultural development may be scaled up across the eastern
states. The project will share knowledge and experiences with the wider community
of development practitioners across Asia through the IFADAsia knowledge
management portal.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
30. Project financial management arrangements will ensure that: (i) funds are used for

intended purposes efficiently and cost-effectively; (ii) disbursement of funds
facilitates rapid implementation of activities; (iii) funds are well managed and flow
smoothly; (iv) financial statements are prepared in conformity with internationally
recognized accounting standards; (v) a robust flow of reliable information on
project activities facilitates accountability, transparency and disclosure; and
(vi) project resources and assets are safeguarded.

31. As fiduciary risks are high in Myanmar, the project will apply a number of mitigating
measures: (i) installation of professional accounting software; (ii) competitive
recruitment of qualified staff; (iii) preparation of a financial management manual
integrating controls linked to operations; (iv) state-level PIOs with delegated
authority to manage and disburse project resources, and confirmation of PCU
delegated authority; (v) technical assistance and external oversight; (vi) a control
framework integrating periodic internal audits, independent external audits and
social elements; and (vii) a good governance framework to ensure accountability
and transparency.

32. Retroactive financing. As an exception to section 4.08 of the General Conditions
for Agricultural Development Financing, a maximum amount of SDR 100,000 for
otherwise eligible project expenditures incurred after the date of project approval
by the Executive Board and before the entry into force of the financing agreement
will be financed. Such financing will be mainly for the implementation of start-up
activities in respect of expenditures for: (i) capacity-building for PCU/PIO staff and
target groups; (ii) consulting services for studies and field surveys; and (iii) other
consultancy services. Such expenditures are pre-financed by the Government, and
will be reimbursed by IFAD only after the financing agreement has entered into
force and conditions precedent to disbursement have been met.

33. The project will use the imprest fund method in operating the two designated
accounts (for the loan and grant respectively). The Government will ensure that
counterpart funds are contained in the national allocations for MOAI at central and
state levels and that they are released to the project promptly.

34. Flow of funds to the two states will be decentralized. This will strengthen
governance structures while maintaining transparency of activities and central
controls. The bank account signatory powers for state-level expenditures will be set
at a sufficiently senior level. Control of expenditures at the state level will be



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

6

66

maintained by retaining centralization of withdrawal application preparation and
approval, access to state-level accounting data, and consolidation of AWP/Bs and
reporting.

35. External audit will be carried out in compliance with International Standards on
Auditing and IFAD’s Guidelines on Project Audits, and independent external auditors
will be appointed on a timely basis. Audit reports will be furnished to IFAD within
six months of the end of the relevant fiscal year.

36. The PCU will oversee project procurement at central and state levels. The
procurement of goods, works and services will be handled by the state-level PIOs,
with support from the PCU for consolidated or international purchases. Procurement
will be carried out in compliance with the IFAD procurement guidelines and
handbook. Procurement methods, prior review arrangements, cost and time
estimates, and risk mitigation measures will be defined in the letter to the borrower
and reflected in the procurement plan. The project implementation manual will
detail procurement procedures, processes and management arrangements.

E. Supervision
37. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD. A supervision and implementation

support mission will be undertaken annually. MOAI departments at central and
state levels will support and participate in these missions.

38. Supervision will be applied as a continuous process requiring ongoing
communication and engagement with the central Government, state governments,
the PCU and PIOs. It will encompass three functions: (i) fiduciary compliance –
covering legal conditions, financial management, procurement and contracting;
(ii) supervision – focusing on performance, progress towards objectives, activities
and outputs, planning and budgeting, monitoring and reporting, governance and
management, targeting and gender equality; and (iii) implementation support.
Implementation support will incorporate a country programme perspective by:
introducing a broad view of development investments; influencing policy based on
operational experiences; developing systems and institutions for poverty reduction;
facilitating financial and knowledge partnerships; and generating lessons and best
practices.

39. Considering the limited implementation experience in Myanmar, two midterm
reviews (MTRs) will be undertaken, at year two and year four, to assess the
progress, achievements, constraints, emerging impact and likely sustainability of
project activities and to make recommendations and necessary adjustments for the
remaining project periods. MTRs will be carried out jointly by the Government, the
PCU, PIOs and IFAD. At the end of the project, a project completion report will be
prepared by the Government, with support from IFAD.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
40. Total investment and incremental recurrent project costs, including physical and

price contingencies, are estimated at US$65.2 million over the six-year project
implementation period. The exchange rate has been set at 1,000 Myanmar kyats to
one United States dollar (the average rate prevailing at final design), and a
constant purchasing power parity exchange rate is assumed.

B. Project financing
41. The project will be financed by an IFAD loan on highly concessional terms of about

US$27.6 million (42 per cent of total costs), an IFAD grant of about US$1.5 million
(2 per cent), cofinancing of US$29.2 million (45 per cent), a government
contribution of about US$4.9 million (8 per cent), and a beneficiary contribution in
kind of US$2.0 million (3 per cent). The Export-Import Bank of Korea (KEXIM) has



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

7

77

participated in the project design process and has expressed its intention to
cofinance the project.

Table 1
Indicative programme costs by component and financier*
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Borrower /
counterpart IFAD loan IFAD grant Cofinancier Beneficiaries Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount %
A. Strategic investments

1. Land development 3 042.5 4 513.5 - 29 172.5 - 36 728.4 56.3
2. Community agroforestry 134.2 4 457.0 - - 1 243.2 5 834.3 8.9

Subtotal 3 176.6 8 970.5 - 29 172.5 1 243.2 42 562.8 65.3
B. Enabling investments

1. Knowledge and technology 513.7 3 668.5 251.7 - 211.9 4 645.8 7.1
2. Services 113.4 10 292.5 95.0 - 566.4 11 067.3 17.0

Subtotal 627.1 13 961.0 346.7 - 778.3 15 713.1 24.1
C. Project management 1 126.5 4 632.6 1 154.4 - - 6 913.6 10.6

Total project costs 4 930.2 27 564.1 1 501.2 29 172.5 2 021.5 65 189.5 100.0

* Final disbursement categories will be decided during negotiations based on IFAD’s procedures, which will
include a maximum of five cost categories for reasons of efficiency.

Table 2
Indicative programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Borrower/
counterpart IFAD loan IFAD grant Cofinancier Beneficiaries Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Works 3 042.5 7.6 8 798.3 21.9 - - 28 407.6 70.6 - - 40 248.3 61.7
2. Vehicles 716.9 71.0 292.8 29.0 - - - - - - 1 009.7 1.5
3. Equipment and materials 7.1 7.6 86.6 92.4 - - - - - - 93.7 0.1
4. Consultancies 28.9 0.8 1 925.0 53.8 847.1 23.7 764.9 21.4 11.0 0.3 3 577.0 5.5
5. Training 197.9 1.6 2 943.5 64.5 654.1 14.3 - - 767.3 6.0 4 562.8 7.0
6. Goods services and inputs 235.3 6.9 1 945.6 56.8 - - - - 1 243.2 36.3 3 424.0 5.3
7. Matching grants and

associated investments - - 5 155.5 100 - - - - - - 5 155.5 7.9
8. Credit guarantee scheme - - 2 978.3 100 2 978.3 4.6
9. Staff salaries and

allowances 528.4 14.1 3 224.7 85.9 - - - - - - 3 753.1 5.8
10. Operating costs 173.3 44.8 213.9 55.2 - - - - - - 387.2 0.6

Total project costs 4 930.2 7.6 27 564.1 42.3 1 501.2 2.3 29 172.5 44.8 2 021.5 3.1 65 189.5 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
42. The project will directly impact an area of some 187,000 acres, of which

58,000 acres are irrigated, 104,000 are upland rainfed, and 25,000 are forest. It
will provide a range of economic and social benefits to 62,400 households
consisting of 315,000 rural women and men. Projections indicate that incremental
agricultural production in the project area from 2015 to 2021 will have an
estimated value of US$38.2 million at farm gate prices. The acreage cultivated is
expected to increase by 21 per cent, and cropping intensity by 22 per cent. Net
income per acre will increase by 64 per cent, while net income per household will
increase by 100 per cent.

43. The project's financial internal rate of return is estimated at 15.1 per cent. Its
economic internal rate of return is estimated at 13.4 per cent.

D. Sustainability
44. The sustainability of project investments will be fostered through: (i) access to

knowledge – KCs will be low-cost facilities that will eventually operate on a cost-
recovery basis, evolving into PPP ventures in the medium term; (ii) access to
markets – upgraded commodity chains, contract farming and outgrower schemes



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

8

88

will ensure smallholder access to markets sustained through underlying business
relationships; (iii) access to water – irrigation and drainage improvement, combined
with participatory water management, will improve water distribution, and
operation and maintenance; (iv) access to finance – financial inclusion activities will
eventually link smallholders and agroforestry households with the formal financial
sector; and (v) extension services – use of MOAI extension officers trained by the
project will ensure continuity in delivery of services.

45. The project’s exit strategy is to: strengthen public institutions at central and state
levels; rely on a range of institutional service providers for implementation of
activities; foster profitable business relationships between producers and markets;
and improve the capabilities of poor rural women and men.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
46. The key risks identified relate to: (i) insecure land tenure; (ii) political interference

in project management; (iii) poor governance capacity; and (iv) fiduciary risk.
These risks are mitigated by a set of assurances negotiated with the Government,
decentralization to the state level, participation in planning and implementation,
robust fiduciary compliance procedures, capacity-building of relevant institutions at
the state level, and intensive supervision and implementation support by IFAD.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

47. The ESAP is compliant with all relevant IFAD policies, in particular: (i) its targeting
strategy is consistent with the IFAD Targeting Policy approach of focusing on
economically active poor rural women and men; (ii) its investments in rural
economic growth are compliant with the IFAD Rural Finance Policy focus on
promoting inclusive financial systems; (iii) its participatory approach to land
development is consistent with the principles of free, prior and informed consent
and community-driven development stated in the IFAD policies on Improving
Access to Land and Tenure Security and Engagement with Indigenous Peoples;
(iv) its evolving gender mainstreaming strategy is in compliance with the IFAD
Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment; (v) its focus on promoting
PPPs for private-sector development and policy dialogue is in line with the IFAD
Partnership Strategy; and (vi) its environmental impact assessment procedures for
infrastructure investment are aligned with the IFAD Climate Change Strategy for
proper adaptation and mitigation measures.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
48. The project's rational is anchored in IFAD’s mandate of poverty reduction and the

Government's policy on reducing economic and social disparities in rural areas. It is
consistent with Myanmar's National Comprehensive Development Plan, the
Framework for Economic and Social Reforms, and the Poverty Alleviation and Rural
Development Action Plan. It is closely coordinated with the emerging agriculture
sector investments of partners such as the World Bank and the multi-donor
Livelihoods and Food Security Trust Fund (LIFT).

Innovations and scaling upC.
49. The project is the first investment of its kind in the states inhabited primarily by

ethnic groups. It introduces several innovations in its model for sustainable
agricultural development in the upland/highland areas of Myanmar's eastern states.
Key innovations in the Myanmar context include: (i) introduction of a participatory
development approach; (ii) targeted delivery of technologies and services;
(iii) promotion of climate-smart agricultural practices and technologies;
(iv) livelihood diversification, with potential for higher value addition; (v) promotion
of smallholder-driven small and micro-businesses; and (vi) support for adapted
rural finance products and services.



Annex EB 2015/114/R.12/Rev.1

9

99

50. The Government considers the project a model that will eventually be scaled up in
upland/highland areas of Myanmar. The project adopts a modular approach, to the
extent feasible, in which a standard package of investment is designed to expand,
replicate, adapt and sustain successful investments. Through its investment tools
and forward-looking policy support, the project will create the pathways, drivers
and spaces for scaling up.

51. The Italian Development Cooperation has indicated its interest, in principle, in
providing parallel cofinancing to the Government to scale up the ESAP to an
additional eastern state.

Policy engagementD.
52. Policy engagement will take place on two levels. First, the project will contribute to

the analysis of policy issues related to implementation experiences. It will also
foster stakeholder alliances to generate policy proposals, build capacity for policy
development and promote policy advocacy within national processes. Specifically,
the project is expected to provide evidence-based policy advice on agricultural and
rural development across upland areas – especially with regard to ethnic states.
The project will also support dialogue on technology, knowledge resources and
financial services in support of poor farm and landless households.

53. Second, the project will enhance IFAD’s direct policy engagement with the
Government and partners by channelling operational experiences in poverty
reduction to the appropriate policy and strategy discussions through platforms such
as sector working groups. These experiences provide unique opportunities to
identify policy gaps and formulate policy recommendations on issues affecting poor
rural people, and to generate an evidence base to inform policy discussions.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
54. A project financing agreement between the Republic of the Union of Myanmar and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an
annex.

55. The Republic of the Union of Myanmar is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

56. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
57. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms to
the Republic of the Union of Myanmar in an amount equivalent to 20 million
special drawing rights (SDR 20,000,000), approximately US$27.6 million, and
upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with
the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
the Union of Myanmar in an amount equivalent to 1.1 million special drawing
rights (SDR 1,100,000), approximately US$1.5 million, and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Islamic Republic of
Pakistan for the Economic Transformation
Initiative - Gilgit-Baltistan

Islamic Republic of Pakistan

Economic Transformation Initiative - Gilgit-Baltistan

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Islamic Republic of Pakistan

Executing agency: Planning and Development Department, Provincial
Government of Gilgit-Baltistan

Total programme cost: US$120.15 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 48.55 million (equivalent to approximately
US$67 million)1

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional

Cofinancier(s): To be determined

Amount of cofinancing: US$22.98 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be determined

Contribution of borrower: US$23.63 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$6.54 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD

Retroactive financing: For eligible expenditures not exceeding US$0.5 million
incurred between the date of Executive Board approval
and the date of entry into force of the financing
agreement

1 Including US$10 million cancelled, upon request by the Islamic Republic of Pakistan as the borrower, from the
financing for the Southern Punjab Poverty Alleviation Project (approved by the Executive Board at its 101st session, EB
2010/101/R.27/Rev.1). The proposed recommitment of the funds cancelled as such is in compliance with the rules and
procedures approved by the Executive Board in “Revision of IFAD approach to use of cancellation of approved loans
and/or grants” at its 111th session (EB 2014/111/R.12/Rev.1).



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for the Economic Transformation Initiative –
Gilgit-Baltistan, as contained in paragraph 43.

Proposed loan to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan for the
Economic Transformation Initiative – Gilgit-Baltistan

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Pakistan has a total land area of 769,095 square kilometres. The estimated

population in 2013 was 184 million,2 of whom over 60 per cent live in rural areas.
In 2014, nominal GDP was an estimated US$ 246.6 billion and per capita GDP was
US$1,275.3 The services sector contributes the largest share to GDP – 53 per cent
– while agriculture and industry contribute 21 per cent and 24 per cent
respectively.

2. Pakistan is a relatively “young” country with over 55 per cent of the population
below the age of 25 and over 35 per cent between 25 and 54 years. Considerable
gender disparities exist on account of socio-economic, political and health factors,
and Pakistan is ranked 141st among 142 countries evaluated by the World
Economic Forum’s Global Gender Gap Index in 2014. The adult literacy rate is 56
per cent but there are huge variations between the urban and rural population and
across regions. The unemployment rate is 6.7 per cent.4

3. The official poverty line in Pakistan is calorie-based and is defined as per capita
food and non-food expenditures per month to support food consumption equal to
2,350 calories per adult per day.5 A report based on the Household Income and
Expenditure Survey (HIES) of 2011 calculates the overall incidence of poverty to be
36.55 per cent, with rural poverty standing at 37.08 per cent and urban at 35.49
per cent.6 Poverty in remote and geographically challenging areas like Gilgit-
Baltistan is largely driven by the small size of landholdings, poor access to
markets, lack of access to credit, inputs and support services, limited off-farm
employment opportunities, and policy and institutional constraints.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

4. The Economic Transformation Initiative – Gilgit-Baltistan (ETI-GB) will directly
support the Government’s second poverty reduction strategy paper (2010), which
includes agriculture as one of the nine core pillars and which places special
emphasis on rural finance and on support for agriculture and small farmers,
microenterprises and small businesses, rural infrastructure, women’s development
and education as important means of poverty reduction.

2 Pakistan Bureau of Statistics, 2013.
3 Economist Intelligence Unit Report, 2014.
4 Pakistan Economic Survey, 2013-14, Finance Division, Government of Pakistan.
5 Ibid.
6 Haroon Jamal, Pakistan Poverty Statistics: Estimates for 2011, Research Report No.84.



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

5. The ETI-GB is also aligned with IFAD’s country strategic opportunities programme
(COSOP) for 2010-2015 , in which Gilgit-Baltistan was prioritized in view of its
comparative deprivation and higher incidence of poverty and the earlier success of
the IFAD-funded Northern Areas Development Programme in improving the
livelihoods of the hard-to-reach poor in Gilgit-Baltistan.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
6. Gilgit-Baltistan is a highly mountainous and remote region in northern Pakistan

covering 72,500 square kilometres, with a population of about 1.3 million. A
distinctive feature of the region is that over 90 per cent of the inhabitants own
some agricultural land, as compared to 52 per cent in rest of the country. However,
the per capita holding is very small at 0.6-0.8 acres. Small farm sizes, long harsh
winters, mountainous terrain and other physical challenges result in consumption
levels that are lower than the national average. Dietary diversity is the poorest in
the country, and the incidence of stunting among children is estimated at an
alarming 36 per cent. A survey by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO) in 2014 registers only 26 per cent of the population as food-
secure, 41 per cent as moderately food-insecure and 32 per cent as highly food-
insecure. The adult literacy rate is low, at 36 per cent, and the poverty incidence is
29 per cent as compared to 21 per cent for Pakistan overall.

7. Over 90 per cent of the region’s population is engaged in agriculture; therefore the
sector has a very important role for growth and poverty reduction. Traditionally,
apricot has been the most commonly produced food item in the region and this
continues to be the case. To capitalize on seasonal and elevation advantages, there
has been a move towards production of other high-value cash crops like fruits and
vegetables. Potato is the leading crop after apricots in terms of cultivated area and
production.

8. Smallholder farming households engaged in apricot and potato production with an
average landholding of less than one hectare (ha) will be the primary target group.
Other beneficiaries will include small-scale processors, trading and export
cooperatives, people engaged in value adding activities, input suppliers and
transporters. Gender will be mainstreamed in all aspects of the ETI-GB and youth
and women will be specifically targeted in skill development for relevant income
generation opportunities. The entry point for the initiative will be organized village
producers’ groups and marketing associations. In organizing these groups and
associations, the ETI-GB will build on the existing social capital generated by the
community organizations organized under other programmes in the region since
1982. An estimated 100,000 smallholder households, including women and youth,
will benefit directly from value chain and irrigation development activities. In
addition, about 100 local entrepreneurs will be assisted in scaling up their services
for different segments of value chains. About 10,000 persons will draw indirect
benefits from the upgrading of farm-to-market roads, extension, research and
other investments.

B. Development objective
9. The development objective is to increase agricultural incomes and employment for

at least 100,000 rural households in Gilgit-Baltistan region, as part of the overall
goal to improve incomes and reduce poverty and malnutrition in the region.

C. Components/outcomes
10. The seven-year operation will comprise of three mutually reinforcing components:

productive infrastructure; value chain development; and programme management
and policy support. These components will deliver five key outcomes: (i) 100,000
households increase their production, productivity and sales in key agricultural
commodities; (ii) a sustainable and community-driven development approach is



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

introduced, which is pro-poor and youth-, gender- and nutrition-sensitive; (iii) agri-
business actors invest in local production, processing and value addition to improve
marketing of local food products; (iv) government and private agricultural services
are sustainably improved and outreach expanded; and (5) the Government
formulates and enforces pro-poor agriculture policies.

11. The productive infrastructure component consists of two interlinked
subcomponents that will be underpinned by community mobilization and planning
activities in the four poorest districts, with the support of a competitively selected
social mobilization partner. These are, first, an irrigation subcomponent to scale up
the tried and tested community-based irrigation development approach, adding
50,000 acres of new irrigated land and providing an average of one acre of
irrigated land to participating households, including women-headed and landless
households. Participating households will also receive support in developing the
land. Second, a farm-to-market roads subcomponent will link existing production
areas and newly developed irrigated areas to main valley roads and trunk roads.
This will be achieved by upgrading 400 km of existing pony tracks to a standard
that allows use by all-terrain vehicles, and upgrading roads currently fit solely for
all-terrain vehicles to a standard that allows for truck transportation.

12. The value chain development component will be driven by a commercial and
market-centered approach whereby the initiative will identify priority valleys in
each of seven districts based on criteria that will include total population, number
of poor households, total production of priority crop, total cropped area, area
available for irrigation development and farm-to-market road needs. Coverage may
be expanded from the third year depending on progress and results. Within a
valley, interventions will start with villages with existing community organizations
that can be consolidated into larger village producer groups (VPGs). These
producer groups will provide the foundation for gradual expansion to all villages in
the valley and the organization of valley producers’ associations (VPAs).

13. The component will facilitate VPA engagement with private actors and other
partners. Contracts between VPAs and their purchasing partners will drive the
business plans of producers’ associations and the support from programme
implementing agencies. In particular, through its value chain technical assistance
team, the initiative will assist producers’ associations, processors and related
service providers in developing business plans and marketing strategies, increasing
product volume at an agreed quality standard, and accessing capital for
development to realize the full potential of their products. Where justified, capital
investments will be complemented by a value chain development fund using a
matching grants mechanism. The initiative will also build the capacity of
government extension and research agencies to effectively provide services to
VPGs and VPAs. Finally, the component will assist the Government in formulating
pro-poor policies and regulations for land records and titling, irrigation water usage
and management, road operation and maintenance, and developing effective
models for extension and research services.

14. The programme management and policy support component will put in place an
effective management and coordination system led by a steering committee
headed by a chief secretary of Gilgit-Balistan. A programme coordination unit
(PCU) will be established and will operate as an autonomous institution under the
guidance of the steering committee, and will be responsible for programme
planning and budgeting, coordination, monitoring, procurement and annual audits,
as well as management of the value chain development fund. The PCU will also
assist government departments with policy development and implementation. The
PCU will ensure that gender, youth, environment, knowledge management and
communication considerations are integrated into all aspects of programme
management and implementation.



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

15. The ETI-GB’s approach is founded on expanding the crop area, improving per-
household land holdings, and modernizing agricultural practices, thereby
transforming the rural economy from deficit/subsistence agriculture to commercial
production with marketable surpluses and more specialized, high-value agriculture
that is responsive to market demands and appropriate for the region’s comparative
advantages. A participatory and community-centered approach to land and water
development will be followed, consistent with the existing traditional practices and
community-based systems in Gilgit-Baltistan. Once a scheme is selected in
accordance with the initiative’s results-based criteria, the social mobilization
partner and implementing agency staff will involve selected communities in
decisions on terms and conditions that relate to them; the implementing agency’s
roles and responsibilities; land ownership; water availability and ownership;
equitable distribution of developed land; identification of beneficiaries including
women-headed and landless households; irrigation scheme implementation
strategy and timelines, etc. Before construction is initiated, a water users’
association, representative of all the beneficiaries, will be established to engage
with the implementing agency, the social mobilization partner and (where one is
required) the contractor. The initiative will also invest in training and equipping 40
youth construction groups for irrigation schemes, to be engaged by communities/
contractors for construction works.

16. Complementing the increase in production, the initiative will support a holistic and
demand-driven approach to value chain development (initially for apricot and
potato; subsequently, other promising products may be pursued). The entry point
for the value chain support will be the organized groups of farmers at village level,
with due regard for women and youth. Organizing smallholder farmers into
producers’ groups and formulating value chain development plans will be the key
elements to address aggregation, quality and marketing challenges. This approach
will involve education, capacity-building and networking of key stakeholders along
the entire value chain, backed by enabling policy support. At the core of this
approach will be a partnership brokerage model, whereby producers and farmers,
public services and private actors will be linked in mutually responsible
partnerships. The strategy is expected to develop capacity and networks for
sustainable expansion of production and marketable surpluses, resulting in
increased incomes and poverty reduction.

17. The initiative will actively engage existing and newly formed women producers’
groups within the target valleys to ascertain women’s priorities in terms of value
chain development, irrigation development and social development. Apart from
actively encouraging and creating opportunities for participation in VPGs, the
initiative will establish 20 women producers’ groups. Suitable opportunities for
women in the local socio-cultural setting will also be identified, such as grading,
packaging, polishing, processing, and women will receive training for such jobs.
Women-centered value chain activities will be another area of focus, including milk
marketing groups and apricot by-product processing. The initiative will introduce
labour-saving devices/equipment for women in order to address the constraints
that result from their disproportionate burden of harvesting, post-harvest shelling,
processing, drying of products, etc. To complement the anticipated effects of
improved infrastructure and higher incomes on nutrition, the ETI-GB shall also
provide training in nutrition to participating households.

B. Organizational framework
18. While the Government of Pakistan’s Economic Affairs Division will be the main

coordinating agency for IFAD financing, the Planning and Development Department
of the provincial government of Gilgit-Baltistan will be the lead executing agency,



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

overseeing implementation through an empowered and autonomous PCU.
Implementation will follow a hybrid model where different components/activities
will be implemented by different public agencies, NGOs and private-sector service
providers, coordinated by the PCU.

19. Subregional coordination units will be established in each of the three regions, i.e.
Gilgit, Diamer and Baltistan. These units will be responsible for planning,
coordination and monitoring of activities in the target valleys and villages in
collaboration with the social mobilization partner, the value chain technical
assistance team and line departments. The main implementing partners will be
(i) social mobilization partners/NGOs, competitively selected; (ii) a value chain
technical assistance team; and (iii) a range of private-sector partners including
local entrepreneurs, apricot processors and exporters, corporate and commercial
buyers of seed and table potato, input supply companies; and (iv) around 220
VPGs (20 of which will be women’s associations), 20 VPAs and four to five regional
producers’ associations.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

20. The annual workplan and budget (AWPB) represents the key planning document for
the initiative. The plan’s format will follow the logical framework, including clearly
spelled out monitoring indicators that can be easily measured and reported. The
overall responsibility for monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities will lie with the
PCU. The planning, monitoring and evaluation (PME) system will be finalized and
made operational, in consultation with all implementing partners, within the first
six months of start-up. The PME system will be part of an overall information,
knowledge management and communication system that will provide timely and
accurate information on implementation progress and feedback for management
decision-making. A baseline survey will be conducted, preferably before start-up,
but at the latest by the end of the third month of implementation to establish
benchmarks based on the logical framework/Results and Impact Management
System (RIMS) related to outcomes and results vis-à-vis beneficiaries. Indicators
will be disaggregated by gender and socio-economic status to the extent possible
to allow for a proper assessment of whether the target beneficiaries are being
reached.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
21. An assessment of the financial management system was carried out to verify

compliance with IFAD’s requirements in terms of fiduciary risk. This risk,
considered high due to the remote location and weak capacity at the decentralized
level, is deemed mitigated to “medium’’ by a set of measures. These include
recruitment of qualified financial staff under performance-based contracts;
quarterly financial reporting; issuance of payments to implementing partners based
on certified statements of expenditure subject to internal and external audit; and
regular joint monitoring of ETI-GB accounts by the PCU, IFAD, the Government of
Gilgit-Baltistan, each within the context of its remit.

22. The PCU will be responsible for financial management and for coordinating and
consolidating all financial reports from implementing partners. The PCU will
maintain a full set of accounts in accordance with IFAD’s requirements and
internationally accepted accounting standards.

23. The annual external audit of expenditures will be carried out by the Auditor-
General of Pakistan, whose role includes the audit of all public resources. These
audit reports will be made available within six months of the close of financial year,
in line with IFAD’s guidelines.



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

24. Internal audit services will be provided by a specialized private firm in the first two
years of implementation, with reports made available to the PCU, IFAD and the
Government of Gilgit-Baltistan.

25. Budgeting. AWPBs will be prepared by the PCU in collaboration with the
implementing agencies, for the approval of the programme steering committee and
IFAD.

26. Flow of funds. A designated account will be opened in the State Bank of Pakistan
for receipt of loan proceeds, with a sub-account in Pakistani rupees. A PCU-
operated programme account will receive funds from the sub-account in order to
meet the PCU’s procurement and implementation obligations. Each of the PCUs and
partner agencies will open dedicated sub-accounts for the receipt of funds against
agreed AWPBs, periodic expenditure statements and expenditure returns. All fund-
flows will be based on the imprest account modality.

27. Procurement. The PCU will be responsible and accountable for procurement of
goods, works and consultancy services, which will be carried out in accordance with
IFAD’s Procurement Guidelines and Procurement Handbook (2010). Procurement
will follow procurement plans approved by IFAD. Specific procurement methods,
prior review arrangements, estimated costs and time frames, and risk mitigation
measures will be defined in the letter to the borrower and reflected in the
procurement plan. The programme implementation manual will detail procurement
procedures, processes and management arrangements.

E. Supervision
28. Supervision will be carried out directly by IFAD, in collaboration with the

Government and the cofinanciers. The supervision plan will include two supervision
missions annually in the first two years. Additional implementation support
missions will be organized by the IFAD country office as needed. Supervision and
implementation support will encompass: (i) fiduciary compliance with attention to
legal conditions, financial management, disbursement, procurement and
contracting; (ii) implementation performance, progress towards objectives,
investments and outputs, governance and management, targeting and gender
mainstreaming; and (iii) implementation support to provide guidance and
assistance. Implementation support will incorporate a country programme
perspective by introducing a broad view of development investments, influencing
policy and practices based on operational experiences, developing systems and
institutions for poverty reduction, facilitating financial and knowledge partnerships,
and generating lessons and best practices.

IV. Costs, financing, benefits
A. Costs
29. The total cost of the initiative, including price contingencies (16 per cent) and

physical contingencies (3 per cent), is estimated at US$120 million. The foreign
exchange component is estimated at US$8 million.



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Table 1
Component cost summary

B. Financing
30. Total costs are estimated at US$120 million. Of this, the Government will

contribute US$24 million (20 per cent) to finance taxes, salaries, operating costs
and certain other expenditures. IFAD will provide highly concessional financing
equivalent to US$67 million and the beneficiaries an estimated US$7 million.
Several donors have expressed an interest in cofinancing the initiative.
Negotiations are currently ongoing to fund the remaining financing gap of US$23
million.
Table 2
Costs by expenditure category and financier
(Millions of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiary
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

Investment cost
1. Civil works 35.03 50.7 13.29 19.2 6.54 9.5 14.26 20.6 69.12
2. Equipment and materials 0.38 60.0 0.14 23.0 - - 0.11 17.0 0.63
3. Trainings 3.67 50.9 1.39 19.2 - - 2.16 29.9 7.22
4. Vehicles 0.25 32.5 0.09 12.0 - - 0.42 55.5 0.76
5. Grants and subsidies 16.28 81.0 3.82 19.0 - - - - 20.10
6. Consultancy 0.19 52.0 0.08 23.0 - - 0.09 25.0 0.36
7. Technical assistance 0.95 51.0 0.35 19.0 - - 0.56 30.0 1.87

Total investment cost 56.76 19.17 6.54 17.60 100.06
Recurrent cost
8. Salaries and allowances 6.51 51.0 2.43 19.0 - - 3.83 30.0 12.77
9. Operating costs 3.73 51.0 1.39 19.0 - - 2.19 30.0 7.32

Total recurrent cost 10.25 3.82 - 6.03 20.09
Total 67.00 55.8 22.98 19.1 6.54 5.4 23.63 19.7 120.15

31. Retroactive financing. An exception to the IFAD General Conditions is foreseen
to allow retroactive financing of eligible expenditures for certain activities before
the financing agreement enters into force. Such expenses will be reimbursable by
IFAD when the financing becomes disbursable. The exact activities and amounts to
be considered eligible for retroactive financing include limited operating costs; the

(Pak Rs '000) (US$ Million)
% % Total % % Total

Foreign Base Foreign Base
Local Foreign Total Exchange Costs Local Foreign Total Exchange Costs

A. Productive Infrastructure
1. Irrigation & Land Development 4 112 473 434 811 4 547 284 10 44 40.12 4.24 44.36 10 44
2. Farm to Market Roads 1 576 450 174 506 1 750 956 10 17 15.38 1.70 17.08 10 17

Subtotal Productive Infrastructure 5 688 923 609 317 6 298 241 10 61 55.50 5.94 61.45 10 61
B. Value Chain Development

1. Vaue Chain Fund 1 986 966 92 570 2 079 535 4 20 19.39 0.90 20.29 4 20
2. Social Mobilization 398 893 12 337 411 230 3 4 3.89 0.12 4.01 3 4
3. Agri Extension 210 673 7 580 218 253 3 2 2.06 0.07 2.13 3 2
4. Agri Research 262 382 13 415 275 797 5 3 2.56 0.13 2.69 5 3
5. Land Titling & Record system 214 861 3 208 218 069 1 2 2.10 0.03 2.13 1 2

Subtotal Value Chain Development 3 073 774 129 110 3 202 884 4 31 29.99 1.26 31.25 4 31
C. Programme Coordination Unit 830 692 22 733 853 425 3 8 8.10 0.22 8.33 3 8
Total BASELINE COSTS 9 593 389 761 161 10 354 550 7 100 93.59 7.43 101.02 7 100

Physical Contingencies 297 229 30 028 327 256 9 3 2.90 0.29 3.19 9 3
Price Contingencies 2 118 263 56 082 2 174 346 3 21 15.74 0.20 15.94 1 16

Total PROJECT COSTS 12 008 881 847 271 12 856 152 7 124 112.23 7.92 120.15 7 119



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

cost of the recruitment process and key equipment; the cost of installing
accounting software and preparing a finance manual; and the costs of carrying out
baseline surveys and recruiting a service provider for social mobilization. The
amount of retroactive financing will be determined during negotiations and will not
exceed US$500,000. The Government of Pakistan agrees to make provision for this
financing initially and will be reimbursed for all eligible expenditures from IFAD
financing. The effective date for the retroactive financing will be the date of the
Executive Board’s approval of the financing.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
32. About 100,000 smallholder households, landless households with unemployed

youth, and women-headed households will benefit directly from the ETI-GB
interventions. Another 10,000 smallholders, daily wage workers, artisans, masons,
etc. will also derive direct and indirect benefits from the interventions. Around 100
people involved in processing, adding value and providing other services along the
value chain will also benefit. The main benefits will be derived from:

(a) An additional 50,000 acres of newly irrigated land, increasing the local
irrigated area by around 30 per cent;

(b) The upgrading of 400 km of roads, which will reduce transportation costs and
enable farmers to transport bigger quantities of better quality;

(c) The injection of about US$25 million into the rural economy through labour
payments for irrigation development, of which about US$23 million will be
recovered and reinvested in the same villages for socio-economic
development, in addition to employment generated in upgrading roads and
food processing;

(d) The provision of a range of capacity-building, local processing, storage and
value addition facilities in support of 220 village producers’ associations;

(e) Sustainable, market-oriented improvements in potato seeds and fruit plant
production, processing and marketing systems;

(f) Strengthening of agriculture extension and agriculture research, and
capacity-building of the Water Management Directorate, Public Works
Department for better service delivery, commensurate with the status of a
provincial agency; and

(g) Policy formulation and reform in critical areas of water management, road
O&M, and land records and titling to ensure improved service delivery, better
governance and sustainability.

D. Sustainability
33. Sustainability will be promoted by engaging community-based groups and

organizations in all activities; upgrading existing systems, practices and structures
already present in the region; achieving scale efficiencies; and investing in
improving access and reducing the high transaction costs prevailing in this remote
region; and generating a commercial basis for future revenue generation by local
governments. Complementary features aimed at strengthening prospects for
sustainability include: (i) emphasizing creation of independent commercial win-win
relationships between the producers and private-sector buyers; (ii) developing
private local processing and value addition industry to create alternative avenues
for marketing of products; and (iii) strengthening the enabling environment
through support to development of local policy and regulatory systems.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
34. Security is a key area of concern for IFAD’s country programme in Pakistan. By

providing an inclusive and expansive development initiative that benefits rural
communities across the region, the ETI-GB is expected to mitigate possible ethnic,



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

religious or tribal tensions. Moreover, as the target area is of strategic importance
for the Pakistan-China economic corridor and for the national water and power
supply, both the federal Government and the provincial government of Gilgit-
Baltistan are placing significant emphasis on ensuring adequate security personnel
to maintain law and order in the area.

35. As this will be the largest development initiative to date in Gilgit-Baltistan, the
capacity of a relatively young provincial government to implement such a large-
scale intervention is another area of risk. The region has only recently been
granted provincial status, and its institutional capacities may still not be up to the
level needed to effectively implement a large development operation. The design
has therefore made provisions for capacity-building of Government services,
competitive packages for key programme staff to be recruited from the private
sector and engagement of experienced NGOs as service providers for field
implementation.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

36. The initiative is in line with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015. The
activities, implementation arrangements and M&E system have been designed in
compliance with the IFAD Policy on Targeting, and in line with the approaches
outlined in the Framework for Gender Mainstreaming in Programme Management
Department (PMD) Operations. The initiative is consistent with the IFAD Private-
Sector Development and Partnership Strategy. Management and operation of the
proposed value chain development fund are aligned with the IFAD Rural Finance
Policy and the IFAD decision tools for rural finance. A detailed environmental
assessment has been undertaken, which determined that the intervention is
aligned with both the IFAD Climate Change Strategy and the Environment and
Natural Resource Management Policy. The assessment confirmed that the water
sources that would be tapped for irrigation are not at threat; and that the
incremental effect of additional water use is negligible. Although some scientific
projections expect overall faster glacial melt in the Himalayas, studies specific to
the Karakoram region (where this programme is located) find that glaciers are
expanding due to different climatic phenomena as compared to the western
Himalayas. The ETI-GB’s environmental classification is Category B.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
37. IFAD will coordinate activities closely with other donor agencies active at present or

in the recent past in the area and will also pursue possibilities of cofinancing from
such sources as Italy, the United States Agency for International Development, the
Japanese International Cooperation Agency and the World Food Programme (WFP).
The design has already benefited from lessons learned in the past and ongoing
programmes of these agencies. IFAD is also working in partnership with WFP to
carry out hazard mapping of the target area and related communication
infrastructure. The possibilities of extending WFP’s school feeding programme and
food-for-work programme to the ETI-GB target area are being discussed with the
WFP country office.

Innovations and scaling upC.
38. Attempts will be made to introduce several innovative aspects to the target area:

(a) Mutually responsible commercial relationships between the private/corporate
sector and groups of smallholder farmers that address the quality and volume
concerns of the buyers and price, market predictability and trust concerns of
the sellers;

(b) Instead of following the traditional 20 per cent community contribution
approach, the ETI-GB will sponsor construction of water schemes and land



EB 2015/114/R.14/Rev.1

10

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

development at full cost, thereby injecting about US$30 million into the local
rural economy in the shape of wages. Benefiting households will be required
to pay back 50 per cent of these costs, but over three crop seasons and into
a community account that would be used for additional infrastructure, value
chain facilities, and social development needs as per agreed village
development plans;

(c) A value chain development fund, operating on a matching grant basis,
covering the full range of products and entire region;

(d) Piloting of cost-effective water-lifting systems along main rivers with the
potential to add thousands of additional acres to agriculture production
system.

Policy engagementD.
39. Policy formulation support will be provided to the Government in relation to value

chain development and priority areas for investments. These include land
settlement and titling, irrigation water policy, road O&M policy, seed and product
certification and quality certification. The IFAD Country Office in Islamabad will
facilitate cross-fertilization between the proposed initiative and other IFAD-funded
projects in the country in these policy areas. In particular, the IFAD-funded
Livestock and Access to Markets Project in Punjab incorporates a value chain
approach that also seeks to engage with government policies, allowing IFAD to
feed bottom-up, pro-poor perspectives into national policy dialogue processes in
areas of key concern for rural poverty reduction in the country.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
40. A financing agreement between the Islamic Republic of Pakistan and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

41. The Islamic Republic of Pakistan is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

42. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
43. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on highly concessional terms
to the Islamic Republic of Pakistan in an amount equivalent to forty-eight
million five hundred fifty thousand special drawing rights (SDR 48,550,000),
and upon such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance
with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President























































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Republic of the
Philippines for the Convergence on Value
Chain Enhancement for Rural Growth and
Empowerment Project (CONVERGE)

Republic of the Philippines

Convergence on Value Chain Enhancement for Rural
Growth and Empowerment Project (CONVERGE)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of the Philippines

Executing agency: Department of Agrarian Reform

Total project cost: US$52.53 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 22.8 million (equivalent to approximately
US$25.01 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 15-18 years, including a
grace period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum
equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest
rate

Contribution of borrower: US$9.59 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$17.93 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/115/R.13

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of the Philippines for the Convergence on Value Chain
Enhancement for Rural Growth and Empowerment Project (CONVERGE), as
contained in paragraph 37.

Proposed loan to the Republic of the Philippines for the
Convergence on Value Chain Enhancement for Rural
Growth and Empowerment Project (CONVERGE)
I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. In 2009 the population was 92.2 million and growing at 2.04 per cent annually. In

2010, gross national income per capita was US$4,002 (in 2008 dollars). Since 1981
GDP growth has averaged 3.1 per cent per annum, but only 2.3 per cent per
annum from 2001 to 2010. Over the period 2004-2010, the headline inflation rate
averaged 5.6 per cent. The Human Development Index of 0.638 in 2010 ranked
the country 97th among 169 countries, whereas in 1998 it was 0.744, which shows
that, over those 12 years, development efforts were unable to improve the human
development status. The gender development index decreased from 0.768 in 2005
to 0.742 in 2008 and the gender empowerment measure fell from 0.590 in 2005 to
0.560 in 2008. The national poverty incidence decreased slightly, from
21.1 per cent of families in 2006 to 20.9 in 2009. But with population growth, the
number of poor families rose from 3.67 million to 3.86 million in the same period,
higher than in 2003. Farmers and fishers were the poorest groups in the country,
with a poverty incidence of 44 and 50 per cent, respectively, in 2006. Nationally,
income inequality remains high, with a Gini coefficient of 0.448.

2. The failure to reduce poverty in recent years reflects underinvestment and the slow
growth of per capita incomes, high population growth and dependency rates,
natural disasters and inflationary pressures, mainly from rising fuel and food
prices. Despite the recent lack of progress in reducing the incidence of poverty, the
Philippines Development Plan (PDP) 2011-2016 envisages that the country can still
achieve Millennium Development Goal poverty reduction targets by 2015.
Favourable factors exist that may help the country break out of its perennial
condition of widespread rural poverty, inequity and lagging human development,
including a healthy external payments situation, years of trade reform (leaving an
industrial sector fairly undistorted by subsidies and heavy protection), a stable
currency, low inflation and positive political developments.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

3. The proposed project is consistent with the PDP 2011-2016, the IFAD Strategic
Framework 2011-2015 and the IFAD country strategy for the Philippines for 2010-
2014. The rationale for IFAD’s help in financing the project is to: (i) exploit
opportunities to support the agrarian reform process and help meet the needs of
under- and unserved agrarian reform beneficiaries (ARBs) – through a value chain
approach to enhance agricultural growth and agribusiness development – in order
to maximize benefits from the land distribution programme; (ii) support
harmonization of rural development efforts by the Departments of Agrarian Reform
(DAR), Agriculture (DA) and Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), and
other agencies engaged in agribusiness development, in order to maximize impact
in rural poverty reduction; and (iii) support the DAR approach of clustering
agrarian reform communities to realize economies of scale for production, access to



EB 2015/115/R.13

2

markets and service provision in order to benefit from value chain development.
The project will contribute to the PDP’s goal of a competitive and sustainable
agriculture and fisheries sector through improved food security and increased rural
incomes, and it supports the national Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Programme.

4. The project is part of the National Convergence Initiative (NCI), which seeks to
synchronize the initiatives of the three departments engaged in rural development
– DAR, DA and DENR – and optimize use of the resources available to support
sustainable rural development. Linkages will be built with the Department of Trade
and Industry (DTI) under the Rural Microenterprise Promotion Programme, with
the DA under the Second Cordillera Highland Agricultural Resource Management
Project and with the DENR under the Integrated Natural Resources and
Environmental Management Project approved by the Executive Board in December
2012. Lessons learned in ongoing and previous projects have been incorporated
into the design.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project will target Regions IX, X and Caraga, located in the west, north and

north-east of Mindanao, which are the three poorest regions of the country,
accounting for 18 per cent of those living below the national poverty line. Within
the three regions, the project will target 11 agrarian reform community (ARC)
clusters, including 93 ARCs in 48 municipalities in 10 provinces. The target group
includes ARBs, other smallholders, under- or unemployed rural youth, indigenous
peoples (IPs), women, and business development partners, including eligible
people’s organizations (POs). The total size of the target group is estimated at
144,732 agricultural households (about 773,106 people), including non-ARC
barangays (villages) and IP households. Of this total, ARBs account for 59,217
households, of which 30 per cent are headed by women. The major crops
cultivated include coconut, rice, maize, rubber, banana, high-value vegetables, oil
palm, coffee and cassava. Some 29 per cent of ARC average incomes are below the
poverty line.

B. Project development objective
6. The overall goal of the project is to contribute to the reduction of poverty incidence

in the 10 target provinces of Regions IX, X and Caraga. The project’s development
objective is to enable ARBs and other smallholder farmers in the 10 target
provinces of Regions IX, X and Caraga to become highly productive and
competitive entrepreneurs and contribute to the achievement of broad-based rural
economic growth. The expected impact and outcome indicators for the
approximately 35,000 households and 100 POs (e.g. farmers’ cooperatives and
associations) in the 11 ARC clusters include: (i) average annual income increased;
(ii) increased farm income derived from new farming activities; (iii) increased
ownership of household assets; and (iv) reduced prevalence of child malnutrition.

C. Components/outcomes
7. The project has the following components: (1) participatory value chain analysis

and planning; (2) integrated smallholder agricultural and rural enterprise
development; (3) subdivision of collective certificates of land ownership award and
facilitation of land transfer programme; and (4) project management, monitoring
and evaluation and knowledge management.

8. Component 1: Participatory value chain analysis and planning. The expected
outcome of this component will be that value-chain business development plans for
selected crops are validated and implemented, resulting in improved farm income.
In each of the 11 ARC clusters, the component will support: (i) validation of the
proposals for value chain development as identified by the feasibility studies;
(ii) identification of the gaps and inefficiencies in the value chains and of the
solutions and investments required; (iii) identification of POs and private-sector



EB 2015/115/R.13

3

organizations wishing to and capable of participating in value chain development;
and (iv) updated ARC value chain investment plans (ARC-VIPs).

9. Component 2: Integrated smallholder agricultural and rural enterprise
development. The expected outcome of this component is improved production,
value addition and marketing of selected agricultural commodities. The component
has two subcomponents: (i) farm and value chain enterprise development; and
(ii) investment in value chain-related rural infrastructure.

10. Under farm and value chain enterprise development, the project will support
improvement of the quantity and quality of production at the farm level and the
phasing of production to meet market demand. It will achieve this through farmer
training, capacity-building and the provision of technical and farm management
advice in product testing, soil analysis, production technologies and management,
adaptation to threats from climate change, environmental awareness-raising and
good agricultural practices. This will involve the private sector (e.g. extension
personnel employed by buyers or consolidators) and/or public-sector agencies (e.g.
DAR development facilitators, technical staff of local government units (LGUs) and
the Agricultural Training Institute). In the area of value addition and diversification,
the project will facilitate the creation of appropriate business models and of the
institutional structures required to enable smallholders and their organizations to
engage in value addition and enterprise development, with private-sector
management of these value chains. The project aims to increase farmer share in
value chains through product differentiation and the already-mentioned value
addition and diversification. Project interventions will be implemented through the
provision of matching grants when there is a clear opportunity to improve
profitability for the target group. Other investments to enhance value addition
include the provision of assistance for product development, branding, packaging,
logistics, certification/accreditation, technology and equipment upgrading, and
organizational development through training with a focus on meeting market
requirements. The project will provide investments, on a cost-sharing basis, to
match the contributions of private-sector participants for eligible proposals and for
financing the equipment associated with post-harvest facilities.

11. In the area of market and investment facilitation, the project will develop linkages
within the value chain among input providers, producers and buyers to enhance
the profitability of farm enterprises. Assistance in consolidating supplies to meet
the volume and frequency requirements of buyers and investors is part of this
process. The assistance provided will include support for improving and/or
extending existing market information systems, trade fairs, business and investors’
forums, and assistance in negotiations with buyers and investors for leasehold,
contract growing, joint venture or marketing arrangements. The project will make
use of the expertise of agencies such as DA, DENR, DTI and the Department of
Science and Technology (DOST) to enable target beneficiaries to optimize
production of their chosen commodities, improve their market access and
competiveness, generate greater profits and provide a more integrated package of
services in the priority chains to be developed. The project will also assist project
beneficiaries in accessing funding from the banking and microfinance sectors using
a combination of approaches: private-sector enterprises involved in the value
chain; project matching grant funds to farmers, POs and private-sector
organizations meeting strict eligibility criteria for investments; development of the
capacity of viable farmers’ organizations to access finance from the formal banking
sector, government finance institutions and microfinance institutions; and linkages
with financial institutions to develop appropriate financing packages and products
for the value chain initiatives.



EB 2015/115/R.13

4

12. Under investment in value chain-related rural infrastructure, after participatory
planning with target ARCs and target group members, the project will invest in
rural infrastructure subprojects meeting eligibility and priorities criteria to support
value chain development. Eligible infrastructure includes farm-to-market roads,
rehabilitation/restoration of communal irrigation schemes (CISs), water-harvesting
and management, post-harvest facilities (storage, auction centres, etc.) and water
supply required to process local produce for value chain development. Irrigators’
associations and farmers’ groups/associations will operate and maintain CISs and
post-harvest facilities, while LGUs will maintain the farm-to-market roads.
Investments in additional road construction will take place only after firm funding
has been secured from participating LGUs. In addition, the capacity of LGUs to fund
and undertake maintenance of the roads will be closely monitored.

13. Component 3: Subdivision of collective certificates of landownership
award (CLOA) and facilitation of land transfer program. This component will
cover the subdivision of CLOAs and facilitation of land transfer action to stabilize
ownership and property rights in the project areas. This will provide incentive to
farmers to make their lands more productive and enable them to access credit and
engage in agribusiness projects with private investors. Target outputs and
outcomes for this component will be under the regular programme of DAR and will
be funded under the regular budget of DAR.

14. Component 4: Project management, monitoring and evaluation and
knowledge management. The expected outcome of this component is that the
project is completed on time, within the agreed budget, and to the satisfaction of
beneficiaries. The output will be timely, cost-effective and transparent
management that is gender and culturally sensitive. The component will finance
the costs of project management and coordination, monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) and reporting activities at national, regional and provincial levels. It will also
finance the costs of contracted project staff based in the central project
management office (CPMO) in Mindanao, the three regional project management
offices (RPMOs) and in the 11 provincial project management offices (PPMOs),
honorariums of DAR regular staff assigned to the project, equipment, vehicles,
short-term consultants, training, preparation of project manuals, case studies and
operating costs.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

15. The key elements of the overall project approach are: (i) use of a participatory
value chain development approach to enable target beneficiaries to optimize
production of their chosen commodities, sustainably improve the profitability of
household farm enterprises, improve their market access and competiveness and
generate greater profits; (ii) application of convergence in implementing project
activities under the leadership of DAR to enhance the investment and opportunity
climate for agribusiness; (iii) use of the ARC clustering approach for the provision
of support to ARCs for value chain development; (iv) implementation through DAR,
at all levels, with the participation of the other agencies (e.g. DTI, DOST, LGUs and
the National Commission on Indigenous Peoples [NCIP]); and (v) emphasis on
knowledge management (KM) and learning to ensure that experience and lessons
learned are available to improve project performance and for scaling up and wider
dissemination.

16. The project implementation period is six years. The implementation strategy will
include: (i) geographic targeting to identify the project areas and provide a
preliminary list of target commodities based on the 11 feasibility studies and
investment plans already prepared; (ii) selection of private sector organizations to
provide marketing and/or other services that meet the proposed eligibility criteria
during the initial participatory value chain analysis and planning phase; (iii) self-
targeting by members of the target group based on their interest in participating in



EB 2015/115/R.13

5

project activities; (iv) non-poor households will be targeted through their inclusion
in the POs or other types of organizations formed; and (v) provision of public
goods, such as improved farm to market roads, rehabilitated CISs, post-harvest
facilities, etc. Consultations were held with the NCIP, the organization charged with
supporting the integration of IPs in the mainstream. The approach to working with
IPs as a sub-group of the target group will work within the framework of the NCIP’s
Ancestral Domain Sustainable Development and Protection Plan. This approach
involves putting into practice the principle of free and prior informed
consultation/consent on all project activities by providing adequate information.

B. Organizational framework
17. DAR will be the lead agency for project implementation, in cooperation with DA,

DENR, DTI and DOST. DAR has the necessary institutional capacity and structure to
undertake this role and the experience gained from implementing over 60
externally funded projects – including two recently completed IFAD projects that
were implemented satisfactorily in Mindanao. DAR has staff at all levels of
government, down to the municipal level (municipal agrarian reform officers), and
a development facilitator assigned to each of the 11 ARCs to work with
beneficiaries. The project management structure involves a CPMO based in
Cagayan de Oro (Region X); RPMOs in each of the three regions; and PPMOs in
each of the 10 provinces (two operational divisions in Bukidnon). The oversight
structure includes a project steering committee at the national level as the
project’s policymaking body; a regional multi-stakeholders committee (RMSC) in
each of the three regions to advise regional project implementers on major policy
considerations and technical and operational issues and to ensure participation of
the region-based agencies in project implementation; and a cluster project
operations team (CPOT) in each of the 11 ARC clusters to serve as coordinating
mechanisms for delivery of government services to the clusters.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

18. At start-up, project staff and stakeholders at national and regional levels will
prepare a multi-year global workplan and budget for achieving project objectives
and targets, for approval by the project steering committee. Participatory planning
of annual workplans and budgets (AWP/Bs) will start at the barangay and ARC
cluster levels, involving representatives of the ARCs, CPOTs and PPMOs. The
project will have a results-based M&E system to report the status of project
implementation and progress on outputs, outcomes and impact. The overall M&E
system will consist of regular reports and process monitoring by the CPMO, based
on data provided by RPMOs, PPMOs and implementing agencies, and
communicating the project’s physical progress data and financial accounts,
maintained by the CPMO and regional/provincial offices. During the first project
year (PY1), DAR will undertake a baseline survey to cover all indicators of the
logical framework, including RIMS indicators, and, subsequently, midterm impact
and completion impact surveys. M&E and KM units will be established in all
implementation levels. M&E documentation results will contribute to policy studies
to improve the business environment for smallholder farmers in the Philippines,
with a view to scaling up within the country.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. Financial management of the project will follow government systems, rules and

regulations for receipts and disbursements of proceeds from the loan – to the
extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s standard disbursement procedures. The
Bureau of the Treasury, through DAR, will maintain one designated account
exclusively for the loan. DAR, through the CPMO, will be responsible for overall
management of project funds, which includes: oversight of project operations,
procurement, internal control, accounting, review and consolidation of project
AWP/Bs, physical and financial reporting, audits; and consolidation of accounts and



EB 2015/115/R.13

6

withdrawal applications. RPMOs and PPMOs will be accountable for project funds
received for implementation of the project. DAR will execute a memorandum of
agreement with each of the partner implementing agencies at national, regional,
provincial and municipal levels to specify the services and support to be provided
by each agency and by the project.

20. IFAD’s review of the project implementation manual (PIM) will be a precondition of
disbursement. Guidelines in the PIM will be consistent with the Government’s and
IFAD policies, systems and procedures. Annual financial statements on project
funds will be prepared in accordance with acceptable accounting standards, such as
the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS), the International Public
Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS), or national standards where these are
converging towards internationally recognized best practice and/or are deemed to
provide minimum disclosures.

21. The project’s consolidated financial statements will be audited annually in
accordance with IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits. All project accounts will be
audited, including all sources of funding. Annual audit reports will be submitted to
IFAD within six months after the end of each fiscal year.

22. The project will follow government procurement regulations (RA 9184) using the
latest implementing rules and regulations – to the extent that they are consistent
with IFAD’s Project Procurement Guidelines. IFAD will apply a zero-tolerance policy
to fraudulent, corrupt, collusive or coercive actions.

E. Supervision
23. Annually, IFAD and the National Economic Development Authority will jointly

conduct a full supervision and implementation support mission, and a post-
supervision mission 6 to 9 months later, depending on progress.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
24. Project costs are estimated at about US$52.53 million over a six-year

implementation period, including taxes and duties estimated at US$5.96 million or
11 per cent of total costs. Price contingencies of 3 per cent, and physical
contingencies have been computed at 3.5 per cent of base costs on all items, both
decided by the National Economic and Development Authority.

Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD
Loan Government LGUs

Beneficiary/
proponent Total

Components Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Participatory value chain analysis and planning 0.58 63.5 0.34 36.5 - - - - 0.92 1.8
2. Integrated smallholder agricultural and rural

enterprise development

i. Farm and value chain enterprise development 11.78 35.6 1.72 5.2 2.01 6.1 17.56 53.1 33.07 63.0

ii. Value chain related rural Infrastructure 10.86 79.0 1.05 7.6 1.47 10.7 0.37 2.7 13.74 26.2

Subtotal 22.63 48.3 2.77 5.9 3.48 7.4 17.93 38.3 46.81 89.1

3. Project management, M&E and KM

1. M&E and KM 0.93 50.9 0.90 49.1 - - - - 1.83 3.5

2. Project management 0.86 29.0 2.10 71.0 - - - - 2.96 5.6

Subtotal 1.80 37.4 3.00 62.6 - - - - 4.80 9.1
Total 25.01 47.6 6.11 11.6 3.48 6.6 17.93 34.1 52.53 100.0



EB 2015/115/R.13

7

B. Project financing
25. Project financing comprises: (i) an IFAD loan of US$25.01 million (47.6 per cent);

(ii) contribution of the borrower for US$9.59 made of national government
counterpart funding of US$6.08 million (11.6 per cent) and LGU financing of
US$3.51 million (6.6 per cent); and (iii) contributions from proponents and
beneficiaries of about US$17.93 million (34.1 per cent). The financing plan by
expenditure category and financier is presented in table 2 below. The categories of
expenditures may be merged into broader categories in the financing agreement.

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD
Loan Government LGUs

Beneficiary/
Proponent Total

Expenditure categories Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1.   Works 9.79 80.0 0.61 5.0 1.47 12.0 0.37 3.0 12.24 23.3

2.   Equipment and materials (for farms and
enterprise development)

8.17 30.0 0.68 2.5 1.50 5.5 16.88 62.0 27.23 51.8

3.   Equipment and materials (for value
chains)

1.87 55.0 0.34 10.0 0.51 15.0 0.68 20.0 3.40 6.5

4.   Consultancies 3.69 73.0 1.36 27.0 - - - - 5.05 9.6

5.   Training and workshops 1.32 71.7 0.52 28.3 1.85 3.5

6.   Equipment 0.17 35.0 0.32 65.0 - - - - 0.49 0.9

7.   Government support staff - - 0.80 100.0 - - - - 0.80 1.5

8.   Operation and maintenance - - 1.48 100.0 - - - - 1.48 2.8

Total 25.01 47.6 6.11 11.6 3.48 6.6 17.93 34.1 52.53 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
26. It is estimated that about 35,000 rural households will benefit directly from the

project, including 3,000 jobs to be generated by the project in the value added
subsector. Some 15,000 households, not counted elsewhere, will benefit from
improved rural roads, bringing the total to 50,000 beneficiary households. The
main incremental outputs following project investment in the target ARC clusters
will derive from the priority products selected by the feasibility studies. Likely
benefits at the farm level will stem from increased production and improved
productivity, enhanced value added at the farm level and higher prices as a result
of both quality improvements and more efficient marketing. Additional benefits will
be generated by the project’s capacity-building programme, e.g. strengthened
capacity to participate in value chain and rural enterprise development, and for
implementing agencies, capacity to target and manage poverty reduction and rural
development programmes in a gender-sensitive and participatory manner.

27. The financial and economic impact of the project has been assessed by:
(i) preparing detailed feasibility studies for the value chain investments that are
likely to be undertaken under the project; and (ii) analysing each model to
ascertain probable impact at the individual farmer level, in comparison with typical
without-project incomes. The project shows an economic internal rate of return
(EIRR) of 44.6 per cent and a cost-benefit ratio of 1.57 discounting benefits and
costs at 15 per cent. The sensitivity analysis demonstrates that the results are
robust. For example, the project would still be viable if all costs increased by
20 per cent and benefits 20 per cent lower. The economic and farm budget
analyses will be updated based on market demand and value chain analysis
undertaken in the first year.

D. Sustainability
28. The following elements are built into project design to help ensure that the

proposed investments and benefits are sustainable: (i) dedication of the first year
of implementation to the analysis, identification and planning of the project’s
investments in priority value chains involving famers, their organizations and the



EB 2015/115/R.13

8

private sector; (ii) the experience and lessons learned in the implementation of the
11 feasibility studies contribute to ensuring that subsequent investments are
sustainable; (iii) the project has a strong focus on involvement of the private sector
on a long-term basis to enhance the sustainability of investments and benefits;
(iv) it will support contractual and other types of arrangements linking smallholders
with the private sector to enable them to move up the supply chain and incorporate
greater value addition; (v) beneficiaries and LGUs will be involved in providing
counterpart funds for infrastructure facilities and will be responsible for their
operation and maintenance; (vi) project design takes into account the knowledge,
systems and practices of IPs, which will also help ensure the sustainability of
project interventions in areas where IPs are present; and (vii) 18 months before
the completion date, the CPMO will work closely with all stakeholders at national,
regional, provincial and municipal levels, and with ARCs and barangays, to finalize
an exit strategy and sustainability plan based on specific mechanisms to ensure
sustainability after the end of the project.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
29. The first risk is that effective coordination among the three NCI agencies in the

field will be more difficult than at the national level. Project design counters this
risk as follows: (i) all agencies having a role in project implementation will be
members of the project steering committee to be able to resolve inter-agency
coordination issues; (ii) all implementing agencies will have an NCI focal point
through whom the project will interact with the NCI at the national level; (iii) the
three RMSCs will include representation of all relevant agencies to ensure effective
coordination of implementation in the regions and ARC clusters; and (iv) within
ARC clusters, CPOTs will include staff involved in day-to-day project
implementation. The second risk is the degree of willingness of the private sector
to be involved in implementation of component 2, which is essential for the success
of the project. This risk is addressed through: (i) component 1 and the
participatory analysis and planning process, which will involve all potential
participants, including representatives of private-sector agencies involved in the
particular value chains under analysis; and (ii) during the value chain analysis and
planning process, publication of the availability of grants for value chain
development to match investments from the private sector, the size of the grants
available, and the terms and conditions of the grants for diverse interventions. The
third risk is the weak capacity of poorer LGUs to provide the required counterpart
funds for rural infrastructure investment. The project counters this risk by reaching
an agreement with the Government on a financing plan for these investments
based on a financing ratio of 80 per cent for the IFAD loan, 5 per cent for national
government counterpart funds, 12 per cent on average for LGUs and 3 per cent for
beneficiary contributions.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

30. IFAD policies relevant to the project include: the IFAD Targeting Policy: Reaching
the Rural Poor; Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment; Engagement with
Indigenous Peoples; IFAD Rural Enterprise Policy; IFAD’s Private-Sector
Development and Partnership Strategy; IFAD Climate Change Strategy; IFAD Rural
Finance Policy; and IFAD Policy on Preventing Fraud and Corruption in its Activities
and Operations. Project design has reflected these policies and lessons learned in
the IFAD country programme. The project is classified as Category B and employs
the following mitigation measures: value chain development is resilient to climate
change, environmentally friendly and sustainable; training includes management
and adaptation to the threats of climate change and environmental awareness;
environmentally friendly and sustainable production systems will be promoted (e.g.
use of the farming systems approach, good agricultural practices and varieties that
can tolerate climate variability); and DENR and its local offices will be involved to
ensure that value chain development is in line with good practices for



EB 2015/115/R.13

9

environmental and natural resource management.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
31. The project objective is aligned with the PDP’s goal of a competitive and

sustainable agriculture and fisheries sector. The project will complement other
donors working in the same sector – such as the Asian Development Bank, Japan
International Cooperation Agency and World Bank – to increase project impact in
poverty reduction and on policy dialogue with the government and other
stakeholders. IFAD will also work with government programmes for an improved
policy environment and governance. The project will explore diverse types of
partnership arrangements between project beneficiaries and the private sector,
ensuring that such arrangements are fair to farmers and ARC communities.
Private-sector organizations and business development partners can take a leading
role as innovators in improving the returns from existing and emerging value
chains in an enterprise-oriented development approach.

Innovations and scaling upC.
32. The project will be the first foreign-assisted project under DAR to support the NCI.

Its investment is quite small when compared with the growth needed to make a
serious dent in rural poverty in Mindanao. However, the project could catalyse
improved household incomes and attract further investment for scaling up – in
order to fully realize the potential benefits of Mindanao’s comparative advantage in
key agricultural commodities.

Policy engagementD.
33. The project will finance policy/case studies – for policy dialogue and consultation

with relevant national and local institutions and with other stakeholders – on
planning and implementation of the value chain approach to agro-enterprise
development, mechanisms for convergence and other relevant studies. The studies
envisaged could include: (i) consolidation of smallholder production to achieve
economies of scale in production and marketing, appropriate business models, and
contractual and legal arrangements; and (ii) innovative engagement of the private
sector in providing rural infrastructure to support value chain development.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
34. A financing agreement between the Republic of the Philippines and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an
appendix.

35. The Republic of the Philippines is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

36. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
37. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of the Philippines in an amount equivalent to twenty-two million
eight hundred thousand euros (EUR 22,800,000), equivalent to approximately
US$25.01 million and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





















































President's Report

Proposed loan to the Republic of the
Philippines for the Fisheries, Coastal
Resources and Livelihood Project (FishCORAL)


Republic of the Philippines

Fisheries, Coastal Resources and Livelihood Project
(FishCORAL)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of the Philippines

Executing agency: Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources,
Department of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$43.05 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 27.31 million (equivalent to approximately
US$29.96 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 15-18 years, including a
grace period of 3 years, with an interest rate per annum
equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of borrower: US$11.76 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.33 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/115/R.12

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of the Philippines for the Fisheries, Coastal Resources and
Livelihood Project (FishCORAL), as contained in paragraph 34.

Proposed loan to the Republic of the Philippines for the
Fisheries, Coastal Resources and Livelihood Project
(FishCORAL)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Philippines is a middle-income country, and in 2013 the GDP reached an annual

growth rate of 7.2 per cent. However, the recent increase in GDP has not translated
into a reduction of the incidence of poverty, indeed there has been little change
from 2009 to 2012; 22.9 per cent (2009) and 22.3 per cent (2012) of families in
those two years were living below the poverty line. The failure to reduce poverty
during the previous decade reflects underinvestment, slow growth of per capita
incomes, a high population growth rate, high dependency rates, inequitable
distribution of income, natural disasters and inflationary pressures, mainly from
rising fuel and food prices. Nationally, income inequality remains high, with a Gini
coefficient of 0.44. Despite the recent lack of progress in reducing the incidence of
poverty, the Philippines Development Plan (PDP) 2011-2016 envisages that the
country could still achieve the Millennium Development Goal poverty reduction
targets by 2015. In 2011, the Human Development Index for the Philippines was
0.644, ranking 112th among 187 countries. The country’s Gender Inequality Index
improved to 0.427 in 2011, ranking 75th in the world.

2. Fishers were among the poorest groups in the country, with a poverty incidence of
41.4 per cent in 2009, higher than the 35 per cent in 2003. Municipal fishers1 and
their families remained poor due to: (i) low coastal productivity owing to habitat
and watershed degradation; (ii) fish stock depletion due to illegal fishing practices,
pollution and overfishing; (iii) lack of access to basic services and institutional
support; (iv) high population density in coastal areas; (v) poor post-harvest
handling and distribution systems; (vi) lack of alternative income-generating
activities; and (vii) weak political will on the part of local leaders to enact and/or
enforce fishery laws.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

3. The rationale for investing in the fisheries sector is that: (i) fishers, especially
municipal fishers, are among the poorest groups in the country; and (ii) the
fisheries sector is very important to the fishing communities as it is the source of
their livelihoods and a major source of dietary protein for the population as a
whole, and the main source of foreign exchange earnings for the national economy.
The project includes investments and activities to address the key issues that have
impoverished many fishing communities, such as coastal habitat degradation, use
of illegal fishing practices, overfishing, lack of enforcement of fishery ordinances,
pollution and a lack of viable livelihood activities alternative to fish capture. It will
adopt the ecosystem approach to fisheries and coastal resource management, and
a bay-wide approach to enabling the municipalities and fishing communities to

1 Those who fish within 15 km of the shoreline, 12 km in the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao.



EB 2015/115/R.12

2

improve the productivity and sustainable management of their fishery and coastal
resources. The project will link the livelihood enterprises it supports to the market
economy to help ensure their sustainability. It will assist the Bureau of Fisheries
and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) in improving its institutional capacity to support the
fisheries and coastal resources sector. The project is in line with the priorities
defined in the PDP 2011-2016 for the fisheries sector in the areas of inclusive
growth, poverty reduction, improving the economic status of poor coastal
communities, building the capacity of communities and local administrations to
better manage their coastal resources, improving the productivity of inshore
waters, exploring the export potential of fisheries, improving food security and
nutrition, and overall GDP growth. It also contributes to attainment of the goals and
targets of existing sectoral plans, such as the Agrikulturang Pilipino (AgriPinoy), the
Agricultural and Fisheries Modernization Programme (AFMP) and the Fisheries Road
Map. Investment in livelihood development supports the Agribusiness Road Maps
for the fisheries sector and the regional development plans.

4. The project is complementary to and supportive of the Government’s
Reconstruction Assistance to Haiyan and the Department of Agriculture’s
rehabilitation plan for the agriculture sector. These initiatives will help rebuild
fishing communities and rehabilitate coastal resources affected by Typhoon Haiyan
in the Eastern Visayas Region, through rehabilitation of the coastal and fishery
resources and recovery of the livelihoods of fishing communities – contributing to
increasing community resilience to natural disaster and climate change risks. The
project is consistent with the strategic objectives of the country strategic
opportunities programme (COSOP) 2010-2016 in: (i) improving fisheries and
coastal resource management and the livelihoods of poor coastal communities; and
(ii) managing natural resources within the context of climate change, gender
mainstreaming, policy dialogue and support for decentralization.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The project will target 11 bays/gulfs from Regions 5, 8 and 13 in Luzon and

Visayas, and the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (ARMM). The targeted
bays are located in 14 provinces, with 103 municipalities or cities bordering the
bays/gulfs and 1,098 coastal villages/barangays. Approximately 724,000 poor
people or 188,000 households live in these coastal villages, of which 90,596 are
fishing households with an estimated 38,050 of them living below the poverty line,
including households headed by women and/or out-of-school youth. The main
criteria for selection of project beneficiaries will be based on the socio-economic
conditions of fishing households, using up-to-date lists of poor households from the
Department of Social Welfare and Development. The project will identify potential
beneficiaries by targeting existing, eligible registered people’s organizations (POs)
and their fishing community members. Members of the target group will include
memberships of the POs, either self-selected or based on their interest in the
proposed livelihood enterprise(s) or through participatory wealth ranking. The
project will also establish new POs in response to demand from the target group.

B. Project development objective
6. The overall goal of the project is to contribute to reduction of poverty in the target

coastal communities of the targeted bays/ecosystems by 5 per cent from the mean
poverty incidence of 42 per cent. The development objective is to realize (a) annual
income of participating fishing community households increase by 10 per cent from
baseline; and (b) employment of women engaged in income generating activities
increased to 40 per cent from the baseline of 20 per cent.



EB 2015/115/R.12

3

C. Components/outcomes
7. The project has three components: (i) coastal resource management; (ii) livelihood

development; and (iii) project management and coordination. The expected
outcomes for components 1 and 2 are: component 1: fishing communities adopt
sustainable management of fishery and coastal resources that increase overall
stocks; and component 2: fishing households in the target coastal communities
constantly engaged in diversified sources of income.

8. Component 1 will:

(a) Assess governance and legislation by the bay management councils (BMCs),
and facilitation of the formation, reactivation and management of the
operations of the BMCs, including the adoption of bay-wide fisheries
ordinances. The project will encourage the creation of integrated fisheries and
aquatic resource management councils (IFARMCs) where no such organization
exists, and will support their operation and that of the existing IFARMCs,
including capacity-building. It will also facilitate the participation of local
fishing communities in the management of municipal fisheries and coastal
resources, together with local government units (LGUs), by incorporating pre-
existing fisheries management systems. It will assist LGUs in introducing
and/or completing registration of municipal fishers, their motorized and non-
motorized fishing vessels and gear and the introduction of a municipal
licensing system for fishers, fishing vessels and gear, as well as collection of
associated licensing revenues and their use to support enforcement of
fisheries ordinances.

(b) Help control overfishing caused by illegal fishing and high population density
along the coastline and will support law enforcement and regulatory activities
of LGUs to manage fishing efforts and provide alternative marine and land-
based livelihood opportunities to contribute to a reduction in overfishing. It
will address the lack of landing, catch and effort statistics by having fishing
households record data to enable BFAR to propose policy measures to
appropriately address overfishing based on reliable and timely information.
The project will support a review of existing relevant legislation, including
municipal fishery ordinances, in consideration of the proposed changes in the
Fisheries Code.

(c) Reinforce fishery law enforcement teams (FLET) at village or community and
LGU levels. BFAR will organize and strengthen law enforcement teams
composed of coast guard and police personnel to apprehend violators. The
project will assess the types and social and economic characteristics of illegal
fishing, propose ways to address this complex issue, and provide equipment
and training as required. The project will assist LGUs in improving
coordination functions with BFAR and other relevant agencies; the fisheries
database and reporting system; and revenue generation from registration
fees, fines, and fees for resource use, etc. These steps will help institutionalize
the arrangements for funding law enforcement activities and fisheries coastal
resources management.

(d) Update coastal resource management plans through a participatory process
involving local communities, people’s and private-sector organizations and
local governments. They will become coastal resource management and
investment plans and will be part of a comprehensive land and water use plan
and of the municipal development plans of LGUs. All subprojects proposed for
financing and included in the municipal development plans will reflect the
need to address the expected impacts of climate change and to reduce the
risks of natural disasters. Assistance will be provided to help LGUs settle
disputes on municipal boundaries to establish clear municipal waters
delineation.



EB 2015/115/R.12

4

(e) Manage mangroves, sea grasses, coral reefs and beaches using an ecosystem
approach. New and existing fish sanctuaries and other types of protected
areas will be established and managed. The project will help protect, enhance
and rehabilitate resources, e.g. stock enhancement in protected areas using
juvenile and adult fish from hatcheries.

(f) Support coastal resource management – the project will finance the
infrastructure and equipment required, including delineation markers for
identified fish sanctuaries within targeted bays. LGUs will be fully responsible
for the operation and maintenance of the infrastructure and equipment
provided by the project – during and after the implementation period – with
the support of IFARMCs.

9. Component 2 will:

(a) Support/reactivate suitable existing POs and form new groups/POs as needed,
giving particular attention to the participation of women. Key elements of the
training modules will be group organization and management, basic
entrepreneurship, business management, value chain concepts and
approaches, coastal resource management and gender mainstreaming.

(b) Promote environmentally friendly livelihood enterprises identified in the
approved coastal resource management plans, for example fisheries-related
enterprises, sustainable tourism and other appropriate enterprises. There will
be no project support for increasing fishing activities or for provision of fishing
gear. Mitigation measures for identified feasible livelihood enterprises will be
put in place to prevent further environmental degradation, waste generation
and overexploitation of resources. Project-financed inputs for livelihood
enterprises will be provided as a package, combined with the provision of
training for the members of POs, including both technical skills and the
business development aspects of operating livelihood enterprises. Subsequent
cycles will be financed from the income earned, while successful enterprises
can access microfinance institutions or NGO sources to finance future
expansion.

(c) Finance the following: infrastructure facilities to support seaweed production;
access improvements, connecting coastal communities to the nearest all-
weather road for transport of marine products; improvements of selected
BFAR hatcheries; and, where needed and justified, construction of fish-landing
facilities; provision of mini ice plants with cold-storage facilities, smoke
houses, store houses and dryers. It will also assist in the identification of
potential private investors and the preparation of feasibility studies. POs will
be fully responsible for the operation and maintenance of the infrastructure
and equipment provided by the project – during and after the implementation
period.

10. Component 3 will assist BFAR in implementing its reorganization plan in the four
regions and will finance the project management and coordination structures and
associated monitoring and evaluation (M&E) mechanisms at national, regional, bay-
wide and city/municipality levels.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
11. The key elements of the project’s implementation approach include: (i) use of the

ecosystem approach for fisheries management; (ii) financing of activities identified
by coastal communities and municipal/city authorities and included in the LGU
development/investment plans; (iii) implementation arrangements that will follow
the Government’s procedures and mandate at all levels and will operate within the
government framework for decentralization and as part of the National



EB 2015/115/R.12

5

Convergence Initiative; and (iv) consultation with the National Commission on
Indigenous Peoples, if indigenous peoples (IPs) are found to live in any of the
target coastal communities – following the approach and procedures for engaging
IPs in development. The phasing of project implementation will be based on the
readiness of POs, LGUs, BMCs and regional agencies. The livelihood development
subprojects will be aligned with the priority commodities identified by the BFAR
Regional Roadmaps to ensure their suitability for the target locations and thus
contribute to their sustainability.

B. Organizational framework
12. BFAR will be the project’s lead implementing agency, with full responsibility for

project administration and management, and will use its existing structures at
national, regional, and provincial levels to implement project activities. The
municipalities and cities are responsible for managing municipal waters and coastal
zones. A high-level inter-agency project steering committee (PSC) at the national
level will provide policy guidance; approve project implementation guidelines,
annual workplan and budgets (AWP/Bs) and procurement plans; and resolve
implementation issues that cannot be decided at the regional level. A regional
coordination and steering committee (RCSC) will serve as the policy and
institutional advisory committee for project implementation at that level, and will
facilitate effective and efficient delivery of various agencies’ services in support of
the project. A bay coordination and support committee will coordinate project
activities within each bay. A project support and coordination office (PSCO) at BFAR
central office will be responsible for supporting, coordinating and monitoring project
implementation, coordinating within BFAR and with government oversight agencies,
LGUs, project management teams at regional, municipal and bay/gulf levels, and
IFAD. Regional project management offices (RPMOs) will be established in each
target region. Municipal/city project management offices (M/CPMOs) will be based
at the municipal or city LGU in Regions 5, 8 and 13, while in ARMM a municipal
project implementing unit (MPIU) will be based at the BFAR Provincial Fisheries
Office under the leadership of the provincial fisheries officer. The project will
operate as part of the National Convergence Initiative, with assistance from other
government agencies as needed.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

13. Planning. AWP/Bs will be prepared through a participatory process, starting at the
community level and involving representatives of POs, the CPMO/MPMO/MPIU and
the bay/gulf alliance. RPMOs will consolidate the provincial AWP/Bs into a regional
document. PSCO will consolidate the regional AWP/Bs into a national AWP/B for
IFAD review and subsequent PSC approval.

14. Monitoring and evaluation. Project M&E will be in accordance with the
Government’s harmonized, national Results-based Performance Management
System and IFAD’s Results and Impact Management System (RIMS). It will report
on project implementation status and progress in terms of outputs, outcomes and
impact. The RCSC and RPMO will provide regular reporting on accomplishments
regarding policy and major operational issues to regional development councils,
LGUs and other stakeholders. The project will conduct baseline and completion
impact studies. A rapid participatory resource and socio-economic assessment will
be conducted in each bay at project start-up and completion.

15. Learning and knowledge management. The project will generate and manage
knowledge in order to: improve implementation; contribute to BFAR’s body of
knowledge; aid in raising awareness of stakeholders; and enhance future policy
development and project/programme implementation. It will support innovative
approaches, document lessons learned and organize knowledge-sharing among
project staff, BFAR and other implementing agencies. It will also share knowledge



EB 2015/115/R.12

6

with other IFAD-assisted projects across the country and the region.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
16. Financial management. BFAR, through the PSCO, will be responsible for overall

financial management of the project, including AWP/Bs, procurement, flow of funds,
disbursements, internal control, accounting, financial reporting and audit. The
project will follow the government’s financial systems, rules and regulations under
the New Government Accounting System, consistent with IFAD’s standard
disbursement procedures, for receipts and disbursements of proceeds from the
IFAD loan and government counterpart funds. RPMOs will be responsible for
management of funds at the regional level. BFAR will execute a memorandum of
agreement with each LGU and other implementing agencies at national, regional,
provincial and municipal levels to detail responsibilities, required services and their
financing. In order to reduce fiduciary risks arising from insufficient experience and
capacity, the financial management capability of the central and regional offices of
BFAR and of LGUs will need to be strengthened through staff training and close
supervision.

17. Flow of funds. The Department of Finance, through the Bureau of the Treasury,
will open a designated account in United States dollars, in the central bank or
another bank acceptable to IFAD, exclusively for the loan. Project accounts in the
Philippine peso will be opened at central and regional levels.

18. Procurement. BFAR will undertake major procurement packages in line with the
annual procurement plans through the PSCO and RPMOs supported by their
respective BAC and Finance and Administrative Services Division. Procurement will
follow the Implementing Rules and Regulations of the Government Procurement
Reform Act (RA 9184) to the extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s Project
Procurement Guidelines. Smaller items, as defined in the procurement plans, will be
procured by regional offices.

19. Audit. Project consolidated financial statements will be audited annually by the
Commission on Audit in accordance with IFAD’s Guidelines on Project Audits. The
annual audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months of the end of each
fiscal year.

20. Governance. IFAD will apply a policy of zero-tolerance in respect of fraudulent,
corrupt, collusive or coercive action.

E. Supervision
21. IFAD and the National Economic Development Authority will jointly conduct annual

supervision and implementation support missions, and IFAD will conduct a post-
supervision mission 6-9 months later, depending on the project’s progress.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
22. Total project costs are estimated at US$43.05 million over a five-year

implementation period, as shown in table 1. This includes taxes and duties
estimated at US$3.72 million or 8.8 per cent of total costs, which will be covered by
the Government’s contribution. Base costs were estimated at 2013 prices, with
price contingencies of 3 per cent per annum for pesos and dollars, and physical
contingencies of 3.5 per cent of base cost for all expenditures except staff costs.
Physical contingencies amount to US$1.14 million and price contingencies to
US$1.43 million, yielding total contingencies of US$2.57 million (6 per cent of total
baseline costs). The estimated average cost per target beneficiary household is
US$274 per household.



EB 2015/115/R.12

7

Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan Government LGUs
Beneficiary/
proponent Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Coastal resources

management 18 751.2 77.7 2 537.4 10.5 2 725.8 11.3 128.3 0.5 24 142.6 56.1
2. Livelihood

development 10 988.2 72.7 1 721.1 11.4 1 199.8 7.9 1 199.8 7.9 15 109.0 35.1
3. Project management

and coordination 216.4 5.7 1 866.1 49.2 1 710.5 45.1 - - 3 793.0 8.8
Total project costs 29 955.7 69.6 6 124.6 14.2 5 636.1 13.1 1 328.1 3.1 43 044.6 100.0

B. Project financing
23. Project financing comprises: (i) an IFAD loan of US$29.96 million (69.6 per cent);

and (ii) a Government contribution of US$11.76 million (27.3 per cent), consisting
of the national government counterpart contribution of US$6.12 million
(14.2 per cent) and LGU financing of US$5.64 million (13.1 per cent); and
(iii) contributions in cash or in kind from proponents and beneficiaries of about
US$1.33 million (3.1 per cent).

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan Government LGUs
Beneficiary/

proponent Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Works 1 726.8 80.3 230.4 10.7 193.4 9.0 - - 2 150.6 5.0
2. Equipment,

materials, and
supplies 17 734.0 76.4 2 486.1 10.7 1 735.9 7.5 1 247.4 5.4 23 203.4 53.9

3. Consultancies 10 494.9 89.5 1 071.2 9.1 80.8 0.7 80.8 0.7 11 727.7 27.2

4. Government staff - - 367.1 16.1 1 915.5 83.9 - - 2 282.6 5.3
5. Operation and

maintenance - - 1 969.8 53.5 1 710.5 46.5 - - 3 680.3 8.5
Total project costs 29 955.7 69.6 6 124.6 14.2 5 636.1 13.1 1 328.1 3.1 43 044.6 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
24. About 724,000 poor people or 188,000 households living in the 1,098 coastal

villages in the 11 targeted bays/gulfs will benefit directly from the project, of which
about 90,596 are fishing households, with an estimated 38,050 (146,495 people)
living below the poverty line. Project interventions are expected to improve the
productivity of municipal waters and coastal zones and generate livelihood benefits
for the members of coastal communities. Project benefits are expected to be
generated through: (i) effective law enforcement and regulatory activities with
respect to municipal fisheries; (ii) improved protection and management of coral
reef, mangrove, sea-grass ecosystems and other coastal resources; and
(iii) implementation of sustainable community-based livelihood enterprises.

D. Sustainability
25. To help ensure sustainability, the following are included in project design:

(i) assisting LGUs in developing sustainable sources of local revenues to finance
FLETs and provide funds for investment in the management of municipal fisheries
and coastal resources; (ii) ensuring the participation of POs and their members in
identifying and planning proposed livelihood activities; (iii) involving the private
sector on a long-term basis to enhance sustainability of the investments in



EB 2015/115/R.12

8

alternative sources of livelihoods for members of coastal communities and their
organizations; (iv) requiring beneficiaries, municipalities and cities to share in the
costs of the project’s investments; and (v) after the midterm review, preparing an
exit strategy and sustainability plan.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
26. The current lack of technical and management capacity within BFAR is a risk. It is

addressed by the inclusion of sufficient contract staff to manage the project
together with the assigned staff of BFAR. The project will support BFAR’s
reorganization plan through provision of the capacity development needed to
improve the technical capacities of BFAR’s offices in the target regions. A second
risk is unsustainability of project activities after the project ends, thereby repeating
the experience of many previous project interventions in various bays/gulfs. The
project design tackles this issue by focusing on the generation of sustainable
sources of local revenues to finance the necessary law enforcement activities and
investment in resource management. Another risk is that agencies concerned may
be unable to provide the coordinated approach needed at the local level. The design
counters this risk through the use of memorandums of agreement between BFAR
and all agencies engaged in project implementation to specify roles and
responsibilities, costs and sources of finance. It also includes all agencies with a
role in project implementation as members of the regional coordination and
steering committees; and indicates that all implementing agencies will have a
FishCORAL focal point at the national level. An associated risk concerns the
willingness of the private sector to be involved in supporting the development of
alternative livelihood enterprises for the members of fishing communities. This is
addressed by involving the private sector from the initial planning stages through to
the processing and/or marketing of the products, and by the availability of some
initial project finance for livelihood development production activities to match
investments from the private sector for processing, drying and marketing.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
27. The project design is consistent with the third strategic objective of the COSOP2 and

aligns well with the IFAD Strategic Framework 2011-2015, which focuses on:
secure access to natural resources; climate change adaptation and mitigation;
improved agricultural technologies and effective production services; more
comprehensive financial services; integration into value chains through competitive
agricultural input and produce markets; rural enterprise development and off-farm
employment opportunities; technical and vocational education and training; and
empowerment of rural poor people through effective and sustainable rural
producers’ organizations. In this context, agriculture includes fisheries. Under the
Philippine Environmental Impact Statement System, the project is classified both as
Category C and Category D, as it is intended to directly enhance the quality of the
environment or address existing environmental problems in coastal areas; and the
rural infrastructure components are small-scale and do not fall under other
categories.

B. Alignment and harmonization
28. The project objective is aligned with the PDP’s goal of a competitive and sustainable

agriculture and fisheries sector. It will complement and coordinate with existing and
planned projects of the Department of Agriculture and others (e.g. the Philippines
Rural Development Project (World Bank), Integrated Environment and Natural
Resource Management Project (AsDB/IFAD) and Ecosystems Improved for

2 “Selected marginalized and poor communities dependent on coastal resources in Bicol, eastern Visayas, northern
Mindanao and ARMM have sustainable access to fisheries and other productive coastal resources, use sustainable
management practices and diversify livelihood opportunities to meet their basic needs (in particular, food).”



EB 2015/115/R.12

9

Sustainable Fisheries (ECOFISH – USAID). IFAD will also work with government
programmes for an improved policy environment and governance. The project will
explore diverse types of partnership arrangements between project beneficiaries
and the private sector. Private-sector organizations and business development
partners will take a leading role as service providers in improving the returns from
livelihood enterprises.

C. Innovations and scaling up
29. Despite the relatively small investment in relation to the scale of the issues

involved, the project could be a catalyst for improving household incomes and
attracting further investment in scaling up. This in turn could realize the potential
benefits from good, sustainable management of city/municipal fisheries and other
coastal resources. A key innovation for scaling up will be the sustainable financing
systems to be developed and introduced at the municipal level to: (i) effectively
enforce the fisheries ordinances for municipal fisheries and coastal resources; and
(ii) improve conservation and management of fisheries and coastal resources by
local governments and fishing communities.

D. Policy engagement
30. The project will support policy/case studies for policy dialogue and consultation with

the relevant national and local institutions. Such communication will concern the
management by LGUs of municipal/city fisheries and coastal resources and
development of alternative livelihood enterprises for coastal communities. The
project will provide support in reviewing existing relevant legislation, covering the
parts of the Local Government Code related to: municipal fisheries; the Coastal
Zone and Fisheries Code of the Philippines; possible duplication between the roles
and responsibilities of the BMCs and IFARMCs; and the future management role of
pre-existing fisheries management systems. The project will also provide support to
review other relevant legislation such as the Agriculture and Fisheries Management
Act. After the midterm review, it would pilot proposed changes to the codes with
respect to municipal fisheries in selected locations.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
31. A project financing agreement between the Republic of the Philippines and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

32. The Republic of the Philippines is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

33. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
34. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of the Philippines in an amount equivalent to twenty-seven million
three hundred and ten thousand euros (EUR 27,310,000) (equivalent to
approximately US$29.96 million), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Democratic Socialist
Republic of Sri Lanka for the
Smallholder Tea and Rubber Revitalization
Project

Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Smallholder Tea and Rubber Revitalization Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka

Executing agency: Ministry of Plantation Industries

Total project cost: US$65.4 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR 18.45 million (equivalent to approximately
US$25.764 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend terms: Maturity period of 25 years, including agrace period of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of
1.25 per cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per
annum

Cofinancier(s): Bank of Ceylon and People’s Bank

Amount of cofinancing: US$3.25 million

Contribution of borrower: US$32.76 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$3.61 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

1

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka for the Smallholder Tea and
Rubber Revitalization Project, as contained in paragraph 34.

Proposed loan to the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri
Lanka for the Smallholder Tea and Rubber Revitalization
Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The Sri Lankan economy has grown at an impressive pace in recent years,

recording an annual average growth rate of about 7.4 per cent in 2014. The
country is on track to meet most of the Millennium Development Goals and
compares favourably with other countries in its income band in terms of gender
equality. The Government’s development policy framework is articulated in the
Public Investment Strategy 2014-2016, which sets the principal targets as raising
the per capita income to US$4,000 in 2016 and elevating Sri Lanka to the level of a
strong middle-income country. The new Government, initially appointed in January
2015 and then reappointed in September 2015, has maintained these targets.

2. Eighty per cent of Sri Lanka’s population resides in rural areas, and agriculture
remains the backbone of the economy despite its declining share of GDP.
Smallholder farmers are major contributors to food security. The government’s
strategic direction for agriculture is to achieve a sustained improvement in
production through increased productivity and market competitiveness. Poverty is
primarily a rural phenomenon, and the main population groups living in poverty
are: (i) smallholders in crop and plantation production; (ii) plantation workers in
estate areas; (iii) artisanal and small-scale fishers; (iv) women-headed households;
and (v) unemployed and underemployed labourers.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

3. Rationale. The tea and rubber subsectors have been important contributors to the
national economy. Tea smallholders contribute 70 per cent of Sri Lanka's total tea
production while smallholder rubber growers make up 62 per cent of the land under
rubber cultivation. About 50 per cent of the smallholder tea lands are more than 20
years old with less than optimal production capacity. There is a dire need for
replanting, without which many of the smallholders will be pushed below the
poverty line. The Government has a subsidy scheme in place aiming to address
smallholders' difficulty in accessing appropriate financial products for tea replanting.
However, both the timeliness and level of financial support this government scheme
provides remain problematic, and additional financing is needed in order to
strengthen smallholders' participation in the replanting programme. The project will
complement the existing government scheme, and will make it more effective by
providing capital investment support to smallholders at the commencement of tea
replanting.

4. As part of the National Rubber Master Plan, the Government has been promoting
rubber in non-traditional rubber cultivation areas to provide a source of livelihood
for smallholders. This expansion is also a direct response to the demands of the



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

2

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

private sector, which has been calling for greater government support for rubber
production. The Government has introduced proactive policy that supports the
granting of land permits, land clearance and initial rubber cultivation. The project
serves to reinforce the Government's priority of rubber development in non-
traditional areas, focusing support on smallholder production.

5. Alignment with government priorities and the results-based country
strategic opportunities programme (RB-COSOP). The project is directly
aligned with the government’s development priorities as defined in the Public
Investment Strategy 2014-2016, particularly the policy directions for the tea and
rubber subsectors. It is consistent with the RB-COSOP for Sri Lanka (2015-2020)
and contributes directly to its two strategic objectives.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. The project area will cover eight neighbouring districts in central and southern Sri

Lanka, including Galle (tea), Matara (tea), Ratnapura (tea and rubber processing),
Badulla (tea), Kandy (tea), Moneragala (rubber) and Ampara (rubber) and Nuwara
Eliya (tea). A total of 144,000 people, or 32,000 households, are expected to
benefit from the project.

7. The target group of tea interventions will be existing poor smallholder tea growers
having less than one hectare of unproductive tea lands. The target group of rubber
interventions will be smallholders having a holding of one hectare of rubber, to be
selected by poverty level. Gender equality will be one of the criteria used in the
selection of beneficiaries, to ensure that at least 30 per cent of the tea and rubber
growers are women.

B. Project development objective
8. The project goal is to enable poor rural people to improve their food security,

increase their incomes and strengthen their resilience. The development objective
is to ensure that smallholders' economic activities in tea and rubber become more
productive, profitable and resilient.

C. Components/outcomes
9. The project will have three components: (i) tea smallholder development;

(ii) rubber smallholder development; and (iii) inclusive rural financing, to be
supported by project management.

(i) Component 1: Tea smallholder development (approximately US$44.44
million; 69 per cent of total base cost), will promote better organization
among tea smallholders to enable them to effectively and sustainably produce
and market their products. It has three subcomponents: (a) strengthening tea
societies in production and marketing; (b) market-driven production support;
and (c) income and market diversification for tea smallholders.

(ii) Component 2: Rubber smallholder development (approximately
US$14.78 million; 22 per cent of total base cost), will enhance rubber
production and processing of quality rubber products with better market
linkages. It has three subcomponents: (a) strengthening rubber societies,
including processing and market sensitivity, (b) market-driven production
support, and (c) income and market diversification for rubber smallholders.

(iii) Component 3: Inclusive rural financing (approximately US$3.5 million;
6 per cent of the total base cost), will facilitate access by the targeted
smallholders to available bank financing for production, harvesting and
marketing of green tea leaves and rubber products. It has two
subcomponents: (a) facilitating access to lending from the banking system;
and (b) supporting implementation arrangements.



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

3

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

10. The main project outcomes include: (i) 200 revitalized tea societies and 100
strengthened rubber societies able to effectively provide a range of services to their
members; (ii) high-yield tea crops replanted on 5,500 hectares and rubber planted
on 3,000 hectares by smallholders to provide a sustainable source of income and
diversified livelihoods; and (iii) strengthened smallholders undertaking sustainable
commercial business with the private sector.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
11. The project will adhere to the principles of demand-driven participatory

development to ensure that smallholders are the key decision-makers when they
participate in project activities. A value chain approach will be adopted in
identifying the relevant activities from production to processing and marketing.
Overall project implementation will take into account the following key factors: (i) a
large number of smallholders are the predominant producers of tea and rubber;
(ii) the private sector is keen to enhance tea and rubber production in order to
meet the growing market demand for these commodities, as well as to promote
sustainable and responsible farming; (iii) the formal banking sector is unable to
effectively provide the needed lending products due to their loan processing
procedures and risk aversion to rural lending; (iv) there is a need to strengthen the
capacity of government extension staff; there is also a need to put in place an
implementation strategy that is sustainable and does not lead to friction with
existing line agency staff; and (v) the cadre of village-level government staff can be
effectively employed for project implementation.

B. Organizational framework
12. The lead agency for the project will be the Ministry of Plantation Industries (MPI).

MPI will (i) appoint a senior staff member to supervise the overall implementation
of the project; (ii) set up a national steering committee to guide and steer project
implementation; and (iii) establish a project management unit (PMU) responsible
for daily project operations. The PMU will be headed by a project manager. District
level implementation will be the responsibility of the Tea Small Holdings
Development Authority (TSHDA) and the Rubber Development Department (RDD),
two of MPI's main constituent institutions. The district office of TSHDA, headed by
the TSHDA regional manager, and that of RDD headed by the RDD deputy director,
will act as the district project management cell (DPMC).

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

13. Planning. The project logframe will be the basis for preparing the annual work plan
and budget (AWP/B). The logframe will be refined periodically to reflect any
changes and adjustments that may be necessary during the life of the project. The
overall responsibility for AWP/B preparation will rest with the project manager, with
support from the TSHDA regional manager for tea and the RDD deputy director for
rubber at the district level. The district project AWP/Bs will be prepared by the
TSHDA regional manager or the RDD deputy director. The project manager will be
responsible for consolidating the district AWP/Bs into the overall project AWP/B, for
approval by the national steering committee and then no-objection by IFAD.

14. Monitoring and evaluation (M&E). The project will establish an effective and
efficient M&E system to provide comprehensive, frequent and reliable data and
information for sound result-based management and decision-making. The overall
responsibility for the project M&E activities will lie with the PMU, specifically its M&E
coordinator, who will be responsible for ensuring the consistency, accuracy and
timeliness of all project reporting. All M&E activities will be based on the IFAD
guidelines for project M&E and the Results and Impact Management System (RIMS)
first- and second-level indicators handbook. All indicators will be disaggregated by



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

4

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

gender and socio-economic status to allow for a proper assessment of poverty and
gender targeting.

15. Learning and knowledge management will be a key underlying theme. The
project is expected to offer valuable opportunities for learning at the policy,
operational and technical levels because it has certain novel features that can make
the existing government scheme for tea replanting and rubber expansion more
effective. In addition, the project can contribute to restructuring the manner in
which the group rubber processing centres are financed and operated as business
enterprises; demonstrating the use of eco-restoration to enhance tea yields;
promoting partnership with the private sector for better market linkages; and
enhancing the access to existing bank lending products for tea and rubber
production and other income-generating activities.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
16. Financial management. MPI as the lead project agency will be responsible for

overall financial management. The financial management arrangements will, to the
extent feasible, be mainstreamed into government systems. Operational day-to-day
fiduciary functions will be the responsibility of the PMU embedded within MPI, in
liaison with the DPMCs attached to district-level TSHDA and RDD offices. The PMU’s
financial management role will include consolidating AWP/Bs, managing the flow of
funds, maintaining project bank accounts, processing disbursement requests,
consolidating interim financial reports, and preparing annual financial statements
for audit. The PMU will put in place an imprest mechanism for the release of
adequate funds to DPMCs. It will also be responsible for ensuring that district-level
finance staff are provided with appropriate training and guidance with regard to
reporting expenditure and procurement. The financial management risk for the
project is rated medium. Measures to be put in place to mitigate this risk include
qualified and experienced financial staff, a detailed financial and accounting
manual, automated accounting processes (accounting software), quarterly financial
reporting, and internal and external audit.

17. Flow of funds. MPI will be responsible for managing the flow of funds from the
IFAD loan proceeds and the government counterpart funds, opening and
maintaining the designated account in United States dollars at the Central Bank of
Sri Lanka to receive initial deposit and replenishments, obtaining the agreed
counterpart funds from the General Treasury, forwarding imprest applications
prepared by the PMU to obtain advances from the designated account to meet
project requirements, and scrutinizing and forwarding withdrawal applications to
IFAD. MPI will make adequate annual budgetary provisions for both IFAD and
counterpart funds in the national budget, based on the project AWP/B.

18. Audit. The Auditor General, who is constitutionally mandated to audit all
government accounts and reports to Parliament annually, will perform the external
audit of the project. The Auditor General will submit audited financial statements
and a detailed audit report along with a management letter no later than six
months after the end of the financial year.

19. Procurement. Procurement of goods, works and services financed by the project
will be carried out in accordance with the national procurement guidelines to the
extent that they are consistent with IFAD's project procurement guidelines. The
procurement methods to be applied in each case will depend on the expenditure
and the estimated value of the contract. The thresholds for the different
procurement methods will be detailed in the letter to the borrower.

20. Governance. In line with its anti-corruption policy, IFAD will apply zero tolerance in
respect of fraudulent, corrupt, collusive and coercive action.



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

5

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

E. Supervision
21. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD which, with government

collaboration, will conduct annual supervision missions, regular implementation
support missions, a midterm review and a completion review.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
22. The total project cost is estimated at US$65.4 million including contingencies

(US$3.8 million) over a period of six years. Project costs are organized into: (i) tea
smallholders development (69 per cent of total base costs); (ii) rubber smallholders
development (22 per cent of total baseline costs); (iii) inclusive rural financing
(6 per cent of the base cost); and (iv) project management (4 per cent of total
baseline costs).
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Tea smallholder
development 16 380 36.9 - - 1 955 4.4 26 107 58.7 44 442 68.0

2. Rubber smallholder
development 7 635 51.6 15 0.1 1 654 11.2 5 480 37.1 14 783 22.6

3. Inclusive rural financing 50 1.4 3 251 92.8 - - 201 5.7 3 502 5.4

4. Project management 1 699 63.6 - - - - 974 36.4 2 674 4.1

Total 25 764 39.4 3 266 5 3 610 5.5 32 762 50.1 65 401

B. Project financing
23. IFAD will provide a loan equivalent to US$25.764 million on blend terms; the

Government will provide counterpart funds equivalent to US$32.76 million; the two
participating banks will provide an amount equivalent to US$3.25 million as a line
of credit from their own funds; and the beneficiaries’ contribution is estimated at
US$3.61 million.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan
Other

cofinanciers Beneficiaries Borrower/Counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 4 491 60.5 - - 1 772 23.9 1 162 15.6 7 425
2. Vehicles 686 41.0 - - - - 987 59.0 1 674
3. Equipment and materials 3 985 72.0 - - 1 332 24.1 219 4.0 5 536
4. Consultancies 587 89.5 - - - - 69 10.5 656
5. Credit - - 3 000 100 - - - - 3 000
6. Goods, services and

inputs 2 028 75.1 - - 505 18.7 169 6.2 2 702
7. Capital grants and

government subsidy 9 624 27.0 - - - - 26 000 73.0 35 624
8. Training 1 294 67.3 251 13 - - 364 18.9 1 923
9. Salaries and allowances 1 645 41.0 - - - - 2 369 59 4 014
10. Operating costs 1 424 50.0 - - - - 1 424 50 2 847
Total 25 764 39.4 3 251 5 3 610 5.5 32 762 50.1 62 504

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
24. The project is expected to benefit a total of about 32,000 households and 144,000

people. Women-headed and poor households will be targeted in particular. The
project's support for tea replanting and intercropping will lead to increased yields



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

6

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

from tea as well as from appropriate inter-crops such as pepper. On average, a
household’s production benefits will increase from 3,000 kg/ha to over 14,000
kg/ha of fresh tea leaves in a year over a 20-year period, at a minimum.
Smallholders planting rubber will be able to benefit from a steady income from
latex, the average production of which is expected to be 2,160 kg per year for the
next 30 years. The project will contribute to institutional sustainability at the village
level by strengthening tea and rubber societies and linking them with private-sector
partners. The project's economic internal rate of return is estimated at 26 per cent.

D. Sustainability
25. There are strong elements in the project design that will enhance the sustainability

of benefits for smallholders. The most significant investment will be in the
replanting of tea and planting of rubber trees on new lands. The tea plantations are
expected to provide yields for another 20 to 25 years while the planting of rubber
trees is expected to provide benefits for 30 to 35 years. The quality of produce will
be ensured through the provision of high quality plants from nurseries certified by
the Tea Research Institute and the Rubber Research Institute. The marketing of tea
and rubber is not an issue in the country as there is high demand for both. Due to
the acute shortage of rubber, any additional rubber product can easily be
marketed. The ability of smallholders to convert latex into ribbed sheets will
enhance shelf life, and this in turn will make marketing easier. The increased
capacity of the smallholders to undertake intercropping and other small enterprises
through project support will enhance the sustainability of their livelihoods.
Smallholders' livelihoods will be further enhanced by increased incomes generated
from linkages with the private sector and implementation of the business models.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
26. The first risk is smallholder's lack of capital to invest in the replanting of old tea

crops and new rubber lands and also in processing equipment. This will be
addressed by providing capital support upfront to supplement government
financing. The second risk is the unavailability of plant materials, which can be
addressed by supporting private nurseries for tea and the large RDD nursery in the
Ampara district for rubber to provide the required plant materials. The third risk is
related to the timely regularization of land for the new rubber plantations. This is
currently being proactively addressed by MPI in collaboration with the Forest
Department and the Mahaweli Development Authority, both of which have agreed
to make the lands available immediately upon project start-up. The fourth risk is
farmer groups' low management and negotiating capacity, poor access to roads,
lack of transport and market information. These will be addressed through capacity-
building for tea and rubber societies and by supporting farm roads for enhanced
accessibility. Finally, the risk of climatic factors such as drought leading to lower
yields will be mitigated through the adoption of good agricultural practices,
including soil renovation and soil moisture management.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
27. The project is in line with IFAD policies, specifically: (i) the project target group has

been clearly defined and the selection of the project area is in keeping with IFAD's
targeting policy; (ii) in compliance with IFAD's gender policy, the project will make
special provision for the targeting of women, and gender disaggregated indicators
will be used to monitor women's participation; (iii) in line with IFAD's private sector
strategy, the project will place a strong emphasis on further developing and
strengthening the smallholders' linkages with licensed tea and rubber collectors and
processors; (iv) in keeping with the IFAD rural finance policy, the project will
facilitate access of smallholders to available financing for production, harvesting
and marketing of green tea leaves and rubber products; and (v) the design has
capitalized on the IFAD strategies and guidance tools for natural resource



EB 2015/116/R.20/Rev.1

7

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

management, climate change and environment, and has structured the project
activities in a way that will bring positive environmental impact and socio-economic
benefits to the communities.

B. Alignment and harmonization
28. The project is aligned with the Government’s development priorities for the tea and

rubber subsectors, and supports the implementation of the newly developed
National Rubber Master Plan. It will complement the ongoing government
programmes for smallholder tea replanting and rubber production. The project will
explore and support diverse types of partnerships between the project beneficiaries
and the private sector for enhanced access to market and financial services.

C. Innovations and scaling up
29. The project will vertically scale up to new geographic areas the successful

interventions in support of smallholder tea and rubber production initiated through
the IFAD-financed Smallholder Entrepreneurship Development Programme. It will
provide funding support for business models that link smallholders with the private
sector to ensure effective market access. The project will also partner with two
state banks to enhance smallholders' access to existing financial products specific
to tea and rubber.

D. Policy engagement
30. The project will facilitate the conduct of studies to assess the role and contribution

of the up-front capital grant in encouraging tea smallholders' participation in the tea
replanting scheme. The results of such studies will be used to initiate policy
dialogue with the Government on reviewing and possibly revising its subsidy
scheme to make it more effective for smallholders.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
31. A project financing agreement between the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri

Lanka and IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed
financing to the borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached
as appendix I.

32. The Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka is empowered under its laws to
receive financing from IFAD.

33. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
34. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the
Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka in an amount equivalent to
eighteen million four hundred and fifty thousand special drawing rights
(SDR 18,450,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

















































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Socialist Republic of
Viet Nam for the Commercial Smallholder
Support Project in Bắc Kan and Cao Bằng


Socialist Republic of Viet Nam

Commercial Smallholder Support Project in Bắc Kạn and
Cao Bằng

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Government of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam

Executing agencies: Provincial People’s Committees

Total project cost: US$74.3 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$42.5 million

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: maturity period of 25 years, including a graceperiod of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of 1.25 per
cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum.

Amount of IFAD grant: US$0.5 million

Contribution of borrower: US$20.6 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$10.7 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD


Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for the Commercial Smallholder
Support Project in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng, as contained in paragraph 39.

Proposed loan to the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam for
the Commercial Smallholder Support Project in Bắc Kạn
and Cao Bằng

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Since the introduction of comprehensive economic reforms known as Đổi Mới

(renovation) in 1986, Viet Nam’s economy has sustained strong economic growth.
Gross domestic product grew at an average of 7.2 per cent per annum over the
past 20 years, reducing poverty rapidly and lifting almost 30 million people out of
poverty since the 1990s. Viet Nam was classified as a lower-middle-income country
in 2009 and achieved five out of the eight Millennium Development Goals by 2010.
Under the higher poverty threshold issued by the Government’s Statistical Office in
2014, 17.2 per cent of the population are now considered to be living below the
poverty line. These achievements have been accompanied by structural shifts in
the economy. Between 1990 and 2012, the contribution of agriculture to GDP
decreased by more than 20 per cent, to 18 per cent in 2013. The proportion of the
labour force engaged in agriculture also decreased from more than 80 per cent in
the 1990s to an estimated 46.3 per cent in 2014.

2. Notwithstanding the economic transition under way towards industrialization,
agriculture continues to play an important role in maintaining Viet Nam’s economic
stability. The agricultural and rural sectors of the economy have, in recent years,
demonstrated solid annual growth of approximately 4.5 per cent due to
liberalization and private sector engagement. The development of the rural
economy, however, is still comparatively slow and not sustainable in many areas
due to inadequate linkages to markets, limited access to rural finance and
technology, and the impacts of climate change.

3. In rural areas, poverty remains a chronic problem, disproportionately affecting
ethnic-minority communities. It is concentrated in the upland areas of the
north-east and north-west, the central coastal region and parts of the central
highlands. While economic development has improved living standards in rural
areas, it has also contributed to income inequity and environmental degradation.
Despite the gains in per capita income in rural areas, tackling residual poverty is a
persistent challenge owing to limited assets, low levels of education and poor
health, particularly among ethnic minorities, who are disproportionately
over-represented among the rural poor.

4. Rural areas have less than half the average per capita income of urban areas but
almost thrice the poverty rate. Many rural households are not considered poor but
maintain an income level just above the poverty line. With little or no savings or
Government support and an almost-total dependence on natural resource
gathering and subsistence farming, they are vulnerable to unexpected life events,
climate shocks and the degradation of land and water resources. Approximately
90 per cent of each rural person’s total spending is to meet basic living costs. The
majority of their income is derived from agriculture, forestry or aquaculture
production and wages from mostly unskilled manual labour. The provinces of


Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng are among the poorest in Viet Nam, with 14.2 per cent of
households classified as poor and 9.4 per cent as near poor in Bắc Kạn, and
21.4 per cent classified as poor and 10 per cent as near poor in Cao Bằng.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

5. The Commercial Smallholder Support Project in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng (CSSP) was
outlined during the development of the Viet Nam country strategic opportunities
programme (COSOP) 2012-2017 and included in the pipeline of projects that
received government approval. CSSP financing includes a loan of US$42.5 million
and a grant of US$0.5 million to scale up IFAD-supported approaches at the
national level through the National Target Programme for New Rural Development
(NTP-NRD) implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development. A
rigorous process of consultation, analysis and participatory design involving
provincial authorities was undertaken from late 2014 to 2016 to identify change
issues and areas of intervention.

6. The CSSP is fully aligned with the Government’s Socio-economic Development
Strategy 2016-20 (SEDS), the NTP-NRD, National Target Project on Sustainable
Poverty Reduction and National Target Project to Respond to Climate Change. The
CSSP is designed in accordance with the strategic objectives of the current COSOP,
seeking to: (i) enable poor rural provinces to carry out market-led pro-poor rural
development; (ii) improve access among the rural poor, particularly women, to
commodity and labour markets; and (iii) enhance the capacity of poor rural
households to adapt to climate change. Agriculture accounts for more than
70 per cent of employment in the project provinces. Significant market demand
and opportunities for improved productivity and value addition exist in the forestry,
non-timber forest products, livestock, ginger, canna, fruit, cassava and peanut
subsectors in the two provinces. Opportunities also exist in ecotourism
development.

7. The CSSP builds on two IFAD-financed initiatives: Developing Business with the
Rural Poor Programme and the Pro-poor Partnership for Agroforestry Development
Project, which ended in 2013 and 2015, respectively. Both were rated “successful”
in the light of sharp reductions in household poverty levels, the adoption of
broad-based strategies to improve productivity, the mainstreaming of a
comprehensive decentralization and community-empowerment strategy
(Cao Bằng), infrastructure development supporting enhanced agricultural
production and market access, and strengthened agricultural value chains
(Bắc Kạn).

8. Based on this progress, the Provincial People’s Committees (PPCs) in the two
provinces identified further areas for poverty reduction efforts, including:
promoting market-oriented production focusing on high-value crops and animal
production; providing sustainable non-State rural financial services, especially for
women; strengthening linkages between enterprises and farmers through
agribusiness-promotion funds; and developing upland production systems with due
attention to natural resource management and climate change adaptation.

9. Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng still face many development constraints, including
inadequate capacity for market-oriented development and investment planning,
poor agribusiness and risk-management skills, lack of access to finance, and
inadequate rural infrastructure, in particular for upland economic activities. These
constraints are exacerbated by the effects of intense rainfall, producing floods and
soil erosion, and unseasonable drought, resulting in crop and livestock losses.

10. CSSP will scale up innovations developed by other IFAD-financed projects in
Viet Nam, with an emphasis on: (i) the expansion of private sector investment in
production and value addition in profitable commodity chains; (ii) the institutional



strengthening, training and capacity-building of existing agencies and local
authorities; (iii) the integration of participatory bottom-up planning, budgeting and
implementation; and (iv) broad-based reform as part of private
sector-development policy to ensure increased competitiveness and the expansion
of rural household incomes and asset-generating opportunities, particularly for poor
people. The Government through NTP-NRD is providing significant cofinancing for
CSSP, indicating a strong sense of commitment and ownership. The US$100 million
Asian Development Bank Basic Infrastructure for Inclusive Growth in North-eastern
Provinces Project, due to commence in 2017, is expected to complement CSSP
investments.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
11. Project area. The project will be implemented in the north-eastern provinces of

Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng in Viet Nam. Participatory process in both provinces
identified 70 communes based on poverty rates, vulnerability to natural disasters,
the commitment of local leadership and the potential to develop pro-poor value
chains.

12. Target population. The project target groups will comprise: (i) rural poor and
near-poor households with land and available labour, including household
enterprises; (ii) unskilled employed rural people; (iii) rural people who lack
productive land but have business acumen and desire; and (iv) farmers who have
the skills to promote commercial agricultural production. Women and
woman-headed and ethnic-minority households will be prioritized among this target
group.

B. Project development objective
13. The overall objective of the project is to contribute to sustainable poverty reduction

in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng. The development objective is to sustainably improve the
income and reduce the climate vulnerability of poor and near-poor farm
households.

C. Components/outcomes
14. The project comprises three main components and a project management

component:

 Component 1: Institutionalized provincial participatory planning. This
component aims to ensure that provincial socio-economic development
planning is legislated, holistic, participatory, climate-adapted and
market-oriented. It has three subcomponents that together underpin the
Market-Oriented Participatory Socio-economic Development Planning
(MOP-SEDP) process.

(i) Strategic investment plan. During the first year of the project, this
subcomponent will support provincial project coordination offices
(PPCOs), backed by international technical assistance, in conducting
financial and economic analysis of key commodity and associated value
chains in both provinces to be incorporated into provincial, district and
communal MOP-SEDPs.

(ii) Climate change-adaptation planning. This subcomponent,
spearheaded by the Provincial Ministries of Natural Resources,
Environment and Planning, will support: (a) the updating of provincial
climate change action plans; (b) awareness-raising of climate change
risks at the commune, district and provincial levels to improve
resilience; and (c) the building of capacities to integrate climate change
adaptation into the MOP-SEDP process.



(iii) Dissemination of climate-informed market-oriented
socio-economic development plans. This subcomponent will roll out
the climate-adapted MOP-SEDP through: (a) strengthened public sector
market economy skills; and (b) focused support to adapt the instrument
to scale. At the commune and district levels – initially in project target
districts and then throughout the two provinces – the project will
facilitate the integration of commodity-based value chain development
(subcomponent ) and climate change-adaptation plans
(subcomponent ii) through a participatory process. This process will
engage relevant entities at the village, commune and district levels and
include all public funding sources, including CSSP and NTP-NRD funds.
Women’s representation in MOP-SEDP planning will be prioritized.

 Component 2: A greener agricultural future. This component will support
the Government’s ambitious green growth agenda by promoting climate
change-adaption technologies that also provide mitigation benefits. It has two
subcomponents:

(i) Forest land and forest allocation. This subcomponent will support
the equitable ownership and efficient use of productive forest resources
in all Bắc Kạn target communes through certification, rehabilitation and
the issuing of forest land and use rights, directly contributing to carbon
sequestration. The project will facilitate the transfer of land and use
rights certificates for 17,000 hectares of forest land to poor households.
Certificates will be issued jointly to both wife and husband.

(ii) Common interest groups (CIGs) for climate adaptation. This
subcomponent will support the establishment or strengthening of
approximately 1,900 CIGs to implement profitable climate
change-adaptation technologies and practices within a value chain
framework, with co-benefits for climate change mitigation. In this
context, forage production will be integrated into farming systems, with
co-benefits for soil fertility and stability. A competitive grant programme
for CIGs whose membership comprises at least 40 per cent women will
support climate change-adaption technologies such as afforestation,
irrigation management, climate-resistant crop varieties,
system-of-rice-intensification rice, forage production, minimum tillage
and organic agriculture.

 Component 3: Profitable farms linked to finance and markets. This
third component aims to ensure increased public and private investment in
sustainable, profitable commodity production and value addition. It comprises
three subcomponents:

(i) Community infrastructure. Public infrastructure investment grants
will be available for investments by communes providing public benefits
essential to targeted commodity-chain development and/or climate
change or disaster preparedness. This activity will be integrated into the
NTP-NRD agriculture infrastructure investment process, which will be
funded by a government contribution. In this context, a vocational
training programme targeting young people will be supported with a
view to generating employment.

(ii) Rural financial services. Newly established Women’s Development
Funds (WDFs) in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng will be supported as an
effective means of improving financial inclusion in the rural communes
of the project area. This will include capacity-building for the WDFs, the
establishment of new women’s savings and credit groups, and seed
capital for lending operations. Support will also be provided to



transform WDFs into fully sustainable microfinance institutions (MFIs) at
project end in accordance with State Bank regulations.

(iii) Agribusiness Promotion Investment Fund (APIF). By establishing
such a fund, the project will provide cofinancing to catalyse
approximately 25 private sector agro-enterprise investments that
improve enterprise competitiveness and linkages to smallholder
farmers, thereby generating incremental markets for raw materials,
value addition and employment. Fund co-investments will be awarded
on a competitive basis, for equipment, transportation and marketing,
environmental management, staff training and technical advisory
services to farmers.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
15. The CSSP will be implemented over the six-year period from 2017 to 2023. The

project will adopt similar implementation arrangements to those used successfully
in other IFAD projects but with a greater role played by the responsible provincial
departments, supported by the PPCOs. In addition, great emphasis will placed on
the decentralization of resources to districts and communes and on private sector
involvement.

B. Organizational framework
16. CSSP will be implemented through the PPCs of Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng, which will

establish PPCOs to coordinate project implementation in their respective provinces
and steering committees to assist the PPCs in guiding government agencies, major
nationwide organizations, the private sector and communities at all levels to
achieve the project objectives. Inter-provincial PPCO meetings will be held twice
per year to foster cooperation in such areas as climate change-adaptation policy,
the identification of shared technical assistance, inter-provincial value chain
planning, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), and learning and knowledge
management.

17. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. The M&E system will monitor
performance and assess the impact of activities. Monitoring will focus on
activities/inputs, outputs, outcomes, performance and risks, while evaluation will
assess the relevance, efficiency, effectiveness and impact on poverty reduction,
business growth, environment, empowerment, sustainability, lessons learned and
knowledge uptake. Both provinces have relevant M&E experience from previous
projects. The M&E system will cover the operational and financial aspects of the
project alike. The annual workplan and budget will be the key planning document
for the project and will be harmonized with the SEDP cycle.

18. Learning and knowledge management. This will comprise two approaches:
(i) knowledge management within the project will support learning among its
components; and (ii) support for a broader set of knowledge management
activities aimed at informing government decision-makers and influencing policy.
Regarding policy development, the experience of a single province, while
important, is unlikely to influence national policy relating to the MOP-SEDP or APIF.
However, the cumulative knowledge from relevant IFAD project experiences in
Viet Nam is substantial and will continue to grow. In this context, each PPCO will
produce an annual knowledge resource addressing the key areas of the IFAD
country programme – namely, private sector investment in upland areas, the
response of poor households to agricultural business opportunities, the
implementation of the MOP-SEDP process and the evolution of WDFs into MFIs – to
feed into national policy dialogue.



C. Financial management, procurement and governance
19. Financial management. The PPCOs will be responsible and accountable to the

Government of Viet Nam and IFAD for the proper use of funds, in line with the
respective legal agreements, subsidiary financing agreements for financial
institutions and contractual arrangements for service providers. The project
financial management arrangements will ensure that funds are used for the
intended purpose in an efficient and cost-effective manner through internal controls
and capacity-building at all levels. The existing computerized accounting system
will be used for bookkeeping and reporting. The accounting systems will provide
detailed financial statements of the operations, resources and expenditures related
to the project for each fiscal year, prepared in accordance with standards and
procedures acceptable to IFAD, and deliver such financial statements to IFAD in a
timely manner. The IFAD financial management assessment rated the fiduciary risk
as medium. However, both provinces have extensive experience in managing
externally financed projects, including IFAD-financed projects, with good outcomes
and accountability frameworks in general.

20. Flow of funds. IFAD will disburse funds in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the financing agreement. Project funds will flow from IFAD via three
designated accounts: two for loan funds and one for grant funds, the latter
operated by the Ministry of Finance in accordance with imprest fund arrangements.

21. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and consulting services financed
by IFAD will be carried out in compliance with IFAD Project Procurement Guidelines.
National procurement procedures, processes and regulations will be applied to the
extent that they are consistent with the IFAD Guidelines.

22. Internal control and external audit. Internal control systems at the PPCO level
will be established. An external audit will be carried out, in compliance with the
International Standards on Auditing and the IFAD Guidelines on Project Audits, of
the consolidated financial statements of both provinces covering loan and grant
funds. Independent external auditors will be appointed in a timely way. The audited
financial statements and audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within the six
months following the close of each fiscal year.

23. Governance. All major cofinancing allocations will be endorsed by the project
steering committee, approved by the PPC and, above certain thresholds, subject to
no objection from IFAD. Cofinancing at the commune level will be the result of an
open and equitable SEDP-based decision-making process that includes a
dispute-resolution mechanism. The IFAD Country Office capacity in project financial
monitoring was strengthened by the recruitment of an additional staff member in
mid-2013, improving the capacity for periodic oversight and support for PPCOs,
including spot checks and strong supervision of audit processes.

D. Supervision
24. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD through the country office in

accordance with the existing arrangements in Viet Nam.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
25. The total project cost is estimated at US$74.3 million. Indicative component costs

are detailed in table 1. Indicative project costs by expenditure category and
financier are provided in table 2.


Table 1
Indicative project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Province-based participatory planning
institutionalized 2,193.8 27.2 - - 5857.7 72.8 8,051.5

1.1 Strategic investment plan 108.0 77.0 - - 32.2 23 140.2
1.2 Climate change adaptation plan 944.6 75.9 - - 299.9 24.0 1,244.5
1.3 Climate-informed, market-
oriented socio-economic plans 1,141.2 17.1 - - 5525.7 82.8 6,666.8

2. A greener agricultural future 8,654.7 62.7 - - 3,557.3 25.8 1,582.8 11.4 13,794.9
2.1 Forest land and forest allocation 1,626.2 63.8 - - 232.3 9.1 691.1 27.1 2,549.7
2.2 CIGs for climate adaptation 7,028.5 62.5 - - 3,325.0 29.6 891.7 7.9 11,245.1

3. Profitable farms linked to finance and
markets 29,933.3 70.0 - - 7,183.7 16.8 5,670.2 13.3 42,787.2

3.1 Community infrastructure 21,330.8 69.2 - - 3,984.1 12.1 5.513.5 17.9 30,828.4
3.2 Rural financial services 4,557.8 96.7 - - - 156.6 3.3 4,714.4
3.3 Agriculture promotion
investment fund 4044.7 55.8 - - 3,199.6 44.2 - - 7,244.3

4. Programme management 7,718.3 18.7 - - - - 7,486.5 81.3 9,204.8
5. NTP-NRD National Coordination
Office Grant - - 500.0 100.0 - - - - 500.0

Total 42,500.0 57.2 500.0 0.7 10,741.0 14.4 20,597.2 27.8 74,338.3

B. Project financing
26. The project will be financed by: (i) an IFAD loan of approximately US$42.5 million

(57.2 per cent of total project); (ii) an IFAD grant of approximately US$0.5 million
(0.7 per cent); (iii) a government contribution of approximately US$20.6 million
(27.8 per cent); and (iv) a beneficiary contribution of approximately
US$10.7 million (14.4 per cent). Reimbursement of eligible expenditures incurred
after approval but before entry into force will be permitted up to a limit of
US$300 000 for each province.

Table 2
Indicative project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries Borrower/ counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 14.5 90.0 - - - - 1.6 10.0 16.2

2. Equipment and
materials

1,227.0 90.0 - - - - 136.3 10.0 1,363.3

3. Vehicles 94.2 50.0 - - - - 94.2 50.0 188.3

4. Consultancies 2,675.9 33.3 500.0 6.2 - - 4.862.0 60.5 8,041.5

5. Training 1,765.1 46.7 - - - - 2,015.9 53.3 3,781.0

6. Grants 32,969.6 66.2 - - 10,741.0 21.6 6.096.2 12.2 49,906.9

7. Credit 3,750.0 100.0 - - - - - - 3,750.0

5. Salaries and
allowances

- - - - - - 3,806.8 100.0 3,806.8

6. Operating costs - - - - - - 3,584.2 100.0 3,584.2

Total 42,500.0 57.2 500.0 0.7 10,741.0 14.4 20,597.2. 27.8 74,338.3


C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
27. The economic analysis determined CSSP to be robust, with an economic internal

rate of return (EIRR) of 14.8 per cent and a net present value discounted at nine
per cent of approximately US$27.0 million. An increase in project costs by
10 per cent would reduce the EIRR to 13.2 per cent, while a decrease in overall
project benefits by 20 per cent would result in an EIRR of 11.3 per cent.
Considering the possibility of a combination of a 20 per cent reduction in
incremental benefits with a two-year delay in benefits, the EIRR would be reduced
to 8.0 per cent. The switching values indicate that the project would remain
economically viable if benefits decreased by 31 per cent or project costs increased
by 46 per cent.

28. The main benefits from CSSP are: (i) increased crop, forest and livestock
productivity and production that is more resilient to the impacts of climate change
as well as improved access to better and more affordable inputs and their
application; (ii) increased proportion of farm produce successfully marketed;
(iii) reduced losses during production and processing; (iv) enhanced value addition
along value chains and improved product quality; (v) enhanced access to
longer-term financial services and cofinancing for productive investments;
(vi) increased employment; and (vii) increased government tax revenues.

29. The project is expected to provide significant direct benefits to at least 135,000
people or 30,000 poor or near-poor households, each expected to grow its assets
by at least 20 per cent. This will be achieved through a combination of
capacity-building, technology transfer and access to finance, supported by
upgraded community infrastructure and cofinancing of innovative investments in
their farming value chain operations.

D. Sustainability
30. The project is focused on enhancing private sector activity and competitiveness in

the specific subsectors targeted for investment. The most important determinant of
the sustainability of such investments, and thereby of their expected benefits, is
their continued profitability. The approach adopted will provide strong grounds for
the expectation that a large majority of investments will endure. The main tools to
enhance prospects for private business sustainability include: (i) enhanced capacity
of government staff, farmers and private rural enterprise actors to analyse and
prioritize investment choices; (ii) rigorous scrutiny of business proposals and
collaborating financial institutions; (iii) the commitment of a substantial proportion
of investment from the client’s own financial resources; (iv) complementary public
investment in infrastructure to improve business conditions and reduce costs; and
(v) a focused investment approach within the communes provided by the
MOP-SEDP process.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
31. The main risk to the overall project objective relates to external macroeconomic

shocks. Such risks are ever present in a relatively open economy such as that of
Viet Nam, particularly when a high proportion of income is derived from export
revenue. At the national level, sound macroeconomic policies, including
market-determined exchange rates, are the main means to mitigate such risk. The
main mitigation measures at the project and enterprise levels are the emphasis on
sound project financial analysis, with emphasis on quality, high productivity and
low cost-per-unit output value. A major socio-economic risk relates to climatic
disaster. The project will advance the climate change-adaptation agenda and
ensure that all project-financed interventions are adapted to the changing climatic
conditions. The relatively weak private business environments in both provinces
pose a further significant risk. Both PPCs have agreed to work with CSSP to create
a more favourable business environment, including by benchmarking their
provincial performance against provinces with high competitiveness indices.


V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
32. The CSSP takes into account key IFAD policies and strategies relating to targeting,

gender, land, ethnic peoples and climate change contributing to the overall
objectives of the current Strategic Framework 2016-2025 and in particular to:
(i) a natural resource and economic asset base for poor rural women and men that
is more resilient to climate change, environmental degradation and market
transformation; and (ii) access for poor rural women and men to services to reduce
poverty, raise income and build resilience in a changing environment. Most
activities related to environmental impact fall under category B.

B. Alignment and harmonization
33. As noted above, the concept note for the CSSP was included in the COSOP project

pipeline and, as such, is aligned with the Government’s development priorities. The
programme underpins the NTP-NRD by supporting the development of market
options for the poor segments of the rural population, creating the necessary
change of mindset at the household level and building capacity to plan market
activities at the commune level.

C. Innovations and scaling up
34. The CSSP approach taken will consolidate and scale up the successes of past

interventions, within the strategic framework of the NTP-NRD, for which a
substantial increase in central government funding is anticipated. Innovations
related to climate-adapted and market-oriented participatory planning and poverty
reduction have been successfully piloted in various IFAD-supported projects in
Viet Nam, including in Bắc Kạn and Cao Bằng. While the commitment of project
provinces to these approaches is significant – particularly for the roll-out of a
provincial MOP-SEDP process – a more rigorous and better market-oriented
approach is required for the effective stimulation and sustainable financing of
private sector investment in agricultural production and value addition along
profitable value chains. IFAD is supporting the roll-out of WDFs in 11 provinces,
with support for these activities under CCSP a part of this scaling-up effort.

D. Policy engagement
35. Along with the World Bank, IFAD has been requested by the Ministry of Agriculture

and Rural Development to assist in an assessment of NTP-NRD phase one and
provide recommendations for phase two, for which the National Assembly has
allocated approximately US$3 billion. The final recommended framework was
submitted to the Government mid-2016. This initiative, along with the grant under
CSSP, provides ample opportunity to scale up IFAD’s collective experiences and
approaches to the national level.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
36. A project financing agreement between the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and IFAD

will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached.

37. The Socialist Republic of Viet Nam is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

38. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



VII. Recommendation
39. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam in an amount equivalent to forty two million
five hundred thousand US dollars (US$ 42.5 million), and upon such terms
and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

FURTHER RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the
Socialist Republic of Viet Nam in an amount equivalent to five hundred
thousand US dollars (US$0.5 million), and upon such terms and conditions as
shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





