












































Note to Executive Board representatives

Focal points:

Technical questions: Dispatch of documentation:

Abdelhamid Abdouli
Country Programme Manager
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2248
e-mail: a.abdouli@ifad.org

Alessandra Zusi Bergés
Officer-in-Charge
Governing Bodies Office
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2092
e-mail: gb_office@ifad.org

For: Approval

Document: EB 2015/LOT/P.23/Rev.1

EDate: 12 November 2015Distribution: Public
Original: English

President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the
Republic of Turkey for the Göksu Taşeli
Watershed Development Project



EB 2015/LOT/P.23/Rev.1

i

Contents

Abbreviations and acronyms ii
Map of the project area iii
Financing summary iv
Recommendation for approval 1
I. Strategic context and rationale 1

A. Country and rural development, and poverty context 1
B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and results-

based country strategic opportunities programme (RB-COSOP) 1
II. Project description 2

A. Project area and target group 2
B. Project development objective 2
C. Components/outcomes 2

III. Project implementation 3
Approach 3A.
Organizational framework 4B.
Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management 4
Financial management, procurement and governance 4D.
Supervision 5E.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits 5
A. Project costs 5
B. Project financing 5
C. Summary benefit and economic analysis 6
D. Sustainability 6
E. Risk identification and mitigation 6

V. Corporate considerations 7
Compliance with IFAD policies 7A.
Alignment and harmonization 7B.
Innovations and scaling up 7C.
Policy engagement 7D.

VI. Legal instruments and authority 8
VII. Recommendation 8

Appendices
I. Negotiated financing agreement
II. Logical framework



EB 2015/LOT/P.23/Rev.1

ii

Abbreviations and acronyms

AWPB annual workplans and budgets
CPMU central project management unit
FO farmers’ organizations
MAPs medicinal and aromatic plants
PPMUs provincial project management units
RB-COSOP results-based country strategic opportunities programme
SIP strategic investment plan



EB 2015/LOT/P.23/Rev.1

iii

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Map of the project area

Turkey
Göksu Taşeli Watershed Development Project



EB 2015/LOT/P.23/Rev.1

iv

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Republic of Turkey

Göksu Taşeli Watershed Development Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of Turkey

Executing agency: Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock

Total project cost: US$25 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 15.95 million (equivalent to approximately
US$17.89 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: EUR 0.35 million (equivalent to approximately
US$0.4 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including a grace
period of 5 years, with an interest rate per annum equal
to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference interest rate

Contribution of borrower: US$3.85 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.86 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.23/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to Republic of Turkey for the Göksu Taşeli Watershed Development
Project, as contained in paragraph 32.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Turkey for
the Göksu Taşeli Watershed Development Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development, and poverty context
1. Socioeconomic background. Turkey is an upper-middle-income country with a

population of 74.9 million and a GDP of US$822 billion in 2013 (according to the
World Bank). It is a European Union accession candidate and a member of the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and the G20.
Turkey is an increasingly important donor of bilateral official development
assistance and has a functioning market economy.

2. Poverty has declined in Turkey. In the last decade alone, the poverty rate was
halved, from 44 per cent in 2002 to 21 per cent in 2011; however, regional income
disparities remain. Imbalances persist in socioeconomic structures and income
levels across both rural and urban settlements, and across regions. Since 2000, the
regional development policy of Turkey has evolved to include enhancing the
competitiveness of regions, strengthening economic and social cohesion, and
reducing regional disparities. The Tenth Development Plan (2014-2018) aims at
directing public investments to areas that prioritize reducing regional development
disparities and utilizing their potential for regional development, particularly within
the Anatolia region.

3. Agriculture is no longer Turkey’s main driver of economic growth: in 2012, it
contributed only 9 per cent of the country’s GDP. Yet it is still important for rural
development, employment (particularly for women, who account for 44 per cent of
the labour force), export and manufacturing. In Turkey, farmers fall into two
categories: (i) commercialized farmers who use the latest technologies, have links
to a wide range of domestic and international information sources, are acutely
aware of global trends and consumer preferences, are interested in innovation and
are integrated into national and international markets; and (ii) resource-poor
farmers who practise subsistence or semi-subsistence farming, and are not
business-oriented. The major constraints facing smallholder agriculture are land
fragmentation, a lack of input technology, weak producers’ organizations and
limited access to markets.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
results-based country strategic opportunities programme
(RB-COSOP)

4. Turkey’s transition to upper-middle-income country status has not ended poverty in
the country. In fact, even in relatively prosperous provinces, pockets of poverty
remain, particularly in the uplands. For years, the public and private sectors have
neither been interested nor able to address the constraints facing smallholder
agriculture in upland areas. The proposed project aims to support the Government’s
efforts to reduce degradation in the upland areas of the Göksu sub-catchment and
improve the natural resource base as a means of improving income and livelihoods
in upland villages. The project area has suffered from low investment in all sectors,



EB 2015/LOT/P.23/Rev.1

2

and continuing low standards of living have resulted in rural outmigration. IFAD’s
focus on poor and vulnerable farmers in less advantaged areas is therefore highly
relevant.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
5. The proposed project will be implemented in selected villages within 9 districts in

the Konya and Karaman provinces of central Anatolia. These districts are located in
the Göksu sub-catchment, one of the four sub-catchment areas in the east
Mediterranean watershed. There are 32,000 households living in the project area’s
202 villages, with a total population of 114,151 situated in the mountainous zones
of these 9 districts. The elevation in this area varies from 600 to 1,800 metres. The
majority of the population is engaged in producing fruit and field crops on
166,536 hectares. On average, these farmers each cultivate about 3.5 hectares of
fragmented cropland and keep goats (between 30 and 50 heads each). Cultivation
is either totally rainfed (the most prevalent) or mostly rainfed, with some irrigated
patches (about 15 per cent).

6. The target group. The project will target 32,000 households consisting of
productive smallholder farming households, poor households and nomadic
households. Productive smallholders include men and women who reside
permanently in the uplands and who practise mixed farming, with a marginal to
adequate surplus for marketing. Poor households consist of youth and women in
search of livelihood opportunities to avoid migration. This group will benefit from
direct targeting mechanisms guided by quotas for livelihood support to women in
participating in farmers’ organizations (FOs) and value chains. The poorest
households are nearly landless, not engaged in agricultural production and rely on
social assistance. The approximately 120 nomadic households in the project area
live on rangelands and engage in small ruminant production and small-scale milk
processing for household consumption and sale.

B. Project development objective
7. The overall goal of the project is to reduce rural poverty by supporting economic

diversification. The development objective is to increase farmers’ incomes through
improved agricultural production and marketing activities, and strengthen resilience
to climate shocks. The project will also improve the living standards of the nomadic
tribes in the Taurus Mountains by improving natural resource management.
Outcomes will include: (i) sustainably increased farm productivity; (ii) higher
product prices received by smallholder producers; and (iii) climate-resilient natural
resource management practices adopted.

C. Components/outcomes
8. The project has three components:

(a) Component 1. Agricultural productivity and natural resource
management will improve overall agricultural productivity and profitability by
sustainably managing land and water resources in upland areas through good
agricultural practices and climate-smart investments that reduce external
shocks.

Subcomponent 1.1. Improved agricultural productivity and quality will
focus on promising crops upstream in the value chains to bridge critical gaps
in order to improve the productivity and quality of cherries, grapes,
strawberries and medicinal and aromatic plants (MAPs). Crop selection is
based on: (i) local production capacities; (ii) comparative advantages; (iii) the
seasonality of supply and demand; (iv) market access and productive
potential in different locations; and (v) indigenous knowledge and traditions.
Project support will include the introduction of: (i) new crop varieties;



EB 2015/LOT/P.23/Rev.1

3

(ii) modern growing techniques (e.g. production in plastic tunnels and a
high-wire training system for vineyards); (iii) water-saving irrigation
techniques supported by solar energy use (e.g. on-farm drip irrigation); and
(iv) agronomic practices that increase production and improve quality.
On-farm investments will be provided through the matching grant
programme.

Subcomponent 1.2. Natural resource management will promote best
practices and introduce adaptation measures for climate-resilient investments
in agricultural and grazing lands. The project will assist beneficiaries in
developing participatory grazing plans that integrate input from herders. It
will also support investments in overnight shelters to protect shepherds from
wild animals and inclement weather, scratch posts, salt licks and portable
mobile solar panels to provide energy in highland rangelands.

(b) Component 2. Market access enhancement will: increase farmers'
incomes through higher farm-gate prices; improve market knowledge and
linkages; reduce post-harvest losses; and enhance farmers’ ability to meet
market demand for quality, volume, regularity, homogeneity, packaging and
branding.

Subcomponent 2.1. Capacity-building for marketing will improve the
knowledge and skills of small farmers and FOs such as development
cooperatives and producers’ associations, and raise awareness of the
importance of post-harvest activities. Training will be provided on food
hygiene and safety, drying and sorting practices to reduce waste and improve
quality, and accounting and marketing. Producers' access to commercial
extension will be facilitated.

Subcomponent 2.2. Value chain development will finance downstream
investments by beneficiaries to support marketing of improved produce under
component 1 through the matching grant programme. Enterprises that add
value to farm produce and service providers in the value chains will be eligible
for project support. With the participation of the beneficiaries and their
associations, strategic investment plans (SIPs) will be prepared for each value
chain. These plans will serve as an investment framework that guides support
to beneficiaries at different stages in the value chain. The SIPs will be
developed in full collaboration with farmers, FOs and small and
microenterprises for cherries, grapes, strawberries and MAPs. SIPs will guide
investments – on- and off-farm – in the following: (i) post-harvest treatments
for hygiene and food safety of all value chain products; (ii) drying, grading,
sorting and packaging of dried grapes and MAPs; (iii) labelling and branding of
newly introduced value chain crops such strawberries and MAPs; and
(iv) re-cooling for cherries and cooling for strawberries.

(c) Component 3. Project management.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

9. The project will be implemented over seven years. As part of a programmatic
approach, the project will be the first of two phased over two overlapping cycles of
the performance-based allocation system cycles. The approach is also in line with
multi-year government plans and programmes. The value chain approach will be
adopted as a means of strengthening the long-neglected links between productive
poor farmers and markets (given the focus of both the public and the private sector
on more prosperous, resource-endowed and less ecologically challenging areas).
The project will use the SIP approach, which was introduced in the 2005
Sivas-Erzincan Development Project and has since been used in the Diyarbakir,
Batman and Siirt Development Project and the Ardahan-Kars-Artvin Development



EB 2015/LOT/P.23/Rev.1

4

Project. The proposed project will enhance the SIP approach by selecting pro-poor
value chains with strong potential to benefit from upstream and downstream
investments and become replicable and scalable models.

Organizational frameworkB.
10. The Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock will be the lead implementing

agency. The overall management responsibility will rest with this ministry’s General
Directorate of Agricultural Reform in Ankara, where a central project management
unit (CPMU) will be established. Two provincial project management units (PPMUs)
will be set up within the ministry’s provincial directorates in Konya and Karaman,
and will be responsible for day-to-day project management and implementation.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

11. The investments will be implemented on the basis of annual workplans and budgets
(AWPBs) prepared in consultation with beneficiaries, with inputs from SIPs for the
identified value chains. Each farmer support team will prepare an annual workplan
in collaboration with project beneficiaries in their villages. The PPMUs will review
implementation and develop consolidated provincial-level AWPBs. The consolidated
provincial AWPBs will be reviewed and incorporated into a project-level AWPB by
the CPMU. The AWPBs will be finalized according to procedures agreed upon with
IFAD and detailed in the project implementation manual. The AWPBs will be
submitted to the General Directorate of Agricultural Reform by the project manager
for review and approval by the steering committee, and presented to IFAD on a
no-objection basis.

12. Continuous learning and knowledge management will be integrated into the project
and mainstreamed into implementation at all levels. The project’s knowledge
management framework will inform the project learning agenda, including the
outputs, outcomes and impacts defined in the logical framework. The Ministry of
Food, Agriculture and Livestock already has a computerized management
information system in place for tracking the inputs, beneficiaries and productivity of
the Government’s agricultural support programme; this system will be linked with
the project’s monitoring and evaluation system. Thematic knowledge products
generated through the project – and knowledge management tools such
as capacity-building activities, communities of practice and South-South
Cooperation initiatives – will be developed and disseminated.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
13. Financial management. The CPMU will be responsible for financial management,

with support from the PPMUs in Konya and Karaman. The project will adopt
accounting procedures and policies consistent with international accounting
standards and with IFAD and government requirements. The Government of
Turkey’s Public Expenditures System, developed by the Ministry of Finance, will be
used to execute all payments from government counterpart contributions and IFAD
loan and grant.

14. Disbursement arrangements and flow of funds. Separate designated accounts
denominated in euro will be opened at the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey
for the IFAD loan and grant with an authorized allocation of approximately
12 months of project expenditure. The designated accounts will be replenished
using the imprest modality. Withdrawal applications will be prepared by the CPMU
every three months or when 30 per cent of the advance has been depleted –
whichever occurs first. Details of the disbursement arrangements, including the
amounts advanced to the designated accounts, will be specified in the project
implementation manual and stated in the letter to the borrower/recipient.

15. Audit. Annual project financial statements will be audited by the Treasury
Controller, who currently carries out external audits for all externally financed



EB 2015/LOT/P.23/Rev.1

5

projects in accordance with International Standards on Auditing and under terms of
reference cleared by IFAD.

16. Governance and financial management risks. A financial management risk
assessment of the proposed project and its fiduciary arrangements has concluded
that the project’s financial management arrangements and internal control systems
satisfy IFAD’s minimum requirements to: (i) provide accurate and timely
information on the progress of project implementation; and (ii) guarantee the
separation of functions through multiple independent controls. The assessment
rated the residual control risk after the implementation of appropriate risk
mitigation measures as low. Fiduciary risk might arise from an initial lack of
financial management capacity within the CPMU and the geographical spread of
project activities. Mitigation measures include strengthening the internal audit
function to include reviews of the use of funds at the village level, recruitment of an
experienced senior accountant in the CPMU and finalization of the project
implementation manual. The latter two are conditions for disbursement of project
funds.

17. Grace period. As per the Government’s request, the grace period is five years
instead of the standard three-year grace period for loans on ordinary terms.

SupervisionE.
18. The project will be supervised directly by IFAD. Supervision and implementation

support will be based on IFAD’s operational modalities and practices, including
those for loan and grant administration, and project implementation support.

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits
A. Project costs
19. The project cost is estimated at US$25 million, of which US$18.21 million

(or 72.8 per cent of the total) will be used to finance component 1: agricultural
productivity and natural resource management; US$4.74 million (or 18.9 per cent
of the total) will finance component 2: market access enhancement; and
US$2.05 million (or 8.2 per cent) will finance component 3: project management.
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries Borrower/ counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Agricultural

productivity and
natural resource
management 12 474.17 68.5 83.62 0.5 2 226.23 12.2 3 427.53 18.9 18 211.55

2. Market access
enhancement 3 962.47 83.7 41.22 0.9 632.64 13.4 100.50 2.1 4 736.83

3. Project
management 1 453.36 70.8 275.16 13.4 323.11 15.7 2 051.62

Total 17 890 71.6 400 1.6 2 859 11.4 3 851 15.4 25 000

B. Project financing
20. The total investment and incremental recurrent costs, including physical and price

contingencies, will be financed over a seven-year period as follows: IFAD financing
will comprise a loan amounting to US$17.89 million and a grant of US$400,000.
The Government’s contribution will be in the form of a budgetary allocation of
US$3.24 million and US$0.61 million in foregone taxes. Project beneficiaries will
contribute an estimated US$2.86 million in cash.



EB 2015/LOT/P.23/Rev.1

6

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 977.30 37.8 220.55 8.5 1 386.65 53.6 2 584.49

2. Equipment and
materials 1 067.30 33.5 467.68 14.7 1 653.86 51.9 3 188.84

3. Goods, services and
inputs 7 100.91 79.6 1 538.00 17.2 280.35 3.1 8 919.26

4. Consultancies 397.39 63.8 124.84 34.8 100.50 16.1 622.73

5. Training 3 410.76 92.5 275.16 7.5 3 685.93
6. Workshops 126.85 84.8 22.83 15.3 149.68
7. Grants and subsidies 3 742.78 84.1 632.64 14.2 75.83 1.7 4 451.25

8. Salaries and
allowances 709.40 70.8 292.85 29.2 1 001.90

9. Vehicles 89.79 84.8 16.60 15.3 105.95

10. Other operating Costs 267.87 92.4 22.11 7.6 289.98

Total 17 890 71.6 400 1.6 2 859 11.4 3 851 15.4 25 000

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
21. The overall project analysis resulted in an economic internal rate of return of

17 per cent over 20 years. The project’s contribution to economic welfare is derived
from: the increased quantity and quality of market-oriented production; better
market access; and higher prices resulting from investments in branding and
employment along the value chains. The sensitivity analysis shows that the
economic internal rate of return remains robust at 10 per cent in the event of a
10 per cent reduction in benefits or a two-year delay in benefits.

D. Sustainability
22. The project is designed to ensure producers’ sustainable access to markets through

integration into existing and new value chains while maintaining the focus on good
agricultural practices and natural resource management. This includes enhancing
the quantity and quality of target crops, and providing assistance with modern
marketing (including branding) and market information. The introduction of farming
as a business for the producers will result in the optimization of land, water and
labour resources in the project area. Strengthening FOs through training and
capacity-building will enable longer-term and more stable contractual relationships
with collectors, processors and exporters. These impacts are expected to last
beyond the seven-year project period. Partnerships between producers’ groups and
the private sector will also be strengthened as a result of improved knowledge
management.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
23. At the macro level, the main risks relate to a reduced emphasis on poverty in

Turkey and macroeconomic instability. All of the Government’s development
priorities as outlined in the national and regional development plans and its
programmes are aimed at reducing income disparity over the long term. The
project area particularly suffers from such disparities; however as a politically
stable upper-middle-income country, the prospects for continuing economic growth
in the country are sound. Turkey continues to move towards European Union
accession and measures to meet standards for trade are being adopted along with
stringent environmental protection protocols. The project team has mitigated any
risk that the implementing agencies will lack capacity to provide market-oriented
information and build capacity by planning for the long-term contracting of a



EB 2015/LOT/P.23/Rev.1

7

marketing consultant. The consultant will be tasked with enhancing the
private-sector orientation of all stakeholders, including government staff at the
central and provincial levels.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

24. The project was designed in line with the IFAD Strategic Framework (2011-2015)
and IFAD’s policies on targeting, gender and environment, and natural resource
management. In addition, the 2012 Technical Note on Matching Grants and the
Private-Sector Strategy have been utilized to ensure that the project makes the
best use of all financial, technical and knowledge products available to IFAD.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
25. Turkey is a member of OECD and is chairing the G20 in 2015. The country is an

increasingly important donor of bilateral official development assistance. In a large
upper-middle-income country like Turkey, IFAD’s overall development contribution
could seem marginal, particularly considering the size of its considerable
development assistance as a donor. There has been demand for IFAD to
demonstrate new models, approaches, knowledge products and services, and global
reach to mobilize required expertise. New models and approaches used by previous
IFAD projects are being mainstreamed by the Ministry of Food, Agriculture and
Livestock, including SIPs, which were introduced by the Sivas-Erzincan
Development Project in 2005, and also used in the Diyarbakir, Batman and Siirt
Development Project and the Ardahan-Kars-Artvin Development Project. The
matching grant programme, originally developed by the World Bank for the Village
Based Participatory Investments Program in 2004 and mainstreamed by the
Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Livestock in 2006, was enhanced by IFAD to make
it a pro-poor instrument. Through its knowledge management agenda, this project’s
CPMU will contribute to better harmonization of donor-funded and government
programmes for rural development.

Innovations and scaling upC.
26. IFAD’s recent focus on value chains is being integrated into the project as a means

to strengthen the links between poor farmers and markets (as a consequence of
both the public and private sectors’ focus on more prosperous, resource-endowed
farmers in less ecologically challenging areas). The project further develops the SIP
approach in rural Turkey with the selection of pro-poor value chains. Given the low
level of investment in the agricultural sector, the project will promote private-sector
investment through the matching grant programme, which facilitates public-private
partnerships though a service provider for marketing. It is expected that the
business models and innovations proven to be successful through this project will
be scaled up with government or other donor support.

27. Producers' climate adaptation capacity will be improved by training in agronomic
practices and awareness-raising on natural resource management geared to
maximize their incomes within the prevailing climate. Innovations such as
integrated pest management, vegetable production under cover, drip irrigation,
solar energy, efficient methods for water harvesting and training in natural resource
management will improve climate resilience.

Policy engagementD.
28. Turkey does not have a significant bilateral donor presence and IFAD’s relatively

limited investment does not entail strong policy engagement at the macro level.
IFAD’s investment has been strategically applied to engage in policy dialogue aimed
at influencing the Government's allocation of resources in impoverished areas.
Greater strategic focus is needed on the links between poverty reduction and the
sustainable management of fragile ecosystems. The establishment of IFAD’s



EB 2015/LOT/P.23/Rev.1

8

country office in Ankara will be an opportunity to enhance its role in aid
effectiveness.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
29. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Turkey and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower/recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

30. The Republic of Turkey is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

31. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
32. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of Turkey in an amount equivalent to fifteen million nine hundred
and fifty thousand euros (EUR 15,950,000) (equivalent to approximately
US$17.89 million), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Turkey in an amount equivalent to three hundred and fifty thousand euros
(EUR 350,000) (equivalent to approximately US$0.4 million) and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.23/Rev.1

1

Negotiated financing agreement: "Goksu Taseli
Watershed Development Project"

(Negotiations concluded on 9 October 2015)

Loan Number: ___________________

Grant Number: __________________

Project Title: Goksu Taseli Watershed Development Project (“the Project”)

The Republic of Turkey (the “Borrower/Recipient”)

and

The International Fund for Agricultural Development (the “Fund” or “IFAD”)

(each a “Party” and both of them collectively the “Parties”)

hereby agree as follows:

Section A

1. The following documents collectively form this Agreement: this document, the
Project Description and Implementation Arrangements (Schedule 1), and the Allocation
Table (Schedule 2).

2. The Fund’s General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing dated
29 April 2009, amended as of April 2014 and as may be amended hereafter from time to
time (the “General Conditions”) are annexed to this Agreement, and all provisions thereof
shall apply to this Agreement.  For the purposes of this Agreement the terms defined in
the General Conditions shall have the meanings set forth therein.

3. The Fund shall provide a Loan and a Grant to the Borrower/Recipient (the
“Financing”), which the Borrower/Recipient shall use to implement the Project in
accordance with the terms and conditions of this Agreement.

Section B

1. A. The amount of the Loan is Fifteen million nine hundred and fifty thousand
Euros (EUR 15 950 000).

B. The amount of the Grant is three hundred and fifty thousand Euros
(EUR 350 000).

2. The Loan shall be subject to interest on the principal amount outstanding at a rate
equal to the IFAD Reference Interest Rate, payable semiannually in the Loan Service
Payment Currency, and shall have a maturity period of eighteen (18) years, including a
grace period of five (5) years starting from the date that the Fund has determined that
all General Conditions precedent to withdrawal have been fulfilled in accordance with
Section 4.02(b).

3. The Loan Service Payment Currency shall be the Euro (EUR).



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.23/Rev.1

2

4. The first day of the applicable Fiscal Year shall be 1 January.

5. Payments of principal and interest shall be payable on each 1st June and
1st December.

6. There shall be two Designated Accounts in EUR for the purpose of financing the
Project opened and maintained in the Central Bank of Turkey.

7. The Borrower/Recipient shall provide counterpart financing for the Project in the
amount of approximately three million eighty-five thousand United States Dollars
(USD 3.85 million) for Project financing and foregone taxes.

Section C

1. The Lead Project Agency shall be the Ministry of Food Agriculture and Livestock
(MFAL).

2. Additional Project Parties are listed in Part II of Schedule 1.

3. The Project Completion Date shall be the seventh anniversary of the date of entry
into force of this Agreement.

Section D

The Loan will be administered and the Project supervised by the Fund.

Section E

1. The following are designated as additional general conditions precedent to
withdrawal: (a) A qualified Senior Accountant shall have been hired through a
competitive process with terms of reference acceptable to the Fund, and (b) the Project
Implementation Manual (PIM) shall have been adopted.

2. This Agreement is subject to ratification by the Borrower/Recipient.

3. The following are the designated representatives and addresses to be used for any
communication related to this Agreement:

For the Borrower/Recipient:

Prime Ministry of the Republic of Turkey
Undersecretariat of Treasury
Inonu Bulvari No. 36 06510
Emek, Ankara
Turkey

For the Fund:

President
International Fund for Agricultural Development
Via Paolo di Dono 44
00142 Rome
Italy



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.23/Rev.1

3

This Agreement, dated _____________, has been prepared in the English language in
two (2) original copies, one (1) for the Fund and one (1) for the Borrower/Recipient.

THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY

______________________
Authorized Representative

INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR
AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT

______________________
Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.23/Rev.1

4

Schedule 1

Project Description and Implementation Arrangements

I. Project Description

1. Target Population. Project Beneficiaries shall be 32,098 households living in
202 villages with a total population of 114,151. The majority is engaged in fruit and field
crop production on 166,536 hectares (of which only 15% is irrigated), and in keeping small
flocks of small ruminants. In addition, the Project shall benefit around 120 nomadic
households living on rangelands in the Project Area.

2. Project Area. The Project shall be implemented in selected villages of 9 districts of
Konya and Karaman provinces of Central Anatolia. The Project Area includes 202 villages
that are situated in the mountainous parts of the 9 districts where the elevation varies
between 600 meters (m) and 1 800 m (the “Project Area”).

3. Goal. The overall Goal of the Project, as phase one of a two-Project Programme, is
to reduce rural poverty by supporting economic diversification through value chain
development and sustainable natural resource management.

4. Objective. The Project Development Objective is to increase farmers’ income from
improved agricultural production and marketing activities in the targeted area with
strengthened resilience to climate shocks. The Project shall also contribute to improving
the standards of living of the nomadic Yörük tribes in the highlands of the Taurus
Mountains, through capacity building that will assist them to organize for improved
management of the common natural resources and investments in animal and rangelands
development.

5. Components. The Project shall consist of three Components: (i) Agricultural
Productivity and Natural Resource Management, (ii) Market Access Enhancement, and
(iii) Project Management.

5.1 Component 1. Agricultural Productivity and Natural Resource Management: This
Component will improve overall agricultural productivity and profitability by
sustainable management of available and often scarce land and water resources in
upland areas through good agricultural practices and climate smart investments that
reduce external shocks. There shall be two sub-components: (i) Improved
Agricultural Productivity and Quality, and (ii) Natural Resource Management.
Improved Agricultural Productivity and Quality will focus on upstream of the value
chains (VCs) of promising crops in the Project Area and target gaps critical to
improve productivity and quality. Natural Resource Management will promote best
practices and introduce adaptation measures for climate resilient investments on
agricultural and grazing lands. Under this Component, the counterpart financing will
cover expenditure related to investment in Vegetable Production, Efficient Irrigation
Practices,  Access Roads to Pastures and Terracing on Agriculture Land.

5.2 Component 2. Market Access Enhancement: This Component will increase the
incomes of the farmers through higher farm gate prices, and improved market
knowledge and linkages. The Project will support farmers to reduce post-harvest
losses and add value to accommodate market demands for quality, volume,
regularity, homogeneity, range of varieties and packaging and branding. The
Component will build on the untapped entrepreneurial capacity of the semi-
commercial smallholders and will have two sub components: (i) Capacity Building for
Marketing, and (ii) Value Chains Development. Capacity Building for Marketing will
improve the knowledge and skills of small farmers and organizations (FOs) where



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.23/Rev.1

5

they are members (e.g. development cooperatives, producers’ associations). Such
improvement is imperative for these producers to ensure remaining competitive and
accelerate the shift from “semi-subsistence farming” to “farming as a business”. This
will be accomplished through extensive training and capacity building for producers
and/or the FOs in order for them to make production and marketing decisions that
are guided by the value chains of crops that they produce. Value Chains
Development will finance, through the Matching Grants Programme (MGP),
downstream investments by the beneficiaries in support of the marketing of the
improved production and quality under Component 1. Service providers and
enterprises that add value to the farm gate or those that provide services to existing
and new VCs will be eligible to benefit.

Under components 2 and 3, the counterpart financing will cover expenditures related to
developing Strategic Investment Plans and seconded government staff respectively.

II. Implementation Arrangements

1. Project Duration. The Project shall be implemented over seven years. The first year
(2016) of implementation will predominantly be dedicated to initial studies, surveys, gap
analyses, and demand assessments. Activities in the first year will nevertheless not
exclude investment activities as long as they are supported with viable business plans. In
the first year, priority will be given to the capacity building, awareness raising,
sensitization and comprehensive training of all stakeholders on the approaches and
opportunities in the Project.  These activities will cover all producers, farmers
organizations, Small and Medium Scale Enterprises (SMEs), women, the Yörük, and
Project staff at all levels ranging from the Provincial Directorates of MFAL (PDA) and
District Directorates of Food Agriculture and Livestock (DDAs) to MFAL in Ankara.

2. Implementation. The Lead Project Agency shall be the MFAL located in Ankara. The
overall management responsibility will rest with the General Directorate of Agrarian
Reform (GDAR of MFAL) in Ankara where a Central Project Management Unit (CPMU) will
be established. The responsibility for field implementation will lie with the Provincial
Directorates of Konya and Karaman for the respective implementations in these
provinces. To be able to take advantage of experiences gained from various
internationally funded projects when it is needed by GDAR technical assistance can be
procured from related international agencies which have experience in providing similar
technical assistance in project management and coordination.

3. Provincial Project Management Units. Two Provincial Project Management Units
(PPMUs) will be embedded in the PDA in Konya and Karaman and will be charged with
the day-to-day field management and implementation of the Project. All staff of the
CPMU and the two PPMUs will be seconded from the cadres of MFAL. Eight
multi-disciplinary Farmer Support Teams (FSTs), each one comprising specialists for field
crop production, horticultural production and agricultural economics, where one will be
female and will be assigned by the PDA to the PPMUs to carry out extension services and
maintain frequent contact with the beneficiaries. Each team will be responsible for one or
more districts identified based on their number of villages and the proximity of those to
each other and the district centers.

4. Project Parties. Several government agencies are active in the Project Area. Close
collaboration and coordination will be sought with the following that are directly related
to the objectives of the Project and will complement its rural poverty reduction and
marketing enhancement initiatives: (i) the Konya Regional Development Administration
(KOP); (ii) the Regional Directorate of Forestry of the Ministry of Forestry and Water
Affairs (MFWA); (iii) the Greater Metropolitan Municipality of Konya; (iv) the Governors’
Offices of Konya and Karaman as Turkish Employment Agency (İŞKUR) and Ministry of



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.23/Rev.1

6

National Education (MONE); (v) the Mevlana Development Agency (MEVKA); (vi) Agency
for Small and Medium-scale Enterprises (KOSGEB), (vii) the German Cooperative and
Raiffeisen Confederation (DGRV); (viii) EU Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance in
Rural Development (IPARD) Local Offices in Konya and Karaman; and (ix) the Provincial
Chambers of Agriculture and of Trade and Industry.

5. Financial Management. The CPMU shall have overall responsibility for financial
management of the Project and shall be supported by PPMUs in Konya and Karaman
respectively. The CPMU and PPMUS will be established and housed within existing
Ministerial and Provincial Directors bodies. Systematic interventions of internal controllers
and auditors will allow for strong internal controls. The CPMU will be staffed with a Senior
Accountant recruited competitively and each of the PPMUs shall have an accountant
seconded from within the PDAs.

6. Project Implementation Manual (PIM). The CPMU will develop a draft PIM covering
all aspects of implementation, management structure, staff terms of reference, financial
management arrangements, etc. which will be submitted to the Fund for no objection.
The Lead Project Agency shall adopt the PIM substantially in the form approved by the
Fund. When the need arises the PIM can be revised at the request of GDAR with the non-
objection of the Fund.



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.23/Rev.1

7

Schedule 2

Allocation Table

1. Allocation of Loan and Grant Proceeds. (a) The Table below sets forth the
Categories of Eligible Expenditures to be financed by the Loan and the Grant and the
allocation of the amounts of the Loan and the Grant to each Category and the percentages
of expenditures for items to be financed in each Category. All amounts are 100% net of
taxes and counterpart contributions provided by the Borrower/Recipient (as specified in
Schedule 1) and contributions from beneficiaries:

Category Loan Amount Allocated

(expressed in EUR)

Grant Amount Allocated
(expressed in EUR)

I. Works 785 000

II. Equipment & Materials 860 000

III. Goods, Services & Inputs 5 700 000

IV. Consultancies 320 000 110 000

V. Training & Workshops 2 840 000 240 000

VI. Grants & Subsidies 3 000 000

VII. Salaries and Allowances 570 000

VIII. Vehicles and Operating Costs 285 000

Unallocated 1 590 000

TOTAL 15 950 000 350 000

(b) The terms used in the Table above are defined as follows:

“Consultancies” under category IV of the Grant shall mean eligible expenditures
incurred related to International and National Technical Assistance on Marketing
Advisory Services.

“Training” under category V of the Grant shall mean eligible expenditures incurred
related to international and domestic study tours, and language courses.

“Grants & Subsidies” under category VI of the Loan shall mean eligible expenditures
incurred related to Matching Grants Programme (MGP) to Individual Farmers
Existing and New Enterprises, Informal Groups, Farmers Associations, New SMEs,
etc.

“Vehicles” under category VIII of the Loan shall mean eligible expenditures incurred
for rented vehicles and mini-buses.



A
p
p
en

d
ix II

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.2

3
/R

ev.1

8

A
p
p
en

d
ix

II
E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.2

3
/R

ev.1

Logical framework

Narrative Summary Key Performance Indicators1 Means of Verification Assumptions (A) / Risks (R)

Goal: Reduced rural poverty by
supporting economic diversification.

 32,000 households in targeted
areas report increased income by
20%

 32,000 households in targeted
areas report improvement in assets
ownership index by 20% (RIMS
level 3)

 Baseline and completion
survey

 State Statistical Committee
 Government statistics

 UNDP/WB reports

 Stable macroeconomic
atmosphere (A)

 Poverty reduction remains
priority agenda

Project Development Objective:

Increased farmers’ income from
improved agricultural production
and marketing activities in targeted
areas with strengthened resilience
to climate shocks

 Farmers in targeted areas report
increased net farm income through
improved access to productive
infrastructure, financial services and
markets by 20%

 Baseline & completion survey
 Government statistics and

TARBIL monitoring
 Interviews/focus groups

 Programme outcomes stimulate
economic growth (A)

 Competition weakens
robustness of markets (R)

Component 1: Agricultural Productivity and Natural Resource Management

Outcome 1:
Farm productivity sustainably
increased

 8,000 small producers in targeted
areas report improved productivity
by 20%

 Baseline and completion
survey

 Programme M&E system
 MTR
 MFAL surveys and reports
 TARBIL monitoring

 Availability of qualified service
providers for group facilitation,
training and extension activities
(A)

 Farmers are willing to invest in
development of the farm
production capability (A)

1 The final targets will be validated at base line to be conducted in year one and will be disaggregated by gender.



A
p
p
en

d
ix II

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.2

3
/R

ev.1

9

A
p
p
en

d
ix

II
E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.2

3
/R

ev.1

Narrative Summary Key Performance Indicators1 Means of Verification Assumptions (A) / Risks (R)

Component 2: Market Access Enhancement

Outcome 2: Smallholder producers
receive higher product prices

 Farm gate product value in the
selected Value Chains increase by
30%

 Post-harvest losses reduced by 20 %
for smallholders producers

 Baseline survey, mid-term and
completion reports

 MFAL surveys and reports

 Records of wholesale and
retail markets

 Focus groups/interviews

 TARBIL monitoring

 Competitiveness of local
products are maintained (R)

 Continuity of MFAL staff (R)

Outcome 3: Sustainable increase
of soil water moisture

 25% increase in soil moisture is
reported.

 Soil testing study  Climate change is in line with
current predictions
















































Note to Executive Board representatives

Focal points:

Technical questions: Dispatch of documentation:

Mohamed Abdelgadir
Country Programme Manager
Near East, North Africa and Europe Division
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2627
e-mail: m.abdelgadir@ifad.org

William Skinner
Chief
Governing Bodies
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2974
e-mail: gb@ifad.org

Executive Board — 122nd Session
Rome, 11-12 December 2017

For: Approval

Document: EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

E
Agenda: 6(e)(v)

Date: 11 December 2017

Distribution: Public

Original: English

President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
Uzbekistan for the Agriculture Diversification
and Modernization Project



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

i

Contents

Abbreviations and acronyms ii
Map of the project area iii
Financing summary iv
Recommendation for approval 1
I. Strategic context and rationale 1

A. Country and rural development and poverty context 1
B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-

COSOP 1
II. Project description 2

A. Project area and target group 2
B. Project development objective 2
C. Components/outcomes 3

III. Project implementation 3
Approach 3A.

B. Organizational framework 4
C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and

knowledge management 4
D. Financial management, procurement and governance 5
E. Supervision 6

IV. Project costs, financing and benefits 6
A. Project costs 6
B. Project financing 7
C. Summary benefit and economic analysis 8
D. Sustainability 8
E. Risk identification and mitigation 8

V. Corporate considerations 9
Compliance with IFAD policies 9A.
Alignment and harmonization 9B.
Innovations and scaling up 10C.
Policy engagement 10D.

VI. Legal instruments and authority 10
VII. Recommendation 10

Appendices
I. Negotiated financing agreement
II. Logical framework



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

ii

Abbreviations and acronyms

ADB Asian Development Bank
M&E monitoring and evaluation
PFI participating financial institution
PMU project management unit
RRA Rural Restructuring Agency
UZS Uzbek sum
WCA water consumer association



E
B
 2

0
1
7
/1

2
2
/R

.2
7
/R

ev.1

iii

M
a
p

 o
f th

e
 p

ro
je

ct a
re

a



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

iv

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Republic of Uzbekistan

Agriculture Diversification and Modernization Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Uzbekistan

Executing agency: Rural Restructuring Agency (RRA)

Total project cost: US$159.6 million

Amount of IFAD loan: US$46.2 million

Amount of IFAD grant: US$300,000

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: 25 years, including a grace period of 5 years
starting from the date of approval by the Executive
Board, with a fixed interest rate equal to 1.25 per cent
per annum and a service charge of 0.75 per cent per
annum

Financing gap: US$47 million

Cofinanciers: Beneficiaries, Government and PFIs

Contribution of borrower: US$27.0 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$19.5 million

Contribution of participating financial
institutions (PFIs):

US$19.5 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Republic of Uzbekistan for the Agriculture Diversification and
Modernization Project, as contained in paragraph 42.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of Uzbekistan
for the Agriculture Diversification and Modernization
Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Uzbekistan is a 447,400 km2 landlocked country in Central Asia bordering

Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan, Afghanistan and Turkmenistan. It had a
population of 31.8 million in 2016, of which approximately 60 per cent is rural.
With a per capita gross domestic product of US$2,130 in 2015, Uzbekistan is a
lower-middle-income country. Data suggest that its economic growth has been
broad based and inclusive.

2. Agriculture provides approximately 25 per cent of the country’s employment and
its share of the gross domestic product was estimated at 17.6 per cent in 2014.
Approximately 40 per cent of Uzbekistan’s rural population is directly engaged in
agriculture-related activities. Food imports meet the country’s growing demand and
the population’s enhanced purchasing capacity is increasingly applied to high-value
goods, particularly meat and dairy products. In 2015, Uzbekistan’s agricultural
imports totalled 11.5 per cent of the country’s total imports (US$1.3 billion)
according to the Economist Intelligence Unit.

3. Poverty declined from 27.5 per cent in 2001 to 14 per cent in 2015. This was
attributed to rapid economic growth, creation of new small businesses and
employment, public investments in education, health and infrastructure, increases
in public-sector salaries and increased remittances. In 2015, the poverty rate in
rural areas was 17 per cent compared with 11 per cent among the urban
population. The country’s low agricultural productivity, high tax burden among the
rural population, high dependency within households, regional disparities and lack
of formal rural labour markets are drivers of rural poverty. A lack of access to
productive assets, infrastructure, energy, land and water, technical and financial
services contribute to poverty and limited productivity, especially among rural
women and young people. Other vulnerable groups include families with many
children, people with disabilities, unemployed people and those with lower
education levels.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

4. Diversification, modernization and import substitution of agricultural production is a
government policy priority as stipulated in Presidential Decree No.2460 on
agriculture sector reforms and development for 2016-2020, and the Welfare
Improvement Strategy (2013-2015). Diversification of products, particularly
horticultural crops, livestock and related sub-sectors is expected to enhance rural
families’ incomes and reduce the number of low-income households. IFAD’s
experience with the value chain approach in the region suggests that private-sector
actors are crucial for smallholder producers to participate in value chains. Traders,
buyers, aggregators, processors, exporters and other private players shape how



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

2

value chains perform. From the viewpoint of smallholder producers (Dekhan and
small private farmers), conducive partnerships with the private sector present a
major opportunity for sustained income generation. The project integrates
private-sector operators willing to invest time and resources to increase value
chain competitiveness in a way that enhances the benefits for smallholder
producers and supports their efforts to strengthen their businesses. This also
makes value chains more inclusive of smallholder producers.

5. The project will work with selected value chains, providing holistic and coordinated
support to all actors in order to improve their performance. Agribusinesses and
other qualified entities will be invited to take the role of leading entity, with a focus
on those willing to develop sound business models through productive partnerships
with their suppliers. Smallholder producers, who are the project’s primary target
group, will be targeted in each selected value chain in order to enhance their
inclusiveness and improve their returns from agriculture. The project’s targeting
strategy will therefore incorporate the principles of smallholder inclusiveness.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. Geographical target. The project will be implemented in the Fergana Valley in the

regions of Andijan, Fergana and Namangan. The country strategic opportunities
programme highlights the challenges experienced in the Fergana Valley due to high
population density; Namangan registers the second lowest per capita gross
domestic product in the country. Women make up half the population, with
women-headed households comprising 18 per cent of the total. Approximately
20 per cent of youth are unemployed.

7. Target groups. The project’s main target groups are: (i) rural low-income
households on Dekhan farms, who are striving to increase income from agriculture
through active participation in project-supported value chains; (ii) small private
horticulture and livestock farmers with a farm size of up to 5 hectares; (iii)
agribusinesses with existing or potential linkages with groups (i) and (ii); and
(iv) rural youth. Special attention will be paid to ensure the participation of
women-headed Dekhan and private farming households, and young women.

8. Beneficiaries. The project is expected to directly reach 75,000 households and
approximately 21,000 indirect beneficiaries. These include 11,000 households
benefitting of loans and training, and approximately 54,000 incremental suppliers
of the leading entities benefitting from project loans. In addition, 10,000 full-time
jobs will be created by the leading entities’ incremental economic activities. In its
first phase, the project is expected to reach out directly to 30,000 households, and
about 10,000 indirect beneficiaries. These include 5,000, households benefitting
from loans and training, plus approximately 20,000 incremental suppliers of the
leading entities (LEs) benefitting from ADMP loans, and some 4,000 ful-time
equivalent incremental jobs created by the LEs’ incremental economic activities.

B. Project development objective
9. The project’s goal is to improve the incomes and livelihoods of rural people in the

target area. Its development objective is to increase the inclusiveness and
profitability of selected value chains through enhanced productivity, market access
and improved natural resource management.



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

3

C. Components/outcomes
10. The project will have three interrelated components; a fourth component will

support project management and implementation. The components are:
(i) inclusive value chain development; (ii) inclusive rural finance; (iii) climate-
resilient rural infrastructure; and (iv) project management.

11. Component 1: Inclusive value chain development. The outcome of this
component will be enhanced capacity for sustainable and efficient performance of
targeted stakeholders, and an enabling business environment for agribusinesses in
selected value chains, with strong backward linkages with smallholder producers.
This component aims to strengthen the capacities of farmers and other
stakeholders in targeted value chains. Three activities will be implemented to
create an enabling business environment for agribusinesses: (i) value chain
mapping exercises based on rapid market assessment results for small ruminants,
fisheries, sericulture and honey prepared during the design; (ii) rapid market
assessments of additional sub-sectors; and (iii) preparation of value chain
development plans, which will be roadmaps for LEs.

12. Component 2: Inclusive rural finance. The outcome of this component will be
increased productivity and efficiency among targeted smallholders, enabling value
chain actors to increase their investments in profitable value chains. The project
will support the State Fund for Support of the Development of Entrepreneurial
Activity in providing credit guarantees to smallholders and rural entrepreneurs who
lack acceptable collateral by offering partial coverage of lending risks. It will also
work with banks interested in lending to farmers in the target regions (and that
meet the project’s eligibility criteria) to facilitate farmers’ and agricultural
businesses’ access to financing. Finally, this component will establish a credit
window for youth who lack access to affordable and flexible lending products.
Banks will be free to set their own interest rates, allowing them to serve project
beneficiaries in a sustainable manner. These banks will be selected through a
competitive process to ensure that those offering the best conditions are chosen.
The outcome will be measured by the following indicator: PFIs’ portfolio risk is
below 5 per cent.

13. Component 3: Climate-resilient rural infrastructure. This component aims to
remove bottlenecks to a reliable irrigation water supply, which inhibit Dekhans and
small farmers from enhancing the diversification and efficiency of agriculture in the
selected value chains. This will be achieved through modernization of the inter-
farm irrigation network operated by water consumer associations (WCAs). It will
enable targeted farmers’ groups to: (i) diversify agricultural production from low-
value to high-value crops; (ii) increase land productivity; (iii) address the
challenges of drought due to climate change; and (iv) increase the capacity of
WCAs and the Basin Irrigation System Administration in efficient water resource
management and irrigation system operation and maintenance. The outcome of
this component will be improved farmland productivity resulting from modernized
irrigation infrastructure, as measured by the following indicator: at least 1,000
farmers report improved supply of irrigation water and increased productivity.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

14. The project will promote a demand-driven value chain approach. This approach will
focus on analysing each step of the value chain and investing in those needs that
have the potential to improve the productivity, profitability and competitiveness of
value chain players, especially Dekhan farmers.

15. The project will promote the upgrading of selected value chains and will include
actions taken by producers, processors, input suppliers and traders at various
points in the value chain to increase future productive capacity and



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

4

competitiveness. The leading entities with successful value chain development
plans prepared through component 1 will be considered for receiving loans from
PFIs through component 2. While loan applications will be assessed individually,
the project will provide support to their business operations through the provision
of technical assistance and training to farmer suppliers and other actors, and
access to improved infrastructure under component 3 to enhance value chains’
competitiveness and efficiency. The project will also promote coordination with
projects funded by other donors, especially those managed by the Rural
Restructuring Agency (RRA) – based on smooth information flow and open dialogue
– in order to ensure synergies and avoid duplication of efforts.

B. Organizational framework
16. The Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources will have overall responsibility for

managing the project on behalf of the Government. Daily oversight will rest with a
project management unit (PMU) under the RRA, a state entity within the Ministry of
Agriculture and Water Resources. Overall management oversight will rest with an
inter-agency council for cooperation with international financial institutions, foreign
governments and donor countries implementing large-scale investment projects.
This council will provide guidance and direction to the project implementing
agency; the project manager will act as secretary to the council.

17. The PMU will be led by a project manager and be composed of: a chief accountant;
procurement officer; rural finance/youth officer; administrative
assistant/translator; and driver. The project will utilize legal staff from the Dairy
Value Chains Development Project. In addition, the project will rely on the services
of national and international specialists in various fields. A project implementation
team will be established in one of the project regions in year 1 (the region will be
determined by the Government, but will most likely be Namangan). The team will
comprise a: regional coordinator (value chain and business specialist); three rural
finance and youth officers; engineer; a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) specialist
and a driver. Regional coordinators will be recruited to coordinate project activities
in the remaining regions. The project implementation team will be responsible for
daily implementation of all aspects of the project, except for financial
administration and procurement, which will be managed by the PMU within RRA.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

18. The project results framework will form the basis for the results-based M&E
system, including performance monitoring and impact assessment. The PMU/M&E
officer will be responsible for all internal M&E of the project. The PMU will submit
progress reports in English to the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources, the
Ministry of Finance and IFAD. A mid-term review will be carried out towards the
end of the project’s third year. During the final year of project implementation, as
part of the preparation of the project completion report and impact assessment
required by IFAD, the M&E data collected over the project implementation period
will be used in a thorough assessment of project achievements. This assessment
will focus on changes in beneficiaries’ livelihoods as a result of project activities,
and the sharing of lessons learned and experiences.

19. Learning and knowledge management. To ensure that the experiences gained
are captured, comprehensive provisions have been made for M&E. The project’s
knowledge management programme will be an essential tool for meeting project
objectives. Two approaches will be used: (i) a knowledge management programme
for supporting within- and between-project learning; and (ii) support for a broader
knowledge management programme aimed at informing government decision
makers and influencing policies. The project will also support efforts to broaden
information dissemination through: development of farmer networks (to share
knowledge on successful adaptation); farmer-to-farmer extension approaches



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

5

(to facilitate technology transfer); development of private technical services
(e.g. private veterinarians); and strengthening linkages among universities,
research and development institutions, and farmer networks to ensure the
relevance of the technology.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
20. In accordance with IFAD guidelines, a financial management assessment was

undertaken. The inherent risk was assessed as high. In order to mitigate this risk,
a stand-alone PMU will be established within RRA with separate financial
management arrangements. This system is already in place for ongoing IFAD
projects and some World Bank projects, and the quality of financial management
has been largely assessed as satisfactory. As a result, the new project will be able
to draw on the capacities already established and working satisfactorily as part of
the ongoing IFAD projects. The ongoing IFAD project, the Horticultural Support
Project, has also shown strong disbursement rates with regards to credit lines.

21. Financial Management. The PMU, with support from the RRA finance unit, will be
responsible for the financial management of the project, including budgeting,
accounting, preparing withdrawal applications, monitoring implementing partners,
preparing consolidated financial reports and internal and external audit
arrangements.

22. Accounting and financial reporting arrangements. The accounting, financial
reporting and audit arrangements have already been established under the ongoing
IFAD projects. Accordingly, all project transactions will be recorded in customized
accounting and financial software on a cash basis in accordance with International
Public Sector Accounting Standards, and quarterly financial reports will be prepared
in formats agreed with IFAD. The project's consolidated financial statements will be
audited annually by an independent audit firm in accordance with internationally
accepted auditing standards and IFAD’s Guidelines on Project Audits.

23. Disbursement arrangements and flow of funds. IFAD financing will be
disbursed in accordance with IFAD disbursement procedures to be specified in the
programme implementation manual and letter to the borrower. Two separate
designated accounts denominated in United States dollars (US$) will be opened for
the IFAD loan and grant in a commercial bank, and will not be mingled with other
funds. From the designated accounts, the funds will flow to the project account
denominated in Uzbek sum (UZS) to finance eligible project expenditures. From the
designated loan account and the project loan account, funds (US$ or UZS) will be
transferred to incremental credit accounts (one account in US$ and one in UZS)
maintained by the PFIs in the form of credit to finance sub-projects undertaken by
beneficiaries. Transfers to the rural guarantee facility will be made using the direct-
payment method to a separate account maintained in US$ in a commercial bank,
and IFAD funds will not be mingled with other funds. Specific conditions for
disbursement will be included in the financing agreement to ensure that proper
safeguards are in place before transferring any funds to the PFIs and the
Guarantee Facility and remedies will be applied in case of non-compliance.

24. Procurement. As part of the detailed project design, IFAD assessed the public
procurement systems and institutions in Uzbekistan for the purpose of identifying
an entity to handle procurement. Despite recent efforts to modernize and
strengthen Uzbekistan’s public procurement system, there are critical gaps in
compatibility with IFAD’s procurement guidelines and procedures. However, the
capacity of RRA to conduct procurement was found to be in line with IFAD
procurement regulations and procedures.

25. Anti-corruption policy. IFAD applies a zero-tolerance policy towards fraudulent,
corrupt, collusive or coercive actions in all projects financed through its loans and
grants. IFAD’s anticorruption policy and whistleblowing procedures will be included
in the project implementation manual.



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

6

E. Supervision
26. Supervision and implementation support. A supervision plan covering the

period until the mid-term review will be agreed at project start-up. The project will
be supervised directly by IFAD. This will include annual risk-based financial
management supervision by a financial management specialist and operational
reviews covering a random sample of project activities, to be carried out in project
years 2 and 4 by independent auditors and under terms of reference acceptable to
IFAD. Details of financial management supervision are provided in appendix 7 of
the project design document. The timely completion of a baseline survey in line
with the project’s outcome and output indicators is fundamental to effective project
supervision.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
27. The main assumptions underlying the derivation of project costs, estimated project

costs and financing plan are that: (i) project costs are based on September 2017
prices; (ii) the project will be financed over a six-year period; and (iii) the official
annual inflation rate of 5.7 per cent is taken as constant for the duration of the
project period (2018-2023). The international inflation rate is set at 2 per cent per
year in line with medium- to long-term projections of the Economist Intelligence
Unit and the World Bank Group (Commodity Market Outlook, January 2017) for the
United States dollars. Further to the devaluation of the UZS on 5 September 2017,
the base exchange rate for this analysis was set at UZS 8,092 to US$1 as the
official exchange rate prevailing at the end of the final design mission. Project costs
are presented in both UZS and US$; conversions from current US$ values into UZS
use constant purchasing power exchange rates. A 20 per cent value-added tax will
be levied on all imported and locally procured goods and services. For directly
recruited local staff, the project will cover the social insurance rate of 25 per cent.

28. Project costs. The total investment and incremental recurrent project costs,
including physical and price contingencies, are estimated at approximately
US$159.6 million (UZS 1,291 billion). Physical and price contingencies are 1 per
cent of the total project cost. This is largely due to the fact that investments
associated with rural finance (lump sum with no contingency) comprise
approximately 88 per cent of the total project costs. The foreign-exchange
component is estimated at US$112.4 million or 70 per cent of the total project
cost. This is due to the fact that most of the project financing is in the form of
credit lines which will be used by the beneficiaries to purchase assets for local
production and also for financing the export of their produce. The Government's
contribution, mainly in the form of taxes, represents 17 per cent of the total cost,
or US$27.0 million. The project management cost is approximately 1.4 per cent of
the total project cost (US$2.2 million). Table 1 provides a summary of the project
financing plan by component.



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

7

Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Financing gap Government PFIs Beneficiaries Total
Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Inclusive Value Chains
Development
1.1 Enabling business
environment for inclusive value
chains 52 14.8 82 23.3 159 45.2 59 16.7 - - - - 352 0.2
1.2 Capacity development for
value chain stakeholders 3 918 37.4 125 1.2 4 519 43.1 1 911 18.2 - - 7 0.1 10 480 6.6
Subtotal 1. Inclusive value chain
development 3 970 36.7 207 1.9 4 678 43.2 1 969 18.2 - - 7 0.1 10 831 0.1
2. Inclusive rural finance
2.1 Rural guarantee facility 1 000 10.1 - - 6 935 69.8 2 000 20.1 - - - - 9 935 6.2
2.2 Agriculture diversification and
modernization credit lines 33 712 28.3 93 0.1 26 538 22.3 19 869 16.7 19 543 16.4 19 466 16.3 119 214 74.7
2.3 Credit line for youth 5 000 41.7 - - 5 000 41.7 2 000 16.7 - - - - 12 000 7.5
Subtotal 2. Inclusive rural finance 39 712 28.1 93 0.1 38 473 27.3 23 869 16.9 19 543 13.8 19 466 13.8 141 149 88.5
3. Climate-resilient rural
infrastructure
3.1 Modernization of irrigation
systems 1 109 21.2 - - 3 260 62.2 874 16.7 - - - - 5 243 3.3
3.2 Increasing capacities of WCAs 37 37.3 - - 46 46.0 17 16.7 100 0.1
Subtotal 3. Climate-resilient rural
infrastructure 1 146 21.5 - - 3 305 61.9 890 16.7 - - - - 5 342 3.3
4. Project management
4.1 Project management unit 800 62.9 - - 275 21.6 198 15.5 1 273 0.8
4.2 Project implementation team 572 59.9 - - 269 28.2 114 11.9 955 0.6
Subtotal 4. Project management 1 372 61.6 - - 544 24.4 312 14.0 2 228 1.4

Total 46 200 29.0 300 0.2 47 000 29.1 27 041 16.9 19 543 12.2 19 466 12.2 159 550 100.0

B. Project financing
29. The project will be financed through multiple sources, including an IFAD loan, an

IFAD grant, the Government, beneficiaries and PFIs. The IFAD loan from the
2016-2018 performance-based allocation system (PBAS) totalling US$46.2 million
will cover 29 per cent of project costs, contributing to: 37 per cent of the inclusive
value chains development component (component 1, totalling US$10.8 million);
28 per cent of the inclusive rural finance component (component 2,
US$141.8 million); 21 per cent of the climate-resilient rural infrastructure
component (component 3, US$5.3 million); and 62 per cent of the project
management component (component 4, US$ 2.2 million). In addition, IFAD will
provide a grant of US$300,000 to cover part of the international technical
assistance and training provided under component 1, and technical assistance to
Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources under component 2. The Government
will waive all taxes related to project expenditures, including all those associated
with goods and services procured with the loans generated by the project’s funded
credit lines, and the social fund associated with personnel. The Government's
contribution,  mainly in the form of taxes, represents 17 per cent of the total cost
or US$27.0 million. PFIs are expected to contribute US$19.5 million to match the
funds made available by the project. Beneficiaries will contribute at least
US$19.5 million. The financing gap of US$47 million may be sourced by
subsequent PBAS cycles (under financing terms to be determined and subject to
internal procedures and subsequent Executive Board approval), or by cofinancing
identified during implementation.



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

8

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Financing gap Government PFIs Beneficiaries Total

Category Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Equipment and goods 2 448 39.4 - - 2 718 43.8 1 035 16.7 - 7 0.1 6 208 3.9

2. Civil works 1 513 26.0 3 192 54.8 1 123 19.3 - - - 5 828 3.7

3. Vehicles 82 75.0 27 25.0 109 0.1

4. Technical assistance

International TA 494 43.0 46 4.0 418 36.4 192 16.7 - - 1 150 0.7

National TA 600 20.5 254 8.7 1 486 50.8 500 17.1 85 2.9 2 925 1.8
Subtotal Technical Assistance
and Studies 1 094 26.8 300 7.4 1 904 46.7 692 17.0 85 2.1 4 075 2.6

5. Training 251 36.8 317 46.5 114 16.7 682 0.4

6. Inclusive value chain financing

Guarantee Finance 1 000 10.1 6 935 69.8 2 000 20.1 9 935 6.2

Credit Line for AMD 33 712 28.4 26 444 22.2 19 815 16.7 19 458 16.4 19 458 16.4 118 888 74.5

Credit Line for Youth 5 000 41.7 5 000 41.7 2 000 16.7 12 000 7.5
Subtotal Inclusive Value Chain
Financing 39 712 28.2 38 379 27.3 23 815 16.9 19458 13.8 19458 13.8 140 823 88.3

Total Investment Costs 45 100 28.6 300 0.2 46 510 29.5 26 805 17.0 19 543 12.4 19458 12.3 157 725 98.9

7. Salaries 746 68.9 337 31.1 1 084 0.7

Operations & Maintenance 111 54.8 58 28.6 34 16.7 203 0.1

Operating Costs 243 45.0 95 17.6 202 37.4 539 0.3

Total Recurrent Costs 1 100 60.3 490 26.8 235 12.9 1825 1.1
Total 46 200 29.0 300 0.2 47 000 29 27 041 16.9 19 543 12.2 19 465 12.2 159 550 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The project is expected to generate substantial net incremental benefits for farming

households, Dekhan farmers, commercial farmers, agri-firms and rural
entrepreneurs. These include: (i) at least 80 per cent of project beneficiaries
reporting at least a 20 per cent increase in income; (ii) at least 75,000 households
receiving services promoted or supported by the project; (iii) at least 10,000
full-time jobs (or equivalent) created; and (iv) at least 70 per cent of supported
smallholder producers, including Dekhans, reporting a 20 per cent increase in sales
along their value chains

31. Economic rate of return. On the basis of the above assumptions, the economic
analysis of the project indicates that the total investment gains are significant and
robust in economic terms. The analysis results in an internal economic rate of
return of 16.5 per cent and a net present value of US$33.7 million over 20 years
based on quantifiable benefits that relate directly to the activities undertaken by
the project.

D. Sustainability
32. The sustainability of the project’s results is based on: (i) the value chain-champion

business and technical capacity-building activities to be promoted; (ii) the
demand-driven nature of the intervention; and (iii) the preparation of value chain
development plans as the basis for all investments, which should lead to inclusive
and more equitable and profitable value chains. The project’s sustainability is also
based on an exit strategy that comprises: (i) ensuring the ownership by
beneficiaries of the financed activities; (ii) the participatory development of
demand-driven technology; (iii) integration along value chains, including input



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

9

suppliers and service providers; and (iv) limited project operational, staff and
recurrent costs.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
33. The major risks are: (i) a distortive policy environment; (ii) a lack of stakeholder

participation; (iii) market-related risks including potential exchange rate
fluctuations; (iv) a failure of communication; (v) deteriorating financial
performance of some PFIs; and (vi) the outbreak of transboundary animal disease,
(vii) complex flow of funds, as well as (viii) relatively large financing gap. Mitigation
measures include: regular supervision, and preparation of a detailed project
implementation manual; separate US$ accounts for IFAD financing and procedures
to manage foreign exchange risks, in-depth, participatory analysis of production
and business opportunities; intensive training for farmers on how to position their
products; establishment of proper contracts; training on business management;
regular project monitoring; annual assessment of banks against minimum eligibility
requirements; upgrading critical competencies in active disease surveillance and
reporting from the field; and ensuring that there are veterinary field staff capable
of sharing information and specimens with the Government’s veterinary disease
diagnostic laboratories. Moreover, specific conditions related to disbursement and
audit will be included in the financing agreement to ensure that proper safeguards
are in place with regards to funds being transferred to the PFIs and the guarantee
facility. The PFIs also will also be subject to strict monitoring measures, as well as
compliance based disbursement procedures. As the financing gap will mainly
finance credit lines, the project will still be able to function, even if the additional
financing does not materialize.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

34. The project design is aligned with all relevant IFAD strategies and policies,
including the: (i) Strategic Framework (2016-2025); (ii) Policy on Targeting;
(iii) Policy on Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment; (iv) Rural Finance
Policy; (v) Private-Sector Development and Partnership Strategy; (vi) Rural
Enterprise Policy; (vii) Environment and Natural Resource Management Policy; and
(viii) Social, Environmental and Climate Assessment Procedures. Given the nature
and extent of the likely environmental impacts, the project is classified as a
category B in line with IFAD’s environmental assessment procedures. The potential
negative environmental impacts are assessed to be within controllable limits.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
35. The project is closely aligned with and supports the Government’s priorities for

diversification and modernization of the agriculture sector, as expressed in the
Welfare Improvement Strategy (2013-2015) and Presidential Decree No.2460 on
agriculture sector reforms and development for 2016-2020, which stresses the
need to gradually shift from cotton and wheat to value-added commodities, and
introduce resource-saving technologies.

36. Seeking to avoid the duplication of efforts and foster complementarities while
taking advantage of business-related best practices and technological innovations,
the intervention strategy will be based on: (i) building partnerships with the
country’s private commercial sector, and related stakeholders; (ii) local research
institutions and industry associations, particularly for expanding technical
assistance services and market channels; (iii) harmonization with the initiatives of
development partners present in the country such as ADB, the Food and
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the World Bank; and (iv) the
principles of the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness.



EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

10

Innovations and scaling upC.
37. The project has two main innovative features. First, it will introduce a rural

guarantee facility that will leverage up to five times the value of the facility; the
US$9.9 million invested will help to attract US$49.5 million into Uzbekistan’s
agricultural sector. IFAD will be a pioneer among international financial institutions
by investing in the State Fund, and will document and disseminate its experiences
among other funders to attract more resources to the State Fund. In addition, the
adoption of the specialized automated Cash-flow Linked Agri-Risk Assessment tool
for loan analysis and management will build the capacity of participating banks to
lend to the agricultural sector and manage their agricultural loan portfolios more
efficiently.

Policy engagementD.
38. Successful policy engagement will depend on the capacity to generate analytical

evidence at the outcome and impact levels. To capture experience gained, two
approaches are envisaged: (i) a knowledge management programme within the
project to support within- and between-project learning; and (ii) support for a
broader programme of knowledge management aimed at informing government
decision-makers and influencing policy. Considering the relatively recent IFAD
experience in the country and collaboration with the ADB and the World Bank, IFAD
is transitioning to a more integrated, strategic, and programmatic dialogue to
identify barriers to a conducive business environment.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
39. A project financing agreement between the Republic of Uzbekistan and IFAD will

constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

40. The Republic of Uzbekistan is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

41. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
42. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the Republic
of Uzbekistan in an amount equivalent to of forty-six million two hundred
thousand United States dollars (US$46,200,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of
Uzbekistan in an amount equivalent to three hundred thousand United States
dollars (US$300,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

1

Negotiated financing agreement

Agriculture Diversification and Modernization Project

(Negotiations concluded on 22 November 2017)

Loan Number: _______
Grant Number: _______

Project Title: Agriculture Diversification and Modernization Project (“ADMP” or “the
Project”)

The Republic of Uzbekistan (the “Borrower/Recipient”)

and

The International Fund for Agricultural Development (the “Fund” or “IFAD”)

(each a “Party” and both of them collectively the “Parties”)

hereby agree as follows:

Section A

1. The following documents collectively form this Agreement: this document, the
Project Description and Implementation Arrangements (Schedule 1), and the Allocation
Table (Schedule 2), and the Special Covenants (Schedule 3).

2. The Fund’s General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing dated
29 April 2009, amended as of April 2014, and as may be amended hereafter from time to
time (the “General Conditions”) are annexed to this Agreement, and all provisions thereof
shall apply to this Agreement. For the purposes of this Agreement the terms defined in
the General Conditions shall have the meanings set forth therein.

3. The Fund shall provide a Loan and a Grant to the Borrower/Recipient (the
“Financing”), which the Borrower/Recipient shall use to implement the Project in
accordance with the terms and conditions of this Agreement.

Section B

1. A. The amount of the Loan is forty-six million and two hundred thousand United
States dollars (USD 46 200 000).

B. The amount of the Grant is three hundred thousand dollars (USD 300 000).

2. The Loan is granted on blend terms, and shall be subject to interest on the principal
amount outstanding at a fixed rate of 1.25 per cent and in addition a service charge of
0.75 per cent per annum payable semiannually in the Loan Service Payment Currency
and shall have a maturity period of twenty five (25) years, including a grace period of
five (5) years, starting from the date of approval by the Executive Board.

3. The Loan Service Payment Currency shall be the United States dollar (USD).

4. The first day of the applicable Fiscal Year shall be 1 January.



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

2

5. Payments of principal, interest and service charge shall be payable on each 15 May
and 15 November.

6. There shall be two Designed Accounts in USD, one for the IFAD loan and one for
the IFAD grant for the benefit of the Project in a commercial bank. The IFAD funds shall
not be mingled with other funds. In addition, there shall be two project accounts in UZS
to receive the Financing from the respective Designated Accounts in a commercial bank.

7. The Borrower/Recipient shall provide as its contribution to the Project counterpart
financing in sufficient amount to cover taxes and custom duties associated with the
implementation of the Project.

Section C

1. The Lead Project Agency shall be the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources
(MAWR).

2. The following are designated an additional Project Party: Rural Restructuring
Agency (RRA).

3. The Project Completion Date shall be the sixth anniversary of the date of entry into
force of this Agreement.

Section D

The Financing will be administered and the Project supervised by the Fund.

Section E

1. The following are designated as additional grounds for suspension of this
Agreement:

(a) The Project Implementation Manual ("PIM") referred to in Paragraph 19,
Section II of Schedule 1 hereto, or any provision thereof, has been waived,
suspended, terminated, amended or modified without the prior consent of the
Fund, and the Fund has determined that such waiver, suspension,
termination, amendment or modification has had, or is likely to have, a
material adverse effect on the Project.

2. The following are designated as additional general conditions precedent to
withdrawal:

(a) A Presidential Decree confirming the Rural Restructuring Agency as the
agency responsible for the management of the Project shall have been issued;

(b) Key Staff, including a Project Manager, a Chief Accountant and a Procurement
Officer with qualifications and experience acceptable to the Fund have been
duly appointed;

(c) A Project Implementation Manual (PIM) containing the Financial
Administration and Accounting procedures, has been cleared by the Fund;



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

3

3. The following are the designated representatives and addresses to be used for any
communication related to this Agreement:

For the Borrower/Recipient:

Batir Asadillaevich Khodjaev
Minister for Finance of the Republic of Uzbekistan
Ministry of Finance
5, Mustaqillik Square
10000-8 Tashkent

For the Fund:

The President
International Fund for Agricultural Development
Via Paolo di Dono 44
00142 Rome, Italy

This Agreement, dated _______, has been prepared in the English language in two (2)
original copies, one (1) for the Fund and one (1) for the Borrower/Recipient.

REPUBLIC OF UZBEKISTAN

____________________
(Authorized Representative)
(Name and title)

INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR
AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT

___________________
Gilbert F. Houngbo
President



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

4

Schedule 1

Project Description and Implementation Arrangements

I. Project Description

1. Project Area. The Project will be implemented in Fergana Valley, in the regions of
Andijan, Fergana and Namangan.

2. Target Population. The main target groups of the Project are: (i) rural households
of dehkan farms, who strive to increase income from agriculture through active
participation in the Project supported value chains; (ii) small farmers engaged/interested
in horticulture and livestock (with farm size of up to 5 ha); (iii) agribusinesses with
existing or potential linkages with (i) and (ii); and (iv) youth living in the Project regions.
Special attention will be paid to ensure the participation of female-headed households
both in dehkan and small farmers, as well as to reach out female youth.

3. In its first phase, the Project is expected to reach out directly to 30,000
households, and about 10 000 indirect beneficiaries. These include 5 000, households
benefitting from loans and training, plus approximately 20 000 incremental suppliers of
the Leading Entities (LEs) benefitting of ADMP loans, and some 4 000 full time equivalent
incremental jobs created by the LEs’ incremental economic activities.

4. Goal. The development goal of the Project to improve the incomes and livelihoods of
rural people in the Project area.

5. Objective. The Project’s Development Objective is to increase inclusiveness and
profitability of selected value chains through enhanced productivity, market access and
improved natural resources.

6. Components. The Project will have three principal inter-related components as well
as another one to support Project management and implementation:

7. Component 1: Inclusive Value Chains Development: The outcome of this
component is enhanced capacity for sustainable and efficient performance of targeted
stakeholders and aimed to create an enabling business environment for agribusinesses in
selected value chains (VC) with strong backward linkages with smallholder producers; and
to strengthen the capacities of the farmers and other stakeholders of those VCs. Three
activities will be implemented under this component: (i) Value Chain Mapping exercises
based on Rapid Market Assessment results for small ruminants, fisheries, sericulture and
honey prepared during the design; (ii) Rapid Market Assessments of additional
sub-sectors; and (iii) Preparation of VC development Roadmaps for LEs.

8. Component 2: Inclusive Rural Finance: The outcome of this component is
increased productivity and efficiency along targeted smallholder-inclusive value chains to
enable value chain actors to increase investment in profitable value chains through the
provision of credit and a guarantee facility. The Project will support (i) the State Fund for
the Support of the Development of Entrepreneurial Activity (SFSDEA) to render credit
guarantees to smallholders and other rural enterprises who lack acceptable collateral by
offering the partial coverage of lending risks; (ii) work with banks interested in lending to
agriculture in the target regions and meeting the Project’s eligibility criteria to facilitate
farmers and agricultural businesses’ access to finance; and (iii) establish credit window for
youth who are underserved by financial services with affordable lending products. Banks
will be free to set their own interest rates allowing serving the Project beneficiaries in a
sustainable manner; however the banks will be selected through a competitive process to
ensure that those offering the best conditions are chosen.

9. Component 3: Climate-resilient Rural Infrastructure: This component aims at
removing bottlenecks for reliable irrigation water supply, which inhibit increasing
participation for dehkans and small farmers in enhanced diversification and efficiency of



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

5

agriculture for the selected value chains. This will be achieved through modernization of
inter-farm irrigation network operated by Water Consumer Associations (WCAs) and will
provide conditions for targeted farmers’ group to: (i) diversify agricultural production from
low to high value crops; (ii) increase land productivity; (iii) address challenges of drought
due to climate change; and (iv) increase capacity of WCAs and Basin Administration of
Irrigation System (BAIS) in efficient water resource management and irrigation system
operation and maintenance.

II. Implementation Arrangements

10. Approach. The Project will promote a demand driven value chain approach. The
value chain approach will focus on analyzing each step of the value chain and investment
on those needs which have the potential for improving productivity, profitability and
competitiveness of the value chain players, particularly focusing on dehkan farmers.

11. The Project will promote upgrading of selected value chains and will include
actions taken by producers, processors, input suppliers and traders at various points in
the value chain to increase future productive capacity and competitiveness. The LEs with
successful Value Chain Roadmaps prepared under Component 1 will be favourably
considered for receiving loans from PFIs under Component 2. While loan applications will
be assessed individually, the Project will provide complementary support to enhance their
business operations through provision of technical assistance and training to farmer
suppliers and other actors as well as access to improved infrastructure under Component
3 to enhance overall competitiveness and efficiency of the value chains. The ADMP will
promote close coordination with projects funded by other donors organizations especially
with those projects also under the Rural Restructuring Agency (RRA).

12. Organizational framework. The MAWR will have the overall responsibility for
management of the Project on behalf of the Borrower/Recipient. Day-to-day oversight of
the ADMP’s management will rest with a Project Management Unit (PMU) under the RRA.
The overall management oversight of the Project will rest with an Inter-agency Council
(IC). The IC is an inter-governmental institutions agency for Cooperation with
International Financial Institutions, Foreign Government Agencies and Donor Countries in
Implementation of Large-scale and Strategically Important Investment Projects.

13. The PMU for the ADMP will be headed by a Project Manager and be composed of
(preliminary): a Chief Accountant; Procurement Officer; Rural Finance /Youth Officer;
Administrative Assistant; and a Driver. The ADMP will use Horticultural Support Project
/Dairy Value Chains Development Project legal staff. In addition, the Project will count on
the services of national and international specialists in various fields. A Project
Implementation Team (PIT, RRA regional representation) will be established in one of the
regions of the Project area in PY1. The PIT would comprise a: Regional Coordinator
(Value Chain and Business Specialist), three Rural Finance Officer/gender/youth,
Engineer, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E Specialist) and a driver. The PIT will be
responsible for day-to-day implementation in the field of all aspects of the Project, with
the exception of financial administration and procurement, which will be managed
entirely by the relevant personnel of the RRA/ADMP PMU at central level.

14. The PMU/PIT shall coordinate the work of consultants and participating financial
institutions (PFIs) that will interact with VC actors on planning and financial matters.

15. The MOF shall make the Subsidiary Loans available to the PFIs under Subsidiary
Loan Agreements (SLAs) to be entered into between the Borrower/Recipient, the RRA
and each PFI. The SLAs shall be under terms and conditions cleared by the Fund and in
adherence with the Investment Guidelines. Except as the Fund shall otherwise agree,
the MOF shall not assign, amend, abrogate or waive any SLA or any of its provisions. The
project monitoring and evaluation system and processes will be established and managed
in accordance with established IFAD procedures by the PMU with support from IFAD. The



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

6

Logical Framework provides indicators for implementation along with their corresponding
means of verification. These will form the basis on which the M&E system will be built.

16. At the start of the Project and no later than 90 days after the date of entry into
force of this Agreement, the PMU shall manage a comprehensive baseline survey which
will be updated on annual basis to track the different Project indicators over time,
including for the mid-term review. During the Project’s final year, a completion survey
will be conducted. Results will be compared against the baseline survey results to assess
project impact.

17. Supervision. The Project will be directly supervised by IFAD. The IFAD country
team shall provide continuous implementation support to the Project and shall undertake
supervision missions on an annual basis to assess overall management arrangements
and performance including financial and procurement aspects and monitoring and
evaluation. The supervision shall be carried out jointly with the Borrower  representatives
and IFAD.

18. Mid-Term Review. A mid-term review shall be carried out towards the end of third
Project year. The review shall be undertaken in accordance with IFAD-MTR guidelines in
consultation with the Borrower  representatives.

19. Project Implementation Manual (PIM). The RRA/PMU shall prepare a draft PIM
acceptable to the Fund and submit it to the Fund for no objection. The PIM may be
amended when necessary with the approval of the Fund in order to introduce clarification
in procedures, eliminating constraints for project implementation and for facilitating
access of producers to the project services.



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

7

Schedule 2

Allocation Table

1. Allocation of Loan and Grant Proceeds. (a) The Table below sets forth the Categories
of Eligible Expenditures to be financed by the Loan and the Grant and the allocation of the
amounts of the Loan and the Grant to each Category and the percentages of expenditures
for items to be financed in each Category:

Category

Loan Amount
Allocated

(expressed in
USD)

Grant
Amount
Allocated

(expressed
in USD)

Percentage net of
Taxes, Government

contribution,
Co-financing and

beneficiary
contribution

I. Civil Works 1 490 000 100%

II. Equipment and Materials (including
Vehicles)

2 420 000
100%

III. Consultancies (including Technical
Assistance and training)

1 170 000 300 000 100%

IV. Credit and Guarantee Funds:

(a) Guarantee Finance 1 000 000 100%

(b) Credit line for AMD 33 710 000 100%

(c) Credit line for Youth 5 000 000 100%

V. Operating cost (Salaries and
recurrent cost) 1 040 000 100%

Unallocated (1%) 370 000

TOTAL 46 200 000 300 000

(b) The terms used in the Table above are defined as follows:

Category II "Equipment and Materials" means Eligible Expenditures related to
Goods, Equipment and Materials as well as Vehicles.

Category III "Consultancies" means Eligible Expenditures related to
Consultancies, Technical Assistance, Trainings and Workshops.

Category V "Operating cost" means Eligible Expenditures related to Salaries
and Allowances, operating cost of the PMU/PIU and other recurrent cost.



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

8

2. Start-up Costs. To facilitate a prompt start-up, a withdrawal up to USD 200 000
may be made to incur expenditures related to the Project start-up activities before the
satisfaction of the general conditions precedent to withdrawal. The start-up activities may
include inter alia: (i) establishment of the PMU and salaries of key staff, (ii) Formulating
of the Project Implementation Manual; (iii) Preparation of the first AWPB and
procurement plan; (iv) Organization of a start-up workshop, (v) Prepare specifications for
the accounting software; (vi) Finalization of Investment Guidelines, Value Chain
Development Roadmaps, and templates for Subsidiary loan agreements.

3. Specific Conditions of withdrawal. In addition to the general conditions precedent to
withdrawal listed in Section E, the following specific conditions for first withdrawal will
apply.

I. No funds will be transferred to the Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs)
before the following conditions have been fulfilled:

(a) The first three Value Chain Roadmaps have been prepared and received
the Fund's no-objection.

(b) The Investment Guidelines (or equivalent) for the use of PFI loan
proceeds, including the operating modalities including the eligibility
criteria for the PFIs and end-borrowers for each credit window
(agricultural diversification and modernization window or youth window)
has received the Fund's no-objection.

(c) The Subsidiary Loan agreements (SLA) for providing credit to PFI received
the Fund's no-objection

(d) The PFI has opened an account to receive IFAD loan funds and a revolving
account for credit reflows.

II. No funds will be transferred as part of the guarantee finance before the following
conditions have been fulfilled:

(a) The SFSDEA has become operational and a due diligence assessment
including an assessment of its Financial Management capacity has been
conducted and shared with the Fund.

(b) An agreement, specifying all the necessary modalities for the guarantee
finance, between the RRA  (or other entity as agreed with the Fund) and
the SFSDEA has been duly formalized and received the Fund’s no-
objection.

(c) The Investment Guidelines (or equivalent) and operating modalities
including the eligibility criteria for issuing guarantee finance have received
IFAD's no-objection.

(d) A separate account for the IFAD loan funds in the SFSDEA has been duly
opened.

(e) The template for a sub agreement for providing guarantees to financial
institution/smallholder/rural business has received IFAD's no-objection.



Appendix I EB 2017/122/R.27/Rev.1

9

Schedule 3

Special Covenants

In accordance with Section 12.01(a)(xxiii) of the General Conditions, the Fund may
suspend, in whole or in part, the right of the Borrower/Recipient to request withdrawals
from the Loan Account and the Grant Account if the Borrower/Recipient has defaulted in
the performance of any covenant set forth below, and the Fund has determined that such
default has had, or is likely to have, a material adverse effect on the Project:

1. Guarantee Financing. The Borrower/Recipient shall ensure that funds transferred for
the guarantee financing are deposited in a separate bank account and will not be mingled
with other funds. At all times the Borrower/Recipient shall ensure that the funds are used
for the intended purpose and made available in a timely manner in order not to adversely
affect the development impact of the activity. In addition the Borrower/Recipient shall
ensure that the SFSDEA (i) keeps records of all the transactions related to the Project in
accordance with international accounting standards, and (ii) issues timely periodic
financial reports on the use of the Project funds to the PMU to satisfy their reporting
requirements.

2. Audit arrangements. The Borrower/Recipient, through the RRA, will appoint
independent auditors acceptable to IFAD, under the terms of reference cleared by IFAD,
and in line with the IFAD Guidelines for Project Audits. An audited annual financial
statement for the entire Project, together with a management letter on audit
observations on internal controls, shall be submitted to the Fund within six (6) months of
the fiscal year end. Moreover, the Borrower/Recipient shall ensure that the IFAD funds
transferred to the SFSDEA are part of the audit and that the auditors are granted full
access to all documentation as may be required.



A
p
p
en

d
ix II

E
B
 2

0
1
7
/1

2
2
/R

.2
7
/R

ev.1

1
0

Logical framework

Results hierarchy Indicators Means of Verification Assumptions

Hierarchy Indicator C.I. Baseline Mid-term
End

Target Source Frequency
Responsibi

lity

Goal

Improved incomes and
livelihoods of rural people in the
Project area

Percentage of project beneficiaries
reporting at least 20% increase in
income1

Impact2 0% 30%
80% (30%

women) Baseline, mid-term and impactsurveys
Specialized (qualitative /
quantitative) thematic studies
Household income surveys

Baseline,
Mid-term,
Completion
Annually

PMU M&E
unit

Overall political
and economic
situation remains
stable
Stability of prices
in agricultural
commodities

Number of HHs receiving services
promoted or supported by the project

Outreach 0 15,000
75,000
(30%

women)

Project development objective

Increased inclusiveness and
profitability of selected value
chains through enhanced
productivity and market access
and improved natural resources

Number of full-time job (or equivalent)
created3 2.2.1 0 2,000

10,000
(30%

women)

Baseline, mid-term and impact
surveys
Annual outcome surveys
Project baseline study and mid-
term review and implementation
completion report
Uzagroexport,4 plus reports from
participating agri-firms
(processor/aggregator) on access
to foreign markets

Baseline,
Mid-term,
Completion

PMU M&E
unit

Macro-economic
conditions remains
stablePercentage of supported smallholder

producers including dekhans reporting
20% increase in sales along the value
chains

2.2.5 0 30% 70% (30%
women)

Component 1. Inclusive Value Chains Development

Outcome 1: Enhanced capacity
for sustainable and efficient
performance of targeted
stakeholder

Percentage of supported
smallholder/dekhan farmers engaged
in partnerships/ commercial
agreements5 with LEs

0% 30%
70%
(30%

women)

Annual surveys

Annually PMU M&E
unit

Government
policies and rural
economic reforms
supporting
smallholders,
private sector
development and
the agriculture
sector are
implemented

Project’s M&E records and report

Percentage of smallholder producers
reporting adoption of new / improved
technologies or practices6

1.2.2 0% 30%
80%
(30%

women)

Government’s national, regional
and local production data

Targeted field studies and surveys

Output 1.1

Enabled business environment
for inclusive value chains

Number of LEs supported in the
preparation of a Value Chain
Development Plan

0 800
1,200
(30%

women)
Project records

Continuousl
y

PMU M&E
unit

Output 1.2
Strengthened value chains
stakeholders

Number of value chain stakeholders
receiving training on better agronomic, 0 6,500

10,000
(30% Project records

Continuousl
y

PMU M&E
unit

1
This indicator is inspired by the RIMS Impact-level indicator “Number of people experiencing economic mobility”, corresponding to SDG target 1.1 and 1.2, but taking into account the specific aspect of income, where ADMP is expected to generate an impact. These

project’s direct beneficiaries are estimated around 75,000 households. These include stakeholders benefitting of credit lines supported by the ADMP, as well as of trainings/other supports provided by the project and by the project’s supported LEs, or from FFS
curricula and guided exposure to technological demonstration plots.
2 RIMS impact level indicator, corresponding to SDG target 1.1 and 1.2.
3 The target corresponding to some 80% of the number of full-time equivalent jobs created through ADMP interventions (see Appendix 10, Economic and Financial Analysis).
4 Uzagroexport is a state enterprise that monitors the export. There is a branch in each region of Fergana Valley.
5 Including, but not limited to, formal contracts with traders / aggregators / processors. LEs will specify those linkages in their Strategic Plans / Roadmaps, developed by LEs within sub-comp. 1.1.
6

The outreach is mostly determined by sub-component 1.2’s interventions. Beneficiaries include 1,200 LE representatives (also benefitting of support under sub-component 1.1 for their roadmap; about 5,000 LE suppliers,
benefitting from inclusive workshops/ trainings; about 600 Mahalla leaders (community mobilization and TOT); about 1,000 additional Mahalla members; 3,200 producers benefitting of demo plots (10 farmers at least for each demo
plot established); 2,250 FFS members. Adoption rate is about 80%.



A
p
p
en

d
ix II

E
B
 2

0
1
7
/1

2
2
/R

.2
7
/R

ev.1

1
1

Results hierarchy Indicators Means of Verification Assumptions

Hierarchy Indicator C.I. Baseline Mid-term End
Target

Source Frequency Responsibi
lity

livestock and business practices7 women)
Component 2. Inclusive Rural Finance

Outcome 2: Productivity and
efficiency along targeted
smallholder-inclusive value
chains increased

Number of incremental suppliers
generated by investment along the
selected value chains

0 10,000
50,000
(40%

women)

Project baseline study and mid-
term review and implementation
completion report;

Annually PMU M&E
unit

Micro-economic
conditions are
supportive for
doing business

Participating Financial Institutions
and Central Bank
Project M&E records and report

Output 2.1
Operational Rural Guarantee
Facility

Value of loans guaranteed by the Rural
Guarantee Facility8

0 15.0 m US$ 49.5 m
US$

Project records Continuousl
y

PMU M&E
unit

Output 2.2

Increased access to credits by
rural residents

Number of value chain stakeholders
(Leading Entities) in the project areas
accessing financial services9

1.1.5 0 500
1,200
(30%

women)
Project records Continuousl

y
PMU M&E
unit

Output 2.3

Increased access to credits by
youth

Number of youth involved in the
selected value chains accessing to the
financial services10

0 250
1,000
(50%

women)
Project records

Continuousl
y

PMU M&E
unit

Component 3. Climate-resilient Rural Infrastructure

Outcome 3: Improved farmland
productivity resulting from
modernized irrigation
infrastructure

Number of HHs reporting increase in
production as a result of the adoption
of modern irrigation techniques11

1.2.4 0 200
1,000
(30%

women)

Annual outcome surveys

Annually PMU M&Eunit

Government
policies and rural
economic reforms
supporting
smallholders,
private sector
development and
the agriculture
sector are
implemented

Project’s M&E records and report
Government’s national, regional
and local production data

Targeted field studies and surveys

Output 3.1
Enhanced access by smallholder
farmers to modernized irrigation
systems

Number of hectares under upgraded
irrigation 0 2,000 3,500 Project records

Continuousl
y

PMU M&E
unit

Output 3.2

Strengthened WCAs Number of WCA representativestrained 0 20 30 Project records
Continuousl
y

PMU M&E
unit

7 Adapted from the RIMS CI 1.1.4: “Number of persons trained in production practices and/or technologies”.
8 The Rural Guarantee Facility (US$ 9.9m) would allow mobilizing a five-fold amount of loans. With an average loan size of US$ 20,000 (assumed also for other credit lines within ADMP’s scope, this implies some 2,475 loans.
9 ADMP’s funded credit lines (US$ 54.8m) would generate some 1,200 loans with average size of US$ 45,000. The target is expected to be achieved faster than the Rural Guarantee Facility as the credit lines are expected to be
immediately operational.
10 Under the assumption that youth would borrow an average of U$$ 10,000, the Youth Fund (US$ 10.0m) would be able to generate some 1,000 loans, one fourth by mid-term.
11 The modernization of the tertiary irrigation would benefit some 3,500 ha in the three regions, with 3.5 ha average land size / farm it implies some 1,000 households.



