























































AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK GROUP 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 
MULTINATIONAL 

 

 

 

 

 

TECHNOLOGIES FOR AFRICAN AGRICULTURAL TRANSFORMATION: 

FRAMEWORK PROGRAM IN SUPPORT OF “FEED AFRICA” 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

Program Overview 

1.1 More than 160 million Africans (about one in four Africans) are food insecure and 

malnourished, making Africa the most food-insecure region in the world. More than 32 million African 

children under five are underweight, of which nearly 10 million are severely underweight, and 14.3 

million are wasted, with low weight for their height. Africa’s recent economic gains are at risk if this is 

allowed to continue.  Low agricultural productivity and value addition are at the heart of the 

malnutrition, employment and income challenges on the continent. The agricultural sector accounts for 

between 50 and 70% of employment in African countries, but produces only 25% of Africa’s Gross 

Domestic Product (GDP). 

1.2  Asia was in a similar position in the 1960s but 20th century scientific advances in agriculture 

developed by a number of International Agricultural Research Centers (IARCs) in Latin America and 

Asia were applied, leading to the Asian “green revolution”. These centers became the Consultative 

Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR) and together with countries in Asia they 

catalyzed one of the greatest increases in food production and improved nutritional well-being such as 

the world has ever known. Today, the technologies exist to feed Africa, if widely deployed. They include 

high yielding crop varieties and livestock breeds, bio-fortified crops such as pro-vitamin A rich cassava, 

high iron and zinc rice, and high zinc sorghum, which if scaled up can help address the problems of 

malnutrition and stunting of African bodies and minds. Africa has more food production technologies 

available today than Asia had at the time of its green revolution. What is missing is taking these 

technologies to farmers at scale. Also missing has been a well-coordinated food production technology 

delivery platform to help address all of the related issues of extension (training), policy, market, 

institutional, R&D, and regulatory issues hindering the widespread use of technologies. 

1.3  The Bank seeks to focus the technically excellent but hitherto uncoordinated efforts of CGIAR 

and their work with National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES), in particular as 

represented by their continental umbrella, the Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA) and 

Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs). The result will be a Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure 

(RTDI), with emphasis on agro-ecological zones and their priority commodities that will reach 40-50% 

of all African farmers with the most relevant food production technologies by 2025. The overall goal of 

TAAT is to radically improve agriculture as a business across Africa by deploying agricultural 

productivity-increasing technologies within eight Priority Intervention Areas (PIAs): i) Self-sufficiency 

in Rice Production, ii) Cassava Intensification, iii) Food and Nutrition Security in the Sahel, iv) 

Transforming African Savannahs into Breadbaskets, v) Revitalizing Tree Plantations, vi) Expanding 

Horticulture, vii) Increasing Africa’s Wheat Production, and viii) Achieving Self-sufficiency in Inland 

Fish Production. Within these PIAs, nine (9) agricultural commodities are prioritized. TAAT is designed 

as a Framework Program that allows partners (the World Bank, AGRA, BMGF, IFAD, etc.) to 

contribute resources and to expand country coverage over time. The Bank’s PY1 funding will be UA 

29 MILLION (US$ 40 MILLION) in grants to finance the centrally managed activities (for ADF-only 

countries while partner resources will initially target ADB countries). Similar amounts will be sought 

for PY2 and PY3. Further, the Bank is expected to provide close to US$350 million through its normal 

country lending programs, beyond the central activities, towards areas that will support development of 

agricultural value chains, market and infrastructure and access to finance, all of which will bolster the 

success of agricultural transformations at the country level. 

1.4 And while TAAT is a key platform for driving the Feed Africa strategy of the Bank, the 

resources needed to achieve the objectives of Feed Africa are huge and well beyond what could be 

achieved alone. So the Bank is developing strategic alliances and partnerships to help mobilize resources 

to achieve the objectives. TAAT is planned as a multi-donor financing platform to help take proven 

agricultural technologies to scale across Africa. The fundamental guiding principles of TAAT are: 

technology matters; scale matters; the policy and regulatory environment matters; and partnerships 

matter. 



 

iv 

1.5 A successful green revolution in Africa must be inclusive and based on a recognition that 

agricultural transformation and women’s empowerment are inextricably linked.  Addressing the gender 

disparities that persist in African agriculture presents a tremendous opportunity to unlock the potential 

of African agriculture. The agricultural sector in Africa is the largest employer of women; 62% of 

economically active women are working in the sector, while in countries such as Rwanda, Malawi and 

Burkina Faso, over 90% of economically active women are involved in agricultural activities. Yet 

depending on the country, the rural wage gap between men and women in Africa is estimated at between 

15-60%.  Research also indicates that women farmers are just as efficient as male farmers when granted 

equal access to inputs and skills.  TAATwill systematically incorporate consideration for gender 

equality and ensure women’s equal access to agricultural technologies..  For TAAT will prioritize the 

needs of women to level the playing field and increase agricultural productivity to achieve impact.  

1.6 TAAT is a strategic alliance with the goal of mobilizing $1 billion towards its goal of scaling 

up agricultural technologies. The Bank and the World Bank have been working actively together on 

conceptualizing TAAT for the past close to two years. The World Bank initially planned to put US$500 

million towards TAAT partnership in countries, an amount it announced would be increased to $700 

million during the multi donor discussion on the planned initiative during the World Food Prize events 

in Des Moines, Iowa in October 2017. The other members of the TAAT alliance will include the Bill 

and Melinda Gates Foundation, the Rockefeller Foundation and the Alliance for a Green Revolution in 

Africa (AGRA), all of whom have committed significant resources. Indeed, the Bill and Melinda Gates 

Foundation has already approved its financing support to the TAAT central coordinating platform 

housed at IITA, which will be described below. 

1.7 Other institutions have been actively participating in TAAT's conceptualization, including the 

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, the International Fund for Agricultural 

Development, Agence Française de Development, DFID, USAID and other bilateral institutions and 

the private sector. Several of these institutions expect to collaborate on TAAT and also to co-finance 

national level interventions through parallel financing. It is worth noting that at the World Food Prize 

events in Iowa, which brought together the world's leading agriculture experts, TAAT was seen as 

potentially the "most significant effort to pull resources together to deliver technologies at scale across 

agroecological zones to farmers in Africa".  

1.8 TAAT aligns with the twin objectives of the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (TYS), inclusive growth 

and transition to green growth, with agriculture as one of the three areas of special emphasis. It also 

resonates with four of the Bank’s five corporate priorities (Feed Africa, Industrialize Africa, Integrate 

Africa and Improve the quality of lives of Africans), encapsulated in the High 5s. In addition, TAAT is 

strongly anchored on the Feed Africa agenda, endorsed by African leaders at the High-Level Conference 

held in Dakar in October 2015, which itself was anchored on the African Union’s Malabo Declaration, 

as well as Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 1 and 2 of eradicating extreme poverty and ending 

hunger and malnutrition. Given the agro-ecological perspective of the PIAs, TAAT contributes to the 

Regional Integration Policy and strategy (2014-2023) and is aligned with the transition states strategy 

in applicable RMCs of the Bank. TAAT is also anchored around previous projects supported by the 

Bank, namely: i) the “Support to Agricultural Research for Development of Strategic Crops in Africa” 

(SARD-SC), which funded research on four of the six strategic crops of the African Union (Cassava, 

Maize, Rice and Wheat), following a value chain approach; ii) the project to deploy the New Rice for 

Africa (NERICA) in seven African countries – a project that won the U.S. Treasury award in 2014; iii) 

the project on the Promotion of Science and Technology for Agricultural Development in Africa 

(PSTAD) implemented in 34 RMCs; and iv) various research-for-development projects (in Cameroon, 

Tanzania, and other countries) that contributed some of the proven agricultural development 

technologies selected for deployment in TAAT. 

1.9 Knowledge gained from implementation of prior agricultural research operations and other 

regional projects, particularly on the need to build country capacity for project implementation and 

delivery, has been taken into consideration in the design of TAAT. Similarly, the knowledge generated 



 

v 

from TAAT will be used to design, manage, and implement similar Bank-financed projects in the future. 

Through M&E, knowledge related data will be collected throughout implementation. Data will be 

analyzed and the results used to improve project implementation in real time. 

1.10 All African countries are eligible to participate in TAAT based upon a commitment to enact 

policies that facilitate the uptake of food production technologies, strengthen National Agriculture 

Research and Extension Systems (NARES), and participate in activities agreed upon with the CGIAR 

consortiums and Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs) under TAAT. They will be supported through 

centrally managed technology deployment compacts or country programs in which the Bank 

collaborates with partners (e.g., WB, AGRA, BMGF, and IFAD) to incorporate TAAT components into 

agricultural value chain development programs. The TAAT program consists of four major components 

namely: i) the creation of an enabling environment for deployment and adoption of food production 

technology by famers, in particular vibrant seed systems or artificial insemination programs, technology 

release and registration policies that are regionally harmonized, and regional programs to combat pest 

and disease threats; ii) a Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI)—a consortium of CGIAR 

centers, NARES, and SROs. These form the TAAT platform, which is able to provide and deploy 

needed food production technologies and any additional adaptive research required; iii) deployment of 

appropriate food production technologies, through crop/livestock campaigns in RMCs; and iv) project 

management. 

1.11 Operationally, TAAT will function as follows: The Regional Technology Delivery 

Infrastructure (RTDI) made up of CGIAR centers and other technology providers, will develop a menu 

of proven food production technologies in nine priority commodities. These include seed systems or 

artificial insemination programs for best bet crop varieties/livestock breeds for large scale deployment; 

protocols for disease control on a regional basis; farmer education in improved crop/animal production 

methods; aquaculture, etc.  RMCs, as represented by NARES, will work with the CGIAR centers to 

prepare proposals, based on the menu of food production technologies, for outreach campaigns;  the 

proposals will be submitted to the decision-making body of the RTDI, the Clearinghouse (details in 

Appendix 1).  Once proposals are approved, funds will be released for execution but the Clearing house 

will continue to provide oversight during execution. TAAT is not a research program but takes food 

production technologies that exist—the result of decades of research efforts—to millions of farmers via 

crop/livestock outreach campaigns and the creation of an enabling environment working with the 

researchers themselves. 

1.12 The food production technologies to be deployed under TAAT have the features of Regional 

Public Goods (RPGs) namely: (i) non-rivalry, (ii) non-exclusivity, (iii) broad public interest and benefit, 

(iv) strong alignment with the Bank’s strategic orientation and continental and regional objectives; (v) 

catalytic and upstream role, and (vi) higher developmental impact through cooperation. Food production 

technologies being deployed will be available to all stakeholders in the target agro-ecological zones or 

commodity belts for free. No country will be excluded. Key related lessons learned will include the 

stronger working relationships between the CGIAR centers and NARES, and the experience in working 

across multiple countries with similar agro-ecological zones, among others. 

1.13 TAAT will allow donors to work together through a well-coordinated regional technology 

delivery platform, for appropriate technologies to be deployed to millions of farmers across Agro-

ecological zones. It will bring to bear the joint collective effort of international, regional and national 

agricultural systems to improve connections between research and extension and reform regulatory 

systems that impede speedy transfer of technologies across borders..  

1.14 By going to scale on the Priority Intervention Areas (PIAs), TAAT’s key benefits include (i) 

increased agricultural productivity and diversification, leading to improved food and nutrition security, 

(ii) job creation through expanded commercialization and industrialization, (iii) improved 

socioeconomic status of farmers including women and youth due to higher incomes, (iv) reduced 

vulnerabilities to market price fluctuations due to reliable supply leading to better organized markets, 



 

vi 

(v) improved soil, land and water management practices due to Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs), 

and (vi) increased resilience to climate variability and stress through the deployment of Climate Smart 

Agriculture (CSA) technologies and innovations. TAAT will make a significant contribution to Feed 

Africa’s key agricultural development objectives, which are 1) eliminating extreme poverty, 2) ending 

hunger and malnutrition, and 3) achieving food self-sufficiency and turning Africa into a net food 

exporter. 

1.15 Projections based upon overall project design and assumptions developed for the larger Feed 

Africa strategy, as well as World Bank and AGRA programs, suggest that TAAT, by scaling up food 

production technologies, will result in 120 million tons of additional raw food production per year, will 

assist about 40 million beneficiaries (11.7 million households), and lead to increased food production 

valued at $1.7 to $2.8 billion resulting from an $850 million investment by the end of the program.. 

Investments in TAAT will be greatly compounded by larger loans/grants awarded to RMCs through 

Feed Africa.  

1.16 Management hereby seeks Board approval for the first year resources (PY1) from the Regional 

Public Good (RPG) window and will return in subsequent years (PY2 and PY3) with further requests and 
also for specific country programs.



 

vii 
 

Results Based Logical Framework 
Country and program name: Multinational – Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) 

 

Purpose: To "rapidly expand access of smallholder farmers, the majority of whom are women, in low-income RMCs to high yielding agricultural technologies to improve their food production, 
assure food security and raise rural incomes, and provide regional public goods by scaling up agricultural technologies across similar agro-ecological zones 

 

RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

RISKS/MITIGATION MEASURES 

Indicator (including CSI) Baseline (2017) Target (2020) 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Enhanced food and nutrition 

security, reduced poverty and 

improved livelihoods 

1. Population are more food secure 
(of which women will be 50%) 

2. Prevalence of stunting among 
children under 5 (disaggregated 

by gender) 

1. 20% of 
Africans are 

food insecure  

2. 31.2% for 
African region 

(ranges 31.7% 

to 42.6%  

1. 40% reduction  
2. 30% reduction 

1. Annual 
country food 

security status 

report. 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

Increased income (inclusively) 

 

 

Increased agriculture 

commodity productivity 

 Household income 
 

 

 Crop productivity 

 Livestock productivity 

 US$1,650 
 

  

 As in Appendix 
2 

 50% increase 
 

 

 30% - 50% increase  

1. Annual 

National Bureau 

of Statistics 

Reports. 

2. Annual Report 

of Ministry of 

Agriculture  

Risk: Lack of enabling environment (policy, 

market, etc.) 

Mitigation: Fact-based & targeted  advocacy 

Risk: Lack of commitments of stakeholders in 

implementation 

Mitigation: Active engagement of all 

stakeholders, with clear roles 

Increased employment 

(inclusively) 
 No. of jobs created (of which 

women & youth)  disaggregated 

by food commodity 

 0  450,000 (50% 
women) 

 

Increased food production 

 

Increased food and nutrition 

security 

 

Direct TAAT beneficiaries 

 

 

Value addition of TAAT 

 Tons of food (additional) 
disaggregated by food commodity 

 Household dietary diversity 
 

 

 No. of beneficiaries 
(disaggregated by age and sex) 

 

 Value of additional production 

 0 
 

 

 0 
 

 0 
 

 

 US$3.29 billion 

 17 Million MT 
 

 

 3 new food/hh 
 

 10.34 million hhs 
(2027) (50% women 

& 25% youth) 

 US$4.99 billion 

 

 Component 1: Creation of Enabling Environment (EE)     

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

Output 1.1: Policies for 

deployment and adoption of food 

production technology policies 

harmonized across  a region 

 No. of technology policies 
harmonized across countries and 

regions 

 0  7 (1/commodity) 1. Qtrly Program 
Monitoring 

Reports. 

2. Annual CG 

Center Reports. 

3. Annual NARES 

Reports 

4. Qtrly Market 

Reports 

Risk: Lack of commitment & logistical support 

to enable training. 

Mitigation: Sensitization & identification of 

strategic training partners 

Risk: Policy inconsistency on the part of 

governments & long process in changing 

policies 

Mitigation: Dialogue using fact-based 

rationale for losses due to policies status quo 

Output 1.2: Capacity of national  

seed systems built  
 No. of weak systems strengthened  0  7 (1/commodity) 

Output 1.3: Improved crop 

varieties and livestock breeds 

released in one country widely r 

 No. of improved crop varieties & 
livestock breeds widely applied in 

agro-ecological zones 

 0  14 (2/commodity) 



 

viii 
 

available for adoption in other 

countries within a region 

Risk: Lack of commitment by the youth 

involved in technology promotion 

Mitigation: Proper orientation on mindset 

change 

Risk: Lack of cooperation by government 

agencies 

Mitigation: Dialogue for buy-in 

Risk: Lack of enabling environment (policy, 

market, etc. 

Mitigation: Fact-based & targeted advocacy 

Risk:  Lack of commitment & logistical 

support to enable training 

Mitigation:  Sensitization & identification of 

strategic training partners 

Risk: Lack of availability of off-taker markets 

Mitigation: Facilitate linkages between 

producer groups and off-takers through 

commodity marketing agreements. 

Output 1.4: Constraints to 

technology adoption addressed 
 No. of technology adoption 

constraints removed 

 0  14 (2/commodity) 

Output 1.5: policies for release 

and registration of food 

production technologies 

harmonized 

 No. of technology policies 
harmonized across countries and 

regions 

 0  7 (1/commodity) 

Output 1.6: Technology 

promotional activities carried out 
 No. of promotional activities with a 

focus on technologies for safe and 

nutritious foods 

 0  3000  
 

  

Output 1.7: Activities carried out 

to promote the consumption of 

safe and nutritious foods 

 No. of promotional activities  0  40 

Output 1.8: Input & output 

markets accessed 
 No. of communities with better 

access to input & output markets 

 0  2,350  

Component 2: Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI) 

Output 2.1: Menu of Best-bet 

food production technologies 

generated 

 No of best-bet technologies scaled 
out. 

 0  21 (3/commodity)   

Output 2.2: Campaigns for 

transnational control of pests & 

diseases designed/implemented 

 No. of campaigns implemented   0  14 (2/commodity) 
 

 

 

 

Output 2.3: Crop/Livestock 

technology delivery compacts 

convened 

 No. of delivery platforms convened  0  14 (2/commodity)  

 

Output 2.4: Young class of 

‘Agripreneurs’ supported 

 

Output 2.5: M&E of the platform 

carried out 

 

 No. of Agripreneurs supported 
 

 No. of M&Es of the platform 
carried out 

 

 0 
 

 

 0 

 

 5000 
 

 

 7 (1/platform) 

  

Component 3: Deployment of Appropriate Technologies (DAT) 

Output 3.1: Trans-national 

control of pest/diseases facilitated 

Output 3.2: Appropriate 

technologies identified and 

deployed 

Output 3.3: crop and livestock 

outreach campaigns 

 

Output 3.4: Wide-scale farmer 

 No. of trans-national pest & 
diseases facilitated 

 

 No. of technologies identified and 
deployed 

 

 No. of successful crop/livestock 
outreach campaigns 

 0 
 

 

 0 
 

 

 

 0 

 7 (1/commodity) 
 

 

 14 (2/commodity) 
 

 

 

 7 (1/commodity) 

  



 

ix 
 

extension and innovative models 

designed and implemented  
 No. of wide-scale farmer 

extension models implemented 

 

 

 0 

 

 

 7 (1/commodity) 

Component 4: Project Management 

Output 4.1: Functional TAAT 

Program Management 
 No. of fiduciary activities handled 

effectively and efficiently under the 

TAAT program 

 0  20 1. Qtrly Program 
Monitoring. 

Risk: Lack of cooperation among Compacts 

Mitigation: Effective team building from the 

onset. 

K
E

Y
 A

C
T

IV
IT

IE
S

 

COMPONENTS INPUTS 

Component 1: Creation of Enabling Environment (EE)           UA 12.28 Million 

1.1: Harmonize and streamline technology release systems and registration as well as seed system policies across countries 

and regions (to ensure spillover effects) 

1:2: Capacity development of weak seed systems 

1:3: Ensure that improved crop varieties and livestock breeds for specific agro-ecological zones are widely applied and 

used 

1:4: Identify and remove constraints to agricultural technology adoption in Africa through appropriate policy audits 

TOTAL PROJECT COST: UA 40.00 MILLION 

 

ADF Grant:                             UA 29.00 million          (72.50%) 

AGRA:                                     UA 7.25 million            (18.10%) 

BMGF:                                     UA 0.85 million             (2.10%) 

Government of RMCs          UA 2.90 million             (7.30%) 

Component 2: Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI)                                                       UA 9.82 Million 

2.1: Identification & selection of best-bet technologies for uptake by RMCs 

2:2: Design & develop appropriate campaigns for transnational control of pests and diseases and its implementation 

2:3: Convene a Crop/Livestock technology delivery platform of all major actors for each of nine priority commodities 

2.4  Engage the CGIARs and other technology providers to develop a menu of proven food production technologies in the 

nine priority commodities 

2:5: Support the development of a young class of ‘agripreneurs’, through demonstration, training and financing in 

coordination with ENABLE Youth 

2.6: Carry out M&E of the platform 

Component 3: Deployment of Appropriate Technologies (DAT)Program   UA 16.01 Million 

3.1: Facilitation of trans-national control of pest and diseases through awareness raising campaigns (that pest and diseases 

do not respect political boundaries) and development of appropriate protocols  

3:2: Deployment of appropriate technologies through crop/livestock outreach campaigns in RMCs 
3.3 Design and implement wide-scale farmer extension and innovative models to organize and aggregate farmers 

 Component 4: Project Management (PM)                UA 1.89 Million 

 4.1: Management of TAAT fiduciary issues (Procurement, Disbursement, Financial Management)  



 

x 
 

Program timeframe 

Table 1: TAAT Program Timeframe  
Year 2017 2018 2019 2020 

Quarter 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 

Initial Activities                 

Internal Processing of Appraisal                 

Loan Negotiations                 

Board approval                 

Grant protocol signature                 

Recruitment of Program Staff (Clearinghouse, etc.)/Nomination of Program Steering Committee members                 

Satisfaction of conditions for effectiveness & first disbursement                 

Program launching/training of program teams in FM & Procurement                 

Preparation and validation of procedures manuals                 

Preparation & signing of MoUs with various implementing partners                 

Component 1: Creation of Enabling Environment (EE)                 

Design and monitoring of supporting policies                 

Technology survey and assessment                 

Assessment of Seed Systems and livestock breeds dissemination systems                 

Proposals on crop/livestock campaigns of proven agricultural technologies                 

National technology deployment and promotion                 

Component 2: Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI)                 

Farmers and input dealers registration                 

Design and implementation of trans-national campaigns for pests & disease control                 

Crop/Livestock technology delivery compact activities                 

Support to development of young class of ‘Agripreneurs’ & Promotion of technologies thru demonstration activities                 

Develop a menu of proven food production technologies in the nine priority commodities                 

Trainers training of others on the use of technologies & GAPs                 

Component 3: Deployment of Appropriate Technologies (DAT)                 

Facilitation of trans-national control of pest and diseases (through awareness raising, etc.)                 

Development of strategies for deployment of proven technologies                 

Design and implement wide-scale farmer and innovative extension models                 

Component 4: Program Management (PM)                 

Preparation, approval and floating of bidding docs & contract awards for goods, works & services                 

Contracts execution for goods, works and services                 

Quarterly reports submission                 

Annual reports submission                 

Program Work plans and Budgets                 

Steering committee meetings                 

Bank’s supervision missions                 

Audit                 

Mid-term review                 

Program Completion Report                 



 

1 

1. INTRODUCTION 

1.1 Africa’s Agricultural Sector is Underperforming 

1.1.1 The African continent has enormous potential for agricultural production. Yet more than 160 

million Africans are food insecure and malnourished. This is about one in four Africans, making Africa 

the most food-insecure region in the world. Every day over 100 million children in Africa go to bed 

hungry with devastating long-term consequences on their physical and mental development, hobbling 

their productivity as adults. Indeed, this has led to 58 million stunted African children—short in height 

for their age—representing an increase of 23% since 1990, despite worldwide declines of 37% over the 

same period. More than 32 million African children under five are underweight, of which nearly 10 

million are severely underweight, and 14.3 million are wasted, with low weight for their height. Simply 

put, more than a third of African children under five are either moderately or severely underweight. 

Africa’s recent economic gains are at risk if this is allowed to continue. 

1.1.2 Related to health and nutrition concerns, low agricultural productivity and value addition are 

very much at the heart of employment and income challenges on the continent. The agricultural sector 

accounts for between 50 and 70% of employment in African countries, but produces only 25%, of 

Africa’s Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Consequently, many people work in agriculture for their 

livelihoods and yet produce and earn very little for it. Furthermore, less than 30% of harvests are 

processed into value added products compared to 98% in developed countries. Only $40 of value is 

added to one ton of processed products in Africa compared to $180 in rich countries. These are missed 

opportunities to create wealth and employment, especially for women who predominate in the 

population of African farmers today (70–80% of African farmers are women). This places women and 

their families in precarious situations, exacerbating the health and nutrition challenges already 

described. To escape this negative feedback loop, increasing agricultural productivity and value addition 

is key. The interventions described here address productivity issues while other measures being rolled 

out within the Bank’s Feed Africa strategy work on improving value addition.   

1.1.3  Why is productivity so low in Africa? For a variety of reasons including poor soils and limited 

access by smallholder farmers to improved crop varieties and livestock breeds, fertilizer, soil 

correctives, and appropriate crop production packages. African staple crop yields have barely grown in 

the last 25 years, and remain the lowest of any region in the world. The productivity of five staple 

crops—rice, wheat, maize, potato, and cassava—is just over half of the international average. Annual 

growth of cereal yields was only 1.3% from 1990 to 2014, compared with 4.1% in Brazil during the 

same period. Strikingly, between 2001 and 2008, agricultural GDP in Africa grew at just 3.4% while 

overall GDP grew nearly twice as fast, at 6% annually.   

1.1.4  In sum, the underperformance of the African agriculture sector leads to low incomes and 

expensive and often poor quality food, which has a direct bearing on hunger, malnutrition, poverty, and 

human capital and which hinders economic opportunities in the farm and non-farm sectors alike.   

1.2 Asia’s Green Revolution was the result of Technological and Institutional  Innovations 

1.2.1 Asia’s experience illustrates how rapidly things can turn around with the right actions at a 

critical time. In the mid-1960s in Asia, rising populations, an underperforming agricultural sector, and 

consecutive droughts led to significant food shortages, widespread hunger, and malnutrition. However, 

through spectacular scientific advances in wheat and rice breeding and agronomy, the food crisis was 

rolled back and India became food secure within four years, by 1970; Pakistan, Thailand, the Philippines 

and Bangladesh followed soon after. The Asian agricultural phenomenon is estimated to have saved a 

billion lives and is now known as the ‘Green Revolution’. 

 



 

2 

1.2.2  The Asian experience was inspired by earlier successes in Latin America. The 20th century 

scientific advances in agriculture that were so successfully applied in Asia had been developed by the 

Mexican Agricultural Cooperation Program for wheat, established by the Rockefeller Foundation in 

Mexico City in the 1950s, and by the International Rice Research Institute (IRRI) for rice, created by 

the Rockefeller and Ford Foundations in Los Banos, Philippines, in the 1960s. This was south-south 

learning at its best. 

1.2.3  And indeed this south-south learning was deliberately supported by global development 

partners at the time. The World Bank, from the late sixties to the early eighties, provided institutional 

innovations to deploy and adapt the wheat and rice agricultural technologies to millions of hectares of 

farmlands in Asia. The World Bank also facilitated the establishment of public institutions at global, 

regional and country levels combined with policy advice and support to Asian countries, to implement 

a far-sighted strategy of reaching resource-limited farmers with the best of modern agricultural 

technology. One of these is the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR), a 

global network of agricultural R&D institutions, established in 1972. The CGIAR centers were set up 

to be international centers of excellence in agricultural innovation, where cutting edge crop and 

livestock technologies were developed by the world’s best scientists and tested and adapted to individual 

country conditions, in collaboration with the National Agricultural Research and Extensions Systems 

(NARES). NARES are made up of national agricultural research institutes, universities, public and 

private extension (training) agencies, farmer organizations, etc., representing the national voices and 

approaches to agricultural technology development and deployment. It is safe to say that the Asian 

Green Revolution would not have happened without heavy investments by the World Bank, the 

Rockefeller and Ford Foundations, and Asian governments in agricultural research and development, 

credit, input distribution, extension, and rural infrastructure. On average, Asian governments doubled 

their own spending on agriculture between 1972 and 1985. 

1.2.4  The Rockefeller and Ford Foundations expanded International Agricultural Research Centers 

(IARCs) to Africa in the late 1960s—with the first center being the International Institute for Tropical 

Agriculture (IITA), established in Ibadan, Nigeria in 1967 to tackle technological barriers to raising 

food production. In the 1980s, two other centers were established in Kenya: the International Livestock 

Research Institute (ILRI) and the International Center Agroforestry Research (ICRAF, presently 

referred to as “World Agroforestry Center”); as well as a fourth center, the Africa Rice Center in Cote 

d’Ivoire. Of the 15 centers, four are based on the African continent. Centers in Asia and Latin America 

also opened research stations in Africa in the 1980s, including the Wheat and Maize Research Center 

in Mexico (CIMMYT) and the Tropical Crops Center (CIAT), demonstrating the increasing interest of 

international donors to bring the research and the technology for a green revolution to Africa.  

1.3 Why technologies have not moved to scale before in Africa 

1.3.1  But Africa missed the first green revolution for several reasons. Technologies have not moved 

to scale before in Africa due to: i) weak agricultural extension systems, ii) poor linkages between 

research and extension, iii) long technology verification and release systems, iv) a focus on national 

boundaries instead of across agro-ecological zones, v) insufficient attention to private sector value 

chains, vi) poor market linkages, vii) weak policy and regulatory environments, and viii) the absence  

of a regionally coordinated effort to deliver technologies across similar Agro-ecological zones 

(technologies without borders). 

1.3.2  Africa’s internal borders pose a serious challenge to the spread of technology on the continent. 

New agricultural technologies spread slowly across Africa’s agro-ecological zones because they are 

partitioned into multiple countries with differing governments, languages, phytosanitary controls and 

seed-certification processes. At the same time, pests and diseases do not respect arbitrarily drawn 

political borders and easily spread across them. This creates a deadly mismatch between prevailing 

dangers and the ability to roll out technologies to stop them in their tracks. The Fall Armyworm is a 

good example of such a pest that travels quickly and wreaks destruction on entire crops in its path. The 



 

3 

Armyworm was spotted for the first time in northern Nigeria in 2016 and has already managed to spread 

to at least 40 African countries (see Appendix 3 for a description of the Fall Army Worm Problem and 

mitigation plan led by the Bank). Tragically this is a crisis with known scientific solutions in the US 

and Brazil to stop the pests in their path, but without mechanisms to rapidly deliver them to African 

fields. And this is but one example. 

1.3.3  Low public sector investment in agriculture, poor seed systems, weak public extension, and 

lack of a harmonized regional legal framework for registration of crop varieties, and animal breeders’ 

rights (intellectual property), have meant that even existing improved varieties and breeds do not get 

into the hands of most farmers within a country or across a region. The share of acreage planted using 

improved crop varieties is only 30% in Africa compared with more than 50% in Latin America and 

more than 80% in Asia. Improved livestock breeds are even less prevalent.  

1.3.4  Investment by governments in the agriculture sector has also been a key driver of Green 

Revolutions in other regions. Mindful of this, African governments came together in 2003 to agree on 

the Comprehensive African Agriculture Development Program (CAADP), which, among other things, 

called for African countries to spend 10% of their budgets on agriculture. Yet, to date, only a handful 

of countries have managed to meet this target, hindering the resources available to support the transfer 

of new agricultural technologies into and within Africa. 

1.4 Feed Africa: AfDB’s Initiative to Drive Africa’s Green Revolution 

Feed Africa is the Bank’s bold initiative to end hunger, malnutrition, extreme poverty, and food 

imports—currently estimated at US$35 billion and projected to rise to US$110 billion by 2025, if 

nothing is done. This is a massive challenge as well as a massive opportunity. Feed Africa takes a 

commodity value chain approach to developing agriculture in Africa. A guiding principle of the Feed 

Africa Initiative is treating agriculture as a business, rather than as a way of life, and ensuring the 

inclusivity of women and young people. The goal is to produce thriving small-, medium-, and large-

scale agribusinesses in every segment of commodity value chains on the continent. Therefore, for Feed 

Africa to succeed, it must do two things. First, it must significantly raise agricultural productivity. 

Second, it must move African production much higher on the value chain, with agribusinesses 

producing and selling processed goods, not simply basic commodities, while providing markets for 

African farmers. The TAAT initiative aims to achieve the first goal, while a number of other initiatives, 

notably the development of agropoles and well-functioning markets, focus on the second. TAAT is 

therefore the bedrock of Feed Africa.  

1.5 Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT)  

1.5.1  Similar to Asia, enhancing Africa’s productivity requires significantly increased investment 

from African governments, businesses and development institutions to deploy  proven 21st century food 

production technologies to tens of millions of African farmers where they will have the most impact. 

These food production technologies already exist and include new high yield crop and livestock 

varieties,  micro-nutrient dense crops – for example, pro-vitamin A rich orange-fleshed sweet potato 

and high iron beans, drought tolerant maize varieties, integrated pest and disease management (IPDM), 

and simple storage and post-harvest technologies to reduce crop losses.   

1.5.2  The potential of these food production  technologies to provide food and nutrition security has 

been demonstrated and needs to be taken to scale.  For example, DroughtTEGO® is a trademark for a 

high yielding drought-tolerant maize variety developed by the Water Efficient Maize for Africa 

(WEMA) Project to mitigate against drought stress. Experts predict that with global changes Sub Sharan 

Africa will be disproportionately affected by drought and suffer a 30% decrease in yields.  Kenyan 

farmers who grew the WEMA varieties during the drought of 2016 obtained 3.6MT/Ha of maize 

compared to 1.5MT/Ha in fields of farmers who grew other commercial hybrids. In addition, it has been 

demonstrated that 125g of orange fleshed sweet potatoes (OFSP) can provide the daily provitamin A 



 

4 

needs of a preschooler. Vitamin A Deficiency (VAD) is a significant health concern in Africa 

contributing to high rates of blindness, disease and premature death in children and pregnant women.  

An estimated 43 million children under 5 years are Vitamin A deficient and  between 50,000 and 

125,000 of those vitamin A-deficient children go blind every year, half of them dying within 12 months 

of losing their sight.   

1.5.3  A major target of TAAT is the control of the Fall Army Worm  (FAW), a recent pest problem 

on the continent that currently puts at risk an estimated 13.5 million tons of maize valued at US$ 3 

billion in the 2017/2018 season.  This assessment is from research funded by the Department for 

International Development (DFID) at the Center for Agriculture and Biosciences Intenational (CABI) 

that assessed current and potential damage of the Fall Army Worm  (FAW).    Based on the 

aforementioned research findings, DFID requested the leadership of the African Development Bank to 

contain the serious problem of Fall Army Worm (FAW). Following, the Bank hosted a meeting of 

experts at the recent World Food Prize symposium in Des Moines, Iowa; in attendance were Center for 

Agriculture and Biosciences Intenational (CABI), USAID, the International Center for Improvement of 

Wheat and Maize (CIMMYT, the Spanish acronym), the International Center for Insect Physiology and 

Ecology (ICIPE), and the private sector.   The meeting recommended a regional approach,  awareness 

raising campaigns, scouting and early detection, 1Integrated Pest and Disease Management (IPDM), and 

search for resistance in preferred varieties.  TAAT will tackle Fall Army Worm (FAW) based on these 

recommendations working with CABI, ICIPIE, CIMMYT, National Agriculture Research and 

Extension Systems (NARES) of RMCs, regional and Sub-Regional Organizations, and R&D Centers.  

1.5.4  Simple storage and post-harvest technologies being to reduce crop losses and help farmers 

manage the increased harvest under TAAT include: hermetic grain storage (Purdue Improved Crops 

Storage system) that prevent pest and mycotoxins infection of stored grains.  Other post-harvest 

technologies include affordable and efficient grain drying, and low cost extruders for production of 

simple processed food by small and medium scale agribusinesses.    

1.5.5  Crop campaigns to reach farmers with agricultural technologies of inputs and extension have 

occurred in Africa with significant success in the past.  Over a four-year period, 2011-2015, Nigeria, 

working closely with Africa Rice, the rice CGIAR center in Africa, combined innovative (ICT-based) 

ways to deploy improved rice production technology of seeds and fertilizer, a value chain approach, and 

supportive public policies to reach 6 million rice farmers. Average yields in the country doubled from 

2MT/Ha to over 4MT/Ha and national paddy rice production rose by an additional 7 million MT. 

1.5.6  Similarly, in Malawi, delivery of subsidized seeds of improved maize varieties and fertilizer to 

millions of farmers in 2004 made the country self-sufficient in maize production and a net exporter of 

maize in a single season. Ethiopia’s national extension system also deployed new crop technologies to 

over 4.4 million smallholder farmers from 2010 to 2015 on nearly 2.2 million hectares of land. Since 

then, Ethiopia’s agriculture sector has enjoyed an average growth rate of over 7% per year, which has 

contributed in no small way to the double digit annual growth rate of the economy overall. 

1.5.7  The approach to scaling technologies has been based on national boundaries, instead of agro-

ecological zones across multiple countries. The releases of crop varieties often go through four years of 

testing in national contexts, which has to be replicated across countries within the same agro-ecological 

zone in which the same technology can make a difference. Thus, a technology that is good fit for a given 

agro-ecological zone of ten countries could take 40 years to reach farmers if deployment from country 

to country spreads one after the other. What is needed is a new approach that will cut back on these 

unnecessary regulatory bottlenecks and fast track the release of technologies across similar agro-

ecological zones in one go. This is what TAAT will do. This will help open up the regional seed industry 

and markets and lead to faster uptake of technologies. 

                                                           
1 1  Integrated Pest and Disease Management (IPDM) optiones  include resistant germplasm, pesticides, biopesticides, botanicals, pheromones, 

biocontrol via natural enemies, etc. 



 

5 

1.5.8. TAAT will engage  Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI) - of CGIAR centers 

and other technology providers to develop a menu of proven food production technologies working with 

National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES), Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs) 

and the Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA), the umbrella body of NARES in Africa. 

Based on the menu of proven food production technologies, RMCs, as represented by NARES, will 

work with the CGIAR centers to prepare proposals for food technology outreach campaigns across 

similar agro-ecological zones that cut across multiple countries to the decision making body of the 

RTDI, the Clearinghouse (see details in Appendix 1). There are eight Priority Intervention Areas (PIA) 

of TAAT that are agro-ecology based and cover 18 priority commodities (see Appendix 2).  But for this 

phase, nine food production technologies have been prioritized because of potential impact to increase 

food security, combat malnutrition, reduce food imports, and improve livelihoods.  They include: Water 

Efficient Maize for Africa (WEMA), high yielding rice varieties adapted to Africa (the NERICA 

varieties), high-yielding and high-starch cassava varieties, high yielding sorghum and millet for the 

Sahel, orange fleshed sweet potatoes, high iron beans, small livestock (goat and sheep), aquaculture, 

and new wheat varieties.  Control of pests and diseases, for example the Fall Army Worm (FAW), is a 

cross cutting intervention across all nine technologies.  

1.5.9  While TAAT is not a research program to develop new technologies—for the most part the 

needed technologies already exist and in some cases are already in use—but rather a crop and livestock 

outreach campaign to disseminate best-bet crop varieties/livestock breeds and practices to the farmers, 

it requires a close partnership with National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES) 

and International R&D Centers to provide solutions that tend to arise as research is deployed over a 

wide range of similar but diverse agro-ecologies with unique micro-ecosystems. 

1.6 TAAT will carry out positive gender discrimination in favor of women 

1.6.1 A successful green revolution must be inclusive and based on a recognition that Africa’s 

agricultural transformation and women’s empowerment are inextricably linked. Addressing the gender 

disparities that persist in African agriculture presents a tremendous opportunity to unlock the potential 

of African agriculture with the World Bank cautioning that “failure to recognise the different roles of 

men and women in agriculture is costly, resulting in misguided projects and programmes, forgone 

agricultural output and incomes, and food and nutrition insecurity”.  Indeed incorporating consideration 

for gender issues systematically in agricultural research, development, and extension systems will 

contribute significantly to meeting the food needs of Africa’s growing population and ensure that 

productivity gains in food systems translate to improved welfare of the poor. 

1.6.2 Women are important to Africa’s agriculture and agriculture is important to African women’s 

lives. The agricultural sector is the largest employer of African women, with 62% of economically 

active women working in the sector.  In countries such as Rwanda, Malawi and Burkina Faso, over 90% 

of economically active women are involved in agricultural activities.  Despite being heavily engaged in 

agriculture, African women earn less than men from the sector with the rural wage gap between men 

and women estimated at between 15-60%. In the case of Ivorian cocoa and Ethiopian coffee, for 

example, women provide 68% and 75% of the labour, respectively, but earn only earn 21% and 34% of 

the income generated. 

1.6.3 Research indicates that, when granted equal access to inputs and skills, women farmers are just 

as efficient as male farmers. Hence the privileging of male farmers, for example in Ivorian rice projects, 

is based on erroneous assumptions not supported by data. As such, gender responsiveness in agricultural 

research and development is not about ‘fixing the women farmers’, but rather addressing the 

institutional structures and technological impediments that hamper their productivity. Ultimately, the 

empowerment of women farmers requires institutional transformation, with research institutions 

becoming more gender responsive and paying close attention and genuinely responding to the needs of 

women farmers 



 

6 

1.6.4 In partnership with African Women in Agricultural Research and Development (AWARD), 

the Bank will systematically incorporate consideration for gender equality and ensure women’s equal 

access to agricultural technologies. In this regard, AWARD will support TAAT by: (i) Convening and 

coordinating a network of technical gender experts that would be available to members of the TAAT 

consortium to address issues of gender in the selected value chains which will maximize the impact of 

TAAT by providing consolidated gender expertise and opportunity for shared learning; (ii) Identifying 

and prequalifying bankable and scalable agricultural research and development innovations that address 

the gender gap in African agriculture and build relationships with private sector and other uptakers of 

gender responsive agricultural technologies.  Expected outcomes will be demonstrated change in in 

gender awareness, attitudes and/or behaviours of TAAT partners, a measurable increase in TAAT 

partner institutions with gender responsive agricultural innovation policies and strategies, and TAAT 

outputs that are gender responsive across value chains. 

1.7 Expected Impact of TAAT 

1.7.1. TAAT interventions are projected to raise productivity and increase food production over the 

next 8-10 years (Table 2). TAAT will add an estimated 120 million MT of food to Africa’s food 

production valued at US$1.71 to US$2.8 billion (Table 2).  

Table 2: Impact on Productivity, Production, and Livelihood of TAAT 

Commodity Productivity 

baseline  (2016) (MT/Ha) 

Productivity 2025 

(MT/Ha) (mean) 
Production (MT) 

Maize  2 4 30 million 

Lowland Rice 2 4 15 million 

Wheat 1.5 3 25 million 

Sorghum 1 2 10 million 

Millet 1 2 5 million 

Cassava 12 20 20 million 

Small livestock (live 

weight at 12 months) 

25 Kg 50 Kg 10 million 

Fish (live weight at 6 

months) 

3 Kg 5 Kg 5 million 

 

1.7.2  TAAT will benefit, through improved food security and income, an estimated 11.7 million 

households (representing on average 40 million people) over ten years, reducing by as many as a third 

the total number of hungry people on the continent. The increased food production is also expected to 

have an effect on food prices, reducing the amount of food households spend on food, and further 

increasing access to more food. It is estimated that TAAT, including its Bank-financed Country 

programs, combined with the affiliated programs of the World Bank and AGRA, will contribute to 

lifting about 40 million people out of poverty. 

1.7.3  TAAT will help to create huge regional spill-over effects and Regional Public Goods (RPGs). 

Of particular importance are RPGs that target imminent “regional public threats” of destructive pests 

and diseases of crops/livestock that do not respect political borders and easily spread across them.  A 

good example is the recent invasion into Africa of the Fall Armyworm described above, which currently 

puts at risk an estimated 13.5 million tons of maize valued at US$ 3 billion in the 2017/2018 season.   

1.8 TAAT is a Regional Program Producing Regional Public Goods (RPGs) 

1.8.1  TAAT resources are targeted at facilitating effective functioning of the Regional Technology 

Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI), made up of International Agriculture Research Centers of the 

Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR), National Agricultural Research 

and Extension Systems (NARES), African Agricultural Technology Foundation (AATF), Sub-Regional 

Organizations, all  non-governmental organizations, that will ensure that proven agricultural 

development technologies are rapidly deployed to RMCs. 



 

7 

1.8.2  TAAT aims at producing Regional Public Goods (RPGs), including: i) harmonized regional 

and Transnational border protocols for introduction and release of improved varieties/breed and other 

agricultural technologies, ii) Synchronization of seed system protocols, especially those that deal with 

liberalization of foundation seed production (to include private sector seed companies), iii) combatting 

“regional public threats” of destructive pests and diseases of crops/livestock that do not respect political 

borders and easily spread across them.   

1.8.3  The requested grant from the RPG window of ADF 14 will support CGIAR and low-income 

RMCs to drive delivery of food productions technologies into hands of at least 60% of all farmers after 

eight to ten years. Twenty two of these RMCs, namely: Benin, Burkina-Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Congo 

DRC, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, Kenya, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, 

Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia have written to the Bank to 

express interest in participating. Six of them (Chad, Congo DRC, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Sierra Leone, 

and Sudan) are in fragile situations as defined by the eligibility for the Transition Support Facility (TSF) 

support under ADF-14. However, it should be noted that TAAT will produce Regional Public Goods 

(RPGs) of public interest; no RMC can be excluded from it or from their spillover benefits, given their 

public goods characteristics (see section 4.2 and Appendix 4). TAAT is therefore not exclusive to low-

income ADF RMCs. Non-ADF countries interested in TAAT such as Egypt, Morocco, and Tunisia 

(ADB countries that have written to express interest in TAAT) are welcome to participate via  the ADB 

funding window of the Bank or other eligible partner funds (e.g., funds from BMGF and World Bank). 

Participation will simply depend on the ability of RMCs to meet requirements for technology 

deployment. For the 25 countries (22 ADF and 3 ADB) that have expressed interest in participating in 

TAAT, the country programs in the pipeline that are aligned to inserting a TAAT component are listed 

in Appendix 5. TAAT is therefore open to all RMCs, via their NARES, to make their best technologies 

accessible to farmers within countries working in close collaboration with regional and continental 

organizations. The new crop varieties and livestock breeds, cross-boundary crop and livestock diseases 

control (e.g., Fall Armyworm), crop management practices, knowledge and other products from the 

CGIAR’s research work are indeed RPGs made widely available to individuals and organizations 

working for sustainable agricultural development around the world. TAAT will be held to high 

standards of deployment and must meet clear key performance indicators or funding will be 

discontinued to erring institutions. 

1.9 TAAT will benefit from the lessons learned from previous Bank interventions  

1.9.1  The Bank’s earlier experience with the “Support to Agricultural Research for Development of 

Strategic Crops in Africa” (SARD-SC) program – which funded research on four of the six strategic 

crops of the African Union (Cassava, Maize, Rice and Wheat) – provides crucial lessons that TAAT 

will build upon.  They include: i) experience on how to work regionally with international centers of 

excellence (the CGIAR) to rapidly introduce and test technologies across a region for optimal yields 

and eventual deployment to farmers; ii) The SARD-SC program revealed the importance of going to 

scale to ramp up food production and reduce imports.  TheSARD-SC program led to a doubling of 

yields for wheat, rice, maize, cassava on experimental fields and in on-farm trials; if average wheat 

yields increases from 1.5 to 3MT/Ha and higher tons per hectare could be replicated across 9.8 million 

hectares grown in Africa, the continent could be on the path to self-sufficiency in wheat production; iii) 

SARD-SC also demonstrated the advantages of working across multiple countries with similar 

agriculture-ecological zones, simultaneously introducing, testing and releasing new crop varieties in 

several countries at the same time. Other lessons are have been learned from the development of the 

NERICA (New Rice for Africa) rice varieties by AfricaRice in the 1990s (Appendix 6). 

1.10 The Value-Added of TAAT 

1.10.1  The value-added of TAAT is that it can leverage crop and livestock technologies that have 

been developed and validated in one or a few countries across entire agro-ecological zones covering 

many countries. For example, maize yields can be doubled across East and Southern Africa via an 



 

8 

introduction, registration, and deployment of already available drought tolerant Water Efficient Maize 

for Africa (WEMA) varieties. And perhaps the best demonstration of the value added of TAAT is in 

tackling pests and diseases such as Fall Armyworm accross an entire region.   

1.10.2 TAAT will allow donors to work together through a well-coordinated regional technology 

delivery platform, for appropriate technologies to be deployed to millions of farmers across Agro-

ecological zones. It will bring to bear the joint collective effort of international, regional and national 

agricultural systems to improve connections between research and extension and reform regulatory 

systems that impede the speedy transfer of technologies across borders. 

2 PROGRAM DESCRIPTION 

2.1 Objectives of TAAT 

The development objective of TAAT is to "rapidly expand access of smallholder farmers, majority 

women, to high yielding agricultural technologies to improve their food production, assure food security 

and raise rural incomes, and deliver regional public goods by scaling up agricultural technologies across 

similar agro-ecological zones". Overall TAAT has three main objectives:  

i) Creating an enabling environment for technology adoption by famers via policies for 
deployment and adoption of food production technologies that are regionally 

harmonized, food and nutrition conscious, and environmentally sustainable; 

ii) Facilitate effective delivery of technologies to farmers by working with existing Regional 
Technology Delivery Infrastructure in a compact with RMCs, represented by NARES, 

private sector actors, and an independent technology Clearinghouse; 

iii) Raising agricultural production and productivity through the identification and 
deployment of appropriate technologies, including nutrient dense crop varieties, and 

vigorous crop outreach campaigns, extension, and market linkage campaigns, in RMCs. 

2.2 Strategy of TAAT 

2.2.1  Feed Africa takes a value chain approach to raising crop/livestock productivity in Africa. 

Figure 1 shows where TAAT will intervene in the commodity value chains. A commodity value chain 

is described as a series of goods and services required for a commodity to be produced and then to move 

from the place of its primary production to the ultimate end-user (Figure 1). 

 



 

9 

Figure 1: Positioning of TAAT within agricultural commodity value chains  

 

2.2.2  Agricultural growth that has occurred in Africa reveals that productivity enhancement and 

market access development are prevalent factors. Productivity unaccompanied by strong growth in 

markets leads to a glut from over-production, while markets without increased productivity gives rise 

to food imports due to insufficient supply. Feed Africa will work to reinforce these productivity aspects 

of the value chain and agriculture markets through its various initiatives such as TAAT, Agropoles, 

post-harvest losses and agro processing. The role of TAAT in particular is to improve outcomes at the 

beginning of this chain by increasing productivity, as well as resilience to weather and disease-related 

risks, providing a much more solid basis from which to build strong production systems and markets 

that make African agribusinesses successful. TAAT will work in concert with the other initiatives to 

foster the deployment of commercially viable technologies with improved access to input and output 

markets, and other enablers such as innovative finance and soft/hard infrastructure.  

2.2.3 It is important for TAAT to generate ‘quick wins’ to create credibility and attract both 

additional public and private sector financing. An initial set of priority agricultural commodities are: 

i) Water Efficient Maize for Africa (WEMA), 

ii) Import-quality rice for the west African lowlands, 

iii) Cassava for industrial use, 

iv) Small livestock (goats and sheep), 

v) Sorghum/millet for the Sahel, 

vi) Aquaculture 

vii) High yielding wheat varieties 

viii) Orange fleshed Vitamin A rich sweet potato varieties 

ix) High iron beans varieties for Africa 



 

10 

Management of pests and disease is a cross cutting theme across all the nine technologies 

2.2.4 Clear metrics of target productivity, production, beneficiaries, agro-ecologies, and countries have 

been pre-determined for these nine priority food production technologies (See Appendix 7) 

2.3 TAAT Activities 

2.3.1  The TAAT program consists of four major components namely: 

i) Component #1: Creation of an enabling environment for technology adoption by famers 
via a seed system, technology release and registration policies that are regionally 

harmonized 

ii) Component #2: A Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI)—or TAAT 
platform—that is able to provide and deploy needed food production technologies and any 
additional adaptive research required 

iii) Component #3: Deployment of appropriate food production technologies, through 
crop/livestock campaigns in RMCs 

iv) Component #4: Project Management. 

2.3.2  Harmonization of technology release and registration, and seed system, policies 

 across regions 

The approach to scaling technologies based on national boundaries needs to be replaced by an approach 

that involves agro-ecological zones that spread across multiple countries. Policies and protocols for 

release and registration of crop varieties and animal breeds needs to be streamlined so that 

varieties/breeds released in one country can be utilized in other countries of the same region, same with 

seed system protocols that can replicated across countries within the same agro-ecological zone. TAAT, 

working with Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs) and CGIAR center responsible for policy work, 

IFPRI (and its key partners such as the Africa Technology Policy Studies ATPS Network), will review 

national and regional policies on variety release, registration, and the seed system with an aim of 

harmonizing them to fast track the release of technologies across similar agro-ecological zones. This 

will help open up the regional seed industry and markets and lead to faster uptake of technologies. 

2.3.3. The Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI)—or TAAT platform 

RTDI is a consortium of CGIAR centers, FARA, Africa Agricultural Technology Foundation (AATF) and 

SROs working on regional approaches to deployment of new crop and livestock technologies, and 

combatting pest and disease threats through a fair and transparent method in prioritizing technologies 

and allocating resources. The RTDI will develop a menu of food production technologies and work with 

RMCs, as represented by NARES and the private sector, to develop a proposal to take these technologies 

to scale.  Figure 2 schematically describes the RTDI processes. The RTDI is made up of four units, 

namely: 

1. A Project Steering Committee (PSC): the highest decision-making body composed of 
representatives of participating RMCs, the private sector, CGIAR centers. The 

committee provides oversight to Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI).  

2. Clearinghouse: the body of the consortium that decides on which technologies should 
be used. The Clearinghouse will be independent of the Project Management Unit (PMU);  

3. Commodity Technology Delivery Compact (CTDC): is at the core of TAAT and it is 
an agreement among the entire ecosystem of actors needed to deliver improved 



 

11 

technologies at scale for a specific crop or livestock value chain, for each of the priority 

commodities. They will be hosted the CGIAR center or institution with the particular 

mandate for each specific crop; 

4. A Project Management Unit: oversees day-to-day implementation of project fiduciary 
and administrative activities;  

2.3.4  Identification and deployment of appropriate technologies, through crop/livestock 

campaigns in RMCs 

TAAT will engage CGIAR and other technology providers to develop a menu of proven food production 

technologies, namely: seed system or artificial insemination guidelines (technical manuals) for large 

scale deployment of improved varieties/breeds, disease control, improved crop/animal production 

methods, aquaculture, etc.  RMCs, as represented by NARES, will prepare a proposed food technology 

outreach campaign covering one or more of the menu items, with support from the respective CTDC 

for submission to the Clearinghouse of the RTDI. The proposals will clearly state the target 

beneficiaries, location, development impact, and timelines within the RMCs. The Clearinghouse will 

review the proposals according to a set of agreed criteria and recommendations for funding. Oversight 

will also be provided for implementation by the Clearing house. 

 

Figure 2: Process of origination, review, decision making, and funding in the Regional Technology 

Delivery Infrastructure 

2.4 Expected Output and Outcomes 

2.4.1 Expected Outputs 

TAAT interventions are projected to raise productivity of target commodity up to 100% over the next 

8-10 years (Table 2). Other outputs include reduction of Vitamin A deficiency in children under five 

and pregnant women by 30% and reduction in post-harvest losses by 50% in target locations of TAAT 

over the next 8-10 years. 



 

12 

2.4.2 Provision of Regional Public Goods (RPG)  

Regional public goods will be provided via a number of vehicles including: 

i) Harmonization of regional and transnational border protocols for introduction and 
release of improved varieties/breed and other agricultural technologies 

ii) Synchronization of seed system protocols, especially those that deal with production of 
foundation seeds (inclusion of private sector seed companies) 

iii) Disease control – monitoring and IPDM methods 

iv) Extensive adaptation trials of crop varieties across the region, including nutrient dense 
varieties 

2.4.3 Crop Outreach Campaigns to reach millions of African Farmers 

i) Toolkits for the different priority commodities provided to the RMCs 

ii) Feedback on performance of technologies via the RTDIs 

iii) A doubling of acreage under improved crops and breeds, from the current 30% to 60%, 
by 2025 

iv) Availability of cheap and nutritious food 

2.4.4 Expected Outcomes 

TAAT will benefit via increased food security and income, raising farmer’s household incomes by an 

average of US$600 per annum, reaching an estimated 11.7 million households, representing on average 

40 million people, over ten years, and reducing by as much as a third the total number of hungry people 

on the continent. TAAT will add an estimated 120 million MT of food to Africa’s food production 

valued at US$1.71 to US$2.8 billion (Table 2).  The increased food production will also have an effect 

on food prices, reducing the amount households spend on food, and further increasing access to more 

food, in a positive feedback loop. TAAT is expected to add 3.15 million direct farm jobs over eight 

years. 

2.5 Costs and Financing Arrangements  

2.5.1 Program Cost  

TAAT is divided into centrally managed activities, designed to produce regional public goods, and 

funded by grants from the Bank and partners, and country program activities to be financed through 

sovereign loans from the Bank and partners. The UA 29 million from the ADF XIV Regional Public 

Goods (RPGs) window will solely finance regional public goods described in the TAAT Program 

Framework Document. BMGF has already approved $1.14 million and AGRA is processing a $10 

million grant for centrally managed activities of TAAT. The country programs will be financed via 

AfDB sovereign loans to RMCs, as well as World Bank loans to RMCs to the tune of USD 700 million. 

The Bank’s financing of the central programs will be for nine priority commodities using 

resources from ADF XIV RPG window. This first set of commodities will be implemented over three 

(3) years (2018 to 2020). Only activities of the first nine commodities have been described in more 

detail in the present report, with the costing information below.  

 



 

13 

2.5.2  The total cost of first phase of TAAT is estimated at UA 40.00 million (USD 56.532 

million) net of taxes and based on 2016 prices comprising UA 15.27 million or 38% in local costs 

and UA 24.73 million or 62% in foreign costs. This cost is inclusive of physical and price 

contingencies estimated at average rates of 3% and 5%, respectively. The physical contingencies are 

estimated from 0% (emolument) to 5% (works) based on common practices. The price contingencies 

were estimated on the basis of actual and projected levels of local inflation rates of about 2% per annum 

and foreign inflation rates. 

2.5.3  The summary of the first phase of nine commodities costs by component and by category 

of expenditure are presented respectively in Tables 3-4. 

Table 3: Summary of Program Cost by Components 

COMPONENTS 
(USD '000) (UA '000) % % 

Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total FE BC 

 

1. CREATION OF ENABLING 

ENVIRON. FOR TECHNOLOGY 

ADOPTION 

6 049.38 9 800.52 15 849.90 4 280.32 6 934.49 11 214.82 62 30 

 

2. REGIONAL TECHNOLOGY 

DELIVERY INFRASTRUCTURE 

(RTDI) 

4 900.26 8 043.82 12 944.09 3 467.25 5 691.52 9 158.77 62 25 

 

3. DEPLOYMENT OF APPROPRIATE 

TECHNOLOGY (DAT) 
7 528.70 13 604.50 21 133.20 5 327.04 9 626.05 14 953.09 64 40 

 4. PROGRAM MANAGEMENT 1 771.93 777.78 2 549.70 1 253.75 550.33 1 804.08 31 5 

Total BASELINE COSTS 20 250.27 32 226.62 52 476.89 14 328.36 22 802.39 37 130.75 61 100 

 Physical Contingencies 954.01 1 608.79 2 562.79 675.02 1 138.32 1 813.34 63 5 

 Price Contingencies 379.90 1 112.42 1 492.32 268.80 787.11 1 055.91 75 3 

Total PROJECT COSTS 21 584.17 34 947.83 56 532.00 15 272.18 24 727.82 40 000.00 62  
 

Table 4: Summary of Program Cost by Category of Expenditure  

EXPENDITURES CATEGORIES 
(USD '000) (UA '000) % % 

Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total FE BC 

 I. Investment Costs 18 834,77 32 027,12 50 861,89 13 326,80 22 661,23 35 988,03 63 97 

 A. GOODS 25,25 84,75 110,00 17,87 59,97 77,83 77 - 

  Vehicles 9,00 36,00 45,00 6,37 25,47 31,84 80 - 

  Equipment & Inputs 16,25 48,75 65,00 11,50 34,49 45,99 75 - 

 B. SERVICES 17 211,32 30 634,75 47 846,07 12 178,11 21 676,04 33 854,15 64 91 

  Training 5 138,97 6 280,96 11 419,93 3 636,15 4 444,18 8 080,33 55 22 

  Studies 1 861,58 5 584,74 7 446,32 1 317,19 3 951,56 5 268,75 75 14 

  Contractual Services 9 905,52 18 395,97 28 301,49 7 008,79 13 016,32 20 025,11 65 54 

  Audit 305,25 373,08 678,33 215,98 263,98 479,96 55 1 

 C. MISCELLANEOUS 1 598,20 1 307,62 2 905,82 1 130,83 925,22 2 056,05 45 6 

II. Recurrent Costs 1 415,50 199,50 1 615,00 1 001,56 141,16 1 142,72 12 3 

 A. PERSONEL 1 155,00 - 1 155,00 817,24 - 817,24 - 2 

 

B.DAILY SUBS. ALLOWANCES 

(DSA) 120,00 - 120,00 84,91 - 84,91 - - 

 

C. OPERATION AND 

MAINTENANCE 100,00 150,00 250,00 70,76 106,13 176,89 60 - 

  Vehicles 60,00 90,00 150,00 42,45 63,68 106,13 60 - 

  Equipment 40,00 60,00 100,00 28,30 42,45 70,76 60 - 

 

D. GENERAL OPERATING 

CHARGES 40,50 49,50 90,00 28,66 35,02 63,68 55 - 

Total BASELINE COSTS 20 250,27 32 226,62 52 476,89 14 328,36 22 802,39 37 130,75 61 100 

 Physical Contingencies 954,01 1 608,79 2 562,79 675,02 1 138,32 1 813,34 63 5 

 Price Contingencies 379,90 1 112,42 1 492,32 268,80 787,11 1 055,91 75 3 

Total PROJECT COSTS 21 584,17 34 947,83 56 532,00 15 272,18 24 727,82 40 000,00 62  
 

2.6 Program financing arrangements  

2.6.1  Of the total first phase Project cost of UA 40 million (USD 56.532 million), Bank Financing 

will be UA 29 million or USD 40 million (72.5%)  (See Tables 5 and 6). This will finance 100% of 

Goods; 100% of services for the Commodity Technology Delivery Compact (CTDC); 100% funding 



 

14 

for Enable Youth in TAAT (ENABLE-TAAT) and 100% operating costs. Bill and Melinda Gates 

Foundation (BMGF) will provide UA 0.83 million ((USD 1.138 million) or 2.1 %) to assist the 

establishment of the Clearing house. The funding from BMGF will cover recruitment of key staff and 

other operating expenses. The Clearinghouse will play a major role in the TAAT implementation. The 

Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA) will provide UA 7.25 million (or USD 10 million) 

to finance 100% services (across Components 1, 2, and 3). The participating RMCs will contribute 

UA2.90 million (7.3%) in local currency, 100% in-kind, by provision of farm land for extension training 

facilities, demonstration activities, and other critical RPGs-promoting activities. Project beneficiaries 

include a variety of stakeholders: agripreneurs, farmer based organizations and cooperatives, 

commodity processors, private sector operators, registered SMEs, seeds producers, agro-input dealers, 

service providers, millers, aggregator and market operators, and young graduates.   

2.6.2  While table 5 below indicates the financing arrangements by local and foreign currency 

distribution, table 6 indicates financing by year. Grants’ allocations by source and expenditure 

categories is presented in Appendix 8a and by components in Appendix 8b 

Table 5: Financing arrangements by Local & Foreign Distribution 

FINANCING 

SOURCES 

Financing (USD '000) Financing (UA '000) 

% Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total 

 ADF Grant 12 894,72 28 090,97 40 985,70 9 123,84 19 876,16 29 000,00 72,5 

 AGRA 4 058,45 6 187,97 10 246,43 2 871,61 4 378,39 7 250,00 18,1 

 BMGF 532,43 668,88 1 201,30 376,73 473,27 850,00 2,1 

 Government 4 098,57 0,00 4 098,57 2 900,00 0,00 2 900,00 7,3 

Total Financing 21 584,17 34 947,83 56 532,00 15 272,18 24 727,82 40 000,00 100,0 

NB: Government contribution is 7.3% and in-kind (national staff salaries, part of the operating cost, rental value of the office space offered, laboratory 

infrastructure and experimental land and the loss in fiscal receipts due to tax and custom duty exemption of different project procurement). It is less than 

10% required because six (6) of the target 22 low-income RMCs are countries are in fragile situations and conflict-affected (see related Annex in Vol. II 
of the Report, Technical Annex).. 

Table 6: Financing arrangements by Year 

FINANCING SOURCES 
Financing (USD '000) Financing (UA '000) 

2018 2019 2020 Total 2018 2019 2020 Total 

  ADF Grant 25 862,19 10 008,30 5 115,21 40 985,70 18 299,15 7 081,51 3 619,34 29 000,00 

  AGRA 5 059,20 3 435,51 1 751,71 10 246,43 3 579,71 2 430,84 1 239,45 7 250,00 

  BMGF - 593,01 608,29 1 201,30 - 419,59 430,41 850,00 

  Government 2 727,48 676,36 694,73 4 098,57 1 929,87 478,57 491,57 2 900,00 

Total Financing 33 648,88 14 713,18 8 169,94 56 532,00 23 808,73 10 410,51 5 780,76 40 000,00 

 

2.6.3 During the implementation period for each component, expenditures will be carried out 

according to the schedule in Table 7. The nine priority commodity value chain activities will be 

implemented during the first two years through a comprehensive deployment of new technologies in 

RMCs. Year 3 will be dedicated to the consolidation of the results through mainstreaming of the value 

chain development activities on a commercial basis 

  



 

15 

Table 7: Expenditure Schedule by Component (USD and UA Million)  

COMPONENTS 
(USD '000) (UA '000) 

2018 2019 2020 Total 2018 2019 2020 Total 

 

1. CREATION OF AN 

ENABLING 

ENVIRONMENT FOR 

TECHNOLOGY 

ADOPTION 

4 498,30 6 346,72 6 515,11 17 360,14 3 182,83 4 490,71 4 609,86 12 283,41 

 

2. REGIONAL 

TECHNOLOGY 

DELIVERY 

INFRASTRUCTURE 

(RTDI) 

10 679,31 2 313,01 889,80 13 882,13 7 556,30 1 636,60 629,59 9 822,49 

 

3. DEPLOYMENT OF 

APPROPRIATE 

TECHNOLOGY (DAT) 

17 430,36 5 194,06 - 22 624,42 12 333,09 3 675,13 - 16 008,22 

 

4. PROGRAM 

MANAGEMENT 
1 040,90 859,38 765,03 2 665,31 736,51 608,07 541,31 1 885,88 

Total PROJECT COSTS 33 648,88 14 713,18 8 169,94 56 532,00 23 808,73 10 410,51 5 780,76 40 000,00 
 

2.7 Key Performance Indicators 

The TAAT first phase commodities performance indicators are outlined in the Results Based Logical 

Framework at three levels: Impact, Outcome and Output. 

 The impact indicators relate to more food secure population and dealing with the 
prevalence of stunting among children under 5 years. 

 The outcome indicators are household income, agricultural productivity, job creation, 
tons of additional food commodity, household dietary diversity, value of additional foods 

produced, and number of beneficiaries. 

 The output indicators include: technology policies harmonized across regions/countries, 
weak systems strengthened, improved crop varieties and livestock breeds widely applied, 

technology adoption constraints removed, promotional activities with a focus on 

technologies for safe and nutritious foods, and communities with better access to inputs 

and output markets. Others are best-bet technologies scaled out, campaigns implemented, 

delivery platforms convened, agripreneurs supported, M&Es of platforms carried out, 

trans-national pests and diseases facilitated, technologies identified and deployed, menus 

of proven food production technologies developed, and wide-scale farm extension 

models implemented.  

 See the RBLF for complete list. 

3 FEASIBILITY OF TAAT 

3.1 Economic and Financial Performance 

3.1.1 It is anticipated that the Bank’s intervention will result in positive economic and financial 

impacts in RMCs from the nine priority technologies, especially given the public goods nature of the 

interventions. Economic and financial analyses were carried out using the economic surplus approach 

for the nine selected commodities. Improvements taken into account were streamlined and harmonized 

release of improved crop varieties and livestock breeds, strengthening of seed systems, use of improved 

varieties of crops across the applicable agro-ecological zones, design and implementation of appropriate 

campaigns for trans-national control of pest and diseases, good agricultural practices (GAPs), capacity 

building and outreach, policy support and advisory services, as well as demonstration and promotional 

activities. The benefits were measured based on increase in food supply as a result of improved access 

to proven technologies and other farm inputs. The annual flows of gross economic benefits from 



 

16 

increased crop and livestock productivity, production and value chains were estimated and aggregated. 

The aggregate benefits and costs (per commodity value chain) were then discounted to derive the 

estimated present value (in 2017 values) of total net benefits from the intervention. The benefits and 

costs were later aggregated across the nine priority commodities to calculate the aggregate financial and 

economic impacts.  

3.1.2 The consolidated Net Present Value (NPV) of the Financial Net Benefits was US$ 431.5 

million with an internal rate of return (FIRR) of 27%. Using World Prices (to correct for domestic 

distortions, taxes, and subsidies), the NPV of net economic benefits was calculated at US$ 280 million 

with an internal rate of return of 23%.  The result is quite robust and includes changes in productivity 

(crop and livestock), levels of adoption of proven agricultural technologies, and discount rates. For 

instance, a scenario of adoption by 10% of farmers, 10% productivity increase, and 10% discount rate 

across the nine priority commodities still gave an aggregate NPV of US$ 296 million with an internal 

rate of return of 18%. This supports the potential economic impact of the TAAT approach.  

3.2 Environmental and Social impacts and Gender 

3.2.1 TAAT has been classified as Category 2 operation, indicating that the program activities are 

expected to have limited adverse environmental and social impacts. An Environmental and Social 

Management Framework (ESMF) for the mitigation of adverse environment and social impacts of the 

program was posted on the Bank’s website on 4 July 2017. It provides the processes and methodologies 

to be implemented by the Clearinghouse/PMU to screen and manage potential environmental and social 

impacts and risks likely to result from the proposed agriculture technologies and demonstration 

activities. Because TAAT will be executed at RMCs, the ESMF draws on applicable national and 

regional regulatory frameworks as well as international good practice guiding environmental and social 

management.  

3.2.2  Women’s large overrepresentation in agricultural tasks in Africa, combined with the existence 

of a gender gap in agricultural productivity and the need to boost Africa’s agricultural output calls for 

increased attention to raising female agricultural productivity. The technologies it invests in must 

respond to the needs and priorities of women as well as men in order to level the playing field and 

increase agricultural productivity. Implementing partners must emphasize the deployment of gender-

responsive technologies. There is a strong case within TAAT for carrying out positive gender 

discrimination, since women form the majority of farmers as well as food processors in Africa. Studies 

have shown that women are as efficient as men, given access to same technologies. A World Bank 

publication (2008) clearly documents gender based differences in African agriculture and in terms of 

technology, land, extension, finance, time, mobility and education and training. 

3.2.3  TAAT will ensure the gender responsiveness of the technologies. Evidence shows that 

introducing new agricultural technologies can exacerbate already existing gender disparities and make 

life tougher for smallholder farmers, especially women and girls. However, with proper attention, 

agricultural technologies have the potential to bridge the gender gap and lead to inclusive, agriculture-

driven prosperity for all Africans. The African Women in Agricultural Research and Development 

(AWARD) will be one of the partners for the TAAT program to not only build the capacity of key Bank 

staff and TAAT implementers to be more gender responsive, it will help mitigate potential negative 

gender impacts while upscaling those technologies that bridge Africa’s gender gap in agriculture. The 

TAAT program recognizes that gender equality in agribusinesses is a priority. The mechanisms to 

ensure social inclusion and gender equality in this project include appropriate outreach strategy and 

gender sensitive training on good agricultural practises, as well as adequate provisions for both genders 

to access affordable and quality agricultural technologies and input and output markets. In addition, this 

project will prioritize the adoption of gender friendly technologies and support policies in the target 

countries. 

 



 

17 

4 IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1 Implementation Arrangements 

4.1.1 Structure and Activities of the RTDI (TAAT Platform) 

The structure of the Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI) consists of the Project 

Steering Committee (PSC), the Clearing House, the Commodity Technology Delivery Compact 

(CTDC), and the Project Management Unit (PMU).  These component are described in more details 

below. 

4.1.2  Project Steering Committee (PSC) 

The Project Steering Committee is the highest decision-making body composed of representatives of 

AfDB, African Ministers of Agriculture of participating RMCs, the various CG Centers, the Private 

sector, NARES and regional farmer organizations. The committee provides oversight functions to 

Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI).  All annual work programs will be cleared by the 

PSC prior to funding.  Membership of the Program Steering Committee (PSC) will be approved by the 

Bank.  

4.1.3 Clearinghouse 

The Clearinghouse is the main decision making body of the RDTI when it comes to selecting which 

technologies to disseminate and scale up. It will be substantially autonomous; its work plan and budget 

will be approved by the Program Steering Committee (PSC). The objective of the Clearinghouse is to 

decide which proven agricultural technologies proposed by each Crop/Livestock compact group can be 

rolled out and taken to scale. The activities of the Clearinghouse are indicated in Appendix 1. 

The activities of the Clearinghouse include:  

i) Evaluating requests from the compacts for technologies to be rolled out and scaled up. 
This will be akin to a peer review mechanism of the proposed technologies; 

ii) Validating the design and plan with stakeholders for a buy-in and commitment; 

iii) Identifying the optimal mix of partners that will accompany the implementation, 
backstopping and monitoring of the proposed plan;  

iv) In collaboration with the RMCs, conduct monitoring and assessment of milestones and 
Performance Indicators;  

v) In collaboration with the Bank, advising Governments and private actors on investment 
opportunities and financing mechanisms for going to scale. 

4.1.3.1. Although the Clearinghouse will be based at the IITA sub-station in Cotonou it will be fully 

independent of the IITA management. It is not a part of the PMU and will operate as an independent 

unit with its own competitively recruited Director, supported by technical and support staff.  The key 

skills assets required in the Clearinghouse include: i) technology transfer specialist; ii) an outreach 

expert; iii) a communication expert;  iv) a gender development specialist, and v) M&E Specialist in 

addition to other general services staff.  

4.1.4 Crop/Livestock Technology Delivery Compacts 

At the heart of TAAT’s technology deployment effort is the Crop/Livestock Technology Delivery 

Compact (CTDC).  CTDC is an agreement between the CGIAR center with mandate for the commodity 



 

18 

value chain, NARES, the RMCs and the entire ecosystem of value chain actors—from input supplier, 

processors, aggregators, equipment manufacturers, extension agencies, etc.  The CTDC drives the 

implementation of TAAT activities for each of the nine priority commodities. RMCs who indicate 

interest in accessing and deploying at scale technologies for the commodity in question, can become a 

part of the compact. Request from the CTDCs for deployment of a list of technologies and resources 

required will be submitted to the RTDI, specifically the Program Steering Committee (PSC), who will 

work in tandem with the clearing house to review and approve the appropriate technologies. Figure 4 

shows the structure of the Commodity Technology Delivery Compacts (CTDC). 

4.1.5  The structure of the Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure (RTDI) can be observed in 

figure 4 and 5. 

The activities of the RTDI or TAAT platform include: 

i) Identification and selection of best-bet technologies for uptake by RMCs involved in 
crop/livestock compacts; the RMCs will be front and center of the compacts to ensure 

ownership and sustainability with attention to specific value chains); 

ii) Improvement of seed systems. Specific tasks are: evaluation of existing seed systems 
to identify strengths and weaknesses, identification of policy and capacity development 

needs to address the weaknesses and take advantage of the strengths, implementation of 

the identified policy and capacity development needs to strengthen the seed systems; 

iii) Harmonization of regional variety release systems to ensure regional spillover effects 
of technologies. Specific tasks are: identification of constraints to variety release and 

access to improved varieties of crops in Africa and why varieties suitable for specific 

agro-ecologies cannot be applied to the wider ecological reach because of country 

boundaries, identification of policy and capacity-building options to address this issue, 

implementation of the identified policy and capacity building options on the ground, 

monitoring the effects); 

iv) Facilitation of trans-national control of pest and diseases.  Specific tasks are: 
awareness raising that pest and diseases do not respect political boundaries with clear 

examples, design and development of appropriate campaigns for trans-national control 

of pest and diseases, implementation of the agreed on campaigns for trans-national 

control of pest and diseases; 

v) Support RMCs with policy audits and reviews to remove constraints to technology 
adoption and use; 

vi) Engage the Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs) on harmonization of agricultural 
technology release and synchronization of foundation seed protocols, disease control, 

monitoring and Integrated Pest Disease Management (IPDM) methods2, and adaptation 

trials of crop varieties across the region, including nutrient rich varieties; 

vii) Design and execute a comprehensive communication strategy to effectively 
communicate the goals, activities, and benefits of the Agricultural Transformation 

Agenda; 

 

                                                           
2  Integrated Pest and Disease Management (IPDM) is combining different methods of pest and disease control ranging from varietal resistance and 

tolerance, chemical control (pesticides, fungicides, bactericides, etc.), biocontrol (using natural enemies of the pests), cultural practices (crop rotation, 
mixed cropping, planting dates,, etc.), and  



 

19 

viii) Fiduciary responsibility for the centralized activities of TAAT. 

Figure 3:  Schematic of the Regional Technology Delivery Infrastructure 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 Figure 4:  Schematic representation of the Commodity Technology Delivery Compact 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

20 

4.1.6  Two of such Compacts, CIPRISSA (for Rice) and TASI (for the African Savannahs) have 

already been set up by the Bank to coordinate activities for scaling up technologies to achieve self-

sufficiency in rice production and for transformation of the African Savannah into bread baskets. The 

CTDC will also engage Development Finance Institutions (DFIs) and Development Partners, namely 

the World Bank, JICA, IFAD, BMGF, Rockefeller Foundation, African Agriculture Fund (AAF), 

Agriculture Fast-Track Fund, Fund for African Private Sector Assistance (FAPA), Making Finance 

Work for Africa Partnership (MFW4A), Africa Climate Change Fund, Clim-Dev Fund, and Climate 

Investment Funds (CIF), and many others to secure co-financing for TAAT.   

4.1.6.1 The activities of the CTDC include: 

i) Convene a Crop/Livestock technology delivery platform of all major actors for each 
of nine priority commodities (e.g., rice, wheat, aquaculture, water efficient maize for 

Africa, cassava, sorghum/millet, livestock, orange fleshed sweet potato, and high iron 

beans).  Specific tasks are to consult, discuss, and prepare an agreement (the compact) of 

technologies, activities, and focus of the platform. The compact will discuss and agree 

on the technologies to be delivered, packaging, targets and timeline to cost-effectively 

deliver the technologies in a timely fashion; 

ii) Agree with NARES and Extension agencies on approaches to deploy technologies 
Specific tasks are to meet with key stakeholders (NARES, Extension agencies, NGOs, 

private sector, etc.) in RMCs to discuss best approaches to deploy technologies; prioritize 

the approaches in terms of effectiveness; deploy the preferred approaches with the 

country’s agencies leading; monitor progress, learn lessons and make immediate use of 

the lessons in improving delivery; 

iii) Define the target areas.  Specific tasks are to consult with the RMCs about which 
geographic areas to focus on during the different phases of technology deployment; 

discuss and agree with the RMCs on material and human resources required to cover the 

target area and how to sources these; implement the technology; 

iv) Mobilize all actors across the value chain. Specific tasks are to identify and register all 
the key actors across each target commodity’s value chain; call a meeting of the different 

actors across each target commodity value chain to ascertain constraints and how best to 

solve these; assign roles on technology delivery to different actors across the value chain; 

ensure that different actors across the value chain perform the assigned functions; 

monitor, learn lessons and make immediate use of the lessons in improving technology 

delivery; 

v) Design and implement wide-scale farmer extension models and innovative models to 
organize and aggregate farmers; 

vi) Work with FARA and others to build capacity in the NARES and public sector for 
program design, execution, and monitoring, and in the private sector for value chain 

organization and governance; 

vii) Support the development of a young class of ‘agripreneurs’, through demonstration, 
training and financing in coordination with ENABLE youth; 

viii) Promote climate-smart practices among farmers through funding and demonstration 
of the value of sustainable agriculture approaches;  

ix) Set targets and KPIs; monitor the achievement of the KPIs; distil lessons for 
improvements in future; .  Specific tasks are to discuss and identify key target areas; 



 

21 

formulate the targets that are achievable; mobilize those needed to achieve the targets; 

identify appropriate key performance indicators (KPIs) for different targets set 

x) M&E of the platform, using the outcome to improve the performance of the platform. 
Specific tasks are to design appropriate M&E data collection and analysis for the 

platform; discuss and ensure the leadership of RMCs in the M&E; implement the M&E. 

4.1.7. Project Management Unit (PMU) 

The Project Management Unit will: i) oversee day-to-day implementation of project fiduciary and 

administrative activities; ii) organize the transfer of project resources to the institutions leading the 

commodity value chains; iii) coordinate the compilation and review of reports from value chains and 

enablers for submission to the Bank; and iv) elaborate/implement administrative and financial 

management guidelines/template to be used across. 

4.1.8  The decision to pursue TAAT through a consortium of CGIAR Centers, the National 

Agricultural Research Systems (NARES), and their Umbrella body, FARA, donors, and development 

centers was decided at the High Level Conference on Feed Africa held in Dakar, Senegal, October 21-

23, 2015. At that meeting, the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture (IITA), being the oldest 

CGIAR center in Africa and the center with the most geographical spread – 20 sub-stations across the 

continent, was selected to coordinate the TAAT platform or the Regional Technology Delivery 

Infrastructure (RTDI).  IITA is therefore the Executing Agency (EA). IITA will set up a small Program 

Management Unit (PMU), headed by a competitively recruited Project Coordinator, to undertake 

fiduciary functions (procurement, disbursement, financial administration, reporting, audits, etc.). 

Specific MoUs and implementation agreements will be signed with each of the lead institutions of the 

target commodities and the other key Implementing Agencies (IAs). 

4.1.9  The day-to-day management of the CTDCs is left to the various Lead Centers. Each Lead 

Center, or expert CGIAR center, shall prepare an annual work plan and budget that will be submitted 

for the review and approval by the Clearinghouse based on clearly defined deliverables. African 

Agriculture Technology Foundation (AATF), IITA, and CIMMYT will lead the Water Efficient Maize 

Production; AfricaRice and IWMI shall lead the activities within the Rice Self-sufficiency; IITA leads 

Cassava Intensification; ICRISAT lead in Sahel Food Security; ILRI will lead on livestock; World Fish 

will lead on fish initiative; ICARDA and CIMMYT are responsible for Wheat Self-sufficiency. 

4.1.10  Policy support: International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) will support the various 

institutions on policy issues that enhance successful program implementation and the attainment of the 

expected widespread and transformational impact. IFPRI will also work with other institutions that 

contribute to agricultural development policy work, including ‘The African Seed Access Index 

(TASAI)’, and African Technology Policy Study Network Program (ATPS). It will undertake its 

activities in consultation with each IA, reporting to clearinghouse. 

4.1.11. Capacity development: Forum for Agricultural Research in Africa (FARA) shall undertake 

capacity building at all levels within partner institutions and within the Priority Intervention Areas 

(PIAs) and their value chains. They shall also sign a MoU with Regional Technology Delivery 

Infrastructure (RTDI), with indications of their expected role and terms of delivery as well as expected 

budget for the various activities. FARA will ensure that the thematic content of capacity development 

activities and modules are designed and administered in consultation with appropriate and qualified 

entities, including relevant and participating CGIAR Centers. FARA will also undertake its activities in 

consultation with each program initiative team and report to the Clearinghouse. An Activity Plan for 

each initiative will provide detailed work plans. 

 



 

22 

4.1.12  The National Agricultural Research and Extension Services (NARES) will be the primary 

delivery agent for the deployment of the selected technologies, in close consultation with the 

Government Ministries of Agriculture to ensure country buy-in. This will be supported by private sector 

entities and relevant donor/partner programs in the respective countries. These delivery channels include 

the AGRA supported input dealer network, the World Bank supported West African Agricultural 

Productivity Program (WAAPP) and similar programs in other regions. Support from CGIAR Centers 

Value Chain Leaders will be transactional, value for money and demonstrable benefits, supporting 

national institutions to roll out validated and branded technologies. 

4.1.13  Mechanisms for timely startup include the early appointment of the Head of the Clearinghouse 

and Program Coordination team, and execution of implementing MoUs between IITA (the EA) and the 

implementing partners. This team will oversee the project inception workshop to elucidate all the plans 

for a smooth program take-off.  

4.1.14  In the target RMCs, numerous donors are supporting overall agricultural development. Donor 

coordination occurs in different ways including through Thematic Working Groups, Sector Wide 

Approaches (SWAps), and Integrated Sector Approaches. For TAAT, the key donors that have indicated 

commitment so far include AfDB, World Bank, Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Rockefeller 

Foundation, and AGRA. These donors have been coordinating efforts through joint design workshops 

aimed at steering the development of TAAT for success and the achievement of the intended impact on 

the ground, and at ensuring that ongoing experiences are taken into account, and not duplicated (e.g., 

World Bank’s WAAPP, EAAPP, and APSA; AGRA’s work on input dealership; and BMGF’s work on 

technology development; etc.). Several of such meetings were attended by representatives of other 

prospective donors such as USAID. This coordination is also critical for effective monitoring of the 

program, and will continue during program implementation.   

4.1.15 Specific roles of each CGIAR center can be found in Table 8. 

4.2 Regional Public Goods (RPG) and Access to RPG Window of ADF 14:  

4.2.1  TAAT meets all features (Stages I and II) of RPGs, namely: (i) non-rival benefits (i.e., one 

country’s consumption does not subtract from the amount available to other countries), (ii) non-

excludable (no country in the region can be excluded from benefiting, except at a prohibitive cost), (iii) 

broad public interest and benefit (as demonstrated by letters of expression of interest from 22 low-

income ADF RMCs and three ADB RMCs and involvement of numerous NARES, FARA, SROs, and 

RECs in the formulation of TAAT); (iv) regional dimension or multi-country involvement (22 low-

income RMCs are targeted; Three ADB countries have expressed interest; TAAT adopts a regional, 

agro-ecological and commodity belt focus; TAAT will renew the drive to transform Agriculture in 

Africa by scaling up regional cooperation in combatting crop and livestock diseases, and accelerating 

delivery and development impact); (v) strong alignment with the Bank’s strategic orientation and 

continental and regional objectives (TAAT is aligned with the Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy and four of 

the five high priority goals - the “High 5s”- namely; Feed Africa, Industrialize Africa, Integrate Africa, 

and Improve the quality of life for the people of Africa; TAAT is one of the flagship initiatives identified 

in the Bank’s recently approved Feed Africa: Strategy for agriculture transformation in Africa: 2016–

2025); (vi) catalytic and upstream role (TAAT’s interventions will remove bottlenecks and 

disincentives that have forestalled uptake of agricultural technologies in Africa and upstream segments 

of commodity value chains, making it catalytic and upstream; Given that the commodities of focus in 

TAAT are strategic to the Bank’s RMCs, as underscored by CAADP, TAAT will clearly play a catalytic 

role to engender strong support for these commodities, and (vii) higher developmental impact in 

cooperating (given that crop and livestock diseases travel freely across national boundaries, making it 

impossible for individual countries to achieve anything better than in cooperation). The different 

products from the CGIAR’s research work (earlier indicated) are indeed RPGs made widely available 

to individuals and organizations working for sustainable agricultural development in the world. It is for 

these reasons of public interest, non-rivalry in partaking in the benefits from TAAT, multi-country 



 

23 

involvement, and non-excludability that TAAT was selected among programs seeking support under 

the RPGs window as part of the 2017 RO prioritization exercise of the ADF-14 (see 2017 Regional 

Operations Prioritization and Selection Report, Ref. MJ/ADC/07/17/02 dated 28 July, 2017). Details 

are presented in Appendix 4.  

Table 8: The roles of CGIAR and other R&D Centers, and key stakeholders in TAAT 

CGIAR Center/Collaborator Role in TAAT 

International Institute for Tropical 

Agriculture (IITA) 

Global yam and cowpea R&D center; African center for maize and cassava.  Will lead the work on 

cassava industrialization working with National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems 

(NARES) and collaborate with African Agricultural Technology Foundation (AATF) on Water 

Efficient Maize of Africa (WEMA).  Coordinating Agency for TAAT. 

International Food Policy Research 

Institute (IFPRI) 

Global food policy R&D center.  Will leads work on Policy Support Services, working with 

National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES) and Alliance for Green 

Revolution in Africa (AGRA) 

Africa Rice African rice R&D center.  Will lead work on rice working with National Agricultural Research and 

Extension Systems (NARES) and International Rice Research Institute (IRRI)  

International Center for Tropical 

Agriculture (CIAT, its Spanish acronym) 

Global beans, cassava, and tropical forages R&D center.  Will lead the high iron beans effort 

working with National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES)  

International Center for Agricultural 

Research in Dry Areas (ICARDA) 

Regional R&D center for dry areas. Will lead work on wheat working with National Agricultural 

Research and Extension Systems (NARES) and International Center for Wheat and Maize 

Improvement (CIMMYT, its Spanish acronym) 

International Livestock Research Institute 

(ILRI) 

Global livestock R&D center.  Will lead work on small ruminants working with National 

Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES)  

WorldFish Global fish R&D center.  Will lead work on aquaculture working with National Agricultural 

Research and Extension Systems (NARES) 

African Agricultural Technology 

Foundation (AATF) 

African center for the acquisition and licensing of agricultural technology from around the world.  

Will lead the Water Efficient Maize for Africa (WEMA) effort working with National Agricultural 

Research and Extension Systems (NARES), International Institute for Tropical Agriculture (IITA) 

and International Center for Wheat and Maize Improvement (CIMMYT, its Spanish acronym) 

International Center for Insect 

Physiology and Ecology (ICIPE) 

African R&D center for pest control.  Will work with the Center for Agricultural Biosciences 

International (CABI), CIMMYT, and National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems 

(NARES) on control of Fall Army Worm 

Center for Agricultural Biosciences 

International (CABI), 

Global R&D center for agriculture and biosciences.  Will work with the International Center for 

Insect Physiology and Ecology (ICIPE), CIMMYT, and National Agricultural Research and 

Extension Systems (NARES) on control of Fall Army Worm 

International Center for Wheat and Maize 

Improvement (CIMMYT, its Spanish 

acronym) 

Global R&D center for wheat and maize.  Will collaborate with African Agricultural Technology 

Foundation (AATF) on Water Efficient Maize for Africa (WEMA)   

International Potato Center (CIP, its 

Spanish acronym) 

Global potato R&D center; will lead the work on orange fleshed sweet potato working with 

National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES) 

International Rice Research Institute 

(IRRI) 

Global rice R&D center; will work with AfricaRice and the NARES on rice production and post-

harvest technologies. 

International Water Management Institute 

(IWMI) 

Global water management R&D center. Will work on irrigation with AfricaRice on rice and with 

International Center for Agricultural Research in Dry Areas (ICARDA) on wheat 

Alliance for Green Revolution in Africa 

(AGRA) 

AGRA will provide parallel financing, lead downstream delivery of TAAT technologies, help 

strengthen policy dialogue with national governments and the private sector to shape and ensure a 

shared commitment to improving delivery systems, working with IFPRI. AGRA will also be 

involved in Capacity Development and Outreach work led by FARA. 

Regional Member Countries (RMCs) RMCs via National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES) will work with the 

lead CGIAR centers, Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs) on agricultural commodity value chains 

carrying out policy reforms, crop outreach campaigns, regional disease and pest control initiative. 

RMCs will also organize producers into farmer organizations and link to existing market and 

financial support programs. RMCs will also leverage country investment programs to execute 

TAAT. 

National Agricultural Research and 

Extension Systems (NARES) 

National Agricultural Research and Extension Systems (NARES) will be involved in deploying the 

selected technologies at country level, among other things.  

Forum for Agricultural Research in 

Africa (FARA) 

FARA shall undertake capacity building at all levels within partner institutions and in the PIAs and 

their constituent value chains. 

Sub-Regional Organizations (SROs) Sub-Regional Umbrella bodies of NARS; will lead regional policy effort 

African Women in Agricultural Research 

and Development (AWARD) 

AWARD will collaborate to ensure that women are given priority attention in all cases. 

World Bank Major partner in financing TAAT at Country level. Expected financing at level of USD 700 million 

 

  



 

24 

4.3 Cost-sharing exemption 

4.3.1  The centrally managed activities planned to be funded with RPG resources in Phase I of TAAT 

do not have revenue generating capacity.  They are designed to target 22 low-income RMCs and set the 

stage for upcoming phases, which will require cost-sharing by participating countries, and country 

programs (funded through loans), both of which will benefit and deepen the application of science and 

technology to sustainable agricultural development in Africa. In addition, given TAAT’s regional, agro-

ecological and commodity belt focus, six of the targeted 22 low-income RMCs (Chad, Congo DRC, 

Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Sierra Leone, and Sudan) are loan ineligible and in fragile states. TAAT therefore 

meets the eligibility for cost-sharing exemption and qualifies for financing through grant resources 

outside the PBA allocation (i.e. exclusively from the RO envelope). In line with this policy, OpsCom 

has cleared the cost-sharing exemption for the initial phase of the program, and recommends that cost-

sharing should be explored in subsequent phases after the project is launched. Management considers 

that TAAT meets the eligibility for cost-sharing exemption and therefore seeks Board approval for 

financing of TAAT through grant resources outside the PBA allocation. Details on TAAT’s eligibility 

for the grant funding and cost-sharing exemption are presented in Appendix 9.  

4.4 Linking centrally managed programs to country programs 

4.4.1 TAAT has two planks: the centrally managed operations and the subsequent country programs. 

The benefits that the former will deliver are catalytic and upstream to the main country investment 

programs which will further be financed by the Bank and its partners (the WB, IFAD, AGRA, BMGF, 

etc.). Without TAAT and the support of the Bank, investments by the World Bank and development 

partners may not achieve as great a development impact. A good example is in the control of regional 

pest and disease threats to increased productivity. 

4.5 Private Sector Participation 

4.5.1 TAAT is developing a unique approach to working with the private sector via the Commodity 

Technology Delivery Compacts.  Over 40 private sector organizations ready to partner with TAAT were 

identified during the course of project development. These businesses operate in the areas of input 

manufacture and distribution, commercial seed and propagule production, bio-fertilizers, irrigation 

equipment and supplies, greenhouse construction and food processing. TAAT will create business 

opportunities for the private sector by building seed systems in the rural areas, including agro-dealer 

networks, thereby expanding demand for seeds and services (crop insurance). The Commodity 

Technology Delivery Compact will ensure that the private sector is at the table as opportunities are 

being discussed. 

4.6 Procurement Arrangements 

4.6.1 Procurement of goods, works and the acquisition of consulting services financed by the Bank 

for the program, will be carried out in accordance with the “Procurement Policy and Methodology for 

Bank Group Funded Operations” (BPM), dated October 2015 and following the provisions stated in the 

Financing Agreement. Donor partners (WB, AGRA, BMGF, etc.) may use their own procurement rules 

over the resources which they contribute and implement in a parallel arrangement. The Bank 

procurement rules will apply to Bank financed activities. Specifically, procurement and financial 

management would be carried out as described in Appendix 10 and Appendix 11.   

4.7 Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 

4.7.1 As part of the M&E System to be carried out by the Commodity Technology Delivery Compact 

(CTDC), advanced monitoring tools aligned with the Bank's Agricultural Transformation Agenda 

indicators will be used to ensure day-to-day effective performance measurement. This includes but is 

not limited to options available at IITA and across its CGIAR Centers including participatory field-level 



 

25 

assessments, remote sensing, GIS, Big Data operations that compile and analyze program and national 

statistics, and advanced statistical diagnoses. Monitoring functions will be accompanied by detailed 

training in the use of these tools; as such, reporting will stem from participatory monitoring methods 

and structured data collection instruments. The functions of Knowledge Management are central to the 

M&E Framework and will be designed as a continuous, dynamic, action-reflection-action process. An 

independent external review will be carried out for TAAT at the end of year 2 (2019). 

4.7.2  An inception report will be prepared by the implementing partners, including baseline status, 

detailed work plans and budgets, as well as communication and technology deployment plans. All 

implementing partners will provide quarterly updates and regular situation reports; a mid-term progress 

report by each IA; a midterm progress report by the Clearinghouse; annual audit reports by independent 

external auditors; regular supervision reports would be carried out jointly by AFDB Country Offices 

and the Clearinghouse for national level interventions. All reports would be shared among the partners 

in the TAAT Framework. 

4.8 Sustainability 

4.8.1 The sustainability of TAAT will be achieved through: i) stronger links between research and 

extension; ii) stronger linkages of farmers to markets; iii) focus on agricultural value chains to ensure 

that the demand and supply sides are integrated; iv) supportive policy and regulatory environments; and 

v) expected higher commitment of governments to agriculture in the focal countries.  

4.9 Potential Risks and Mitigation Measures 

4.9.1 Potential risks and measures to mitigate are shown in Table 9. 

Table 9:  Risks and Mitigation 

Potential Risks Mitigation Measures 

Lack of enabling environment (policy, market, etc.). Provide fact-based & targeted advocacy. 

Weak value chain linkages especially to off-takers and processors Build capacity of outgrowers around established commercial 

companies and processors 

Lack of commitments of stakeholders in implementation  Active engagement of all stakeholders, with clear roles 

Lack of commitment & logistical support to enable training  Sensitization & identification of strategic training partners. 

Policy inconsistency (on part of governments) & long process in 

changing policies. 

Dialogue using fact-based rationale for losses due to policies 

status quo 

Lack of commitment by the youth involved in technology promotion 

and demonstration. 

Proper orientation on mindset change through participatory 

approaches and incubation centers. 

Lack of cooperation by government agencies Dialogue for buy-in. 

Weak NARES capacity and resource base Be focused on important specific interventions. Capacity of 

NARES strengthened. 

Retaining earlier promising technologies that become obsolete along 

the way 

The Clearinghouse will institute a mechanism for identifying 

and decommissioning obsolete technologies  
 

5. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

5.1 Legal instrument 

5.1.1 The legal instrument to finance the centralized activities of the TAAT Framework Program is 

an ADF grant (from the Regional Public Goods window) for the eight CGIAR centers who will be 

involved in management of core TAAT activities. A Protocol of Agreement shall be entered into 

between by IITA on behalf of the CGIAR Centers and the Fund.  Conditions for Fund intervention and 

disbursement can be found in Appendix 12. 

5.2 Undertakings 

5.2.1 The Recipient (IITA) shall undertake to: i) Execute an Implementation Agreement with each 

of the implementing agencies; ii) Submit legal opinion(s), issued to the Fund by legal counsel acceptable 

to the Fund, in respect of each of the Implementation Agreement(s) submitted to the Fund, confirming 



 

26 

that the Implementation Agreements(s) between IITA and the relevant implementing agency has been 

duly authorized, ratified and executed on behalf of IITA and the relevant implementing agency, and 

constitutes a legal, valid and binding agreement on both parties; and iii) Not apply for withdrawal of the 

relevant portion of the proceeds of the Grant in respect of any implementing agency that has not 

executed an Implementation Agreement with the Recipient.  

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

This program complies with all applicable Bank policies. 

6 RECOMMENDATIONS 

The Boards of Directors are hereby requested to: 

(i) Approve TAAT as a Framework Program to be implemented in three (3) phases; 

(ii) Approve a Grant of Twenty Nine Million Units of Account (UA 29,000,000) from the 
regional public goods envelope of ADF-14, to IITA, for the purpose of implementation 

of centrally managed activities (for ADF-only countries while partner resources will 

support ADB countries) of the first phase and deployment of the first set of nine priority 

food production technologies, subject to the terms and conditions stipulated in this report; 

(iii) Approve an exemption from cost-sharing for phase 1; 

(iv) Take note that Management will submit to the Board(s); (a) on an annual basis, a status 
report on the implementation of the TAAT Framework Program; (b) separate specific 
proposals for the financing of the second and third phases subject to satisfactory 

implementation of the first phase, for consideration and decision in accordance with 

applicable Bank Group policies; and c) the requests for country program funding as these 

originate from specific RMCs. 




