























































 

 

 

 

PROJECT:  AGRICULTURAL MARKETS, VALUE ADDITION AND TRADE 

DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (AMVAT) 

 

 

COUNTRY: REPUBLIC OF SOUTH SUDAN  

 

 

PROJECT APPRAISAL REPORT 

Date: November 2020 

  

 

  

  

 

 

 

Grant Information 

Client information 

 

RECIPIENT:    Republic of South Sudan  

 

EXECUTING AGENCY:   Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security 

 

IMPLEMENTING AGENCY:  Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the UN 

 

 

Financing plan 

 

Source Amount 

(UA million) 

Amount 

(USD Million) 

Instrument 

ADF-15 5.53 7.80 Grant 

TSF Pillar I 4.47 6.30 Grant 

FAO 0.20 0.28 Grant 

GoSS 0.59 0.83 Counterpart Contribution 

    

TOTAL COST 10.79 15.21  
 

  

 

 

 

Timeframe - Main Milestones (expected)  

 
 

Concept Note approval  

 

September 2020 

Project Board Consideration December 2020 

Effectiveness February 2021 

Last Disbursement  September 2025 

Completion  December 2025 

 

 

 

  



 

 v 

Project Summary 
 

Project Overview:  
The Agricultural Markets, Value Addition and Trade Development Project (AMVAT) uses an 

agricultural value chain approach with emphasis on the development of producer associations. 

The development goal of AMVAT is to contribute to reduced food insecurity, poverty 

reduction and building of community and household resilience. Specific objectives include: (i) 

increased agricultural productivity, (ii) increased agro-processing, aggregation and marketing 

of agricultural produce, and (iii) trade and export of agricultural products and merchandise. 

This will be achieved through four components: (i) increase agricultural productivity and 

production; (ii) improve market-place economic and social infrastructure; (iii) enhance market 

and trade enabling environment; and (iv) project management and coordination. The project 

will be implemented over a five-year period (2020-2024). The total project cost is UA 10.79 

million from an African Development Fund (ADF-15) grant of UA 5.53 million performance-

based country allocation, Transition Support Facility Pillar I (TSF-I) grant of UA 4.47 million, 

a Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) grant of UA 0.20 million and UA 0.59 million as 

counterpart contribution (in-kind land for the market in Juba) from the Government of South 

Sudan. Due to capacity limitations in the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security, the Food 

and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations will implement the project on behalf 

of the Government.   

 

Beneficiaries: The Project will support 20,000 farming households (about 120,000 individuals) 

to increase agricultural productivity and incomes, in the three states of Central Equatoria, 

Eastern Equatoria and Jonglei. The project will target households that have been receiving food 

aid over the past several years (many of them IDP returnees) but are now ready to graduate into 

agricultural market development activities to produce agricultural commodities for food and 

marketing for increased incomes. About fifty percent of these households are women headed 

households. The project will establish 20 Aggregation Business Centres (ABCs), 100 Business 

Producer Associations (BPAs) and 10 Seed Enterprise Groups (SEGs) to provide improved 
seeds to the BPAs and outside markets. Women and youth will be targeted to participate in the 

management and activities of the ABCs, BPAs and SEGs and will also be beneficiaries in the agro-

processing activities at the urban market. The project will also provide food safety training for 

laboratory technicians and other stakeholders in the food chain market system which will provide safer 

and more healthy food for over 500,000 people.  

 

Needs Assessment: South Sudan has a largely unrealised agricultural potential. Over 95% of 

the total area (658,842 km2) is considered suitable for agriculture, 50% of which is prime 

agricultural land where soil and climatic conditions are conducive for production of a variety 

of crops and livestock. However, the periodic armed conflicts in South Sudan have had serious 
negative effects on food production and security and this has resulted in a huge food import bill (43% 

of total imports in 2017), despite the country being well-endowed with natural resources that are good 

for agriculture to thrive. According to the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification issued in June 

2019, 6.35 million people (over 50% of the population) were facing crisis (IPC Phase 3 and above) 

of food insecurity. Despite the extensive agricultural potential, agricultural and food products 

rarely find their way into markets and thus are not traded on a significant scale as such, they 

have not been able to generate the much-needed foreign exchange for the country. In addition, 
South Sudan has high levels of malnutrition: 33 percent of boys and 29 percent of girls are stunted. The 

Government’s agenda for economic diversification is anchored on the agriculture sector, which is vital 

for economic activities. The agriculture sector contributes about ten percent (10%) of GDP but employs 

seventy-eight percent (78%) of the population – there is therefore considerable room for improvement 

of the sector. The AMVAT project will provide much needed skills and inputs for farmers to increase 

productivity, aggregation capacity and post-harvest agro-processing equipment to improve value 

addition. It will also provide capacity building to improve the marketing and trade environment for 

agricultural products to increase incomes and create jobs. 

 

 

 



 

 vi 

Bank’s Value Added: The Bank has considerable experience and expertise across the 

continent working with partners to increase agricultural productivity, add value and develop 

markets. This is demonstrated by the Bank’s Technologies for African Agricultural 

Transformation (TAAT) flagship whose objectives are to expand access of smallholder 

farmers, majority being women, to high yielding agricultural technologies to improve their 

food production, assure food security, raise rural incomes and scaling up agricultural 

technologies across similar agro-ecological zones. The Bank has also successfully 

implemented the Markets and Agricultural Trade Improvement Project (MATIP) in Uganda 

which established over 20 markets across the country and increase trade in agricultural products 

significantly. A second phase of the MATIP is currently being implemented. In South Sudan, 

the Bank has implemented the Short-Term Regional Emergency Response Project (STRERP - 

UA 31.5 million) under the Bank’s Say No to Famine Framework, with highly favourable 

outcomes. In addition, the Bank has supported the water and sanitation sector, power 

transmission and distribution systems, good governance and non-oil revenue mobilization and 

accountability projects in South Sudan. Implementation of projects in the country portfolio 

continued even during the period of conflict and the COVID-19 pandemic and this effort has 

been instrumental in helping to improve the lives of the people of South Sudan. 

 

Knowledge Management: The ability for farmers to enhance productivity and trade depends 

highly on access to suitable technologies, markets and other allied services whereby famers’ 

linkage with other actors in the value chains remains essential and requires support. The Project 

will therefore generate critical knowledge for supporting farmers to move from subsistence to 

commercial agriculture in the selected states, which will build up lessons for the design and 

management of similar interventions, to be scaled in other states, as well as in other Regional 

Member Countries (RMCs). A series of training and coaching activities for different categories 

of farmers and traders has been embedded in the project and a number of agricultural 

commodity studies planned. In line with the Bank’s Knowledge Management Strategy (2015-

2020), the knowledge obtained will be captured through regular supervision, progress reporting 

and mid-term review, and as part of project completion report (PCR) preparation process, 

documented and shared within the Bank and with other development partners (DPs) and RMCs. 

Given that the project covers four selected crops in three different states, with varying 

opportunities and challenges, there is potential to generate useful lessons. 



 

 vii 

 

 R E S U L T S - B A S E D  L O G I C A L  F R A M E W O R K    
A  PROJECT INFORMATION 

❚ PROJECT NAME AND SAP CODE: Agricultural Markets, Value Addition and Trade 
Development Project (AMVAT), P-SS-AAZ-001 

❚ COUNTRY/REGION: South Sudan/ Eastern Africa 

❚ PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVE: Contribute to reduced food insecurity, poverty reduction and building of community and household resilience. 

❚ PROJECT ALIGNMENT:  

a) Country/region strategy: South Sudan’s National Development Strategy (NDS) (2018-2021) & Bank’s Interim Country Strategy Paper (2019-2021) 
for South Sudan 

b) Bank’s priority/sector strategy: Aligned to the Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy , Feed Africa Strategy, Improve the Life of the People of Africa and the 
Bank’s Strategy for Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience in Africa. 

c) Alignment indicators: Prevalence of food insecurity  in targeted areas 

B  RESULTS MATRIX 
RESULTS CHAIN AND INDICATOR 

DESCRIPTION 

RMF or ADOA 

INDICATOR 

UNIT OF 

MEASUREMENT 
BASELINE (2020) 

TARGET AT 

COMPLETION (2025) 

MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 

FREQUENCY OF 

REPORTING 

❚ OUTCOME 1: Increased agricultural productivity and income of households (disaggregated by female headed households) 

INDICATOR 1:  Average yield 

(T/Hectare) for target crops 

 
□ Tons per hectare 

Maize: 1.9 

Sorghum: 1.7 

Groundnuts: 0.95 

Sesame: 0.48 

Maize: 2.4 

Sorghum: 2.0 

Groundnuts: 1.2 

Sesame: 0.72 

National Crop 

Census, 

FAO/WFP- Annual 

CFSAM report, 

Project M&E 

Reports 

Annual 

INDICATOR 2: Average household 

income per 1.5 ha farm  USD $422  $673 Annual 

❚ OUTCOME 2:  Increased agricultural products marketed through formal markets 

INDICATOR 3: Annual volume of 

agricultural farm produce marketed 

through formal markets in the target 

states 

□ Tons TBD by baseline study 
TBD (30% increase of 

baseline) 

Market Centre 

monitoring reports, 

ABC performance 

reports 

Annual   

❚ OUTCOME 3:  Improved capacity of stakeholders in applying food safety & quality standards (SPS, CODEX, etc.) 

INDICATOR 4: Annual volume of 

food products tested and certified in 

laboratories in the project area  
 Tons 0.5 100 

Reports from 

SSNBS 

Report from the 

Mini-Labs 

Annual 

❚ OUTPUT 1: Enhanced farmers’ knowledge for better production, aggregation and marketing   

INDICATOR 5: Farmer leaders 

trained in selected themes as 

Trainers of Trainers (ToTs) 

(disaggregated by gender) 

□ Number  0 500 ToTs (250 women) 
Project monitoring 

reports  

State Performance 

reports  

Annual 



 

 viii 

INDICATOR 6: Farmers trained in 

selected themes (GAP, Farming as a 

business, IPM, etc.) (disaggregated 

by gender) 

 Number 0 
7,500 farmers (3250 

women) 

MAFS reports 

Annual 

❚ OUTPUT 2: Established and strengthened Aggregation Business Centers (ABCs) mainstreaming youth and women 

INDICATOR 7: Aggregation 

Business centers (ABC) established □ Number 0 20 
Project monitoring 

reports, 

ABC progress 

reports 

Annual 
INDICATOR 8: Women and youth 

in ABC leadership positions   Percentage 0 
50% women and 50% 

youth  

OUTPUT 3: Strengthened capacities for the production and dissemination of improved seeds  

INDICATOR 9: Seed Enterprise 

Groups (SEGs) established 

(mainstreaming  women and youth) 
 Number  0 

10 (with 2 women and 2 

youth groups) 
Project monitoring 

reports ABC 

progress reports 

Annual 

INDICATOR 10: No. of hectares 

planted with improved seeds □ Number 0 20,000 
Annual 

OUTPUT 4: Adequate infrastructure set up for better for better aggregation and marketing 

INDICATOR 11: Modern markets 

constructed  Number 0 1 
Market management 

report Project 

monitoring reports 

Annual 

INDICATOR 12: Traders using 

post-harvest and value addition 

equipment at markets (disaggregated 

by gender) 

□ Number 0 TBD 
Annual 

OUTPUT 5: Enhanced capacity development and trade environment in the application and management of CODEX Standards  
INDICATOR 13: CODEX trading 

standards developed for cereals and 

oils seeds 
 Number 0 2  

SSNBS Reports for 

SPS  

Project monitoring 

reports 

Ministry of Industry 

and Trade reports 

Annual 

INDICATOR 14: Custom officers, 

traders and stakeholders  trained to 

apply CODEX standards on oilseeds 

and cereals (disaggregated by 

gender)  

 Number  0 130 (65 women) 

Annual 

INDICATOR 15: Food testing mini 

laboratories  (General chemistry, 
aflatoxin lab) and testing service 

facilities equipped 

 Number 0 2 
Annual 

OUTPUT 6: Strengthened value chain development and market linkages among actors 

INDICATOR 16: Multi stakeholder 

platforms (MSPs) for cereals and oil 

seeds established 
 

Number 

0 2 

Project monitoring 

reports  

Ministry of Industry 

and Trade reports 

Annual 



 

 ix 

OUTPUT 7: Enhanced project coordination and management 

INDICATOR 17: Annual work plans 

developed and approved  Number 0 5 
Project monitoring 

reports 
Annual 

INDICATOR 18: Supervision and 

progress reports conducted 

(technical and financial) 
 Number 0 10 

Project monitoring 

reports Annual 

INDICATOR 19: Capacity 

development fiduciary clinics for 

GoSS conducted  
 Number 0 2 

Project monitoring 

reports Annual 

       
 

 
  



 

 x 

PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE  

Year 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 

Quarter 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 1 2 3 4 

Initial Activities                      

Signature of loan agreement and Disbursement effectivness                      

Finalise the setting up of project implementation unit and project governance structures                     

Project Launching                     

Baseline study                      

Component 1:                       

Establish Aggregation Business Centers (ABCs), their training and provision of equipment                     

Establishment of 100 Business Producer Associations (BPAs) and their training                     

Train and coach ToTs in Good Agricultural Practices (GAPs)                     

Establish Seed Enterprise Groups (SEGs), their training and provision of equipment                     

Provide equipment for seed testing laboratory and training for the laboratory technicians                     

Support MAFS to develop the seed sector framework                     

Component 2:                        

Preparation of feasibility study and detailed design for modern market infrastructure                     

Developing Marketing Management Guidelines and Manual                      

Constructoin of the market infrastructure                     

Provide primary value addition equipment for the market                     

Component 3:                        

Develop CODEX standards and guidelines including capacity building and dissemination                     

Equip 2 food testing mini laboratories for aflatoxin and general chemistry and training of technicians                     

Setting up platforms for cereals and oil seed sectors                     

Capacity development for stakeholders (customs officers, traders, chamber of commerce, etc.) on food 

safety and quality systems and export market linkages 
          

 
   

 
   

 
 

Component 4:                        

Project management, M&E and reporting (quarterly progress and supervision reports)                     

Undertake thematic studies                     

Implementation of ESMP                      

Capacity development, training and equipment for MAFS and MTI                     

Mid-term review (MTR)                     

Project Completion Report (PCR)                     



 

1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE MANAGEMENT OF THE AFDB GROUP TO THE BOARD OF 

DIRECTORS ON THE PROPOSED ADF-15 AND TSF PILLAR-I GRANTS TO THE REPUBLIC OF SOUTH 

SUDAN FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AGRICULTURAL MARKETS, VALUE 

ADDITION, AND TRADE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT (AMVAT). 

 

Management hereby submits the following report and its recommendation concerning a proposed 

African Development Fund (ADF-15) grant of UA 5.53 million (USD 7.80 million) performance-based 

country allocation and  Transition Support Facility Pillar I (TSF-I)  grant of UA 4.47 million (USD 6.30 

million)  to the Republic of South Sudan to finance activities to support the Agricultural Markets, Value 

Addition and Trade Development Project (AMVAT) in South Sudan. 

 

I – STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 

1.1. Project linkages with country strategy and objectives  

 

1.1.1 AMVAT is fully aligned with and supported by South Sudan’s National Development Strategy 

(NDS) (2018-2021) whose overarching objective is to Consolidate Peace and Stabilize the Economy and 

in particular, its strategic priority no. 3 Ensuring Secure Access to Adequate and Nutritious Food. The 

NDS is divided into Clusters and the priority actions of the Economic Cluster includes to expedite 

economic infrastructure development (including agricultural infrastructure) and to fast-track 

development of legal, regulatory and institutional frameworks – activities that are integrated in the 

AMVAT components. Furthermore, AMVAT will provide gender-sensitive capacity development to the 

Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security, Ministry of Trade and Industry and other stakeholders, 

including the development of multi-stakeholder platforms for cereals and oil seeds. AMVAT is also 

aligned to the Government of South Sudan’s climate change adaptation plans for the agriculture sector 

as outlined in the country’s Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) and National Adaptation 

Programme of Action (NAPA), which include promoting climate smart agricultural (CSA) technologies 

and enhancing agricultural productivity through development of infrastructure and improved crop and 

livestock varieties. 

 

1.1.2 Moreover, AMVAT is aligned to the Bank’s South Sudan Interim Country Strategy Paper (I-

CSP) 2012-2018) extended to December 2021 by supporting the single pillar of State Building through 

Capacity Building and Infrastructure Development and specifically by developing market and 

aggregation infrastructure. The project is included in the I-CSP pipeline. The Project is aligned with the 

Bank’s Ten-Year Strategy on aspects of infrastructure development, skills and technology, agriculture 

and food security and gender. It is also aligned to the Bank’s Feed Africa Strategy, in particular the 

flagships of Technologies for African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT) whose objective is to 

increase agricultural productivity and value addition as well as the Special Agro-industrial Processing 

Zones (SAPZ) whose objective is to increase investment for enabling rural infrastructure for agro-

processing and value addition. It is also aligned to the High 5 on Improving the Quality of Life for the 

People of African by improving the health and nutrition of the communities through increased 

productivity of nutritious food crops. Furthermore, the project is aligned to the Bank’s Jobs for Youth in 

Africa Strategy (2016-2025) and in particular the Enable Youth flagship that emphasizes inclusive 

employment for youth in agribusiness. Furthermore, the project is aligned to the Bank’s Strategy for 

Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience in Africa (2014-2019).   

 

 



 

2 

 

1.2. Rationale for Bank’s involvement 
  

1.2.1. South Sudan’s vast agricultural potential is largely unrealised. Over 95% of the total area 
(658,842 km2) is considered suitable for agriculture, 50% of which is prime agricultural land 

where soil and climatic conditions are conducive for production of a variety of crops and 

livestock. A large part of the country, particularly the southern part, has high rainfall for 8-9 

months a year, ranging from 500-600 mm/year to more than 1,500 mm/year. However, the 

periodic armed conflicts in South Sudan have had a serious negative effect on food production 

and security and this has resulted in a huge food import bill (43% of total imports in 2017), 

despite being well well-endowed with natural resources that are good for agriculture to prosper. 

According to the Integrated Food Security Phase Classification issued in June 2019, 6.35 million 

people (just over 50% of the population) were facing a food insecurity crisis (IPC Phase 3 and 

above). Despite the huge agricultural potential, agricultural and food products rarely find their 

way into markets and thus are not traded on a significant scale and have not been able to generate 

much needed foreign exchange for the country. In addition, South Sudan has high levels of 

malnutrition: 33 percent of boys and 29 percent of girls are stunted. Similarly, 30 percent of boys 

and 24.5 percent of girls are underweight. The Government’s agenda for diversification of South 

Sudan’s economy is anchored on the agriculture sector, which plays a vital role in economic 

activities. The agriculture sector contributes about ten percent (10%) of GDP but employs 

seventy-eight percent (78%) of the population. Most agricultural products that are exported are 

in the form of primary products and are later imported as value-added products. This situation 

leads to losses in foreign currency, employment opportunities and opportunities for customized 

value-added products. 

 

1.2.2. Both agricultural input and product markets in South Sudan are not well developed. No effective 
investment can be made in scaling up production without first strengthening markets. The present 

system of fresh supplies to retail markets in urban areas is dominated by imports – in the case of 

Juba by supplies from Uganda. Three types of food markets currently exist in South Sudan: rural 

primary markets located in villages and small towns and often held on a periodic basis; rural 

assembly markets located in agricultural surplus areas; and urban retail markets serving 

consumers in main towns and cities. Terminal wholesale markets within or near major cities have 

yet to evolve. As a result of the underdeveloped marketing arrangements, post-harvest losses at 

the farm level and within markets are very high, as are food prices.  

 

1.2.3 The AMVAT activities are informed by several studies that support the development of 
agricultural economic infrastructure and trade development. The 2020 report “Conflict, Mobility 

and Markets - Changing food systems in South Sudan” notes that the post-independence conflict 

has made South Sudan’s markets volatile. This has increased risks and liabilities for bigger 

traders, but also offers opportunities for smaller ones.  

 

1.2.4 The World Bank’s 2019 diagnostic study “South Sudan: Linking the Agriculture and Food Sector 
to the Job Creation Agenda” is emphatic that with the implementation of the peace deal, South 

Sudan could start a trajectory of recovery and growth, which ushers in an opportunity for 

investments in the food sector by applying a value chain lens that does only address food security 

needs, but also, generates income and lays the foundation for livelihoods and job creation. 

Among other important enablers to begin to facilitate agribusiness transformation, the flagship 

study refers to rural assembly markets located in agricultural surplus areas, as well as urban retail 

markets serving consumers in main town and cities as being vital for beginning to strengthen the 

distribution and marketing channels. 



 

3 

 

 

1.2.5 A 2019 study “Moving towards markets: cash, commodificaton and conflict in South Sudan” 
notes that while food insecurity is linked to South Sudan’s conflicts, a less visible factor is the 

move towards markets. Producing food for markets rather than for home consumption, turning 

food into a commodity and turning farmers into wage workers – all these shifts appear to be 

implicated in the country’s hunger crisis. On a positive note the report claims that South Sudanese 

food producers and consumers are moving towards markets. 

  

1.2.6 UNDP’s 2012 study “Investing in Agriculture for Food Security and Economic Transformation” 
cautioned that short, medium and long term actions focusing on rural sector activities including 

ensuring adequate supplies from agriculture and efficient functioning markets, storage and 

transportation are important to stabilize and improve the food security situation in South Sudan. 

 

1.2.7 Other studies that form an anchor for this project vis a vis developing agricultural market 
infrastructure include the Bank’s South Sudan: An Infrastructure Action Plan (2011); the 

Government’s Comprehensive Agricultural Development Master Plan (CAMP, 2015-2020); and 

the Bank’s South Sudan: A Study on Competitiveness and Cross Border Trade with 

Neighbouring Countries (2013). 

 

1.2.8 Why the Bank should Intervene:  Imported agricultural commodities play a dominant role in 
many large marketplaces in South Sudan. However, there remains high potential for domestic 

agricultural commodities to take a larger share of the overall market, and as domestic production 

remains an important component given the rapid expansion of the urban population which has 

created large consumer markets. Agricultural commodity markets are critical drivers to 

agricultural development and the achievement of food security in the country, especially if 

complemented by actions that reduce macroeconomic distortions, lower high market transaction 

costs and increase value addition through an agricultural value chain approach. Markets open 

opportunities for increased intra-urban and cross-border trade between rural and urban areas, 

while serving as wholesale centres and hubs for commodities trade, especially for agricultural 

commodities. This improves the supply and availability of basic goods, improved agricultural 

inputs, as well as contributes to stabilizing commodity prices, thus positively impacting 

households’ ability to access basic food and non-food items to support their livelihoods. 

Operationalizing the markets and aggregation centres will thus benefit smallholder farmers by 

making improved agricultural inputs available to vulnerable households, improving price 

margins, and eventually increasing rural incomes. The Juba market will also improve the 

hygienic environment, help reduce post-harvest losses and install facilities to meet demand, for 

example cold storage units for fish storage. Furthermore, an improved information management 

system for market intelligence and data collection and distribution will help farmers access the 

most updated information on commodity prices and help decision makers widen the evidence 

base and develop a deeper understanding of the complex market dynamics in South Sudan. 

Markets also are key sites of public spaces for social interaction, connection, social inclusion, the 

mingling of different cultures and the building of a sense of local community and social cohesion, 

which are key for sustainable peacebuilding and post conflict reconstruction efforts. 

 

1.2.9 The AMVAT project provides the opportunity to address some of the fundamental constraints to 
agricultural growth in South Sudan, listed above. As such, it has the potential to be truly 

transformational in its scope. The rationale for bank involvement in the proposed project is 

underpinned by: (a) the Bank’s own strong experience and expertise in increased agricultural 



 

4 

 

productivity; (b) a strong commitment and ownership of the South Sudan authorities of the 

project; and (c) the specific request for this project from the Government for Bank support. 

 

 

 

1.3. Donor coordination 

1.3.1 Development partners working in the agriculture sector are guided by the Comprehensive 

Agricultural Development Master Plan (CAMP) 2015-20 and work within the Agriculture and 

Livelihoods Development Working Group (ALDWG) of which the Bank is a member, as well as the 

Partnership for Recovery and Resilience (PfRR) Framework. Apart from the Bank, the other key 

development partners (DPs) active in the sector include DFID, FAO, WFP, EU, Netherlands, Canada, 

JICA, BMZ, SDC, USAID and the World Bank. The DP’s agriculture sector interventions focus on the 

following broad areas: (i) Improved management and equitable access to water sources for livelihood 

activities; (ii) Food production and improved income generation for women and youth; (iii) Livelihood 

diversification (e.g., animal production groups, cereal marketing groups); (iv) Construction of feeder 

roads; and (v) Peace building and conflict resolution. In addition, the Bank is also a member of the donor 

Public Finance Management (PFM) group.  the Heads of Development Cooperation (HoC) group and 

the United Nations Country Team (UNCT).   

1.3.2 During project design, the Bank held discussions with various development partners in the 

agriculture sector on possible collaboration. The HoC was also informed of the AMVAT. The Bank 

agreed to collaborate with JICA on joint support for capacity development to the Ministry of Agriculture 

and Food Security. In addition, the Bank held discussions with IFAD, to collaborate with its project, the 

South Sudan Livelihoods and Resilience Project (SSLRP), which is being prepared. The two institutions 

agreed to implement activities in common states and counties and to design activities that are 

complementary – effectively resulting in parallel co-financing in an amount of approximately USD 3 

million. This demonstrates the strengthening of synergies, bolstering aid coordination and deepening 

value added for the Bank and IFAD. Several development partners are also providing infrastructure such 

as rural roads (the Netherlands) which will complement the proposed market infrastructure of AMVAT 

by making needed farm gate linkages.   

 

Table 1.1 Development Partner Support for Agriculture and Resilience in South Sudan 

No. Development Partner  

Development Partner 

Support (USD) 

% of Total DP 

Support 

1 United State of America                   63,079,419  31% 

2 United Kingdom                   45,131,820  22% 

3 European Union                   38,376,880  19% 

4 Norway                   24,606,522  12% 

5 Netherlands                   15,874,324  8% 

 
 

II – PROJECT DESCRIPTION  

2.1. Project Goal 

 
2.1.1 The development goal of AMVAT is to contribute to reduced food insecurity, poverty reduction 

and building of community and household resilience. Specific objectives include to: (i) increase 



 

5 

 

agricultural productivity, (ii) increase agro-processing, aggregation and marketing of agricultural 

produce, and (iii) increase trade in agricultural products.  

 

 

 

 

Project Description 
 

2.1.2 AMVAT takes an Agricultural Value Chain Approach including supporting the development of 

producer associations. The project will support and complement the entire value chain by supporting 

farmer households engaged in the identified value chains of maize, sorghum, groundnuts and sesame. 

The Aggregation Business Centres will serve as growth hubs in the local areas and will include post-

harvest agro-processing facilities to support and provide value addition to agricultural produce and 

provide extension services to the surrounding areas. These activities will widen the livelihood options 

and income sources of farmers as well as increasing their resilience to climate change impacts through 

improved varieties and reduced post-harvest losses. Vendors and farmers will be organized into producer 

and trader associations to enhance protection and leverage collective bargaining positions and lower 

purchasing and marketing costs through service sharing. Considering the COVID threat, safety measures 

for social distancing will be incorporated within the project to ensure safety during project 

implementation.   
 

Table 2.1: Project components 
No Component Name Cost (UA 

Million) 

Component Description 

1 Increase agricultural 

productivity and 

production 

3.07 

 

Sub-component 1.1: Establish 20 Aggregation Business Centres (ABCs) 

(8 in CES, 8 in EES and 4 in Jonglei)  

 Train and coach ABC leaders (with a 50% target of women) on 
aggregation, value addition/post-harvest technologies, business 

management, access to credit, food safety and quality management, 

marketing, financial literacy, etc. 

 Facilitate the ABCs to provide extensions services to the Business 
Producer Associations (BPAs)  

 Equip the ABCs with post-harvest handling equipment (including 
shellers, threshers, winnowers, tarpaulins, weighing machines, 

aflatoxin testing kits, moisture meters, small mills, oil press for 

groundnuts/sesame) and Market Information System (MIS). 

Sub-component 1.2: Establish 100 Business Producer Associations 

(BPAs) (5 BPAs associated with each ABC)  

 Train 500 Trainer of Trainers and 7,500 farmers (including 50% 
women) in Farmer Institution Development, Farming as a Business, 

Good and Climate Smart Agricultural Practices, Integrated Pest 

Management, Financial literacy, etc. 

 Facilitate the BPAs to access improved and drought resistant seeds. 
The seeds will be subsidized at the beginning, but this will be reduced 

over the life of the project to zero subsidy.   

Sub-component 1.3: Establish 10 Seed Enterprise Groups (SEGs) (1 SEG 

to serve 2 ABCs) 

 Train and coach the SEG management on seed multiplication process, 
seed quality control, commercialization, enterprise development, etc.  

 Provide seed production equipment for the SEGs. 



 

6 

 

 Facilitate the SEGs to provide improved seeds to the BPAs. This 
support will gradually reduce over the life of the project to zero so that 

they can become sustainable.   

Subcomponent 1.4: Support the seed eco-system in the country. 

 Support MAFS to develop the seed sector framework. 

 Provide equipment for the seed testing laboratory to improve its 
capacity – the facilities are already established at MAFS HQ. 

 Provide training of technicians for the seed testing laboratories. 

 Technical Assistance on seed varieties through the Technologies for 
African Agricultural Transformation (TAAT)  

 Undertake value chain studies on Sorghum, Groundnuts and Sesame.  

2 Improve market-place 

economic and social 

infrastructure 

4.95 Sub-component 2.1: The project will support the construction of a modern 

market in Juba (about 8,000 m2). The exact size and type will be 

determined based on the outcomes of the feasibility study. In addition, a 

space of about 130 m2 will be provided for housing the proposed value 

addition equipment and will also provide mini-storage facilities for the 

market. 

 Preparation of feasibility study and detailed designs of the market 
which will include economic and social amenities (including lock-up 

stalls, mini-storage facilities, use renewable/green energy sources 

such as solar power, water including roof catchment harvesting 

facilities, sanitation and hygiene (WASH), child care services, access 

and grounds, sustainable waste management systems such as 

processing bio-wastes to biogas, etc.). The consultancy will include 

preparation of tender documents and construction and supervision of 

the civil works implemented by the project. As an alternative, the 

consulting firm as part of its assignment will review the Juba 

Wholesale Market design and advise the executing agency on the 

feasibility of partially implementing the proposed Juba Market by the 

project. 

 Developing Market Management Guidelines and Manual.  
Subcomponent 2.2: Agro-processing and Trade Facilitation 

 Provide equipment for first level value addition equipment e.g. 
cleaning, grading/sorting and de-stoning for maize, sorghum, 

groundnut and sesame; equipment for quality control, management, 

grading and standardization systems; establish and promote use of 

market information systems (MIS) to facilitate trade building on 

existing systems such as REACH and JMMI.  

3 Enhance Market and 

Trade Enabling 

Environment 

0.98 Sub-component 3.1: Support the Ministry of Trade and Industry and other 

stakeholders on food safety and standards, including Sanitary and 

Phytosanitary (SPS) aspects. 

 Support the national Bureau of Standards (NBS) to develop CODEX 
standards and guidelines, including gender-sensitive SPS capacity 

building and dissemination and gender-responsive customs 

management 

 Equip 2 mini food testing laboratories for aflatoxin and general 
chemistry (Juba and Torit). 

 Training of laboratory technicians on food safety. 

 Establish Monitoring and Evaluation mechanism for Non-Tariff 
Barriers (NTB) and Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT). 

 Support development of SME policy.  



 

7 

 

 Feasibility study for Gum Arabic and study on Markets and 
Marketing. 

Subcomponent 3.2: Establish two viable multi- stakeholder platforms 

 Setting up Platforms for cereals and oil seeds sectors 
 Gender-sensitive capacity development for stakeholders (customs officer, 

chamber of commerce, traders, etc.) on food safety and quality systems and 

export market linkages. Capacity development on gender and trade 

regulations related to agricultural products and Sanitary and Phytosanitary 

measures as well as measures to improve food safety in informal markets. 

4 Project Management 

and Coordination 

1.09  Plan, design, manage and implement project activities, including 
ESMP implementation. 

 Conduct monitoring and prepare quarterly progress and supervision 
reports together with MAFS. 

 Conduct Medium Term Review and Project Completion Report 
missions. 

 Undertake baseline study and value chain studies.  

 Capacity development/training and equipment for MAFS and MTI: 
capacity on procurement and financial management, equipment for 

project focal point (computer/printer, furniture, consumables, etc.).  

 Conduct annual audits. 

  0.70 Third Party Implementation Agency Fee 

 TOTAL 10.79  

 
 

2.2. Technical solutions retained and other alternatives explored  
 

Table 2.2: Project Alternatives Considered and Reasons for Rejection 

Alternative  Brief description Reasons for rejection 

Establishment of a 

seed certification 

body 

 Setting up minimum 

standards for genetic purity 

and recommend minimum 

standards for the classes of 

certified seed, and standardize 

seed certification regulations 

and procedures 

The Government of South Sudan is not currently ready to set 

up the body. Instead of setting up a certification body, the 

project is proposing: i) to develop a seed policy framework 

which will guide the overall seed system in the country until 

the seed policy is adopted, and ii) strengthening the existing 

seed system by expanding the number of seed producers and 

enhance capacities of both seed producers and inspectors.  

 Support research 
institutions to 

release new 

varieties including 

hybrids and 

biofortified seeds 

To ensure that new resistant 

and high yield varieties are 

released to farmers to increase 

their productivity 

Due to project budget constraints and the cost of new variety 

release requirements, it was not possible to pursue this idea 

under the AMVAT. The project will therefore support the 

Seed Enterprise Groups to produce Quality Declared Seed 

(QDS), which is the quality of seed being produced and 

marketed by the seed companies in South Sudan. These are 

improved seeds but not up to the quality of foundation seed.   

Establish large 

rural market 

infrastructure  

Establishing large markets in 

the rural areas where 

production takes place.  

Due to poor road infrastructure one cannot establish large 

markets in the rural areas. The project will therefore support 

the establishment of aggregation centres in the rural areas and 

a modern market in Juba.  

 

2.3. Project type  
The Agricultural Markets, Value Addition and Trade Development Project (AMVAT) is supported under 

the ADF-15 and TSF Pillar-I of the Bank as a standalone investment project.  
 



 

8 

 

2.4. Project cost and financing arrangements  
2.4.1 The cost for the project activities, excluding taxes and duties, is estimated at UA 10.79 million 

including physical and price contingencies. The costs are composed of UA 4.78 million (44%) in foreign 

currency and UA 6.01 million (56%) in local currency costs. The combined physical and price 

contingencies have been estimated at 14% of the total baseline costs. The tables below provide the 

summary of the Project costs which are based on analysis of unit prices obtained from the ministries of 

Agriculture and Food Security, other ministries  and other local institutions and traders. 

 

 

 

Table 2.3: Project Cost Estimates by Component (UA million) 

 

 
 

2.4.2  The project will be financed by an ADF-15 Grant of UA 5.53 million, TSF-I grant of UA 4.47 

million, FAO grant of UA 0.20 million and the Government will contribute UA 0.59 million (5.6% of 

project cost) as in-kind counterpart contribution for the land of the market in Juba. South Sudan’s 

economy is still confronted with a high fiscal deficit (6.4% of GDP in 2019), lack of competitiveness, 

limited foreign reserves and high public debt. These macroeconomic imbalances have been exacerbated 

by the Government’s shift from spending on social services to military expenditure as well as the adverse 

impact of COVID-19 pandemic. Due to high dependence on oil (accounts for 90% of total revenue and 

95% of export earnings), falling oil prices and reduced global demand have negatively impacted budget 

execution due to revenue loses. In this context, the Bank’s Country Financing Parametres recommends 

100% financing by the Bank Group, however the Government will contribute in-kind.    

 

Table 2.4: Sources of Financing (UA Million) 

 

 Foreign Local Total Percent 

 Government of South Sudan 0.00  590.07 590.07 5.5 

 ADF-15 3,288.69 2,241.31 5,530.00 51.3 

TSF-I 1,313.87 3,156.12 4,470.00 41.4 

FAO 177.24 22.75 200.00 1.9 

Total Project Cost 4,779.81 6,010.26 10,790.07 100.0 

 

 

Table 2.5: Project Cost by Category of Expenditure (UA million) 

 

(SSP '000) (UA '000) % Foreign % Base

Component Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total Exchange Costs

1. Increase Agricultural Productivity and 

Production 326,189.69     289,518.44     615,708.13     1,406.23   1,248.14   2,654.37    47             28         

2. Improve Marketplace Economic and 

Social Infrastructure 559,516.89     430,425.07     989,941.95     2,412.13   1,855.60   4,267.73    43             45         

3. Enhance Market and Trade Enabling 

Environment 103,457.78     103,092.86     206,550.64     446.02      444.44      890.46       50             9           

4. Project Coordination and 

Management 171,546.37     204,541.75     376,088.11     739.55      881.80      1,621.35    54             17         

Total Baseline Costs 1,160,710.72  1,027,578.11  2,188,288.84  5,003.93   4,429.98   9,433.91    47             100       

Physical Contingencies 46,323.41       46,323.41       92,646.82       199.70      199.70      399.41       50             4           

Price Contingencies 187,105.16     34,823.36       221,928.53     806.63      150.13      956.75       16             10         

Total Project Costs 1,394,139.29  1,108,724.89  2,502,864.18  6,010.26   4,779.81   10,790.07  44             114       



 

9 

 

 
 

Table 2.6: Expenditure Schedule by Component (UA million) 

 

 
 

2.5. Project’s target area and population  
2.5.1 The Project will support 20,000 farming households (about 120,000 individuals) in the three 

states of Central Equatoria, Eastern Equatoria and Jonglei. The project will target households that have 

been receiving food aid over the past several years (many of them IDP returnees) but are now ready to 

graduate into agricultural development activities to produce crops for food and marketing for increased 

incomes. About fifty percent of these households are women headed households. The baseline study will 

identify the households that will be assisted to form the Business Producer Associations (BPAs) through 

which they will receive support. The project will establish 20 Aggregation Business Centres (ABCs) in 

the three states, 100 Business Producer Associations (BPAs) – each ABC will serve 5 BPAs, and 10 

Seed Enterprise Groups (SEGs) to provide improved seeds to the BPAs and external markets. If one 

considers the impact of the market in the Juba urban area, total population that will be impacted by this 

project will be about 500,000 people. The project will also provide food safety training for laboratory 

technicians and other stakeholders in the food chain market system which will provide safer and more 

healthy food for over 500,000 people. The hub of development will be the ABCs which will serve as 

growth hubs to serve the BPAs and SEGs. The project will identify existing aggregation centres and 

build on those rather than develop completely new ones – there are many aggregation centres already 

run by UN agencies such as FAO and WFP and some private ones. The project will enter into agreements 

with these aggregation centres for the provision of required services.      

 

2.5.2 The selection of the states was informed by the following criteria: (i) key states for food security 

crops and potential for commercial crops; (ii) key states for high value crops with prospects for value 

addition and external trade; (iii) states with policies and support for the proposed project interventions 

including private sector participation; (iv) high percentage of the population likely to directly benefit 

(SSP million) (UA million) % Foreign % Base

Local Foreign Total Local Foreign Total Exchange Costs

 I. Investment Costs

A. Civil Works 627.74 496.14 1,123.88 2.71 2.14 4.85 44 51

B. Goods 43.94 163.42 207.36 0.19 0.70 0.89 79 9

C. Services 338.19 353.30 691.48 1.46 1.52 2.98 51 32

Total Investment Costs 1,009.87 1,012.85 2,022.72 4.35 4.37 8.72 50 92

II. Total Recurrent Costs 150.84 14.73 165.57 0.65 0.06 0.71 9 8

Total Baseline Costs 1,160.71 1,027.58 2,188.29 5.00 4.43 9.43 47 100

Physical Contingencies 46.32 46.32 92.65 0.20 0.20 0.40 50 4

Price Contingencies 187.11 34.82 221.93 0.81 0.15 0.96 16 10

Total Project Costs 1,394.14 1,108.72 2,502.86 6.01 4.78 10.79 44 114

Totals Including Contingencies

Components 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 Total

1. Increase Agricultural Productivity and 

Production 0.60 0.85 0.63 0.53 0.46 3.07

2. Improve Marketplace Economic and Social 

Infrastructure 1.53 2.03 1.34 0.03 0.03 4.95

3. Enhance Market and Trade Enabling 

Environment 0.04 0.49 0.43 0.02 - 0.98

4. Project Coordination and Management 1.00        0.19 0.19 0.20 0.22 1.79

Total Project Costs 3.16 3.56 2.59 0.78 0.70 10.79



 

10 

 

from investment of the project; (v) states where potential development partners are currently located or 

planning to work on upcoming projects to provide complementarity to AMVAT project, e.g IFAD’s 

SSLRP project; (vi) development stage of the population in the state as well as peace and security.  The 

Project will focus on five counties in total so as not to be spread too thinly. In Central Equatoria State, 

the project will focus on Juba and Terekeka counties, in Eastern Equatoria State it will focus on Magwi 

and Torit counties and in Jonglei it will focus on Bor county. These counties were selected because they 

already have several existing aggregation centres and will also allow this project to synergize with the 

upcoming IFAD SSLRP project that will operate in these counties.  

 

2.6. Participatory process for project identification, design and implementation  
2.6.1 The project appraisal was conducted virtually, however the Bank managed to get a lot of the 

required information. The Bank undertook in-depth consultations with relevant government ministries, 

as well as development partners, Civil Society Organisations and farmer groups (e.g. Seed Trade 

Association of South Sudan, South Sudan Agricultural Producers’ Association, Chamber of Commerce, 

etc.) during project identification, preparation and appraisal. The consultations were held with key 

ministries, including Finance and Planning, Agriculture and Food Security, Trade and Industry, 

Livestock, Physical Infrastructure in order to identify and review priorities and areas where Bank 

resources would add value. In addition, consultative meetings were held with key stakeholders involved 

in the agricultural and rural development. These included JICA, USAID, the World Bank, FAO, the 

Netherlands, European Union, etc. The Bank made a presentation of the project to the Agriculture and 

Livelihoods Development Working Group (ALDWG) in the country. The Bank also held meetings with 

the South Sudan Agricultural Producers Union and the South Sudan Seed Trade Association among 

others. 

2.6.2 The consultations significantly informed the project design, especially the project components 

and implementation arrangements. For instance, consultations during project preparation indicated that 

it is still advisable to use a third-party implementation agency due to the low government capacity in the 

ministries to implements such projects. During implementation, there will be further engagement with 

key stakeholders in the agriculture sector through the multi-stakeholders’ project National Advisory 

Committee (NAC) and National Technical Committee (NTC) and the ALDWG. 

2.7. Bank Group experience, lessons reflected in project design 

Portfolio Performance and Lessons Learnt: As at 30th September 2020, the Bank’s active portfolio for 

South Sudan comprised eleven (11) sovereign operations, financed mainly using ADF grants and loans, 

with commitments amounting to UA 84.7 million. In terms of sectoral distribution, the power sector has 

the largest allocation (33%), followed by water supply and sanitation (27%), social sector (16%), multi-

sector/governance (15%), finance (6%) and health (3%). The operations are consistent with the sole 

Pillar of the National Development Plan, South Sudan’s CSP and the Bank’s strategic priorities, 

underpinned by the High 5’s vision for Africa’s economic transformation. The country’s portfolio 

performance is satisfactory, with an overall score of 3.8 on a scale of 1 to 4.  The total cumulative 

disbursement rate was 46.8% by 30th September 2020, while the average portfolio age stood at 3.4 years. 

However, critical issues of fragility, particularly insecurity and violence, still affect portfolio 

performance, as well as government’s low absorption capacity stemming from institutional and human 

capital weaknesses. The Bank has adopted the use of third-party implementation arrangements for all 

projects with high fiduciary risks, low capacity and implemented outside Juba. This is to mitigate the 

risks associated with weak institutional capacity (systems and human capital), insecurity outside Juba, 

limited knowledge of Bank rules, procedures and procurement regulations by the Project Implementation 

Unit officials, delays in the implementation of procurement plans and submission of audit reports. The 



 

11 

 

use of a third party such as the FAO mitigates all of these risks as the Bank has already assessed the 

organization and signed a Fiduciary Principles Agreement (FPA) with it to implement Bank projects.   
 

2.8. Key performance indicators 
 2.8.1 The results-based logical framework outlines key project performance indicators. The 

development outcomes envisaged under the project are: (i) the increased average yield (t/ha) and 

household income per ha for target crops,  (ii) 30% increase in farm produce marketed through formal 

markets,  (iv) increase in volume of food products tested and certified in laboratories in the project areas 

from 0.5 t/year to 100 t/year. All of these will lead to increased agricultural productivity and income of 

households. The main indicators defined for monitoring the project outputs are: (i) number of ToTs and 

farmers trained on selected topics; (ii) number of ABCs and SEGs established; (iii) number of youth and 

women in both ABC and SEG management; (iv) number of hectares planted with improve seeds; (v) 

number of modern markets constructed; (vi) annual value of commodities marketed through markets; 

(vii) number of CODEX trading standards and guidelines established and disseminated for cereals and 

oil seeds; (viii) number of new laboratories set up and operating, and (ix) number of technicians and staff 

trained on selected themes. The FAO team in collaboration with the ministry of agriculture will carry 

out internal project monitoring and evaluation in collaboration with the national technical committee to 

monitor the performance of the project. Regular implementation progress will be measured through 

Quarterly Progress Reports and annual technical and financial audits. Disaggregated data will be 

captured at every level and where applicable.  The overall effectiveness of the project at implementation 

will be monitored through the Bank’s bi-annual supervision missions (field and desk). The Mid-Term 

Review will be undertaken in year three, while the Project Completion Report will be prepared during 

the last six months of the project. 

 

III – PROJECT FEASIBILITY 

3.1. Economic and financial performance 

 

FIRR (base case) 21% 

EIRR (base case) 25% 

 

NPV, USD 13.60 million at 12% 

 

3.1.1 The project is financially and economically viable, as evidenced by the Project’s Financial 

Internal Rate of Return (FIRR) of 21% and Economic Internal Rate of Return (EIRR) of 25%. At the 

enterprise level, a typical 1.5 Ha farm model shows that as a result of the project, annual net margin is 

expected to increase by 60%, from USD 422 per farm to USD 673 per farm at full development. This 

demonstrates that at the enterprise level, the project is financially feasible.  

 

3.1.2 The analysis has considered the following assumptions for the market: (i) project life period of 

25 years; (ii) infrastructure operating cost of 2% per year of capex during the project life and 7% capex 

infrastructure investment at year 10; and (iii) implementation schedule of investment built from the 

expenditure schedule of activities. The assumptions for crop production were an increase in productivity 

of the four selected crops ranging from 18% to 100%. The key costs that are considered for the analysis 

include the capital investment costs for the market infrastructure, incremental operational and 

maintenance costs and the increased input costs for the crops. 

 



 

12 

 

3.1.3 The initial focus crops include maize, sorghum, groundnuts and sesame due to the fact that: (i) 

these are food security crops with high nutritive value; (ii) have great commercial potential through agro-

processing and value addition into various products; (iii) they perform very well in these states; and (iv) 

the population in these states is already familiar with the crops. However, other crops and commodities 

will also be considered should they be requested by the communities.   
 

3.1.4 The benefits considered in the analysis are those derived from increased productivity of crops 

due to improved seeds, farmer training, use of modern technologies and the ability to aggregate, store 

and market crops. This increase in productivity and marketing of crops translates directly into increased 

incomes at the household level. The project includes other benefits which have not been factored in the 

EIRR analysis above such as increase in off-farm activities due to better training and enhanced nutrition. 

In addition, the project will include benefits such as innovation, safeguards, policy advice, knowledge 

work, capacity building for government, etc. If all of these benefits are incorporated in the analysis, the 

EIRR would be even higher.    

 

3.1.5  Sensitivity analysis was conducted on the EIRR for various scenarios and as presented in the 

table below, it demonstrates that the project is quite robust and would remain viable under a range of 

alternatives.  

 

Results of the Sensitivity Analysis on the EIRR 

Scenario EIRR NPV (USD million, 12%) 

20% decrease in income from crops 21% 8.44 million 

20% increase in investment costs  22% 11.21 million 

 

3.2. Environmental and Social Impacts 
3.2.1 Environmental and Social: Based on the proposed project scope and structure, the 

environmental and social (E&S) classification for this project is Category 2 in accordance with the 

African Development Bank’s Integrated Safeguards System/Environmental and Social Assessment 

Procedures (ESAP). Taking into account that the project will finance multiple sub-projects (construction 

of several markets and development of agro-processing facilities) whose locations will be in a number 

of counties in the three states of Central Equatoria, Eastern Equatoria and Jonglei that have not been 

pinpointed, the implementation of the project will be guided by an Environmental and Social 

Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF was prepared by the Government of the Republic of South 

Sudan, approved by the Ministry of Environment and the Bank. As required by the Bank, the ESMF 

summary was disclosed on the Bank website on 12th October 2020. The EMSF clearly mandates the 

Project Implementation Unit to prepare Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) once the 

specific project locations have been identified. During the preparation of the ESMF, the capacity of the 

implementing agency to implement the ESMF framework was assessed and found to be satisfactory. The 

PIU will include an E&S Expert as a member of the core team of the project. A provisional sum of USD 

100,000 has been included in the project budget to cater for E&S related activities.   
 

3.2.2 Climate Change and Green Growth: The project has been screened for climate risks and 

evaluated as category 2, meaning that it is vulnerable to the impacts of climate change. Foreseen climate 

risks include droughts, increased temperatures and outbreak of crop and livestock pests and diseases that 

may affect crop production and reduce supply of produce to the envisaged Aggregation Business Centres 

and produce markets. However, the project components will contribute to addressing these climate 

impacts in several ways. First, development and marketing of improved seeds will enhance farmers’ 



 

13 

 

access to and adoption of crop varieties that are resistant to droughts and pests. Training of farmers on 

good and climate smart agricultural practices will also enable them to implement improved farm 

management practices that will enhance their resilience to the impacts of climate change. Second, 

provision of market centres in the three states will provide an avenue for farmers to market their produce. 

This will ensure that they have markets during periods of bumper harvest and hence build resilience against 
post-harvest loses that are normally experienced during such periods. Cold storage rooms will also enable the 

prolonged preservation of produce as increased temperatures tend to cause accelerated food deterioration and 

contamination. Third, development and marketing of new crops varieties will ensure availability of drought- and 

pest-resistant varieties. Moreover, the project will implement green measures including providing renewable 

energy (solar) to light the market, installing water harvesting systems, and facilities for managing waste. 

 

3.2.3 Gender: Significant challenges to the attainment of gender equality exist in South Sudan. 

Cultural norms discourage female education, support early marriage and early childbearing. High levels 

of gender-based violence have been witnessed during the transition period particularly in areas affected 

by conflict. Indicators related to these outputs are sex-disaggregated or gender-relevant. The project’s 

preliminary environmental and social assessment has identified numerous socio-economic benefits to 

women that will arise from the implementation of the project and being in leadership positions of the 

ABCs and BPAs. Details of the benefits will be elaborated in the ESMF report. Project design has 

proposed involvement of women and the youth from the launch of the project hence eliminating 

possibilities of exclusion of the two groups in the implementation of the project and its accruing socio-

economic benefits. The initial assessment also estimates that close to 500,000 people (50% women) are 

likely to benefit from the project hence the project is likely to have significant socio-economic impact 

overall. 

3.2.4  The Project is categorized as GEN II according to the Bank’s Gender Marker System where the 

gender assessment identified four key entry points to improve socio-economic benefits to women 

brought about by the Project through: (i) providing adequate training in good agricultural practices; (ii) 

ensuring equitable access to leadership positions of the ABCs and SMCs; (iii) improving market place 

economic and social infrastructure with inclusion of gender sensitive social amenities such as child care 

and adequate WASH; (iv) and strengthening the capacity of key stakeholders to address the gender 

concerns of the Project. 

3.2.5 These activities are designed to address the gender inequalities and accelerate opportunities for 

women in the agricultural sector. Evidence shows that women in South Sudan lack opportunities for 

economic growth and development, particularly in the agricultural sector. Most of them are involved in 

the informal sector, which is underdeveloped and uncoordinated, and in subsistence farming. Women’s 

involvement in the formal sector is limited due to high levels of illiteracy, lack of access to productive 

and economic assets such as land, finance, credit facilities, agricultural inputs, extension services, and 

low business skills and management capacity. Women represent close to 80% of farm labour, 50% of 

the farmers in the irrigated sector and 57% in the rainfed traditional sector in South Sudan. Although 

women play a crucial role in agriculture, contributing to both the GDP and to household food security, 

their contribution to agriculture and the overall economic development process continues to be 

undervalued. Women carry out a major portion of agricultural activities and bear almost the entire burden 

of household work, including water and fuelwood collection and food processing and preparation. As 

one of the key driving factors of the economy in South Sudan, agriculture and food security greatly 

influence the gender factors especially those that affect women. Farmers, especially women, are faced 

with several challenges including, limited access to fertile land and seeds, lack of modern tools, limited 

access to markets and storage facilities. 
 



 

14 

 

3.3 Fragility and resilience  

3.3.1 Context. According to the United Nations Office for Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs 

(OCHA), in December 2019, there were 7.5 million South Sudanese in need of assistance. The challenge 

compounds just as several states of South Sudan experienced one of the worst floods in recent years. In 

addition, the agricultural sector that is so critical for food security and poverty reduction was also 

negatively impacted by the floods. Preliminary forecasts showed that 75,000 hectares of cultivated land 

have been damaged due to flooding in affected areas, with an estimated loss of 73,000 metric tons of 

cereals. This represents approximately 15 percent loss in production in the affected areas. Consequently, 

about 7,000 metric tons of food commodities were distributed to some 700,000 flood-affected people 

across the country as of November 2019, with distributions continuing into other priority locations. 

 

3.3.2 Fragility in the agriculture sector. The agricultural sector in South Sudan is affected by a 

combination of various complex factors summarized in table 3.1 below. Agricultural output (i.e. crop 

and vegetables) in South Sudan is low due, inter alia, to emigration and displacement; conflict and 

insecurity; limited availability and access to quality seeds; heavy reliance on (erratic) rains and 

vulnerability to drought, which all lead to food insecurity. Demand for agricultural commodities on the 

other hand, has been constrained by frequent economic shocks and insecurity. Limited clarity of the land 

laws, limits the participation of women, displaced and returnee people in certain community as well as 

long term and large-scale investments. Weak institutional capacity coupled with competition for land 

among powerful foreign powers (i.e. countries from the Middle East) and insecurity, exacerbate the 

power-relations among the main stakeholders in the sector. Moreover, limited penetration of social and 

economic infrastructure (i.e. roads, electricity)  and availability of working tools for farmers, as well as 

low quality, quantity and adherence to strict phytosanitary measures limits the distribution and export 

potential for farmers which could represent a potential source of revenue and income. Limited funding 

of the agricultural sector also limits the outreach and capacity of extension services; organization of 

farmers and the sector in general. 

 

Table 3.1 Main challenges in the agricultural sector in South Sudan 
Key issues 

 Land ownership and access 
 Food insecurity 
 Low institutional capacity; 
 Low productivity; 
 Competitions among key stakeholders; 
 Insecurity; 
 Climate change 
 Poor infrastructure 

 

3.3.3 The AMVAT project and fragility in South Sudan. The Agricultural Markets, Value-Chains 

and Trade Development (AMVAT) project seeks to address challenges related to (i) agricultural 

productivity and production; (ii) infrastructure and (iii) farmer organization. As indicated in the table 

below, this focus of the project is consistent with addressing some drivers of fragility in the country as 

well as at the agriculture sector level.   
 

Table 1.2 Fragility sensitiveness analysis of the AMVAT project 
Project 

activity/Component 

Agriculture sector driver of fragility to 

be addressed 

Country level driver of fragility to be 

addressed 

Agricultural 

productivity and 

production 

Low productivity and output Food insecurity 



 

15 

 

Social and economic 

Infrastructure 

development 

High transaction costs Poverty; limited diversification of 

the economy 

Farmer’s organization Low sector and institutional capacity Limited institutional capacity 

 

The focus and components of the AMVAT project greatly contribute to addressing key drivers of 

fragility in the agriculture sector as well as at the country level as described above. However, the project 

still leaves room to addressing key issues such as the land access and ownership by women, the land 

regulatory framework and climate change. Therefore, it is recommended that the project seeks to mainstream 
those issues in its design. Furthermore, the project needs to pay attention to political economy considerations 

among the main stakeholders to avoid unwanted negative effects between them that could harm the successful 

implementation of the project. 

 

IV – IMPLEMENTATION 

 

4.1. Implementation arrangements 
 

4.1.1 The Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security and the Ministry of Trade and Industry shall be 

the executing agencies for the Project. Due to the low capacity of the Ministries to implement such 

projects, the Bank will engage a third-party implementing agency (TPIA) for the project. The 

Government requested that the Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN (FAO) implement the 

project on its behalf. The Bank has already signed a Fiduciary Principles Agreement (FPA) with the 

FAO that describes the procurement and financial management arrangements and will receive an 

administrative fee of seven percent (7%) of the project costs for implementation. The Government will 

assign counterpart focal officers to coordinate implementation with the TPIA.  

4.1.2 The governance of the project will comprise the National Advisory Committee (NAC) which 

will be chaired by the Undersecretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security. The NAC will 

also include the Undersecretary of the Ministry of Trade and Industry and of Finance and Planning, as 

well as high-level leaders from the 3 states of CES, EES and Jonglei and the TPIA. The NAC meets 

quarterly to review the project performance, provide oversight and guidance on policy issues and identify 

potential linkages to enhance synergy and increase impact.  

4.1.3 The governance of the project also includes the National Technical Committee (NTC) which 

provides technical advice and recommendations to the NAC on all technical aspects related to project 

implementation. The NTC is chaired by the Director General in the Ministry of Agriculture and Food 

Security and includes relevant directors from the ministries Trade and Industry and Finance and 

Planning, the TPIA, representatives of the SSAPU, STASS, NBSS and representatives from the 3 states 

and other stakeholders that will be identified. The AMVAT project coordinator will serve as the NTC 

Secretary and the NTC will meet quarterly.  

4.1.4 FAO South Sudan will oversee overall coordination and implementation of project activities 

under the respective components through its field staff and subcontracts with local implementation 

partners (NGOs) through its Letter of Agreement (LoA) collaboration instrument. FAO South Sudan, 

under the leadership of the FAO Representative in South Sudan, will provide oversight and quality 

assurance to ensure successful implementation of the project, including all fiduciary aspects, safeguards, 

monitoring, and reporting of the project’s progress. Under the TPIA arrangements, the FAO will use its 

existing FM, procurement and administrative staff to implement the project. In addition, the FAO will 



 

16 

 

recruit a project coordinator, M&E officer, civil engineer, seed expert, value chain expert and 3 extension 

agents (1 per project state) to be part of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within the FAO. 

4.1.5 This project will be implemented in close collaboration with the MAFS at the national level and 

the relevant government institutions at the State and County levels. MAFS has a strong technical team 

at the national level that has contributed to design of the project and approved the technical aspects of 

the project. The project is designed to engage with stakeholders, transfer knowledge, and build capacity 

at State and County levels to ensure sustainability. 

 

 

Procurement and financial management 
 

Procurement 

4.16 Procurement of goods (including non-consultancy services), works and acquisition of consulting 

services, financed by the Bank will be carried out in accordance with the “Procurement Policy for Bank 

Group Funded Operations”, dated October 2015 and following the provisions stated in the Financing 

Agreement.  

4.1.7 The assessment of procurement risks at the Country, Sector, and Project levels has informed the 

decisions on the procurement regimes applicable for specific transactions or groups of similar 

transactions under the project. Accordingly, considering the substantial procurement risks involved 

coupled with the limited capacity of the Government, the project will be implemented through Third 

Party Implementation arrangements with the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United 

Nations acting as Implementing Agency.  

4.1.8 In March 2018, the Bank and FAO signed a Fiduciary Principles Agreement (FPA) that sets out 

the framework of cooperation between these institutions. This agreement will form the basis for 

implementation of the project in accordance with paragraph 5.3(e) of the Bank’s Procurement Policy. 

Under this arrangement, as part of implementation of this operation, FAO will provide fiduciary 

oversight of the implementation of the entire project, including those relating to the procurement policies 

and procedures.  

4.1.9 For the purpose of implementation of the Project, following the approval of the financing of the 

project by the Bank’s Board of Directors, a Tripartite Funding and Implementation Agreement (TFIA) 

will be signed between the Bank, the Government, and the FAO to put in place a framework that aims 

to deliver the full scope of the project with FAO playing a central role in the execution of the related 

components. The Procurement Technical Annex B5 provides details on the project’s proposed 

procurement arrangements.  

Financial Management 

4.1.10 The Financial management capacity of the Executing Agency, the Ministry of Agriculture and 

Food Security (MAFS) was not assessed during appraisal since the Government wrote an official letter 

to the Bank expressing preference that the UN Food and Agriculture Organization (UN-FAO) to 

implements the project as Third-Party Implementing Agency (TPIA). The FAO will work in close 

cooperation with the MAFS for the smooth implement of the project. The financial management capacity 

of Third-Party Implementing Agency (TPIA), FAO South Sudan was assessed virtually. The FAO 

already has an FPA with the Bank that will govern the Tripartite Agreement to be signed by the Host 



 

17 

 

government, FAO and the Bank. The selected TPIA will maintain sound financial management systems 

and arrangements to ensure that funds are used for the purposes intended.  The FAO will use its systems 

and procedures to ensure sound control of the use of project resources with due considerations to the 

economy, efficiency and value for money. The TPIA will also maintain a project account for the project 

financed activities in accordance with sound international accounting practices. In addition, FAO will 

ensure reliability of financial information by monitoring project implementation, resources and 

expenditures by project component and activities. The Project will be subject to six- monthly Unaudited 

Interim Financial reports and annual financial reporting on project performance and status in conformity 

with FAO’s procedures. 

4.1.11 Financial Reports: The Bank requires FAO to prepare and submit to the Bank a Six-monthly 

and annual interim financial reports certified by an authorized signatory delegated by FAO.  

4.1.12 Disbursement: Disbursements will be done in accordance with the Disbursement Rules and 

Procedures of the Bank, as set out in the Bank’s Disbursement Handbook; and on the basis of the 

Tripartite Project Implementation Agreement(TPIA) to be signed by government, the Fund and FAO.  

The Special Account method will be used, as the disbursements in tranches will be made to FAO 

depending on the nature of the activities and the annual approved work plans. For purpose of the project 

and in line with the annual work plan, the TPIA will provide a Foreign Currency Account to receive 

funds designated for financing project implementation activities. The size of the initial tranche and 

subsequent tranches to FAO shall be based on annual work plans as per the Bank’s disbursement rules. 

The disbursement will be in four (4) tranches (30% for the first three tranches and 10% for the last 

tranche).  

The Bank will issue a Disbursement Letter stipulating key disbursement procedures and practices for the 

project. The Bank will have the right, as reflected in the General Conditions, to suspend disbursement 

of the funds, if reporting requirements and other financing agreements are not complied with. 

4.1.13 Audit: The project audit will not be undertaken separately. The Bank requires annual financial 

audit reports of FAO at the end of each financial year (31st December) in the years the fund was utilized, 

to be submitted to the Fund and to the government within 30 days after the audit report is submitted to 

the General Assembly of the FAO by the Independent Auditors of the FAO. The audit procedures will 

follow the agreement reached in the FPA and TPIA signed by the three parties: government, the Fund 

and the FAO.  

4.2. Monitoring 
 

4.2.1 The AMVAT project will be monitored using KPIs at input, output and outcome levels reflected 

in the RBLF and in the project monitoring matrix presented in annex V. Overall responsibility for M&E 

will rest with the implementation agency, who will put in place an adequate M&E system and monitor 

all the activities and prepare periodic reports, highlighting implementation progress, fiduciary and 

procurement status, stakeholder participation with major focus to the Ministry of Agriculture and Food 

Security, beneficiaries involvement, and risks and mitigation measures. The Project Implementation Unit 

(PIU) within the FAO will prepare semi-annual progress reports which include Unaudited Interim 

Financial Reports (IFRs) certified by an authorized officer of the FAO. The six-month period starts from 

the date of receipt of the first disbursement by FAO. The monitoring will ensure data is disaggregated 

by gender and age at every level where possible. The project will make use of national data sets (e.g. 

National Statistics Office, Youth employment statistics, Household surveys) and Project reports 

whenever possible.  The Bank through its East Africa Regional Development and Business Delivery 

Office and the South Sudan country office will closely monitor day-to-day implementation of the project 



 

18 

 

and carry out at least two (2) supervision missions (in country or virtually) annually, including FM and 

procurement assessments reviews. In addition, the Bank will carry out a mid-term review of the project 

and a project completion report will be prepared at the end of the project.  

 

Table 4.1: Project Monitoring Activities  

 

Activity  Responsible Entity  Timeframe  

Appraisal  Bank  October 2020 

Negotiations  Government/Bank November 2020  

Project Approval Bank December 2020 

Signature of Grant Agreement 

and effectiveness 

Government/Bank/FAO January 2021 

Fulfilment of 1st Disbursement 

Conditions 

Bank February 2021 

Project Launch Bank/ Government/ FAO March 2021 

Service Delivery  FAO/Ministry of 

Agriculture  

March 2021/ December 2025 

Mid-term Review   Bank/Government/FAO June 2023 

Project Completion Report  Bank/ Government/ FAO September 2025  

Auditing  FAO Annual 

4.3. Governance 

4.3.1 South Sudan’s independence is 9 years old, but since 2013 the country has experienced civil war 
leading to weakened administrative and financial management structures. Increasing conflict in 

the country for 6 years before the peace deal signed in August 2018 meant that accountability in 

government funds degenerated to such a level that substantial amount of government funding 

could easily be allocated for military expenditures or other unprogrammed use without due regard 

to approved budget commitments. The expenditure on security for example was 21% of the total 

budget in 2017/2018, a decline from 26.9% in 2016/2017, compared to less than 10% for 

agriculture. Development partners have therefore been concerned about weaknesses in 

governance including: (i) risk and costs associated with conflict escalation; (ii) limited 

implementing capacity of the public service; (iii) social and economic marginalization of mainly 

rural populations that threaten the stability of the country; and (iv) weak institutional capacity.   

 

4.3.2 The risk of poor governance on this project is mainly fiduciary in nature, in addition to the 
capacity to effectively implement the project outside Juba, due to security challenges. This risk 

will be mitigated by engaging FAO as the third-party project implementing agency. FAO South 

Sudan continues to have strong operational, procurement and logistics capacities, enabling the 

effective management and monitoring of large and complex programmes in an insecure context. 

FAO is active in all states of South Sudan, with a main office in Juba and extensive field presence 

through a network of field offices with over 320 staff and engages with over 90 Non-

governmental Organizations (NGO’s), Co-operatives and Community Based Organizations 

(CBO) to secure and deliver its mandate. FAO has a track record of implementing development 

activities right through the insurgency periods which is also strengthened by their strong field 

presence where they have staff in their monitoring offices. Although the project will use third 

party implementation arrangements, the government will support and monitor the actions of the 

implementing agency through joint supervision missions. This will ensure that clear governance 

structures are maintained throughout the project. In addition, the Bank will monitor the project 

through regular desk reviews of project reports provided by FAO and field supervision missions 



 

19 

 

to keep track of the utilization of project funds for approved activities in addition to day-to-day 

contact with the FAO leadership in Juba by the Bank’s Country Manager. 

4.4. Sustainability 

4.4.1 Previous experiences and success stories revealed that strong community-based institutions at all 
levels are the backbone of all activities to ensure sustainable and reliable production and 

marketing. As the AMVAT Project will focus on farmer groups as an entry point and train them 

with specific skills, the Project will actively be involved in organizing communities and 

strengthening grassroots institutions to instil their ownership for effective production, 

aggregation, marketing and trade.   
 

 
4.4.2 The AMVAT project’s focus is on establishing an Aggregation Business Centre model. The ABC 

is designed as a growth-hub for the local area and provides the required facilities and capacity 

building to enhance both the quality and quantity of agricultural produce of targeted crops during 

and long after the Project. Farmers groups as the project foundation will be equipped with 

improved seeds, skills and knowledge, facilities and post-harvest handling equipment to expand 

their production and marketing knowledge and thus, increase their incomes. On the other hand, 

with the establishment of laboratories for food testing and CODEX standards for the cereals and 

oil seeds, and capacity building of relevant staff, it is anticipated that food quality and standards 

will be enhanced and maintained during and after the project. The training and coaching 

instruments will continue to capacitate farmers in the long-term. In addition, the experience of 

the FAO as in implementation agency in planning, delivery, and monitoring of agriculture 

programs will provide the necessary knowledge, experience, and ownership to the MAFS and 

beneficiaries to successfully manage key project activities beyond the Project lifespan. Another 

key area of the Project is the focus on knowledge generation and policy development support. 

The Project will also develop a seed policy framework to help the seed system to thrive further.  
 

4.4.3 Stakeholder consultations undertaken during the identification, preparation and appraisal 
confirmed the commitment of the GoSS and the farmer organizations. The ownership of the 

project shall be maintained through the multi-sectoral Project Steering Committee (PSC) 

consisting of key stakeholders who are committed to seeing agriculture development thrive in 

the long run in South Sudan and to contribute to the country’s inclusive growth. 
 

4.4.4 The Municipal Councils will ultimately own the market facilities and take overall responsibility 
for the management of the market. However, they will recruit a private management company 

competitively for the day today management of the market.  

 

4.4.5 The vendors who occupy these facilities will be selected on a competitive basis. The project will 
facilitate the establishment of vendors association and assist the association to be legally 

established following the country’s registration system. The association will be represented in all 

the decisions regarding the management of the market. The project will also provide the resources 

for capacity building for the owner of the market and the vendors association related to the 

management of the market. Accordingly, a training needs assessment will be carried out.  

4.5 Risk analysis and management matrix 

 



 

20 

 

RISK CATEGORY RISK DESCRIPTION RATING MITIGATION MEASURE 
RISK 

OWNER 

COUNTRY’S 

POLITICAL 

SITUATION AND 

GOVERNANCE 

CONTEXT 

Breakdown of peace 

agreement/ conflict 

Moderate  Continuous dialogue among 

different parties  

GoSS 

EXTERNAL AND 

DOMESTIC 

ECONOMIC RISKS 

Currency devaluation   Substantial  Sound public financial 

management  

GoSS 

SECTOR OF THE 

OPERATION 

Dependency syndrome of 

aid/relief to IDPs/farmers 

Moderate Training farmers on agriculture 

as a business 

GoSS, 

Project 

TECHNICAL ASPECTS 

OF THE OPERATION’S 

DESIGN 

Low educational and literacy 

level of farmers 

Low Training modules use 

approaches that can be 

understood even with low 

literacy   

Project 

FIDUCIARY AND 

VALUE FOR MONEY 

Agreement on fee for 3rd 

party implement-ing agency 

Low Develop and sign Tripartite 

Funding and Implementation 

Agreement 

Goss, 

Bank, 

FAO 

ENVIRONMENTAL 

AND SOCIAL RISKS 

Agro-climatic shocks such as 

drought, floods, etc. 

Moderate Practice climate smart 

agriculture e.g. use drought 

resilient seeds, diligent 

implementation of ESMP 

Project 

CAPACITY OF 

IMPLEMENTING 

ENTITY 

Capacity to reach remote 

rural areas for 

implementation  

Low Project will hire a focal staff for 

each state and FAO will use its 

320 staff throughout the country 

GoSS, 

FAO, 

Bank 
 

4.6. Knowledge building 

The ability for farmers to enhance productivity and trade depends on access and knowledge to 

technologies, markets and services whereby their linkage with other actors in the value chains remains 

essential and requires project support. The Project will therefore generate critical knowledge for 

supporting farmers to move from subsistence to commercial agriculture in the selected states, which will 

build up lessons for the design and management of similar interventions, to be scaled in other states, as 

well as in other RMCs. Series of training and coaching to different categories has been embedded in this 

project to ensure ownership and sustainability of planned activities. In line with Knowledge Management 

Strategy (2015-2020), the knowledge obtained will be captured through regular supervision, progress 

reporting and mid-term review, and as part of program completion report (PCR) preparation process, 

documented and shared within the Bank and with other DPs and RMCs. Given that the program covers 

four selected crops in three different states with varying opportunities and challenges, there is potential 

to generate useful lessons. 
 

 

V – LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

  

5.1. Legal instrument  
5.1.1 The financing instruments to be used for this operation will be:  

a. a Tripartite Funding and Implementation Agreement amongst the African Development Fund, 

the Republic of South Sudan and the FAO for a grant of UA5.53 Million from the ADF-15 

resources; and  

b. a Tripartite Funding and Implementation Agreement amongst the African Development Bank 

and the African Development Fund (as administrators of the Transition Support Facility), the 

Republic of South Sudan and the FAO for a grant of UA 4.47 Million from the TSF Pillar I 

resources; 



 

21 

 

 

the above agreements are hereinafter jointly referred to as the “Tripartite Funding and Implementation 

Agreements”.  

  

5.2. Conditions associated with Bank’s intervention 
 

5.2.1 Condition Precedent to Entry into Force.  The Tripartite Funding and Implementation 

Agreements shall enter into force upon signature by the parties.    

 

5.2.2 Condition Precedent to First Disbursement The obligation of the Bank/ Fund to make the first 

disbursement of the grants under each Tripartite Funding and Implementation Agreement shall be 

conditional upon entry into force of the Agreements. 

 

5.2.3 Other Conditions 

The Recipient shall within three (3) months of the first disbursement of the Grants establish:  

a) a National Advisory Committee (NAC) which will be chaired by the Undersecretary of the Ministry 

of Agriculture and Food Security and comprise of representatives of the Undersecretary of the 

Ministry of Trade and Industry, Ministry of Finance and Planning and  high level leaders from the 3 

states of CES, EES and Jonglei; and  

b) a National Technical Committee (NTC) which is chaired by the Director General in the Ministry of 

Agriculture and Food Security and includes relevant directors from the Ministry of Trade and 

Industry and Ministry of Finance and Planning, the TPIA, representatives of the SSAPU, STASS, 

NBSS and representatives from the 3 states and other stakeholders that will be identified. The 

AMVAT project coordinator will serve as the NTC Secretary.  

 5.2.4 Environmental and Social Safeguards.  

The FAO shall cause all its contractors, its sub-contractors and agents to: 

a) carry out the Project in accordance with the Environmental and Social Management Plan 

(“ESMP”), the Fund’s Safeguards Policies and the applicable national legislation in a manner 

and in substance satisfactory to the Fund; 

b) prepare and submit to the Fund, semi-annual reports on the implementation of the ESMP 

including any implementation failures and related remedies thereof; and 

c) refrain from taking any action which would prevent or interfere with the implementation of the 

ESMP including any amendment, suspension, waiver, and/or voidance of any provision thereof, 

whether in whole or in part, without the prior written concurrence of the Fund; and  

d) cooperate fully with the Fund in the event that the implementation of the Project or change in 

Project scope results in hitherto unforeseen displacement and /or resettlement of persons, and 

shall not commence any works in the affected area under the Project, unless all PAPs in such 

areas have been compensated and/or resettled in accordance with a Resettlement Action Plan 

(RAP), to be prepared by the Recipient. 

 

5.2.5 Recipient Counterpart Contribution for ADF-15 Grant.  The Recipient shall within three (3) 

months of the first disbursement of the Grant or such later date as may be approved by the Fund,  make 

available land for the construction of the markets in accordance with agreed specifications and 

requirements acceptable to the Fund, as its in-kind contribution (the “Counterpart Contribution”) towards 



 

22 

 

the costs of the Project.  
 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 
 This project complies with all applicable Bank policies. 
 

VI – RECOMMENDATION  
Management recommends that the Boards of Directors approve the proposed (a) ADF-15 Grant of UA 

5.53 Million and (b) TSF Pillar I Grant of UA 4.47 Million to the Republic of South Sudan for the 

purposes and subject to the conditions stipulated in this report.



 

