














































AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK


 

 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

PROJECT: TANZANIA AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

COUNTRY : TANZANIA 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT  

 
November 2016 

Preparation 

Team 

Task Manager and 

Team Leader: 

Dr. Sofiane Sekioua Chief Investment Officer, OFSD 

Co-task Manager: Mohamud Egeh Senior Natural Resources Management 

Officer, OSAN 

Task Team: Salum Ramadhani Senior Agriculture Expert, OSAN/TZFO 

 Godfrey Kaijage Principal Financial Management Officer, 

ORPF/TZFO 

 Dejene Demissie Principal Country Program Officer, 

EARC/TZFO 

 Linet Miriti Principal Gender Specialist 

 Olusola Ikuforiji Environmentalist Specialist 

 Fasil Asaye Senior Procurement Officer 

 Benjamin Wamambe Principal Legal Counsel 

Sector Managers: Mohamed Kalif OFSD 

 Josephine Mwangi OSAN 

Sector Directors: Stefan Nalletamby OFSD 

 Chiji Ojukwu OSAN 

 ResRep: Tonia Kandiero TZFO 

 Reg. Director: Gabriel Negatu EARC 

  

Peer 

Reviewers 

 Laura French Senior Investment Officer, OFSD 

 Babatunde Tijani Principal Investment Officer, OFSD 



 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

 

 

 

 
TANZANIA 

 

 
TANZANIA AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

APPRAISAL REPORT 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

OFSD DEPARTMENT 

November 2016 

  
  
  

  
  

  
  

 P
u
b
li

c
 D

is
c
lo

su
re

 A
u
th

o
ri

z
e
d
  

  
  

  
  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

  
  

P
u

b
li

c
 D

is
c
lo

su
re

 A
u

th
o

ri
z
e
d

  

 



 

 

Table of Contents 

 Abbreviations         i 

Loan Information        ii 

 Project Summary        iii 

Results Based Logical Framework      iv 

1. Strategic Thrust & Rationale      1 

2. Country Context        2 

3. Project Description        5 

4. Implementation Arrangements      13  

5. Legal Instruments and Authority      16 

6. Conclusion and Recommendation      17 

Appendix I. Tanzania’s Comparative Socio-Economic Indicators – August 2016 I 

Appendix II. Bank Group Country Portfolio – September 2016   II 



 

 

LIST OF FIGURES 

Figure 1. Real GDP Growth Rate Forecast      2 

Figure 2. Banking System Assets as a Percentage of GDP    3 

Figure 3. Lending Growth Rates       3 

Figure 4. Sector Composition as of December 2015     4 

Figure 5. Organization Structure       7 



 

 

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS 

23 SEPTEMBER 2016 

 

1 Unit of Account (UA) = 1.39 US Dollar (USD) 

1 UA = 3,038.13 Tanzanian Shilling (TZS) 

1 USD = 2,178.90 TZS 



 

i 

ABBREVIATIONS 

ADF  African Development Fund 

AfDB  African Development Bank 

ALCO  Asset and Liability Committee 

ASDP  Agriculture Sector Development Programme 

ASDS  Agriculture Sector Development Strategy 

BDS  Business Development Services 

BRN  Big Results Now 

CAG  Controller and Auditor General 

CSP  Country Strategy Paper 

DFI  Development Finance Institution 

E&S  Environmental and Social 

ESMS  Environmental and Social Management System 

FSAP  Financial Sector Assessment Programme 

FYDP  Five-Year Development Plan 

GDP  Gross Domestic Product 

IFSD  International Financial Reporting Standards 

IMF  International Monetary Fund 

ISS  Integrated Safeguard System 

IT  Information Technology 

MEMARTS Memorandum and Articles of Association 

MIS  Management Information System 

 NPL  Non-Performing Loan 

PAR  Project Appraisal Report 

QCBS  Quality and Cost Based Selection 

SAGCOT Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor of Tanzania 

SDG  Sustainable Development Goal 

TA  Technical Assistance 

TADB  Tanzania Agricultural Development Bank 

TIB  Tanzania Investment Bank 

TZS  Tanzania Shilling 

URT  United Republic of Tanzania 

UA  Unit of Account 

USD  United States Dollar 

 



 

ii 

Loan Information 

Client’s information 

 

BORROWER:   United Republic of Tanzania  

 

EXECUTING AGENCY: Tanzania Agricultural Development Bank 

 

 

Financing Plan 

 

Source UA Million USD Million Instrument 

African Development Fund 67.27 93.51 Loan 

 

 

ADF Key financing information 

     

Interest Rate  None 

Service Charge 0.75%   

Commitment Fee 0.50% 

Tenor 40 years 

Grace Period 10 years  

  

Timeframe - Main Milestones 

 

Project concept note clearance 05 September 2016 

Project approval 14 December 2016 

Signing of loan agreement 31 January 2017 

Last repayment December 2057 

 



 

iii 

Project Summary 

Project Overview: The objective of the present project, which involves a loan from the African 

Development Fund (ADF) to the United Republic of Tanzania (URT) to be on-lent to the Tanzania 

Agricultural Development Bank (TADB), is to contribute to the development of the agriculture sector in 

Tanzania. The agriculture sector provides employment for about 67% of the population of Tanzania and has a 

very big potential for expansion given the abundance of arable land and the availability of inland water 

resources. However, the sector needs to be developed if Tanzania is to achieve sustainable economic 

development and poverty reduction. Specifically, in order for the country to achieve the Sustainable 

Development Goals and the Tanzania Development Vision 2025, the agriculture sector must sustainably grow 

at over 10% per annum. Unfortunately, over the past ten years, the sector has grown at an average of 4.4% per 

annum and contributed an average of 29.3% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). These rates have recently 

declined to 3.2% per annum and 26% of GDP (Q2 2016), respectively. A major problem facing the agriculture 

sector is the unavailability of medium to long-term finance to support, among other things, agricultural 

production, processing and marketing. The TADB is designed to address this through the provision of much-

needed funding to a sector that is key to the country’s development. Indeed, the requested loan from the ADF 

to the URT will be passed on to the TADB as a loan thereby enabling this institution to assist Tanzania in 

achieving its development goals by extending much-needed funding to the agriculture sector. 

Project Beneficiaries: Tanzania is heavily dependent on agriculture which accounts for 26% of GDP and 
35% of foreign currency earnings. The country has a dual agricultural economy, the smallholder farmers and 

the commercial/large-scale farmers. The smallholder farmers dominate the agriculture sector and account for 

most of the food produced in Tanzania. These farmers are expected to be the main beneficiaries of the project. 

The project will also benefit women as they represent the majority of the smallholder farmers in Tanzania. 

Women will benefit from having a portion of the funding specifically dedicated to them as well as from the 

establishment of a mentoring program to build and enhance their skills. The project will thus have positive social 

and gender pay-offs. 

Project Rationale: The project is consistent with the Tanzania Development Vision 2025 which 

emphasizes the following three as national priority goals: i) ensuring basic food security, ii) improving 

household income levels and iii) increasing export earnings. The National Five-Year Development Plan 

(FYDP I and FYDP II) also identifies the agriculture sector as a priority for the country. The specific agriculture 

sector policies and strategies, including the Agriculture Sector Development Strategy (ASDS), the Agriculture 

Sector Development Programme (ASDP), the Kilimo Kwanza Initiative of 2009 and the Southern Agricultural 

Growth Corridor of Tanzania (SAGCOT) initiative, all call for increased commercialization of agriculture. The 

latest national development initiative, the Big Results Now (BRN), identifies three priority crops for the 

agriculture sector which are maize, rice and sugarcane as they contribute to food security and import substitution. 

The project is consistent with a range of Bank Group policies and strategies including: i) the Bank’s Country 

Strategy Paper for Tanzania (CSP, 2016-2020), ii) the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (2013-22), iii) the Bank’s High 

5s, iv) the Bank’s new Strategy for Feed Africa (2016-2025) and v) the Bank’s Gender Strategy (2014-18). 

Bank Value Added: The Bank Group has vast experience in supporting national development finance 

institutions (DFIs) in Africa. Through this operation, the Bank Group will not only provide the United 

Republic of Tanzania with the necessary financial resources to support the TADB, thereby enabling it to expand 

its operations and outreach, but will also contribute to building and enhancing the capacity of this national DFI 

through the proposed technical assistance program (TA Program) which will be funded with a portion of the 

funds that will be made available to the TADB. The Bank Group’s solid expertise and knowledge of DFIs has 

fed into the design of the TA Program which is expected to contribute to ensuring that the TADB is in a position 

to intermediate the funds provided to it in an impactful and sustainable manner. 

Institutional Development and Knowledge Building: The project will add to the body of knowledge 

already acquired within the Bank Group following numerous interventions to support agriculture as well 

as DFIs across Africa. The Bank Group will ensure that knowledge from the operation is captured through 

adequate monitoring and evaluation of its outputs and outcomes, supervision missions, mid-term review, 

stakeholder consultations and project completion reports at the end of the operation. 



 

iv 

Results Based Logical Framework 
Project Goal: To promote financial inclusion and support transformation of agriculture from subsistence to commercial farming in order to effectively and sustainably contribute to economic growth and poverty reduction in Tanzania. 

 RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF VERIFICATION RISKS/MITIGATION MEASURES 

  Indicator  (Including CSI) Baseline Target   

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Enhanced growth rate of the 
agriculture sector and increased 

contribution to GDP. 

Annual growth rate of the of 
agriculture sector. 

 

Contribution of the agriculture 

sector to GDP. 

3.2% (Q2 2016). 

 

 

26% (Q2 2016). 

10% by 2025 (in line with the 
Tanzania Development 

Vision 2025). 

33% by 2025 (in line with the 
Tanzania Development 

Vision 2025). 

IMF’s Article IV Consultation 
Staff Reports. 

IMF’s World and Regional 

Economic Outlook reports. 

National Bureau of Statistics. 

 

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

S
 

Outcome 1. Increased income of 

farmers. 

Mean per capita income of 

farmers in the beneficiary areas. 

USD 466 p.a. USD 600 p.a. by 2020. Household and Economic 

Survey Reports. 

 

National Bureau of Statistics 
and ASDP. 

 

Ministry of Agriculture, 
Livestock and Fisheries. 

 

Tanzania Revenue Authority. 

Risks  

 The proceeds of the ADF loan not deployed successfully thereby 
jeopardizing the financial success of the project and the achievement of 

its development outcomes. 

Mitigation 

 High demand for funding from the agriculture sector in Tanzania. 

 The TADB is committed to the successful implementation of the TA 
Program and enhancing the capacity of its clients. 

 The TADB is expected to finance viable borrowers as a result of its TA-
enhanced lending operations. 

Outcome 2. Increased agricultural 

production and productivity 

(yields) of the targeted agriculture 
value chains. 

 

Note that the basis of the 
estimates are the baseline 

numbers and targets outlined in 

Tanzania’s Agricultural Sector 
Development Program (ASDP). 

Average annual productivity of 

maize (Metric tons per hectare, 

MT/ha). 

Yield of 1.6 of MT/ha in 

2014. 

Increase of 40% by 2020. 

Total annual production of maize 

(MT). 

Annual production of 

6,734,438 MT in 2014. 

Increase of 20% by 2020. 

Average annual productivity of 

paddy (MT/ha). 

Yield of 1.8 MT/ha in 

2014. 

Increase of 50% by 2020. 

Total annual production of paddy 

(MT). 

Annual production of 

1,681,125 MT in 2014. 

Increase of 20% by 2020. 

Average annual yield of 

sunflower (MT/ha) 

Yield of 1.6 MT/ha in 

2014. 

Increase of 25% by 2020. 

Outcome 3. Increased exports. Volume of exported maize in 

metric tons. 

1,056,559 metric tons in 

2014 

Increase of 15% by 2020. 

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

Output 1. Funding extended to 

the agriculture sector from the 
proceeds of the ADF loan. 

Total volume of funding 

disbursed to the agriculture sector 
including the proportion 

benefitting women. 

NA At least UA 67.27 million 

disbursed including 20% 
specifically to women in 

agriculture. 

The financial statements and 

operational reports of the 
TADB. 

 

Bank Group regular supervision 
and monitoring reports. 

Risks 

 Insufficient demand for funding from the agriculture sector. 

 Consultants not recruited and TA Program not implemented. 

 Mentoring program not established and lack of interest from TADB’s 
larger clients to mentor women. 

Mitigation 

 High demand for funding from the agriculture sector in Tanzania. 

 The TADB is committed to strengthening its own capacity with the 
disbursement of the second tranche of the ADF loan conditional on the 

implementation of 2 of the 3 components of the TA Program. 

 The TADB is committed to building the capacity of its clients including 
through the proposed mentoring program for women. 

 TADB’s larger clients will be incentivized to mentor women. 

Output 2. Implementation of the 

TA Program for building the 

capacity of the TADB. 

Number of components of the TA 

Program implemented by the 

TADB. 

NA Full implementation of the 

TA Program including 

training of at least 50 staff. 

Output 3. Implementation of the 

mentoring program for women. 

Number of women benefitting 

from the mentoring program. 

NA At least 880 women 

benefitting from the 
mentoring program. 



 

v 

Project Goal: To promote financial inclusion and support transformation of agriculture from subsistence to commercial farming in order to effectively and sustainably contribute to economic growth and poverty reduction in Tanzania. 

 RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS MEANS OF VERIFICATION RISKS/MITIGATION MEASURES 

  Indicator  (Including CSI) Baseline Target   

K
E

Y
 

A
C

T
IV

IT
IE

S
  Provision of funding from the African Development Fund to the United Republic of Tanzania to support the Tanzania Agricultural Development Bank. 

 

 Technical assistance program (TA Program) to build and strengthen the capacity of the TADB. 

INPUT: 

Funding from the ADF for an amount of UA 67.27 million to be passed on by 

the United Republic of Tanzania to the TADB as a loan. The terms and 

conditions of the loan from the URT to the TADB will be in line with those 
of the loan from the ADF to the URT except for the loan currency which will 

be Tanzanian Shilling. 



 

1 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION OF THE MANAGEMENT TO THE BOARD 

OF DIRECTORS ON A PROPOSED LOAN TO THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF 

TANZANIA TO SUPPORT THE TANZANIA AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT 

BANK 

Management submits the following report and recommendation for a loan from the African 

Development Fund (ADF) to the United Republic of Tanzania (URT) which will be on-lent to 

the Tanzania Agricultural Development Bank (TADB). The loan is for an amount of UA 67.27 

million. The present appraisal report1 focuses principally on assessing the TADB since the 

proceeds of the ADF loan are to be passed on by the URT to this national development finance 

institution (DFI) in the form of a loan. The terms and conditions of the loan from the URT to 

the TADB will be in line with those of the loan from the ADF to the URT except for the loan 

currency which will be Tanzanian Shilling. 

1. STRATEGIC THRUST & RATIONALE 

1.1. The agricultural sector provides employment for about 67% of the population of 
Tanzania2 and has a very big potential for expansion given the abundance of arable land3 

and the availability of inland water resources. However, the sector needs to be developed if 

Tanzania is to achieve sustainable economic development and poverty reduction. Specifically, 

in order for the country to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the 

Tanzania Development Vision 2025, the agriculture sector must sustainably grow at over 10% 

per annum. Unfortunately, over the past ten years, the sector has grown at an average of 4.4% 

per annum and contributed an average of 29.3% of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). These rates 

have recently declined to 3.2% per annum and 26% of GDP (Q2 2016), respectively. 

1.2. A major problem facing the agricultural sector is the unavailability of medium to 
long-term finance to support, among other things, agricultural production, processing 

and marketing. The TADB is designed to address this through the provision of much-needed 

funding to a sector that is key to the country’s development. Indeed, the requested loan from 

the ADF to the URT will be used to support the TADB thereby enabling this institution to assist 

Tanzania in achieving its development goals and inclusive growth by extending much-needed 

funding to the agricultural sector. 

1.3. The present project is aligned with Tanzania’s key priorities. In highlighting the 
importance of the agriculture sector and to address the challenges facing it, the Tanzania 

Development Vision 2025 emphasizes the following three as national priority goals: i) ensuring 

basic food security, ii) improving household income levels and iii) increasing export earnings. 

                                                 

1 The present report has been prepared based on information provided by the URT and the TADB before, during 

and after the AfDB’s appraisal mission to Tanzania from the 5th to 8th of September 2016. During the mission, a 

series of meetings were held with senior government officials at the Ministry of Finance and Planning, Ministry 

of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries, Office of Treasury Registrar, Agriculture Council of Tanzania and the 

Bank of Tanzania. Extensive discussions were also held with the senior management and technical staff of the 

TADB. Furthermore, the appraisal report is informed by the lessons learnt from supporting similar projects in 

other African countries. 

2 The ongoing portfolio in Tanzania, as of September 2016, comprises 24 operations with total net commitment 

of UA 1.36 billion. The portfolio consists of 20 public sector operations and 4 private sector operations. Public 

sector operations (mostly infrastructure: transport, power and water supply and sanitation) represent 86.45% of 

the portfolio while private sector operations make up the remaining 13.55%. The ongoing operations are financed 

through various instruments. ADF loans account for 52% while AfDB public sector loans represent 27% and 

private sector loans account for 14%. ADF grants and various AfDB administered trust funds account for the 

remaining 7% of the financing. See Appendix II for additional information on the portfolio. 

3 Agricultural Land in Tanzania was last measured at 396,500 sq.km in 2016 (44.8% of total land area) versus 

369,744 sq.km in 2008 representing an increase of 7% over the period. 



 

2 

The National Five-Year Development Plan (FYDP I and FYDP II) also identifies the 

agriculture sector as a priority for the country. The specific agriculture sector policies and 

strategies, including the Agriculture Sector Development Strategy (ASDS), the Agriculture 

Sector Development Programme (ASDP), the Kilimo Kwanza Initiative of 2009 and the 

Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor of Tanzania (SAGCOT) initiative all call for increased 

commercialization of agriculture. The latest national development initiative, the Big Results 

Now (BRN), identifies three priority crops for the agriculture sector which are maize, rice and 

sugarcane as they contribute to food security and import substitution. One of the three “big 

ideas” for agriculture under the BRN is delivery of 25 commercial and out-grower investments, 

16 for sugar and 9 for rice. 

1.4. The present project is consistent with a range of Bank Group policies and 
strategies. These include: i) the Bank’s Country Strategy Paper for Tanzania (CSP, 2016-2020) 

which calls for unlocking the country’s productive capacity to promote various key sectors 

including agriculture, ii) the Bank’s Ten Year Strategy (2013-22) particularly its operational 

focus areas (private sector development), areas of special emphasis (agriculture and food 

security) and the promotion of inclusive growth by offering support to smallholder farmers, iii) 

the Bank’s High 5s especially Industrialize Africa, Feed Africa and Improve the quality of life 

for Africans, iv) the Bank’s new Strategy for Feed Africa (2016-2025) and v) the Bank’s 

Gender Strategy (2014-18) for the promotion of gender equality. 

2. COUNTRY CONTEXT 

The Economy 

2.1. Tanzania’s economy is one of the fastest growing among large Sub-Saharan 
African countries (Figure 1). Real GDP growth is expected to remain around 7% in 2016 and 

2017 (in line with 2015), according to the International Monetary Fund (IMF), supported by 

continued investment in infrastructure, manufacturing and tourism. Better availability and 

reliability of power supply, a rapidly expanding services sector and an improvement in the 

country’s terms of trade due to lower oil prices are also factors that are stimulating growth. 

Furthermore, Tanzania holds significant growth potential in every major sector of the economy, 

including agriculture, manufacturing, services, tourism and mining. GDP growth is expected 

to be driven by the construction, transport, communications and financial services sectors. 

Recent offshore natural gas discoveries are projected to expand the country’s export base and 

help to further diversify the economy. 

Figure 1. Real GDP Growth Rate Forecast 

 

Sources: IMF, Tanzania’s National Bureau of Statistics, Moody’s Investors Service. 

2.2. Tanzania has been able to weather recent risk aversion to emerging markets and 
financial market volatility, which led to a 24% depreciation in the local currency against 

the US Dollar in 2015, thanks to its diversified economy and net oil import position. As a 



 

3 

net oil importer, Tanzania is benefitting from the decline in global oil prices, its external 

position has improved and lower pump prices are supporting domestic consumption and 

growth. 

2.3. Relatively low wealth levels and widespread poverty are constraints on economic 
growth. However, while significant infrastructure bottlenecks hamper the country’s full 

growth potential. Tanzania is also less competitive, has lower productivity and provides a less 

favorable business environment than some of its regional peers such as Kenya and Rwanda. 

The Banking Sector 

2.4. With total assets approaching TZS 28.5 trillion at end of 2015 (USD 13.08 billion), 
Tanzania’s banking sector is the seventh largest in sub-Saharan Africa, behind South 

Africa, Nigeria, Angola, Mauritius, Kenya and Ghana. Banking assets rose at an annual rate 

of 21% between 2005 and 2015, compared with average nominal GDP growth of 17% over the 

same period. The banking system, however, remains small in a global and regional context. 

Banking system assets are estimated at around 31.3% of GDP as of December 2015 (Figure 2) 

due to low per capita income, fairly low banking penetration and low transaction volumes. 

Figure 2. Banking System Assets as a Percentage of GDP 

 
Sources: Tanzania’s National Bureau of Statistics, Bank of Tanzania. 

2.5. Lending growth grew at an annual rate of 27% between 2005 and 2015, with 
particularly high loan growth prior to 2009 levelling off to 21% over the past five years 

(Figure 3). The expansion covered most economic sectors, but the agricultural, hunting, 

forestry and fishing sectors have slowed recently to a five-year annual growth rate of 11%. 

Rapid growth continues in trade (25%), building, construction, real estate and leasing (32%), 

education (48%), health (53%), and mining and quarrying (52%). Personal and other services 

grew less aggressively over the past five years (20% annual growth rate), but have recently 

picked up with 46% growth in 2015 alone. 

Figure 3. Lending Growth Rates 

 
Source: Bank of Tanzania. 



 

4 

2.6. Loan books cover a wide range of sectors and segments (Figure 4), a reflection of 
the diversification of the Tanzanian economy. 

Figure 4. Sector Composition as of December 2015 

 
Source: Bank of Tanzania. 

2.7. The banking sector plays a dominant role in the financial system with banks 
having around a 71.3% market share as of the end of March 2016. Pension funds accounted 

for 26.5%, insurance companies for 1.9% and collective investment schemes for 0.5%. Four 

banks account for around half of system assets. These are: CRDB Bank, National Microfinance 

Bank, National Bank of Commerce and Standard Chartered Bank Tanzania. A total of 36 

commercial banks and 12 community banks operate in the country ensuring some level of 

competition. Concentration remains high, however, as smaller banks and community banks 

generally lack extensive branch networks and are unable to compete with larger banks, often 

leading to weaker financial profiles. 

2.8. Non-performing loans (NPLs), defined as 90 days past due, have remained high 
over the past few years, ranging between 6.5% and 9.3% of gross loans since 2011. Despite 

robust growth in the economy since then, NPLs remain elevated and stood at 8.4% of total 

loans as of March 2016. Weaknesses in certain economic sectors are to blame, including the 

inherently volatile agricultural sector which accounts for the highest NPLs. The agricultural 

sector is a top priority for development by the Government of Tanzania but problem loans are 

rife. This is due to the inherent volatility of the sector given its dependence on commodity 

prices and vulnerability to droughts. This, combined with a tendency for the commercial banks 

to extend loans with short-term maturities and high interest rates, results in a higher propensity 

to default in the agriculture sector compared to other sectors. In fact, the little funding that is 

currently offered to the agriculture sector is not considered as suitable given its high interest 

rates and short-term maturities and does not necessarily contribute to the development of the 

sector either as it does not provide the flexibility to accommodate the inherently seasonal and 

cyclical nature of agriculture. 

The Agriculture Sector 

2.9. Agriculture in Tanzania is an important sector of the economy as it accounts for 
26% of the country’s GDP and employs 67% of its population. The sector is also an 

important source of export revenues. Despite its significance to livelihoods and to the overall 

economy, the agriculture sector remains hampered by widespread underinvestment. As a result 

it continues to operate largely at subsistence levels and its potential to bring commercialization 

to scale remains for the most part unrealized. 



 

5 

2.10. A major problem facing the agricultural sector is the unavailability of finance 
(particularly medium to long-term) to support agricultural production, processing and 

marketing. As of December 2015, a mere 8% of commercial banks’ lending went to the sector 

with most of which went to large companies operating in Tanzania. As a result of this 

underinvestment, production in the agriculture sector has not increased significantly over the 

past decades. 

2.11. In Tanzania, there is huge potential to produce both food and non-food crops for 
the domestic and export markets if access to term (medium to long-term) finance is 

improved. The availability of such finance will enable farmers to reduce their exposure to the 

cyclicality and seasonality of agriculture, to make investments in crops with long gestations 

periods and to acquire farm machinery and inputs, irrigation equipment, storage and processing 

facilities thereby transforming the sector and increasing its contribution towards economic 

growth. Access to term finance is critical for the growth of the agriculture sector and the shift 

from subsistence to commercial agricultural production. 

2.12. The commercial banks in Tanzania are reluctant to expand their lending to the 
agriculture sector which they view as risky. This deprives the sector of the much-needed 

funds to boost production, processing and marketing. The commercial banks tend to fund 

themselves with short-term deposits limiting their incentive to extend term finance to a sector 

that they consider as risky although it is not necessarily more risky than other sectors, it is just 

that these banks, having found their niches, have not done enough to adequately structure their 

lending to the sector taking into account risk factors such as seasonal variations which can be 

addressed through the provision of medium to long-term lending. It is against this background, 

and for sustainable economic growth in the country that, the Government of Tanzania has 

decided to establish the TADB so as to address the observed bottlenecks and enhance access 

to credit in the agriculture sector. The TADB has been established as a national DFI with a key 

role of being a catalyst for delivery of credit facilities for the development of agriculture in 

Tanzania. However, the TADB alone cannot satisfy the significant demand for credit of the 

entire sector and this is why it aims to focus on particular actors as well as on a set of high 

potential value chains in which investments can produce results within a short timeframe. The 

TADB will also take a holistic approach and finance the entire value chain namely production, 

processing and marketing. 

2.13. It is worth noting that in 2005, the Government of Tanzania implemented the 
recommendations of the Financial Sector Assessment Programme (FSAP) of the IMF 

which was undertaken in 2003. It was recognized that lack of long-term financing was among 

the stumbling blocks in the growth of the economy. Among the activities that were earmarked 

for implementation was the establishment of development finance institutions to provide long-

term financing to key economic sectors including agriculture. This led to the establishment of 

a number of credit schemes while the Tanzania Investment Bank (TIB) was transformed into a 

development finance institution with an agricultural financing window albeit not sufficient to 

address the needs of the agriculture sector hence the establishment of the TADB. The failure 

of the commercial banks to meet the needs of the agriculture sector in Tanzania provides a 

strong justification for Government intervention particularly through a dedicated DFI whose 

mandate is to specifically serve the agriculture sector. 

3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

3.1. As previously stated, among the major problems facing the agriculture sector in 
Tanzania is the availability and cost of term finance to support agricultural production, 

processing and marketing. As of December 2015, credit to the agriculture sector accounted 

for only 8% of total lending by the commercial banks. Most of this lending was to large 

enterprises operating in the sector. In fact, despite rapid growth of the financial sector in 



 

6 

Tanzania, access to credit and other financial services is a serious constraint to many actors in 

the agriculture sector especially the smallholder farmers for whom funding from the banks is 

simply out of reach. This essentially underlines the rationale for public intervention as the 

financial system has not been able to adequately address gaps in the provision of finance to the 

agriculture sector in Tanzania. 

3.2. The Bank Group is to intervene to provide resources from the African 
Development Fund to the United Republic of Tanzania which will utilize the borrowed 

resources to extend a loan to the TADB which is a state-owned DFI established as part of 

the second pillar of the country’s Kilimo Kwanza Initiative of 2009. The TADB, whose 

design has been informed by an in-depth review of global experiences relating to successful 

national DFIs, is meant to play a critical role in alleviating the financing constraints that hamper 

the growth of Tanzania’s agriculture sector. 

3.3. The TADB was officially launched and started operations in 2015. It is structured 
to deliver medium and long-term funding through wholesale and direct lending as well as 

guarantees and risk-sharing instruments to address the financing gaps in the agriculture value 

chains. 

3.4. The TADB has been focusing on a set of high potential value chains within the 
national priorities. The fourteen value chains of focus fall under eight agriculture sub-sectors 

as follows: cereals (maize and rice), industrial commodities (sugarcane and cashew nuts), 

oilseeds (sunflower and sesame), horticulture (vegetables, fruits and spices), livestock (diary 

and beef), poultry, fisheries and forestry. Overtime, the TADB will support other value chains 

as more funds are made available to it including from the ADF. 

3.5. The TADB will predominantly target smallholder farmers who carry out essential 
agricultural-related economic activities within the value chains of focus (understanding 

that serving the smallholder farmers directly will be challenging, the TADB aims to reach 

them through their farmer organizations). These farmers will be targeted through funding 

as well as technical assistance which the TADB will implement by working closely with 

Business Development Services (BDS) providers across Tanzania. The ultimate objective in 

doing so is to enable these farmers to make the transition from subsistence to commercial 

farming in an effective and sustainable manner. That said, the TADB will also target other 

medium and large scale farmers as well as the agro-processors, among others. Furthermore, the 

TADB will finance infrastructure development for irrigation, storage/warehousing and 

transport. 

3.6. The pricing of TADB’s facilities will take into account its developmental mandate 
as well as the objective of maintaining sustainable operations. This national DFI will aim 

to extend funding with affordable interest rates for agriculture production, processing and value 

addition. As part of its mandate to develop agriculture, it will aim to maintain low interest rates 

for the smallholder farmers based on its cost of funds plus a sufficient margin to cover operating 

expenses and generate a profit to facilitate sustainability of operations. Given that smallholder 

farmers are potentially one of Tanzania’s most powerful sources of economic growth, the 

TADB will thus contribute to inclusive growth as well as sustained poverty alleviation. The 

provision of long-term funding in local currency to the smallholder farmers will also have a 

positive impact on affordability. Extending loan tenors will have a beneficial impact on the 

cash flows of the borrowers, thus allowing them to expand their borrowing capacity and 

businesses. For the larger clients, the TADB will extend financing on market confirming terms, 

nevertheless. This is important as sustainability is paramount and the viability of the products 

that the TADB provides will be crucial to its success. 

 

 



 

7 

3.7. The TADB is currently wholly-owned by the Government of Tanzania and is run 
by a board comprised mostly of independent non-executive directors appointed through 

a competitive process. The board has three committees namely the board business committee, 

the board human resource and administration committee and the board audit, risk and 

compliance committee. Each committee is assigned specific focus areas and specialized 

functions in the operations of the TADB. The managing director is in charge of the TADB’s 

day-to-day affairs supported by a senior management team. The TADB has begun operations 

with 45 staff and expects to continue recruiting staff based on the needs and expansion of 

business operations to reach a total of 150 by 2020. The TADB operates from its head office 

in Dar es Salaam and overtime expects to open a number of offices in relevant areas of the 

country for reaching out to potential customers. Finally, its structure is as follows: 

 

Figure 5. Organization Structure 

 

3.8. The TADB’s authorized share capital is Tanzania Shilling (TZS) 800 billion (USD 
367.16 million). In order to enable the TADB to start carrying out its functions, the 

Government of Tanzania has so far injected TZS 60 billion (USD 27.54 million) as its initial 

capital contribution. However, this limited funding base is hindering the TADB’s ability to 

fully achieve its objectives including extending medium to long-term loans to the agriculture 

sector especially the loans needed for infrastructure development. It is against this background 

that the URT is requesting a loan from the ADF in an amount of UA 67.27 million (USD 93.51 

million, TZS 204.38 billion) whose proceeds will be on-lent to the TADB thereby enabling it 

to expand its operations and outreach. 

 



 

8 

3.9. The borrowed funds are expected to be deployed by the TADB towards funding a 
technical assistance program (TA Program) and supporting complementary activities 

which are expected to have a positive impact on productivity in the agriculture sector in 

Tanzania: 

 Support in the form of medium and long-term funding for agricultural infrastructure 
development (e.g. warehousing facilities and irrigation schemes to provide reliable 

access to water to absorb shocks caused by climatic variability); 

 Support in the form of medium and long-term funding for access to agricultural inputs 
(financing access to quality seeds, fertilizers and pesticides); 

 Support in the form of medium and long-term funding to agro-processing industries; 

 Support in the form of medium and long-term funding for agro-mechanization (e.g. 
tractors, harvesters and irrigation equipment); and 

 Building resilience and capacity to absorb costs by having a portion of the funds 
invested in low risk/high return instruments in order to absorb the high transaction costs 

associated with financing smallholder agriculture at low interest rates. 

3.10. The TADB has been established to promote the transformation of the agriculture 
sector from subsistence to commercial farming by offering loans to the sector at 

affordable interest rates. Affordable interest rates have been identified to be a key driver to 

unlock the potentials of smallholder farmers. The agricultural sector in Tanzania has been 

characterized with low returns and therefore low interest rates for loans are needed to assist in 

enabling start up projects to take off. Lending at low interest rates to the smallholder farmers 

can nevertheless restrict the ability of the TADB to generate profits and can also result into 

operating losses which can deplete capital and endanger the long-term sustainability of the 

institution. To address this issue, the TADB intends to deploy the following measures in order 

to preserve capital and ensure funding sustainability: 

 Adequate pricing of loans to ensure that the overall yields remain positive: The 
TADB intends to recover all costs of financial intermediation (including administrative 

expenses, borrowing costs and provisions against expected losses) and to earn an 

appropriate return on capital. In its pricing policy, the TADB will charge a margin over 

the base rate plus fees and commissions to recover the administrative and operating 

costs incurred in generating, implementing and monitoring a loan as well as the cost of 

capital employed. While the smallholder farmers will be charged low interest rates, the 

TADB expects to compensate for this by charging the larger clients interest rates that 

are essentially market confirming. This cross-subsidization will enable the TADB to 

assist the smallholder farmers while generating positive returns to ensure sustainability. 

In addition, the TADB will diversify its portfolio by placing a small portion of its funds 

in government securities that offer risk free returns. Such diversification will lower the 

risk profile of the TADB’s portfolio while at the same time enhance its return; and 

 Moderating and controlling the issuance of new loans and advances: Issuance of 
new loans and advances will be subject to the availability of funding and compliance 

with existing capital adequacy regulations which require banks not to increase their risk 

weighted assets above the regulatory thresholds in relation to the size of core capital. 

In order to ensure compliance, the TADB’s Asset and Liability Committee (ALCO) 

will continually review its liquidity and capital adequacy and ascertain its ability to 

continue with the issuance of new loans. The TADB may temporarily withhold issuance 

of new loans and advances if liquidity and capital adequacy ratios are breached and if 

other circumstances are deemed necessary such as a deteriorating loan portfolio and 

high level of non-performing loans. 



 

9 

3.11. Furthermore, the TADB’s funding strategy has been developed in order to outline 
the potential sources of funding. While commercial banks mainly rely on short-term customer 

deposits as the key source of funding, the TADB’s funding will come from the main 

shareholder and from concessionary borrowings from international DFIs, at least in the first 

few years of operations. This will contribute to ensuring that the TADB’s funds are low-cost 

putting it in a position to extend affordable loans to its target beneficiaries particularly the 

smallholder farmers to whom funding must be affordable to pursue profitable agriculture 

activities to transform their lives into improved standards. 

Technical Assistance 

3.12. As agreed with the TADB and the Tanzanian authorities during the appraisal 
mission, a portion of the proposed funding of UA 1.0 million (equivalent to USD 1.39 

million) will be utilized to fund a TA Program to further enhance and strengthen the 

capacity of this institution. The Bank Group has vast experience in supporting national 

development finance institutions in Africa. Through this present project, the Bank Group will 

not only provide the United Republic of Tanzania with the necessary financial resources to 

further support the TADB, thereby enabling it to expand its operations and outreach, but will 

also contribute to building and enhancing the capacity of this national DFI through the proposed 

TA Program. The Bank Group’s solid expertise and knowledge of DFIs has fed into the design 

of the TA Program which is expected to contribute to ensuring that the TADB is in a position 

to intermediate the funds provided to it in an impactful and sustainable manner. The main 

components are provided below and are based on a preliminary assessment of the TADB. 

However, once the funds are disbursed, the TADB will be expected to implement the TA 

Program beginning with a thorough needs assessments to further fine-tune the list of areas that 

need to be enhanced and strengthened. That said, the below components will serve as a good 

guide for implementation: 

 Component 1: Process and System Improvements 

This will include support to the TADB in key areas such as asset and liability 

management, risk management, corporate and capital planning, credit underwriting, 

risk based pricing, product development and costing and the enhancement and/or 

development of relevant strategies, procedures, policies and guidelines (especially 

those that relate to internal control systems and audit, code of conduct, financial 

management and accounting and procurement); 

 Component 2: Information Technology (IT) 

This component will cover the IT needs of the TADB in terms of banking software and 

systems in order to enhance outputs and functionalities. It will also cover the TADB’s 

IT infrastructure and management information system (MIS) for portfolio management 

and monitoring including the tracking of the development outcomes of its lending 

activities; and 

 Component 3: Building staff capacity 

This component will entail training staff in key areas such as risk analysis, risk 

management, credit underwriting, asset and liability management, use of new IT/MIS 

and environmental and social risks management. Evidently, the needs assessment will 

provide a more comprehensive list of the needs of the staff of the TADB. Further, to 

ensure maximum impact for this component, the training that will be provided to the 

staff of the TADB will be done primarily on the premises of the TADB or on location 

in Dar es Salaam as to ensure that: i) most of the staff are trained and ii) that the 

resources of this component are not unnecessarily spent on travel. 

 



 

10 

3.13. The TA Program is designed to strengthen the capacity of the TADB. This is 
intended to contribute to building a sound banking business so that this national DFI is not only 

used as an intermediary to channel financing to the agriculture sector in Tanzania, but also to 

build institutional development of a DFI to enable sustainable lending and provide a strong 

demonstration effect. 

Gender Impact 

3.14. Tanzania’s constitution guarantees equality of men and women and supports 
women’s full participation in social, economic and political life. The Government of 

Tanzania has also taken steps to mainstream gender perspectives in sector policies, strategies 

and programs. In agriculture, even though the Kilimo Kwanza Initiative does not specifically 

address gender, pillar 8 of its implementation framework (Science, Technology and Human 

Resources for Kilimo Kwanza) calls for mainstreaming gender in Kilimo Kwanza and 

developing programs to strengthen the position of women in agriculture. 

3.15. Agriculture is a major source of livelihood for most rural populations in Tanzania. 
Women comprise a large proportion of the agricultural labor force yet women farmers are 

consistently found to be less productive than male farmers. There are several barriers that 

hinder their performance. These include limited access to finance as well as inadequate skills 

to run and manage operations and businesses. This project is therefore expected to contribute 

to narrowing the financing gap for women in the agriculture sector while also enhancing their 

skills and capacity. 

3.16. During the appraisal mission, the mission team emphasized the need for the TADB 
to continue targeting and supporting women as beneficiaries considering their critical 

role in the agriculture sector. More concretely, following discussions with the TADB, it has 

been agreed that the project will include the following key actions to support women in 

agriculture: 

 As the TADB scales up support to the agriculture sector in Tanzania through the 
mobilized ADF funds, at least 20% of these resources will be specifically dedicated 

by it towards supporting women in agriculture. This is in addition to the already 

existing access by women to funding from the TADB (i.e. the remaining 80% will still 

go to both men and women); 

 The TADB will put in place a mentoring program for women in agriculture to 
enhance their technical, farming and managerial skills. The mentoring would 

consist of linking women with the TADB’s larger and more experienced clients from 

whom they can benefit and learn. That said, for the mentoring to work, it is critical to 

put in place an effective incentivization scheme for the mentors including, but not 

limited to, small reductions in their cost of borrowing; and 

 At the institutional level, while the TADB has designated a staff member as a 
gender champion, this action is not supported by an institutional policy or 

strategy. During the appraisal mission, it was established that the TADB’s credit policy 

does not explicitly mention women. To address these gaps, the TADB will develop a 

gender policy that will guide how it addresses gender issues internally and externally 

with its clients. Furthermore, the TADB will review its credit policy to reflect its 

commitment to advancing the empowerment of women. The Bank Group will support 

the TADB to develop a Gender Policy which will need to be in place prior to the 

disbursement of the funds. 

 

 



 

11 

Social Issues 

3.17. The funds to be provided to the TADB are expected to contribute towards 
economic empowerment of small scale farmers, entrepreneurship and employment 

creation. These funds are expected to contribute to growth of small businesses, income 

generation, household savings and a surge in value addition activities. The TADB maintains a 

tiered pricing framework whereby it provides funding at low interest rates to the smallholder 

farmers while it charges more to the larger and more established corporate entities in the 

agriculture sector. This cross-subsidization enables the TADB to provide affordable funding to 

the smaller farmers while generating sufficient income to sustain its business. Financial literacy 

among rural farmers and especially women has been identified as a major challenge and the 

TADB is in the process of setting up a technical assistance fund which will focus on capacity 

development for the small farmers. 

Environment Impact 

3.18. The project has been classified as Category FI-B in line with the Bank Group’s 
assessment procedures. The TADB’s portfolio and the proposed investments to be supported 

with financing from the ADF are considered medium risk with limited adverse environmental 

or social impacts that are largely reversible and readily addressed through mitigation measures. 

3.19. At the request of the AfDB and with its guidance and input, the TADB has 
developed and approved an Environmental and Social (E&S) Policy and an 

Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS), which will provide the 

procedures and workflow that will be followed for each investment by the institution to 

manage all levels of environmental and social risks. The proposed investments will be 

screened, reviewed and evaluated against national laws and regulations, the Bank Group’s 

Exclusion List and Integrated Safeguard System (ISS) as well as other applicable performance 

standards or safeguard requirements (specifically those pertinent to the agriculture sector 

including land issues, water management, pollution and climate risks). 

Lessons Learned Reflected in Project Design 

3.20. The AfDB has learned numerous lessons from its work with national and regional 
DFIs from across Africa as well as in its experience providing technical assistance 

programs. These lessons, and the manner in which they have been taken into account in the 

current operation, are: 

Lesson How it will be addressed 

National DFIs across Africa face common 

challenges including: 

 Emphasis placed on loan approvals and 
disbursements over loan quality resulting in 

high non-performing loans 

 Weak administrative systems, procedures 
and reporting systems; and 

 Insufficient human resource capacity. 

The proposed technical assistance program is 

expected to contribute to achieving the 

following key objectives: 

 Enhanced credit underwriting processes 
and skills; 

 Improved IT and management information 
systems for portfolio reporting and 

monitoring; and 

 Skilled staff through relevant trainings. 

3.21. In addition to the above, during the appraisal mission, extensive discussions were 
held with the senior management of the TADB as well as with government officials on the 

need to ensure that the institution, which is newly established, is encouraged to operate 

based on internationally recognized good practice principles that are considered as key 

for success and long-term sustainability. These principles have been identified by the AfDB 

as well as sister institutions such as the World Bank and include: 



 

12 

 While the TADB is currently owned by the Government of Tanzania, it was 
favorably noted that the aim of the authorities, over the medium to long-term, is 

to attract reputable investors to be shareholders in the institution. This is important 

as the shareholding structures of DFIs are moving away from 100% state ownership 

towards mixed public-private capital structures. This will be expected to strengthen the 

governance of the TADB. It was also noted that the governance of the TADB has been 

designed with a board of directors that is predominately composed of independent 

directors selected based on a competitive process. Indeed, as per the TADB’s 

memorandum and articles of association (MEMARTS), the board is designed to consist 

of between 7 and 9 directors, the majority of whom meant to be non-executive and non-

government officials. As per the MEMARTS, the directors are also to be selected to be 

qualified and capable individuals with a high degree of skills, expertise, integrity and 

stature. This is key as it contributes to enhancing performance and minimizing political 

interference. The governance of the TADB was thoroughly discussed, including with 

senior government officials, and it was agreed to ensure independence of both the 

management and the board with their recruitment based on merit only; 

 The need to ensure that the TADB is operationally and financially sustainable with 
overall pricing that reflects costs and credit risk. While the smallholder farmers will 

be provided with funding that is concessional, the TADB will make up for this by 

charging its larger borrowers interest rates that will be market-conforming as well as 

funding itself with low cost liabilities which will help in absorbing the high transaction 

costs associated with serving the smallholder farmers; 

 The importance of putting in place strong administrative systems, procedures, 
policies and guidelines and this is what the TA Program will address. The TA 

Program will also address staff capacity and skills; 

 The importance of avoiding credit misallocation and politically motivated lending 
and to this end, it was agreed that the funding to be provided to the TADB will not 

be utilized for onward lending to ineligible persons. Advancing loans to them will 

lead to automatic acceleration of the loan and cancellation of undisbursed amounts4; 

 During the appraisal mission, it was noted that the TADB is subject to prudential 
regulation and supervision by the Bank of Tanzania under its guidelines for 

development finance institutions. This was also viewed positively as independent 

regulation and supervision by the financial sector regulator rather than a line ministry 

with conflicts of interest enforces disciplined management; and 

 In addition, it was agreed that the TADB should aim as much as possible to operate 
as a wholesale lending institution as international experience has shown that 

wholesale-only development finance institutions that provide funding through 

                                                 
4 Ineligible Persons means the following persons who are ineligible to access funding extended with the proceeds of 

the ADF loan: 

a) Politically Exposed Persons defined as: head of state or head of government and their deputies, if any; cabinet 
minister of central or local government; member of a legislature of central or local government; deputy minister 

or equivalent rank; ambassador or attaché or counsellor of an ambassador; military officer with a rank of general 

or above; chief executive officer of a state-owned company or a state-owned bank; head of a government agency; 

judge; and senior official of a political party represented in a central state or local government legislature; 

b) Civil servants with the position of director, or its equivalent, and above employed by central, state or local 
government; 

c) Directors and senior management of the TADB; and 

d) Any related parties of the persons falling under clauses a) through c) above. 



 

13 

eligible financial institutions5 perform better than those that engage in retail 

operations. A wholesale approach is particularly appropriate with respect to financing 

underfunded segments. Retail development finance institutions are also perceived by 

their retail borrowers as entities that do not need to be repaid as they are owned by 

governments. While the TADB has been established to focus principally on wholesale 

lending activities, it is currently carrying out retail lending although it is expected to 

move towards wholesale lending as more funding is provided to it. The TADB is 

committed to this and will ensure that the funding from the ADF is extended through 

eligible financial institutions. It is worth noting that while extending funding through 

wholesale lending, the TADB will work with financial institutions which will be 

incentivized to enter the agriculture sector or expand service to it by augmenting their 

capacity and by providing them with long-term funding combined with technical 

assistance to increase the attractiveness of the agriculture sector and/or make 

commercial bank credit feasible. Thus, rather than replacing markets, the TADB will 

enhance them by providing term financing to financial institutions for on-lending 

(providing maturities that are otherwise unavailable to the financial institutions) and 

technical assistance to strengthen the financial institutions’ capacity to serve the 

agriculture sector. Furthermore, by working with such financial institutions, the 

TADB’s capital will essentially be protected as the capital of the financial institutions 

will stand between the TADB and any credit losses6.  

3.22. It is worth highlighting that the TADB has been incorporated as a public limited 
company under the Companies Act no. 2 of 2002 and not through an act of parliament. 
This is key for avoiding political interference since the key reporting relationship will be with 

the shareholders and not with the national assembly and the presidency as is the case when the 

establishment of a company is through an Act of Parliament. Furthermore, as stated earlier, 

while the Government of Tanzania is currently the sole shareholder, their intention is to bring 

in additional equity investors overtime so that the shareholding structure of the TADB moves 

away from 100% state ownership towards a mixed public-private capital structure. If this is 

achieved, the governance of the institution will be further strengthened. 

4. IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS 

Procurement Arrangements 

4.1. All procurement of goods, works and services will be carried out in accordance 
with the Procurement Policy for Bank Group Funded Operations and Methodology for 

its Implementation, dated October 2015. The various activities under the TA Program of the 

equivalent of UA 1 million involve the procurement of both goods and consultancy services. 

In the case of consultancy services, the procurement will be carried out on the basis of the 

                                                 
5 The following are minimum eligibility criteria for the financial institutions: i) must be duly licensed and at least 

two years in operation, ii) owners and board of directors should be “fit and proper”, iii) must have qualified and 

experienced management, adequate organization and institutional capacity for its specific risk profile, iv) must be 

in “good standing” with its supervisory authority and remain in compliance at all times, v) must have well defined 

policies and written procedures for management of all types of financial risks, vi) x) must have adequate internal 

audits and controls for its specific risk profile and vii) must have adequate management information systems. 

6 While extending funding through financial institutions, the TADB will need to ensure that the end beneficiaries 

(especially the smallholder farmers) are able to gain access to funding that is affordable in addition to having long 

tenors. To this end, the TADB will explore various mechanisms including auctioning credit to the financial 

institutions especially those serving the smallholder farmers. In order to put competitive pressure on the spreads 

offered by the financial institutions to the final borrowers, the TADB’s interest rates will be determined by an 

auction process under which the financial institutions will compete on the basis of the spreads they propose to 

offer to their borrowers. This innovative approach will ensure that the affordability of the funds being extended 

by the TADB. 



 

14 

Quality and Cost Based Selection (QCBS) method. In particular, the TADB will be required to 

select and engage consultant(s) based on a transparent and competitive process, including well 

developed terms of reference, international advertising, short-listing and a robust evaluation 

process. An evaluation report prepared by the TADB will have to be accepted by the Bank 

Group within 14 calendar days, before recruiting the consultant(s). The procurement of goods, 

related to the IT upgrades component of the TA Program, will need to conform to established 

commercial practices acceptable to the Bank Group so that such procedures result in 

competitive market prices for the goods. The TADB will need to ensure adherence to 

appropriate procurement procedures which will be periodically reviewed for compliance. For 

the rest of the funding, the procurement of goods, works and services by the TADB’s target 

beneficiaries will need to conform to established commercial practices acceptable to the Bank 

Group so that such procedures result in competitive market prices for the goods, works and 

services and meet the needs of the TADB’s beneficiaries. The TADB will ensure adherence to 

appropriate procurement procedures and the Bank Group will periodically review the TADB’s 

compliance in ensuring that such procedures are followed by its target beneficiaries. 

Monitoring, Financial Management and Audit Arrangements 

4.2. The Bank Group conducted an assessment on the adequacy of the financial 
management systems of the TADB, the Executing Agency, based on the Bank’s 2014 

Financial Management Implementation Guidelines and concluded that the overall risk is 

Moderate. The TADB will be monitored, supervised and evaluated regularly by the Bank 

Group. It will prepare annual financial statements in accordance with International Financial 

Reporting Standards (IFRS). The financial statements will include in the notes to the accounts 

the disbursement of the proceeds of the ADF loan by the URT to the TADB and will be audited 

by the Controller and Auditor General (CAG) or a private audit firm appointed by the CAG in 

accordance with the United Republic of Tanzania statutory requirements by applying 

International Standards of Supreme Audit Institutions which are acceptable by the Bank. 

Within six months after the end of each financial year, the TADB will be required to submit a 

copy of its audited financial statements together with the management letter on the weaknesses 

identified by the auditors and the TADB’s management responses and implementation plan of 

the auditor’s recommendations. Furthermore, the TADB is licensed and supervised by the 

central bank and required to meet prudential requirements as regards to capital adequacy, loan 

provisioning and recognition of loan losses as well as other relevant regulations. These will be 

regularly verified by the Bank Group. Relevant to this, the URT should ensure that the TADB 

at all times maintains in full force and effect an operating license from the central bank and all 

such other consents, licenses, approvals, authorizations and exemptions required under the laws 

of Tanzania for the TADB to carry out its business and perform its obligations under this 

present project.  

Sustainability 

4.3. The TADB’s viability is viewed positively for a number of reasons including its 
sound corporate governance and prudent lending strategy. Also, as an institution that is 

expected to focus principally on wholesale lending, this will contribute to preserving the quality 

of its assets and capital. Further, the TADB will be subject to limited liquidity risk as it funds 

itself through long-term funding and not through short-term deposits. In addition, the TADB 

will be subject to prudential regulation and supervision by the central bank, which will enforce 

requirements similar to those applied to commercial banks. Furthermore, the proposed 

technical assistance program will play a key role in strengthening the capacity and enhancing 

the performance of the institution. 

 

 



 

15 

4.4. The long-term sustainability and success of the TADB hinge on its ability to 
mobilize additional capital from the Government7 and other investors as well as low-cost 

debt liabilities from international DFIs. To fund itself, the TADB will also explore the 

possibility of issuing bonds in the local capital market after building a track record of operations 

and thoroughly assessing the market conditions to establish the depth of liquidity as these will 

influence the success rates and costs of the bonds. The importance of mobilizing low cost 

funding is fully recognized by the TADB as articulated in its funding strategy. This, combined 

with its determination to generate positive returns from its lending activities, should ensure that 

any advantage that may accrue to the TADB in being able to fund itself with low cost liabilities 

be accrued by it as a contribution to its equity. 

Risk Management 

4.5. Potential risks are rated as mostly Medium and are expected to be mitigated as 
outlined below: 

 

Potential Risk Rating Mitigation Measures 

High operational costs 

associated with reaching 

out to smallholder 

farmers. 

Medium The TADB will implement measures to minimize costs including reaching smallholder 

farmers through wholesale lending by working with eligible financial institutions and 

developing innovative products and services such as mobile banking. 

Impact of lending at low 

interest rates on financial 

sustainability. 

Medium The TADB is fully aware of the importance of sustainability and while the smallholder 

farmers will be supported with affordable loans, the institution will aim to balance its 

portfolio by also targeting larger clients to whom the funds will be priced based on market 

confirming terms. Additionally, the TADB will invest a portion of its funds in low 

risk/high return government securities to further support the cross subsidization of the 

smallholder farmers. Finally, the TADB expects to continue funding itself through the 

mobilization of low-cost funds. 

The TADB unable to 

effectively intermediate 

the funds extended to it. 

Medium The proceeds of the ADF loan will be made available to the TADB in two equal tranches 

to ensure that it is able to absorb the resources made available to it and effectively 

intermediate them. 

The TA Program is not 

implemented properly by 

the TADB. 

Low to 

Medium 

The proceeds of the ADF loan will be made available to the TADB in two tranches and 

the disbursement of the second tranche will be conditional on the TADB having 

successfully implemented two of the three components of the TA Program. The TADB is 

also strongly committed to ensuring that the TA Program is successfully implemented. 

Funds extended to 

ineligible persons. 

Low to 

Medium 

The TADB will be required to ensure that the funds are not on-lent to ineligible persons. 

Lending to such persons will result in the accelerated repayment of the ADF loan. 

Political capture of the 

TADB.  

Medium 

to High 

This risk is primarily managed with an innovative governance structure. While the TADB 

will be majority government-owned, its MEMARTS provides that the majority of 

directors should be non-executive and non-government officials chosen based on a 

competitive and transparent process. Cognizant that governance failures contributed to 

thwarting the effectiveness of existing DFIs across Africa, the Tanzanian authorities are 

fully committed to a robust governance structure for the TADB. In addition to providing 

comfort as regards the strategic direction of the TADB, the MEMARTS requires that the 

directors should be qualified and capable individuals with a high degree of skills, 

expertise, integrity and stature. The TADB will also be subject to regulation, licensing 

and supervision by the central bank, thus further strengthening the governance 

arrangements as well as due diligence as regards to its operational and financial capacity. 

Finally, the Bank Group will ensure continuous supervision of all key operational aspects 

to ensure good governance.  

                                                 
7 While the Government is committed to injecting additional equity into the TADB, it must scale up its efforts. 

The TADB’s MEMARTS provides that the initial paid-up capital of the institution is TZS 100 billion to be raised 

gradually to TZS 800 billion. The Government will need to significantly scale up its efforts to mobilize additional 

equity for the TADB to ensure that it complies with the MEMARTS. 



 

16 

Knowledge Building 

4.6. The present operation is expected to generate considerable knowledge and 
experience that will add value and build up lessons for the design and management of 

similar projects across Africa. The lessons learnt will be documented including those on 

supporting smallholder farmers especially women. Bank supervision missions, quarterly and 

annual progress reports, mid-term review, audit and completion reports will also provide an 

opportunity to capture knowledge on relevant aspects of this project. As a new institution, the 

TADB will benefit from working with the Bank Group to learn about its procedures and 

safeguards which it can incorporate to enhance itself. The Bank Group will share the lessons 

learnt from the experience of implementing this project in Tanzania. 

5. LEGAL INSTRUMENTS AND AUTHORITY 

5.1. The proceeds of the loan from the African Development Fund to be provided to 
the United Republic of Tanzania will be made available to the TADB by way of a loan in 

accordance with the Bank Group’s On-Lending Policy (ADB/BD/WP/90/36; 

ADF/BD/WP/90/38). The terms and conditions of the loan from the URT to the TADB will 

be in line with those of the loan from the ADF to the URT except for the loan currency which 

will be Tanzanian Shilling. This structure is essentially innovative as it enables the Bank Group 

to support a national development finance institution without being exposed to the risks that 

would be associated with direct lending to such an institution. Plus, it is deploying a debt 

instrument to a country whose credit rating is much better than the rating that would be 

applicable to a direct loan to the beneficiary institution. 

5.2. The legal instrument to be used for this project is a loan agreement between the 
United Republic of Tanzania and the African Development Fund. This loan agreement will 

enter into force subject to fulfilment by the United Republic of Tanzania of the provisions of 

section 12.01 of the General Conditions Applicable to the African Development Fund Loan 

Agreements and Guarantee Agreements. 

5.3. The ADF loan will be extended to the URT and its proceeds transferred by the 
URT to the TADB as a loan on the same terms and conditions (except for the loan 

currency). The URT will sign a loan agreement with the ADF while the URT and the TADB 

will sign an on-lending agreement. 

5.4. The proceeds of the ADF loan will be disbursed in two equal tranches upon 
fulfillment of agreed disbursement triggers. The obligation of the African Development Fund 

to make the disbursement of the first tranche will be conditional upon entry into force of the loan 

agreement and the submission by the URT and the TADB of evidence of the fulfillment of the 

following conditions, each in form and substance satisfactory to the African Development Fund: 

 The opening by the United Republic of Tanzania of a special United States Dollar 
denominated account at the central bank of Tanzania for the deposit of the proceeds of the 

ADF loan. The opening of the account will be evidenced by a letter from the central bank 

confirming that the said account has been opened and providing the account numbers; 

 The opening by the TADB of a special Tanzanian Shilling denominated account at the 
central bank of Tanzania for the deposit by the URT of the proceeds of its loan to the TADB 

(the loan from the URT to the TADB will be in local currency meaning that the URT will 

take on the foreign exchange risk to which the TADB will not be exposed). The opening of 

the account will be evidenced by a letter from the central bank confirming that the said 

account has been opened and providing the account numbers; 

 An on-lending agreement between the URT and the TADB, relating to the loan from 
the URT to the TADB whose amount is equal to the loan from the ADF to the URT, in 

form and substance acceptable to the ADF, has been duly executed by the parties thereto. 



 

17 

The execution of the on-lending agreement shall be supported by a legal opinion issued to 

the ADF by a legal counsel acceptable to the ADF confirming that the on-lending 

agreement between the TADB and the URT, has been duly authorized, ratified and 

executed on behalf of the URT and the TADB and constitutes legal, valid and binding 

obligation of such parties; and 

 The TADB has adopted a Gender Policy in form and substance acceptable to the 
African Development Fund. 

5.5. The obligation of the ADF to disburse the second tranche of the ADF loan will be 
conditional on the following conditions: 

 Submission by the TADB of evidence, in form and substance satisfactory to the AfDB 
Group, that it has successfully implemented components 1 and 2 of the TA Program (noting 

that component 3 involves training staff which is a continuous activity). By linking the 

disbursement of the second tranche to the implementation of the TA Program, the Bank 

Group will be in a position to exercise due diligence as regards to progress; and 

 Supervision by the Bank Group of the utilization of the first tranche of the ADF loan 
and satisfaction that the funds were effectively deployed including towards supporting 

women through funding and the proposed mentoring program. 

5.6. In addition, for the disbursement of the two tranches of the ADF loan, the United 
Republic of Tanzania will be required to ensure that the funds are passed on to the TADB 

within a maximum of 14 calendar days of the URT receiving the funds from the ADF. 
Any delays will result in calls for potential suspension or accelerated repayment of the ADF 

loan. Additional events that may call for potential suspension or accelerated repayment of the 

ADF loan will include the following: i) violation of signed agreements or regulations affecting 

the ability of the TADB to fulfill its mandate or that affect its financial sustainability, ii) the 

TADB’s license has been withdrawn, revoked, amended or suspended, or its renewal has been 

withheld, so as to materially and adversely affect the ability of the TADB to carry out its 

functions and iii) extension of funding to ineligible persons. 

5.7. Finally, this present project complies with all the applicable AfDB Group policies 
including the On-Lending Policy (ADB/BD/WP/90/36; ADF/BD/WP/90/38) referred to 

earlier in paragraph 5.1. 

6. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION 

6.1. The proposed loan from the ADF to the United Republic of Tanzania, to be utilized 
by the URT to support the TADB, will contribute to enabling this national DFI to scale 

up support to the agriculture sector in Tanzania. This institution is expected to play a key 

role in facilitating attainment of sustainable food self-sufficiency and food security in Tanzania 

and in promoting and supporting the transformation of agriculture from subsistence to 

commercial farming in order to effectively and sustainably contribute to inclusive economic 

growth and poverty reduction. 

6.2. The Government of Tanzania is fully committed to the success of the TADB and has 
demonstrated this through the capital that it has injected so far from its own budget and its 

current efforts to mobilize additional funding from new sources including the ADF. The failure 

of the commercial banks to meet the funding needs of the agriculture sector provides a strong 

justification for Government intervention through the proposed borrowing from the ADF. This 

outside funding will enable the Government of Tanzania to support the TADB while providing 

it with the fiscal space for more spending in sectors and projects critical to the country’s 

development (including infrastructure projects planned to facilitate trade and industrialization). 

6.3. In the light of the foregoing, Management recommends that, for the purposes stipulated 



 

18 

in this report, the Board of Directors of the African Development Fund approves the proposed 

ADF loan of UA 67.27 million (equivalent to USD 93.51 million) to the United Republic of 

Tanzania. 



 

I 

Appendix I. Tanzania’s Comparative Socio-economic Indicators – August 2016 

 
Sources: AfDB Statistics Department Databases; World Bank: World Development Indicators; UNAIDS; UNSD; WHO, UNICEF, UNDP; 

Country Reports. 

Note: “n.a.” stands for Not Applicable; “…” means Data Not Available. 

* Labor force participation rate, total (% of total population ages 15+). 

** Labor force participation rate, female (% of female population ages 15+). 



 

II 

Appendix II. Bank Group Country Portfolio – September 2016 

The ongoing portfolio, as of September 2016, comprises 24 operations with total net commitment of UA 1.36 billion. The performance of portfolio 

is rated satisfactory with overall assessment of 3.2. The portfolio has no operation with unfulfilled conditions to first disbursement. However, the 

portfolio is experiencing project start-up delays and slow pace of project implementations reflected by a slow disbursement rate. 

PROJECT/SECTOR 
SOURCE OF 

FINANCE 

APPROVAL 

DATE 
CLOSING DATE 

APPROVED 

AMOUNT IN 

MILLION UA 

DISBURSED 

AMOUNT IN 

MILLION UA 

DISBURSEMENT 

RATE (%) 

AGE 

(YEARS) 

A. NATIONAL OPERATIONS: 

TRANSPORT 

Tanzania Road Sector Support Project I  ADF Loan 2-Dec-2009 15-Dec-2017 152.00 125.04 82.26 6.7 

Tanzania Road Sector Support Project II  ADF Loan 5-Apr-2012 30-Sep-2017 140.00 68.45 48.89 4.4 

Dar es Salaam Rapid Bus Transit Project 
ADB Loan  30-Sep-2015 31-Dec-2020 69.74 0.19 0.27 1.0 

AGTF Loan  30-Sep-2015 31-Dec-2020 31.71 0.16 0.51 1.0 

Transport Sector Support Program 
ADB Loan 26-Nov-2015 30-Oct-2021 193.97 0.00 0.00 0.8 

ADF Loan 26-Nov-2015 30-Oct-2021 54.00 0.60 1.11 0.8 

WATER SUPPLY/SANITATION 

Zanzibar Urban Water & Sanitation ADF Loan 19-Dec-2012 31-Dec-2017 14.00 3.50 24.98 3.7 

Arusha Urban Water Supply Improvement Project 

ADB Loan  16-Sep-2015 31-Dec-2020 102.83 0.00 0.00 1.0 

ADF Loan 16-Sep-2015 31-Dec-2020 18.00 0.32 1.78 1.0 

AGTF Loan  16-Sep-2015 31-Dec-2020 30.07 0.00 0.00 1.0 

ENERGY 

Iringa-Shinyanga Transmission Line ADF Loan 26-Oct-2010 31-Oct-2018 45.36 17.43 38.42 5.8 

Scaling-Up Renewable Energy Program SCF Grant 20-Dec-2013 15-Sep-2017 0.50 0.1 21.01 2.7 

SOCIAL 

Alternative Learning and Skills Development ADF Loan 29-Jun-2011 31-Dec-2017 15.00 3.66 24.38 5.3 

Support to Technical Vocational Education and Training & Teacher 

Education 

ADF Loan 2-Apr-2014 31-Dec-2019 34.00 1.37 4.03 2.4 



 

III 

MULTISECTORAL  

Institutional Support Project for Good Governance ADF Loan 3-Feb-2016 31-Dec-2018 12.00 0.53 4.38 0.7 

      Sub-total 953.18 243.28 25.52 3.28 

B. MULTINATIONAL OPERATIONS:  

East Africa Transport and Trade Facilitation ADF Grant 29 Nov. 2006 31-Dec-2016 6.20 3.87 62.48 9.8 

Arusha-Holili/Taveta-Voi Road Project ADF Loan 16-Apr-2013 31-Dec-2018 79.90 13.19 16.5 3.3 

Lake Victoria Water Supply & Sanitation Programme Phase II ADF Grant 17-Dec-2010 30-Dec-2017 17.48 12.31 70.41 5.7 

The EAC Payments & Settlement Systems Integration Project ADF Grant 5-Dec-2012 30-Jan-2017 15.00 5.71 38.09 3.7 

Regional Rusumo Hydropower ADF Loan 27-Nov-2013 31-Aug-2019 22.41 0.02 0.09 2.8 

EAC Railway Sector Enhancement Project NEPAD IPPF Grant 29-Jun-2012 20-Dec-2016 0.82 0.61 74.99 4.2 

EAC Centres of Excellence for Skills and Tertiary Education ADF Loan 3-Oct-2014 31-Dec-2019 6.25 0.90 14.42 1.9 

Kenya -Tanzania Interconnection ADF Loan 18-Feb-2015 31-Dec-2019 75.29 1.06 1.41 1.5 

      Sub-total 223.34 37.68 16.9 4.1 

      Total Public (A)  1176.52 280.96 23.9 3.7 

C. PRIVATE SECTOR OPERATIONS:  

Bagamoyo Sugar Project and Stand by Facility  ADB Loan 23-Apr-2014 Not signed  32.52 0.00 0.00 2.3 

ADB Loan 23-Apr-2014 Not signed  32.52 0.00 0.00 2.3 

Line of Credit to First National Bank Tanzania  ADB Loan 12-Dec-2012 30-Apr-2017 31.05 14.32 46.12 3.7 

Partial Credit Guarantee for TMRC ADB Loan 4-May-2016 Not signed  2.82 0.00 0.00 0.3 

Line of Credit to CRDB Bank Ltd ADB Loan 18-May-2016 Not signed  85.54 0.00 0.00 0.3 

      Total Private (B) 184.45 14.32 7.8 1.7 

   Total Public and Private (A) + (B) 1361.0 295.3 21.7 3.2 

 





