
























































 

AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND  
 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

BURKINA FASO 
 

 

 

 

SUPPORT PROJECT FOR ESTABLISHING  

AN AGRIBUSINESS BANK (PACBA) 
 

 

 

 
 

PROJECT APPRAISAL REPORT  
 

 

 

 

 

  
 

 

 

 

 

 

 



 

Project Information Sheet 

Customer Information 

BORROWER                    :   Burkina Faso 

 

EXECUTING AGENCIES: Ministry of Economy, Finance and Development (MINEFID) and 

Ministry of Agriculture and Water Management (MAAH) 

Financing Plan 

Source Amount (UA million) Instrument 

ADF 7.500 Loan 

   

   

Government of Burkina Faso 0.126 Counterpart 

Contribution 

TOTAL COST 7.626  

 

Key Financial Information on the Loan 

 

ADF 

Loan 

Interest Type* NA 

Interest Rate Margin* NA 

Service Commission* 0.75% 

Other costs (Commitment Fee) 0.50% 

Tenor 40 years 

Timeframe   2058 

Grace Period 5 years 

FRR, NPV (Baseline scenario) NA 

ERR (Baseline scenario) NA 

 

*Where applicable 

Duration – Key Milestones (expected) 

  

Concept Note Approval March 2018 

Appraisal July 2018 

Country Team October 2018 

Project Approval November 2018 

ADF Loan Effectiveness February 2019 

First Disbursement March 2019 

Last Disbursement March 2021 

Completion September 2021 



iii 

 

Project Summary 

Project 

Overview 

Project Name: Support Project for Establishing an Agribusiness Bank (PACBA) 
Geographical Context: Nationwide 

Implementation Timeframe: March 2019 - March 2021 

Project Cost: UA 7.625 million  

Project 

Objectives 

The project goal is to help increase the growth rate of the agricultural sector and improve its productivity in 

order to reduce poverty and strengthen the resilience of Burkina Faso's rural environment. The specific 

objectives of the project are to: (i) improve access to agricultural financing by establishing an agribusiness 

bank known as Banque Agricole du Faso (Agricultural Bank of Burkina Faso) (BADF); (ii) support the 

country's economic transformation by creating an agro-industrial value chain that provides local 

employment; and (iii) help improve the attractiveness of the agricultural sector for bank financing by 

promoting the establishment of an ecosystem that mitigates risks in the agricultural sector, in particular 

agricultural insurance and warrantage. 

Given the importance of the agricultural sector, the structural transformation of Burkina Faso's economy 

will be based on the development of this sector with respect to production and processing, hence the need 

to address the high marginalisation of this sector as regards financing (only 3.5% of bank loans in 2017). 

Accordingly, in addition to establishing this bank, which receives support from the project, the authorities 

intend, in the medium term, to strengthen the agricultural financing mechanism through the Shared Risk 

Facility, following the example of countries such as Nigeria, Togo, Ghana, etc. 

Needs 

Assessment 

Agriculture is the mainstay of Burkina Faso’s economy. However, its contribution to the creation of national 

wealth remains below its potential. While it employs more than 80% of the working population, it 

contributes only slightly more than 30% to the gross domestic product. The sector continues to face 

constraints on its full contribution to the national economy, particularly production, difficulties in accessing 

financing, and transportation of agricultural products to markets. The proportion of financing devoted to the 

sector accounts for barely 3.5% of bank financing, despite the existence of thirteen (13) banks and four (4) 

financial institutions. 

 

In addition, the unavailability of agricultural insurance, which would even out farmers' income and thereby 

encourage them to repay their loans to financial institutions, is a handicap to agricultural financing. 

Project 

Beneficiaries 

The main beneficiaries are farmers and economic operators engaged in processing activities in the 

agricultural sector. The banking sector, in particular BADF, will witness an improvement in its loans to the 

sector following establishment of the agricultural insurance mechanism. 

Outcomes and 

Impact 

The project will help to create enabling conditions for more sustained and inclusive growth through better 

financing of the agricultural sector, which is a pillar of Burkina Faso's economy. It will improve farmers' 

access to credit and promote the financial inclusion of the farming population. Similarly, the project will 

help to reduce the proportion of non-resilient households.  

Value Added 

for the Bank 

The Bank’s value added resides in the fact that by improving access to agricultural financing and ecosystem 

security through agricultural insurance and warrantage, it will increase and consolidate the impact of projects 

by the Bank and other donors in the sector. Similarly, everyone will benefit from agricultural insurance and 

use of the warrantage mechanism. Agrihub projects supported by some donors will also be open to another 

financing window with BADF.  

Knowledge 

Building 

PACBA implementation will help to build several types of knowledge, particularly: (i) best practice in 

agribusiness investment financing; (iii) the creation of agribusiness project databases to promote the 

emergence of agricultural processing units; and (iv) studies to be conducted on agricultural insurance and 

warrantage. The practices will be disseminated within the administration and to non-State actors through 

the documents produced, procedures manuals, and training sessions that will be organised under the project. 



iv 

 

PROVISIONAL PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE  

 

CALENDRIER D’EXECUTION PREVISIONNEL DU PROJET  

 

 

 

 

 



v 

 

RESULTS-BASED LOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 

Project Goal: Help increase the growth rate of the agricultural sector and improve its productivity in order to reduce poverty and fragility 

  RESULTS CHAIN PERFORMANCE INDICATORS 
MEANS OF 

VERIFICATION 
RISKS/MITIGATION MEASURES 

    
Indicator (Including 

CSI) 

Baseline 

Situation 
Target 

IM
P

A
C

T
 

Increase in the growth 

rate of the agricultural 

sector and improvement 

in its productivity 

Annual growth rate of 

the agricultural sector  

 

Primary sector 

productivity 

5.% in 2016                                                                                                                                                                                                                         

 

EUR 544 

/share in 

2016 

6.5% in 2020                                                                                                                                                                              

 

 

EUR 816/share 

in 2020 

PNDES 

monitoring reports 

BADF activity 

reports 

  

O
U

T
C

O
M

E
S

 

 

Outcome 1.1: Improved 

access to financing for 

the agricultural sector. 

Share of bank credit 

to the agricultural 

sector 

3.5% in 

2017 

4.5% in 2019 and 

5% in 2020  
  

Risks and Mitigation Measures 

(i) Rising socio-political tensions 

Government commitment to continue negotiations to ensure 

that socio-economic and political demands are coherently 

and reasonably taken into account.  

(ii) Increased security risk 

The Government has redoubled its efforts to provide strong 

and sustainable responses, and has resolutely embraced a 

regional counterterrorism framework (G5 Sahel) to address 

the various threats. 

(iii) BADF’s weak human and institutional capacity to 

properly manage the bank 

BADF's management has extensive experience in banking 

and, particularly, in agricultural financing. In addition, the 

technical assistance contract with CNCA of Senegal will 

provide support to BADF in various areas, particularly in 

information systems management and risk management 

systems and procedures. 

(iv) Governance: Strong Government participation in the 

bank’s capital following the Central Bank's request to pull out 

shareholders deemed financially weak. 

Outcome 1.2: Increased 

agricultural processing 

rate  

Increase in the 

agricultural product 

processing rate 16% in 2016 25% in 2020 

PNDES 

monitoring reports  

 

BADF activity 

reports 

Outcome 2: Enhanced 

resilience of agro-sylvo-

pastoral households, 

wildlife and fisheries to 

risks. 

Proportion of non-

resilient agricultural 

households 

42.68% in 

2017 

35% in 2019 and 

25% in 2020  
  

O
U

T
P

U
T

S
 

Component 1: Support for improving access to agricultural financing 

Output 1.1: BADF's 

capital is 100% 

subscribed 

Government pays its 

share in BADF capital  
Not done 

100% subscribed 

capital in 2019 

MINEFID and 

BADF Annual 

Reports 

Output 1.2: BADF is 

established 
BADF is established Nil 

WAEMU 

Banking 

Commission 

grants 

accreditation to 

BADF 

BCEAO 

Output 1.3: BADF is 

operational 
BADF grants loans Nil 

XOF 34 billion 

of loans to the 

agricultural 

sector in 2020 

and 88 jobs 

MINEFID and 

BADF Annual 

Reports 



vi 

 

created, 30% of 

which were 

created by 

women 

The Burkina Faso Fund for Economic and Social 

Development (FBDES) holds the Government’s participation 

and additional shares owned by organisations considered 

weak by the Central Bank; the Central Bank has requested the 

organisations to pull out of BADF capital. FBDES is 

requested to gradually transfer the shares, as well as the 

Government’s participation, to stakeholders in line with its 

area of activity as soon as possible. In addition, the entry of a 

technical and financial partner is also being considered. 

Independent directors will also be co-opted to the Board of 

Directors to improve the quality of the management structure. 

(v) Risk of strong pressure on management from farmers' 

cooperatives who consider BADF as a bank established on 

their initiative and dedicated to them. 

Strong ownership of the project establishing BADF from the 

outset by farmer organisations, and therefore their 

willingness to ensure the bank's viability. In addition, the 

continued and strong sensitisation of farmer organisations on 

the need for the bank's sustainability. BADF will give priority 

to organised farmers' networks that will help collect customer 

information and, if necessary, collect unpaid debts. 

(vi) Strong competition from existing banks 

Given the strong ownership by farmer organisations, BADF 

will rely on farmer sectors to attract farmer customers. The 

bank's activities will be diversified by financing non-

agricultural sectors. 

 

  

Output 1.4: Gender 

equity in BADF 

operations 

BADF loans to 

women farmers 
Nil 

20% of total 

loans 
Same as above 

Component 2: Support for security of the agricultural financing ecosystem 

Output 2.1: The 

agricultural insurance 

mechanism is 

established and 

operational 

Definition of 

insurance indices and 

products, and 

preparation of 

insurance policies 

 

 

 

Procurement and 

operation of 

automatic weather 

stations that meet 

WMO standards 

Insurance 

indices and 

products not 

defined and 

insurance 

policies not 

prepared 

 

 

No 

automatic 

weather 

stations 

Insurance indices 

and products 

defined and 

insurance 

policies prepared  

 

 

 

 

Automatic 

weather stations 

that meet WMO 

standards 

procured and 

installed 

 MAAE 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MAAE 

Output 2.2: The 

warrantage system is in 

place and operational 

Elaboration and 

adoption of regulatory 

texts 

 

Creation of a 

warrantage database 

 

 

Sensitisation of  

stakeholders 

No texts  

 

Lack of a 

warrantage 

database 

 

Warrantage 

not known 

Regulatory texts 

elaboratd and 

adopted  

 

Warrantage 

database created  

 

Actors sensitised 

on warrantage 

 MAAE 

A
C

T
IV

IT
IE

S
  

    

Components  

Component 1: Support for improving access to agricultural financing 

Component 2: Support for security of the agricultural financing ecosystem 

Resources 

ADF                : UA 7.5 million 

Government    : UA 0.125 million 



1 

 

REPORT AND RECOMMENDATION BY MANAGEMENT OF THE AFRICAN 

DEVELOPMENT FUND TO THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS CONCERNING THE 

SUPPORT PROJECT FOR ESTABLISHING AN AGRIBUSINESS BANK (PACBA) IN 

BURKINA FASO 

Management hereby submits this report and its recommendation concerning a proposal to grant an 

African Development Fund (ADF) loan of UA 7.5 million to Burkina Faso to finance the Support 

Project for Establishing an Agribusiness Bank (PACBA). This is an institutional support project that 

will be implemented over the 2018-2020 period to cover Government’s participation in the capital of 

the new bank and establish an agricultural insurance system and a warrantage mechanism in Burkina 

Faso. Therefore, this project will not only strengthen access to agricultural financing but also improve 

the business environment of the agricultural sector and diversify agricultural financing mechanisms. 

 STRATEGIC THRUST AND RATIONALE 

1.1. Project Linkages with Country Strategy and Objectives 

1.1.1 The National Economic and Social Development Plan (PNDES) is the national 

reference framework for interventions by the Government and its partners over the 2016-2020 

period for the structural economic and social transformation of Burkina Faso to achieve strong, 

sustainable, resilient, and inclusive growth that will create decent jobs for all and improve social 

well-being (TA A1). PNDES comprises three strategic pillars: (i) Pillar 1: reform institutions and 

modernize the administration, (ii) Pillar 2: develop human capital, and (iii) Pillar 3: boost growth-

oriented sectors for the economy and jobs. PACBA is aligned on Pillar 3, which aims to boost growth-

oriented sectors for the economy, particularly by developing an agricultural, silvicultural, pastoral, 

wildlife and fisheries sector that is productive and resilient. 

1.1.2.  The Bank's intervention strategy in Burkina Faso over the 2017-2021 period is based 

on the country's development framework (i.e. the PNDES), with particular emphasis on the 

structural transformation of the economy. Consequently, the CSP is structured around two 

pillars: (i) promote access to electricity, and (ii) develop the agricultural sector for inclusive 

growth. Under the second pillar, the Bank will focus on the following actions: (a) support reforms in 

the agricultural sector; (b) develop value chains and water management, relying mainly on support 

for the emergence of growth hubs such as Bagré Hub and cotton processing; (c) promote youth 

employment with particular emphasis on the development of agro-business and professional skills; 

(d) access to financing for the sector with institutional and financial support from an agricultural bank 

being established; and (e) construction of access infrastructure to improve the marketing of 

agricultural products and intra-regional trade. In this regard, PACBA is fully aligned on the Bank's 

strategy, particularly with points (i) to (iv) indicated above. 

1.1.3. In addition, by broadening access to economic opportunities for the people, 

particularly farmers, PACBA is aligned on the Bank's Ten-Year Strategy (2013-2022) with 

respect to the objective of inclusive growth. 

1.1.4. PACBA is also consistent with the Strategy for Agricultural Transformation in Africa 

("Feed Africa"), which aims to "transform African agriculture into a competitive and inclusive agro-

industrial sector that can create wealth". 

1.1.5. The project also falls within the Bank's Second Climate Change Action Plan, 

particularly under its pillar relating to intensified financing for adaptation. 

1.1.6  Finally, PACBA falls within the Bank's Financial Sector Development Strategy, which 

aims to "help increase access to financing, deepen African financial institutions and markets in RMCs 



2 

 

and at regional level, and support financial stability", as well as its Gender Strategy (2014-2018) in 

its focus on women’s economic empowerment.  

1.2. Context of the Bank’s Intervention 

1.2.1 With regard to the economic and social context, activity is picking up vigorously after 

a period of economic sluggishness in 2014 and 2015. Burkina Faso's economic growth remains 

strong despite a fragile security context (TA A4-Note on Fragility). Economic growth is estimated 

at 7% in 2018 after 6.7% in 2017 and 5.9% in 2016. The impact of transformative investments under 

the National Economic and Social Development Plan (PNDES 2016-2020), particularly in increasing 

energy supply, has contributed to this economic dynamism. In addition, the performance of the 

extractive industries through increased gold production has provided additional support for economic 

activity. 

1.2.2. In 2018, the Government concluded a three-year programme supported by the IMF’s 

Extended Credit Facility, which seeks to ensure stability of the macroeconomic framework and 

reduce the fiscal deficit to 5% in 2018 and to a maximum of 3% of GDP in 2019, in line with the 

WAEMU convergence criterion.  

1.2.3. As regards execution of the State budget, the Government intends to continue its efforts 

towards controlling current expenditure, consolidating revenue mobilisation reforms, and 

implementing the PNDES. The measures to be taken in 2018 to increase revenue consist in further 

computerisation of tax services (online procedure, digitalisation, etc.), as well as further consolidation 

of business segmentation and reforms to modernise customs administration. 

1.2.4. At the social level, Burkina Faso falls within the category of countries with low human 

development. The latest poverty survey in Burkina Faso (the Permanent Multisector Survey - EMC) 

estimated the poverty rate at 40.1% in 2014 compared to 46.7% in 2009, which corresponds to a 6.6% 

decline. Despite this progress, the prevalence of poverty in rural areas (41%) is higher than that at 

national level and in urban areas (14%).  

1.3. Rationale for Bank Intervention 

1.3.1. Unlocking access to financing for Burkina Faso's key economic sector (TA A3): The 

agricultural sector’s contribution to national wealth creation remains below its potential. While it 

employs more than 80% of the working population, agriculture contributes only slightly more than 

30% to the gross domestic product. The sector continues to face constraints that hamper it from 

contributing fully to the national economy. These constraints include difficulties regarding 

production, accessing financing and transporting agricultural products to markets. Admittedly, the 

financing of the cotton sector is a success story, thanks mainly to the quality of supervision of the 

sector and the smoothing mechanism put in place (TA C4). However, access to agricultural financing 

remains a real handicap, aggravated by the privatisation of BACB, which has created an institutional 

vacuum in agricultural financing. The proportion of financing devoted to the sector accounts for 

barely 3.5% of bank financing, despite the existence of thirteen (13) banks and four (4) financial 

institutions. There are many reasons for the banks' little interest in agricultural financing. One of the 

main reasons is the high risk inherent in such financing but, above all, the lack of control over the 

value chain: the vast majority of operators in the sector can neither offer adequate guarantees nor 

control the storage and marketing schedule for their products.  

1.3.2. Securing the risk environment to ensure BADF viability and promote the attractiveness 

of agricultural financing for commercial banks. The farms face considerable risks (climate, 

markets, health risks, locust invasions, etc.), which can even lead to total production loss. It should 

be noted that the unavailability of agricultural insurance neither allows farmers to even out their 



3 

 

income nor encourages them to repay their debts to financial institutions. Consequently, it is 

necessary to set up an insurance system. Furthermore, the limited diversification of mechanisms to 

promote agricultural financing remains a handicap, hence the need to develop warrantage. In this 

regard, the Ministry of Agriculture in September 2017 prepared a national strategy to guide 

warrantage interventions with the support of the Alliance for a Green Revolution in Africa (AGRA). 

It is now necessary to move from strategy to action. Finally, it should also be noted that banks 

operating in Burkina Faso lack expertise in providing support and advisory services on agricultural 

sector financing. To help it get started and avoid all these pitfalls, BADF has decided to use the 

technical assistance of Caisse Nationale de Crédit Agricole (National Agricultural Credit Fund) 

(CNCA) of Senegal, an institution with more than thirty years' experience in financing Senegalese 

agricultural development.  

1.3.3. Continue and intensify financing actions for agricultural and agrifood SMEs and SMIs 

initiated in sub-projects supported through lines of credit granted by AfDB to Coris Bank (December 

2016) and Fidelis Finance (June 2014). These financial institutions provide significant support for 

agricultural financing, which is neglected by commercial banks. The support will continue and be 

reinforced with BADF, whose medium- and long-term credit forecasts for the agricultural sector is 

estimated at XOF 4.1 billion in 2019 to XOF 14.54 billion in 2024, with an annual growth rate of 

28%. Furthermore, this operation will help to achieve three of the High 5s1 identified by Senior 

Management, namely: "Feed Africa", "Industrialise Africa" and "Improve the quality of life for 

people in Africa", through the financing of agro-industrial projects that will contribute to promoting 

food security and improving living conditions in rural areas.  

1.3.4. Reinforce and consolidate the Bank's involvement in Burkina Faso’s agricultural 

sector: PACBA will reinforce and consolidate the impact of many other existing projects: Support 

Project for Bagré Growth Pole, Participatory Forest Management Project, Cashew Nut Development 

Support Project in Comoé Basin for REDD (PADA-REDD+), Preparation of PPG PGFC/REDD++ 

FIP, Resilience Building Programme (P2RS) and PPF for Youth and Women’s Integration in Agro-

Sylvo-Pastoral Sectors. PACBA falls within the Lending Programme of CSP 2017-2021 and is a 

Pillar II flagship operation.  

1.3.5. Replicating Existing Success Models in West Africa 

1.3.5.1 Banque Nationale de Développement Agricole du Mali (National Agricultural Development 

Bank of Mali) (BNDA) (TA C7), initially based on a fully agricultural banking model, has gradually 

diversified its portfolio to strengthen its viability. At the end of 2017, it had 54% of its portfolio in 

agricultural value chains, and 46% outside the agricultural sector. It is in its 38th year of existence and 

has remained profitable over the past twelve (12) years.  Originally, BNDA was completely State-

owned. After demonstrating its ability to be viable, it attracted several shareholders, including the 

French Development Agency (20% of the capital) and the German Development Finance Agency 

(DEG) (21% of the capital). BADF will be built on this semi-agricultural banking model, with 40% 

of its exposure outside the agricultural sector. This will allow it to mobilise deposits from other sectors 

and mitigate the effects of any crisis in the agricultural sector. In addition, gradual government 

withdrawal from its capital is being considered to make way for financial partners with expertise in 

agricultural financing. 

1.3.5.2. Caisse Nationale du Crédit Agricole du Sénégal (National Agricultural Credit Fund of 

Senegal) (CNCAS) (TA C7), drawing on the lessons learned over the years, has finally found a model 

that guarantees its viability. CNCAS intervention is accompanied by a series of measures to secure 

the agricultural financing ecosystem in Senegal, in particular: (i) agricultural insurance, of which the 

                                                 
1  The five strategic priorities ("High 5s") identified by Senior Management are: "Light up and power Africa", "Feed Africa", "Integrate Africa", 

"Industrialise Africa" and "Improve the quality of life for people in Africa". 



4 

 

Senegalese Government finances 50% of the premiums, enables it to increase the resilience of its 

borrowers, thereby curbing their default rate; (ii) Government’s subsidising of agricultural credit rates 

to allow a greater number of farmers to have access to credit, thereby promoting diversification of 

CNCAS portfolio; and (iii) guarantees to be granted by the Government in financing major 

agricultural projects will allow CNCAS to have sufficient margins under its prudential ratios to 

increase its financing volumes. With PACBA, the Bank intends to support the establishment of a 

secure ecosystem similar to that of CNCAS in Senegal to strengthen BADF’s viability. To that end, 

a technical assistance contract has been concluded between CNCAS and BADF. CNCAS will assist 

BADF in starting up its activity, particularly the information systems, risk systems, and commercial 

strategy. 

1.3.6. Recent Cases of Bank Support for Agricultural Financing 

1.3.6.1 In December 2016, the Board approved a UA 67 million ADF loan for a 40-year period, 

including a 10-year grace period, to the Government of Tanzania to be on-lent to the Agricultural 

Bank of Tanzania. Tanzania Agricultural Development Bank was officially launched and began its 

operations in 2015. It is structured to provide medium- and long-term financing, in the form of loans, 

guarantees and risk-sharing instruments, to fill the financing gaps in agricultural value chains in 

Tanzania. The support for the Tanzania Agricultural Development Bank has not yet been disbursed. 

1.3.6.2. In December 2014, the Board approved a total financial plan of USD 500 million for the 

Federal Republic of Nigeria for the establishment of the Development Bank of Nigeria. The financial 

plan included: (i) an ADF loan of USD 50 million for 30 years, including a five-year grace period; 

(ii) a USD 400 million loan for 20 years, including a five-year grace period, from the Bank's regular 

resources; and (iii) a direct Bank equity participation of up to USD 50 million in the capital of the 

Development Bank of Nigeria Plc (DBN), with a redemption obligation for DBN after 10 years. The 

purchase of the Bank's stake by DBN is guaranteed by the Federal Republic of Nigeria. The Nigerian 

Development Bank has not yet published its first financial performance for preliminary lessons to be 

learned with respect to financial sustainability. 

 

1.4 Aid Coordination 

1.4.1 The Bank plays a key role in coordinating TFP assistance. After chairing the TFP troika from 

2013 to 2014, it was lead partner of the Sector Dialogue Framework for Infrastructure from 2014 to 

2015, and for Water and Sanitation from June 2015 to October 2016, and finally, the Bank was the 

coordinator of TFPs operating in the youth and vocational training sector from 2014 to 2016. 

1.4.2 With respect to overall intervention volume, the Bank is the third-largest development aid 

TFP, after the European Union and the World Bank. The Bank is also Burkina Faso's main partner in 

the infrastructure sector (Annex 3 and TA A6). 

1.4.3. As regards the financial sector, the Bank is Burkina Faso's leading TFP, especially with the 

different lines of credit granted to the country's banks. As for the agricultural sector, the Bank is 

within the TFP average (those between 10% and 50% of the sector's financing). PACBA’s leverage 

effect on the entire agricultural sector will contribute to better complementarity with the actions of 

other TFPs in the sector.  



5 

 

1.4.4 Concerning warrantage, KFW intends to work with the Government for proper 

implementation of the mechanism, thereby creating good complementarity with support provided by 

PACBA in this area. 

1.4.5 Other TFPs are involved, at different levels, in the project’s activity areas (TA A5). 

1.4.5.1 USAID, in partnership with Coris Bank International, held a training seminar on "Financing 

Agricultural Value Chains" on 3-4 December 2016. To narrow the financing gap in the sector, the 

Trade Hub, a USAID programme which, after analysing the financing rate in West Africa by most 

banks to agrifood and agro-industrial sector stakeholders, took the initiative in 2015 to embark on 

expanding its network of banking institutions to facilitate access to credit for small processors and 

exporters. USAID underscored the importance of the Trade Hub Project and for the United States to 

share its experience in credit guarantees for agricultural financing. 

1.4.5.2 Through "Développement International Desjardins (DID)", Canada initiated the Project for 

Professionalisation of Agricultural Credit Methodologies (PMCA). Several MFI networks, supported 

by DID, operate in rural areas and are required to serve this relatively complex market. DID's Project 

for Professionalisation of Agricultural Credit Methodologies (PMCA) essentially aims to support a 

number of the MFIs as follows: (i) promote access to credit for small farmers; (ii) mitigate credit risks 

associated with the sector; and (iii) increase the profitability of MFIs operating in rural areas. 

1.4.5.3 Other TFPs, particularly Proparco and IsDB, have also intervened through lines of credit to 

Société Générale Burkina Faso and Coris Bank International to support private sector development, 

particularly SMEs and SMIs, as well as promote Islamic financing. 

 PROJECT DESCRIPTION 

2.1 Project Objectives and Components 

2.1.1 The project goal is to help increase the growth rate of the agricultural sector and improve its 

productivity in order to reduce poverty and strengthen the resilience of Burkina Faso’s rural 

environment. The specific project objectives are to: (i) improve access to agricultural financing; (ii) 

support the country's economic transformation through the emergence of an agro-industrial value 

chain that provides local employment; and (iii) help improve the attractiveness of the agricultural 

sector for bank financing by promoting the establishment of an ecosystem that mitigates risks in the 

agricultural sector, particularly agricultural insurance and warrantage. 

2.1.2. The project is structured around two components: (i) support for improving access to 

agricultural financing through Government participation in the capital of the newly established 

Banque Agricole du Faso (Agricultural Bank of Burkina Faso) (BADF); and (ii) support for security 

of the agricultural financing ecosystem by establishing an agricultural insurance system and a 

warrantage mechanism. 

2.1.3 Component 1: Support for Improving Access to Agricultural Financing 

2.1.3.1. Through this component, the project will, in view of the high expectations of the population, 

particularly in the agricultural sector, as well as the significant financing needs of agriculture and its 

transformation, enable the Government to play its role as a driving force by acquiring a stake in 

BADF's capital. Considered as a priority in the Bank's 2017-2021 Strategy for Burkina Faso, the 

establishment of this bank will contribute to efforts towards responding to the scarcity of bank 

financing dedicated to the agricultural sector and lay the foundations for effective implementation of 

agricultural value chains. Thus, the Bank will provide financial support to the Government, 

amounting to XOF 5 billion, for the acquisition of a stake in BADF’s capital. It should be noted that 



6 

 

BADF was approved by the Minister in charge of Finance by decree N° 

183/MINEFID/DGTCP/DAMOF on 16 April 2018 after favourable opinion of the WAMU Banking 

Commission on 14 March 2018 and is currently working towards its operationalisation. The Bank’s 

support will be through the reinboursment method (please refer to section 4.1.4.1). 

2.1.3.2  An analysis of the financial sector (TA A2) shows strong expansion of the banking system 

in Burkina Faso, with bank loans increasing by 20% in 2017 and by more than 6% per year on average 

over the 2012-2017 period. The feasibility study on the Banque Agricole du Faso Project2 shows that 

although it is a competitive sector, the prospects for developing the credit market confirm the 

existence of a niche for the establishment of a new bank dedicated to agricultural financing. Since 

ECOBANK's takeover of Banque Agricole et Commerciale du Burkina (Agricultural and 

Commercial Bank of Burkina Faso) (BACB)3 in 2008, there is no longer any credit institution 

specialised in agricultural financing in Burkina Faso. This accounts for the small proportion of bank 

financing to the primary sector, the importance of which can no longer be underestimated. 

Nevertheless, as a precautionary measure, BADF intends to capture only 1% of deposits and loans at 

start-up, and gradually increase its market share to 3% in the fifth year. BADF will provide 60% of 

its assistance to the agricultural sector (particularly agro-industries), with the remaining 40% going 

to the trade and industry sectors. Accordingly, the establishment of BADF will help to increase the 

share of agricultural financing from 3.5% of bank loans in 2017 to 5% in 2020 and 7% in 2022 (or 

EUR 685 million). The establishment of BADF will create 114 new direct jobs4 in 2023 and more 

than 3,000 indirect jobs5 through recruitment in the agricultural companies that will be financed. To 

contribute to gender mainstreaming in agricultural financing, BADF intends to earmark at least 20% 

of its agricultural financing for women farmers, and subsequently increase it by 15% per year. The 

project will help to increase the country's number of bank account holders, which is expected to rise 

from 26% in 2016 to 40% in 2020.6  

2.1.3.3  Once the banking licence has been obtained, BADF will launch its operationaliSation: (i) a 

headquarters has been identified and rehabilitation works are in progress. The towns selected for 

the first two branches outside Ouagadougou are Dédougou and Bobo-Dioulasso; (ii) SOPRA 

Amplitude banking solution has been selected for BADF's IT systems following a competitive 

bidding process; (iii) connections to GIM UEMOA, STAR-UEMOA and SWIFT payment 

platforms are in progress; (iv) staff recruitment, which began with IT staff, will continue with the 

hiring of commercial and credit officers for the headquarters and Dédougou and Bobo-Dioulasso 

branches; and (v) communication is being organised with the creation of a website, the search for a 

logo, and the recruitment of a communication agency to define the bank’s communication strategy.  

2.1.3.4  Detailed Analysis of Banque Agricole du Faso (BADF) (TA C3) 

2.1.3.4.1   Objectives 

2.1.3.4.1.1 The BADF's corporate goal will be to provide its target customers in rural and urban areas 

with a wide range of financial services (credit, savings, insurance, money transfers, etc.) tailored to 

their needs. The target customers will include rural stakeholders (farmers, stock-breeders, fishermen, 

craftsmen, suppliers of agricultural inputs and equipment, agricultural product traders, processors, 

transporters, etc.) and those in other sectors of the national economy. 

                                                 
2  Sponsored by BADF promoters and implemented by ACS consulting firm. 
3  National Agricultural Credit Fund (CNCA), established by the Government in 1979, was transformed in 2002 into BACB, which oper ated as a 

commercial bank and did not grant medium-term loans. It was sold to ECOBANK under the programme with IMF. 
4  Source: BADF feasibility study. 
5  Based on long- and medium-term loans in 2023 resulting in an investment of XOF 120 billion, estimating the average cost of creating a job at XOF 

40 million. 
6  Source: BCEAO. 



7 

 

2.1.3.4.1.2  The specific objectives are to: (i) promote the development of the agricultural sector 

and offer a range of community-based financial services to the rural and urban population 

throughout Burkina Faso; (ii) contribute to the creation of added value in the agricultural sector 

through the financing of value chains; (iii) promote local investment, development and wealth 

creation among the population; (iv) increase the number of bank account holders in Burkina Faso, 

through gradual geographic coverage of the national territory, with the opening of branches in the 

headquarters of urban and rural municipalities that have enormous potential; and (v) become a 

benchmark in rural financing on the banking market in Burkina Faso and WAEMU.  

2.1.3.4.2  Promoters, Shareholders and Management 

2.1.3.4.2.1.  Shareholders: The high government stake in the BADF’s capital is due to: (i) the 

strong government commitment to the establishment of BADF; and (ii) the Central Bank's initial 

remarks on the financial soundness of the benchmark shareholders, particularly farmers’ 

organisations and associations whose financial structure was considered weak by the Central Bank. 

In order not to delay the establishment of BADF, the shares of these shareholders were taken over by 

FBDES pending their reorganisation in accordance with banking regulations. However, given the 

importance of farmer organisations in BADF's business model, they will continue to sit on the Board 

of Directors. 

Structure of BADF’s Share Capital 

 

2.1.3.4.2.2.  Management Team: The majority of the management team will be members of the 

technical committee responsible for managing BADF implementation. The committee has already 

directed the market survey conducted by ACS, and is preparing the application for a banking licence. 

The committee, headed by the Chief of Staff of the Prime Minister and current Chair of the BADF 

Board of Directors, previously a senior executive at BCEAO, is composed mainly of former BACB 

senior executives and representatives of the agricultural community through farmer organisations. 

The General Manager was the last General Manager of BACB7, which he managed for more than 6 

years. In particular, he led the merger and integration of BACB into ECOBANK. He has more than 

thirty years of banking experience. Before joining BACB's General Management, he had held several 

key management positions in the Credit and Commitments Department and the Administrative and 

Financial Department, and was the Deputy General Manager. His long experience in the banking 

sector, particularly in agricultural financing, will be essential to assisting BADF to cope with 

difficulties inherent in a new bank. 

2.1.3.4.3  Governance: BADF is governed by a Board of Directors, whose role is to define 

strategic guidelines for the bank and ensure their implementation. The Board comprises 10 members, 

                                                 
7  Banque Agricole et Commerciale du Burkina  

Actionnaires Part dans le Capital 

Participations publiques 87,56% 

Etat burkinabè (à travers le FBDES) 63,04% 

Sociétés d'Etat 24,52% 

Caisse Autonome de Retraite des Fonctionnaires (CARFO)  14,01% 

Loterie Nationale du BURKINA (LONAB) 10,51% 

Organisations paysannes 0,66% 

Sociétés privées 6,71% 

WATAM SA 4,90% 

CORIS Bank International (CBI) 0,70% 

Autres 1,11% 

Personnes physiques 5,07% 

Total 100% 

 



8 

 

with 4 Government representatives or 5 if the CARFO representative is included. The other 5 

members are as follows: 2 representatives of the farmers' unions (UNPCB and UNPSB), the 

representative of smallholders, the representative of WATAM, and the representative of the rural 

population. It should be noted that three of the four Government representatives, including the Chair 

of the Board of Directors, have no voting rights. However, the Government and its departments retain 

decision-making power with an absolute majority of voting rights. The farmers and the rural 

population are represented by an observer with no voting rights. The Board of Directors does not 

currently have any independent experts in the banking sector, although independent directors will be 

co-opted as time goes on. Similarly, the diversification of shareholders, with the envisaged entry of a 

leading technical and financial partner, could help to remedy the situation. The Board of Directors 

has three standing committees: (i) the Audit Committee comprises at least 3 directors and is in charge 

of the monitoring and control strategy; (ii) the Credit Committee is composed of at least 5 directors 

and has decision-making powers over any commitment exceeding XOF 50 million; and (iii) the 

Selection and Remuneration Committee comprises 3 directors who direct BADF's remuneration and 

selection policy.  

2.1.3.4.4. Strategy: BADF's model consists in mobilising financial resources and then directing 

them mainly towards financing agricultural value chains in Burkina Faso. The end objective is to 

promote the development of the agricultural sector, as well as achieve more inclusive growth by 

unlocking access to financial services and financing for rural people who form the majority of Burkina 

Faso’s population. To fully implement this strategy, BADF intends to mobilise various sources of 

financing, namely: (i) development finance institutions (DFIs) on which BADF intends to rely to raise 

long-term resources at concessional rates for its activity. Since these resources are not included in the 

basic business plan, this leaves BADF some room for manoeuvre as regards its resources; and (ii) 

customer savings, developed and captured for transformation purposes, constitute BADF's total 

resources, excluding equity, over the entire projection period.  

2.1.3.4.5  Financial Analysis 

Capital: The XOF 14.277 billion capitalisation level at start-up is adequate. This provides a risk 

coverage ratio of 48% in the first year, 31% in the second year, and an average of 20% in the 

subsequent three years. BADF's capitalisation level is significantly higher than that required by the 

Central Bank (8%). It is also higher than the national average (9.3% in 2016) and the WAEMU zone 

average (11.3% in 2016). Finally, it is higher than that of CNCAS, whose average over the past three 

years was 16%.  

Assets: BADF expects to attain a credit portfolio of XOF 26 billion at the end of the first year, i.e. 

1% of the total volume of credit at national level. Over the subsequent four years, it expects to post 

an average annual growth of 40%, resulting in a 0.5% increase in the market share to reach 3% of the 

credit market at the end of the fifth year. This volume of credit represents on average 40% of the 

estimated agricultural financing needs in Burkina Faso. The estimate of gain in market share seems 

conservative, given the limited proportion of agricultural sector financing in the existing bank and 

the strong involvement of the farming community in setting up BADF. BADF expects to maintain a 

high quality portfolio with only 1% of loans in default at the end of the first year, and then a 1% 

increase per year subsequently before stabilising at 4% in the fourth and fifth years (compared to a 

national average of 8.8% in 2016). In the long term, it will be essential to secure BADF's environment 

to enable it to maintain such a rate.  

Profitability: BADF expects to post a Net Banking Income (NBI) of XOF 1.4 billion in the first year 

and an average annual growth rate of 60% subsequently, to reach XOF 8.3 billion by 2022. The 

cost/income ratio is expected to improve steadily from 112% in the first year to 39% in 2022, 

reflecting a low delinquency rate, with provisioning charges remaining under control at 16% of NBI 

over the period. As a result, after a first-year deficit of XOF 419 million, BADF is expected to become 



9 

 

profitable in the second year with a net income of XOF 564 million. The net income should then 

increase steadily to XOF 3.1 billion in 2022.  

Liquidity: BADF’s liquidity seems to be comfortable over the entire projection period. The short-

term liquidity ratio8 averaged 150% compared to 100% required by the Central Bank, reflecting the 

preponderance of savings over demand deposits. Over the projection period, term deposits and other 

savings will account for 54% of deposits (46% for demand resources). The long-term structural 

liquidity ratio9 is comfortable over the first two years, at 180% and 132% respectively, compared to 

100% required. It will gradually decline to 106% in 2022, reflecting deposits and savings mostly at 

less than one year. 

2.1.3.4.6. Supervision. Like all WAEMU banks, BADF will be subject to the supervision and control 

of the Banking Commission. In this regard, it is required to comply with prudential and governance 

regulations, as well as all other aspects of WAEMU banking regulations. For all intents and purposes, 

it should be stressed that the regulations are consistent with Basel international norms and standards, 

with a transition phase from Basel 2 to Basel 3 currently underway. 

2.1.3.5  Expected Outcomes of this Component: The expected outcomes include: (i) an increase in 

the share of bank credit to the agricultural sector from 3.5% in 2017 to 5% in 2020; and (ii) an increase 

in the processing rate of agricultural products from 16% in 2016 to 25% in 2020. 

2.1.4 Component 2: Support for Security of the Agricultural Financing Ecosystem (TA C1) 

2.1.4.1 Context  

2.1.4.1.1.  As regards the establishment of BADF, the authorities of Burkina Faso have undertaken to 

establish and operationalise a system to secure the agricultural financing environment. The objective 

is to enable the new bank to operate in a secure environment that allows it to absorb any shocks related 

to climatic hazards and changes in the prices of agricultural products and/or inputs. In addition, given 

the high level of financing needs for agricultural value chains as expressed in PNDES 2016-2020, the 

Government of Burkina Faso hopes to reinforce the attractiveness of the agricultural sector for private 

commercial banks through these mechanisms. 

2.1.4.1.2.  In this connection and through an ADF loan of XOF 888 750 000, PACBA will support 

the operationaliSation of: (i) the agricultural insurance mechanism being designed between Société 

Nationale d'Assurance et de Réassurance du Faso (Faso National Insurance and Reinsurance 

Company (SONAR) and its technical partner, Mutuelle Agricole Marocaine d'Assurance (Moroccan 

Agricultural Insurance Company) (MAMDA); and (ii) warrantage and third-party holding 

arrangements to ensure decent price levels for farmers, even during periods of falling prices. 

2.1.4.4.1.3 A complementary mechanism for securing the agricultural environment is being 

considered, and will be financed by the Government or other donors. The mechanism is the 

Agricultural Credit Security Fund, with funds for natural disasters and interest rate subsidies. 

2.1.4.2 Need for an Agricultural Insurance Mechanism 

2.1.4.2.1. A secure ecosystem is essential to ensure the viability of agricultural banks. An insurance 

mechanism guaranteeing farmers' income in the event of a drop in prices and/or a poor harvest is 

crucial to ensure a minimum income for farmers, enable them to honour their debt repayments and 

thus be able to borrow again to prepare for the new season. In addition, a secure environment will 

                                                 
8  Ratio of outstanding amounts of high-quality liquid assets (cash and quasi-cash) to expected net cash outflows over the next 30 days. This emanates 

from Basel III and is applied in WAEMU zone as from 1 January 2018. 
9  The ratio of stable financing available (equity, long-term debt) to stable financing due. 



10 

 

allow BADF to diversify into several crops, thus avoiding the effects of concentration. In Burkina 

Faso, the examples of the former banks CNCA-B and BACB illustrate this very well. Such a system 

is essential to help BADF maintain a high quality portfolio. In the basic business plan, BADF intends 

to maintain a portfolio with only 1% of loans in arrears at the end of the first year and then 1% increase 

per year subsequently before stabilising at 4% in the fourth and fifth years. The BADF portfolio 

objective in terms of quality is significant when compared to the national average delinquency rate 

of 8.8% over the past three years and the average rate in WAEMU zone at 14.4%. Therefore, an 

agricultural insurance system that can strengthen borrowers' resilience is essential to enable BADF 

to achieve its portfolio quality objectives. 

2.1.4.2.2. Caisse Nationale de Crédit Agricole du Burkina Faso (Burkina Faso National 

Agricultural Credit Fund) (CNCA-B) went through some difficulties in 2002. Those difficulties were 

due to the fall in world commodity prices to below producer prices. Since farmers' income did not 

allow them to meet their loan charges, CNCA was directly affected by the shock due to the lack of a 

safety net. The crisis was exacerbated by the poor organisation of the sectors. Thus, to diversify 

activities and limite risks, the CNCA-B changed its name for Banque Agricole et Commerciale du 

Burkina (Burkina Faso National Agricultural and Commercial Bank) (BACB). 

2.1.4.2.3. Having drawn lessons from CNCA-B, BACB, has focused its exposure on organised 

sectors to facilitate credit collection and limit delinquencies. The cotton sector, which is better 

structured, has benefited the most from BACB financing. In 2007, higher input prices combined with 

poor rainfall affected cotton harvest volumes. Consequently BACB, which had focused on the cotton 

sector, experienced difficulties that led to its acquisition by ECOBANK Group in 2008, although it 

was profitable. 

2.1.4.2.4. In addition, it is necessary to have a secure environment to prevent the agricultural 

bank from being "forced" to move away from its primary role and core business. Better still, by 

securing the agricultural financing environment, the sector will be able to attract commercial banks 

seeking better diversification. The need for such an environment is demonstrated by the success of 

BNDA in Mali and CNCAS in Senegal (TA C7). 

2.1.4.2.5. Finally, it is imperative to reduce the charge of capital of the new agricultural bank to 

enable it to deploy its resources efficiently. The licence granted to the new bank is a generalist bank 

licence that does not take the special nature of the agricultural sector into account. Borrowers in the 

sector have income that are difficult to predict, volatile and very often seasonal. This carries a higher 

risk level, resulting in a much higher charge of capital for agricultural banks. The establishment of an 

insurance fund is crucial to reduce the charge of capital of the new agricultural bank and enable it to 

deploy its resources as effectively as possible and remain competitive with commercial banks. 

Without such a mechanism, the agricultural bank will be constrained in its ability to lend and will 

most often be limited to short-term loans with a requirement for collateral that is difficult for 

agricultural customers to obtain.  

2.1.4.4.3  Agricultural Insurance (TA C1 / C1.1) 

2.1.4.4.3.1 Description: The agricultural insurance mechanism will start with a three-year pilot 

phase in three regions covering 35% of Burkina Faso's agricultural population (Boucle du Mouhoun, 

Centre-West, and East). The pilot phase will involve three crops whose production account for about 

86% of Burkina Faso's annual food consumption (white and red sorghum, rice and maize). As regards 

the production volume, the pilot phase will cover 1,639,800 tonnes, or 36% of annual national 

production volumes. The mechanism will have two specific parameters to trigger compensation - 

performance coupled with climate data (local weather records). This will increase the mechanism’s 

reliability. Triggering compensation that closely reflects the reality of claims is vital to ensure 

credibility of the system.  No mechanism that combines meteorological data and yields has so far 



11 

 

been established in Burkina Faso. Planet Guarantee, in collaboration with Alliance, has launched two 

insurance products since 2011: (i) one for maize based solely on rainfall; and (ii) the other for cotton 

based solely on yield. Unlike the Planet Guarantee system, the mechanism under this project will be 

based on meteorological data collected locally (through mini weather stations) by the National 

Meteorology Agency (ANM). The installation of an adequate number of mini weather stations in the 

pilot phase areas will help to enhance the reliability of the data collected. The mechanism will 

compensate for any errors made by the current weather stations and take into account all types of 

disasters affecting agricultural production, particularly insects.      

2.1.4.3.2  Implementation Arrangements and Actors: This component of the project will be 

implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture. The main actors and their respective roles in the project 

implementation include the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Management (MAAH), Mutuelle 

Marocaine d’Assurances Agricoles (Moroccan Agricultural Insurance Company) (MAMDA), 

Société Nationale d’Assurance et de Réassurance (National Insurance and Reinsurance Company) 

(SONAR-IARD), and the National Meteorological Agency (ANM). The activities supported under 

the project are as follows: (i) definition of insurance indices and products, and preparation of 

insurance policies; and (ii) procurement and operation of automatic weather stations that meet the 

standards of the World Meteorological Organization (WMO). 

2.1.4.3.2  Status: To date, an inter-ministerial technical committee has been set up (end of 2017) 

for the definition of indices and insurance products, and the development of insurance policies. This 

technical committee has since worked with the technical partner MAMDA, the National Agency for 

Meteorology and Société Nationale d’Assurance et de Réassurance (National Insurance and 

Reinsurance Company) (SONAR). The AfDB support expected at this level relates to the financing 

of the work of the committee set up for this purpose. This includes the financing of the continuity of 

the different wokshops already started by the Committee since its set up end of 2017. 

Agricultural Insurance Scheme 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Government
Insurance premium 

subsidy, 50%

Farmers,
Premium, 50 
compensation

Farmers,
Premium, 50 

compensation

Government
Insurance premium 

subsidy, 50%

Moroccan Agricultural 
Insurance Company

Definition of insurance policies
Billing
Insurance products

Install and run meteorological stations
Make data available

Carry and pool the risk with (1)
the other local companies (2) 
the rest at international level via 
reinsurance

National Insurance and 
Reinsurance Company

Sale of insurance product

National Meteorological 
Agency



12 

 

 

 

 

2.1.4.4.   Warrantage and Third-Party Holding Mechanism (AT C1 / C1.2) 

2.1.4.4.1  Description: 

Warrantage (or storage credit) is a loan 

granted to a producer/farmer and 

guaranteed by his/her product harvest. 

The main purpose is to allow the 

farmer/producer to sell his crop when 

price conditions are most favourable. 

Three actors are involved in this 

mechanism: (1) the third party holder 

who offers storage services; it receives, 

stores and manages conservation of the 

agricultural produce under the 

warrantage throughout the transaction; 

(2) in exchange for his produce, the 

farmer receives from the third party 

holder a certificate which shows storage of his/her produce; (3) the bank, in exchange for the 

certificate held by the farmer, makes available to the latter a loan for an amount equivalent to the 

value of the produce stored by the third party holder.  The operation is closed when the farmer sells 

his produce and repays to the bank the amount borrowed.  

2.1.4.4.2  Objective: Create favourable conditions for the successful development of community 

warrantage and third party holder activities. This mechanism allows farmers to access bank loans 

based on the value of their harvest.  

2.1.4.4.3.  Implementation Arrangements and Actors: The project will be implemented 

through the Ministry of Agriculture; the implementation team is still to be set up. The implementation 

will be conducted with the assistance of the German Cooperation Agency through KFW, which has 

shown interest in providing technical support to the Government of Burkina Faso, particularly in the 

area of professional storage credit. The proposed project activities under warrantage are as follows: 

- Identify, prepare and ensure validation of the draft regulatory texts; 

- Submit the draft texts for adoption; 

- Disseminate the adopted regulatory texts; 

- Create a network of all existing warrantage storage facilities; 

- Disseminate storage and agricultural product standards; 

- Build the capacity of warehouse inspection and control mechanisms; and 

- Establish warrantage cooperatives. 

2.1.5.  Project Cost 

The table below provides cost estimates of the various project components. Component 1 has only 

one operation, namely financing of Government's participation in BADF's share capital, for a total 

XOF 5 billion (or UA 6,367,642.19). Component 2 consists of two sub-components: Sub-component 

Warrantage Scheme 

PREPARATION
- Current status
- Information-sensitization
- Planning

NEGOTIATION
PREPARATION OF STORES 
AND STORAGE

50%-80% monetary value of 
the warrantage stock at 

harvest

CREDIT

AGR Development Consumer credit

Farmers’ organizations
BADF

CREDIT REIMBURSEMENT

HARVEST

NO

YES

On-farm
consumption

Stock 
marketing

STOCK RECUPERATION

INDIVIDUAL OR GROUP 
SALE FOR REIMBURSEMENT



13 

 

2.1 "Establishment of an agricultural insurance mechanism"; and Sub-component 2.2 "Assistance to 

the development of the warrantage activities". 

Table 2.1-1 

Project Components and Cost Estimates in UA Thousand 

Sub-Components Description of Components 

Component 1: Support for improving access to agricultural financing 

UA 6,368 thousand  Financing of the share capital 

Component 2: Support for security of the agricultural financing ecosystem  

Establishment of an agricultural 

insurance mechanism  

UA 846 thousand 

 Procurement and installation of automatic weather stations10  

 Definition of insurance indices and products, and preparation of 

insurance policies 

Development of community 

warrantage and third-party 

holder activities  

UA 380 thousand 

 Identify, prepare and ensure validation of the draft regulatory texts; 

 Submit the draft texts for adoption;  

 Disseminate the adopted regulatory texts; 

 Create a network of all existing warrantage storage facilities; 

 Disseminate storage and agricultural product standards; 

 Build the capacity of warehouse inspection and control mechanisms; 

 Establish warrantage cooperatives. 

Project Audit UA 32 thousand 

TOTAL COST UA 7,626 thousand 

 

2.2 Technical Solutions Adopted and Alternatives Explored  

2.2.1 During dialogue with various stakeholders (Government, BADF, farmers’ organisations, 

etc.), several options were presented regarding activities to be supported to improve the agricultural 

financing environment in light of the multiple constraints and challenges. With regard to the project 

implementation arrangements, although the institutional setup was not a problem since it was 

determined by decree for all Burkina Faso projects, there were several possibilities for the 

establishment and management of an implementation unit. The decisions taken were based on the 

need to focus the project on its ambitions in line with the financial package and synergies with other 

Bank projects in the sector, as well as the interventions of other TFPs. 

 

 

                                                 
10

  Measurement of temperatures, air humidity, rainfall and wind speed. 



14 

 

Table 2.2.1 

Alternatives Considered and Reasons for their Rejection 

Establishment of a 

project 

implementation unit  

Establish a project 

implementation unit 

comprising experts recruited 

for the project implementation 

and fully dedicated to the task 

The decree establishing the institutional set-up for projects in 

Burkina Faso determines the de facto financial and technical 

supervisory authority and, in the case of PACBA, it is the 

Ministry of Economy, Finance and Development (MEFD) 

and the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Management 

(MAAH), respectively. MAAH has qualified technical and 

human resources to carry out agricultural insurance and 

warrantage activities. Furthermore, any additional support in 

this regard would be provided as part of the counterpart 

contribution. 

Consider all 

components 

required to improve 

the agricultural 

financing 

environment 

In this respect, the Government 

provides for several actions, in 

particular agricultural 

insurance, warrantage, the 

establishment of a subsidy 

fund and an agricultural 

security fund 

Despite their relevance, the establishment of a subsidy fund 

and an agricultural security fund were not retained, mainly 

because of limited reflection on the tools and their 

complexity, as well as their high financial costs. In addition, 

as regards relevance, urgency, maturity and cost, agricultural 

insurance and warrantage tools are more appropriate for 

support through PACBA. 

2.3 Project Type 

PACBA is an institutional support project financed from ADF resources by a loan intended to: (i) pay 

the Government's participation in the capital of the new BADF amounting to XOF 5 billion; and (ii) 

finance, for an amount not exceeding XOF 888 750 000, the establishment of agricultural insurance 

and warrantage to improve the agricultural financing environment by reducing credit risks inherent 

in this sector in a country like Burkina Faso. 

2.4 Project Costs and Financing Arrangements  

The total project cost, excluding taxes and customs duties, is estimated at UA 7.626 million (about 

XOF 5.988 billion), all in local currency. The cost does not take into account any physical 

contingencies and/or price escalation, which will be borne by the Government of Burkina Faso. The 

ADF contribution to the project financing is UA 7.5 million and covers the financing of Government's 

participation in the capital of BADF (UA 6.368 million) and the cost of establishing an agricultural 

insurance and warrantage mechanism (UA 1.131 million). The tables below provide more details on 

the overall project cost by component, expenditure category and source of financing. The detailed 

cost table is presented in the Technical Annex. 

Table 2.4-1 

Project Cost Estimate by Component 

Components/Sub-Components 
Cost in XOF Billion Cost in UA Million 

% F.E. 
F.E. L.C. Total F.E. L.C. Total 

1. Support for improving access to agricultural 

financing 
 5.000 5.000  6.368 6.368 83.5% 

2. Support for security of the agricultural 

financing ecosystem 
 0.963 0.963  1.226 1.226 16.1% 

3. Project Audit  0.025 0.025  0.032 0.032 0.4% 

TOTAL BASE COST  5.988 5.988  7.626 7.626 100% 

Provision for price escalation (2%)        

Provision for physical contingencies (3%)        

TOTAL PROJECT COST  5.988 5.988  7.626 7.626 100% 

 



15 

 

Table 2.4-2 

Cost Estimate by Source of Financing (in UA Thousand) 

Source of Financing 
Foreign 

Exchange 

Local 

Currency 

in XOF 

Base Cost 

in UA 

Total 

Cost 

ADF   7,500.00 7,500.00 

Government  125.76  125.76 

Other Sources of Financing     

Total  125.76 7,500.00 7,625.76 

Table 2.4-3 

Project Cost by Expenditure Category (in UA Thousand) 

Expenditure Categories 
Foreign 

Exchange 

Local 

Currency 

Total 

Cost 
% Total 

A. Goods 720.00  720.00 8.6% 

B. Services 32.00  32.00 0.4% 

C. Training 209.00  209.00 2.5% 

D. Operating Costs 297.00  297.00 3.6% 

E. Other: Financing of the Government’s 

participation in BADF's share capital 
6,368.00  6,368.00 84.9% 

Total Base Cost 7,626.00  7,626.00 100% 

Provision for implementation contingencies     

Provision for price escalation     

Total Project Cost 7,626.00  7,626.00 100% 

 
Table 2.4-4 

Expenditure Schedule by Component (in UA Thousand) 

Components/Sub-Components 2018 2019 2020 2021 Total 

1. Support for improving access to agricultural financing 6,368     

Financing of Government’s participation in the share capital 6,368     

2. Support for security of the agricultural financing ecosystem  1,226   1,226 

2.1 Establishment of an agricultural insurance mechanism   846   846 

2.1.1 Definition of insurance indices and products, and preparation of 

insurance policies  126   126 

2.1.2 Procurement and operation of automatic weather stations that meet 

the standards of the World Meteorology Organisation (WMO)  720   720 

2.2 Assistance to the development of the warrantage activities  UA 

410,710  380   380 

2.2.1 Preparation of regulatory texts  19   19 

2.2.2 Validation of the proposed texts  13   13 

2.2.3 Workshop for ownership/dissemination of adopted texts  83   83 

2.2.4 Creation of a warrantage database for networking  66   66 

2.2.5 Standards dissemination workshop  59   59 
2.2.6 Sensitisation on the establishment of warrantage 

cooperatives  67   67 

2.2.7 Support for constituent general meetings of warrantage 

cooperatives  73   73 

3. Project Audit  10.6 10.6 10.6 32 

TOTAL COST 6,368 1,236.6 10.6 10.6 7,626 

 



16 

 

2.5 Project Area and Beneficiaries  

PACBA covers the entire territory of Burkina Faso. Consequently, under BADF, not only will its 

products, particularly loans, be open to all agricultural activities in the country, but it will gradually 

open branches nationwide. Agricultural insurance product will start with a pilot phase for three 

regions, while warrantage will cover the entire national territory. By improving agricultural 

production through productivity and processing, as well as the creation of agricultural value chains 

through increased access to agricultural financing, PACBA will benefit all people in Burkina Faso, 

particularly those living in rural and agricultural areas, young people and women, economic 

operators, and particularly agricultural organisations and leaders (TA C5). In addition, by improving 

the business environment for agricultural financing through agricultural insurance and warrantage, 

PACBA will benefit BADF and the entire banking system. Finally, Government’s participation in 

BADF capital will help to complete its financing and bring the capital up to the minimum level 

required by WAEMU banking regulations. 

2.6 Participatory Approach to Project Identification, Design and Implementation  

At project preparation and appraisal, the main stakeholders were consulted, including farmers’ 

organisations, the association of banks and financial institutions, as well as microfinance and 

insurance institutions, and BCEAO. The same applies to the BADF Design and Establishment 

Committee, set up since July 2016 and chaired by the Prime Minister, BADF Management, the 

consulting firm that prepared the BADF accreditation documents, BADF’s technical partner (Crédit 

Agricole du Sénégal) and the Burkina Fund for Economic and Social Development. At Government 

level, meetings were held with the Ministry of Economy, Finance and Development (MINEFID) and 

the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Management (MAAH). Based on these consultations, the 

project challenges and content were determined and PACBA designed.  

2.7 Bank Group Experience and Lessons Reflected in Project Design 

2.7.1 As at 28 February 2018, the total portfolio volume in Burkina Faso was UA 440.09 million, 

for 17 active projects. The overall disbursement rate was estimated at 50% at that date, for an average 

age of 2.8 years. The sector breakdown of the active portfolio comprises transport (52%), agriculture 

(16.1%), energy (14%), water and sanitation (7.7%), private sector (7.9%), and multi-sector projects 

(2.3%). As regards performance, the Bank's portfolio in Burkina Faso is deemed highly satisfactory 

with an overall score of 3.04 on a scale of 1 to 4, and does not contain any problematic projects. Two 

operations are ongoing in the financial sector: (i) a line of credit for UA 2 million granted in 2014 to 

Fidelis Finance, which was used to finance SMEs operating in various sectors, including agrifood; 

and (ii) a line of credit for UA 32 million approved in 2016 and granted to Coris Bank International 

to finance SMEs operating mainly in the agricultural processing sector. Since these operations are 

still active, there are no completion reports for the sector yet. The project design team also drew 

lessons from the Bank's recent experience in establishing the Tanzania Agricultural Bank and the 

Nigerian Multisector Development Bank. 

2.7.2. Overall, the Bank's portfolio in the agricultural sector in Burkina Faso is significant with 4 

operations and 1 PPF amounting to UA 58.88 million. This represents about 15% of the total project 

portfolio (Annex 2). Ongoing operations include: (i) the Bagré Growth Pole Support Project; (ii) the 

Project to Build Resilience to Food and Nutritional Insecurity; (iii) the Classified Forests Participatory 

Management Project (PGFC) and the Comoé Basin Cashew Nut Development Support Project. 

2.8 Key Performance Indicators 

2.8.1 The key performance indicators identified for measuring expected outcomes upon project 

completion are included in the results-based logical framework. The indicators are essentially:    



17 

 

 Project Impact: The annual growth rate of the agricultural sector is expected to 
increase from 5.9% in 2016 to 6.5% in 2016.  

 Project Outcomes: (i) The proportion of bank credit to the agricultural sector is 
expected to increase from 3.5% in 2017 to 5% in 2020; (ii) the processing rate of 

agricultural products is expected to increase from 16% in 2016 to 25% in 2020; and 

(iii) the proportion of non-resilient households active in the agro-sylvo-pastoral, 

wildlife and fisheries sub-sectors is expected to fall from 49% in 2010 to 25% in 2020. 

 Component 1 Outputs: (i) The Government pays its share in BADF's capital, allowing 
for the capital to be closed and for compliance with the prudential standards of 

WAEMU Banking Commission; (ii) BADF is established and operational, and targets 

XOF 34 billion loans to the agricultural sector in 2020; (iii) gender equity in BADF's 

operations with 20% of total loans granted to women in 2020; this figure is expected 

to increase substantially when BADF launches its special product for women. 

 Component 2 Output: (i) the agricultural insurance mechanism is established in 2020; 
and (ii) warrantage is operational in 2020. 

2.8.2 Progress towards achievement of outcomes will be measured at regular intervals, through a 

variety of activities, including regular Bank supervision missions, and quarterly progress reports and 

audits. Objectively verifiable evidence of progress to the highest targets will be obtained from the 

reports of the quarterly portfolio monitoring meetings organised by COBF with the Bank's project 

implementation units in Burkina Faso. 

 PROJECT FEASIBILITY  

3.1 Economic and Financial Performance   

3.1.1  As an institutional support project, PACBA does not generate direct income to be used in 

determining the financial return. However, through the direct and indirect effects of improving access 

to agricultural financing and the degree of processing agricultural products, PACBA would achieve 

economic and social performance. 

3.1.2  Furthermore, with regard to BADF (TA C3) itself, the analysis, based on the documents sent 

to the Central Bank for the 5-year business plan, shows a profitable banking model from the second 

fiscal year, driven by: (i) sustained growth in Net Banking Income (NBI), +60% on average per year 

to XOF 8 billion at the end of the fifth year; the NBI is driven by the portfolio volume whose average 

annual growth of 40% helps to give the bank 3% of the credit market share at the end of the fifth year, 

(ii) optimised operating expenses with a steadily decreasing operating ratio before stabilisation at 

39% from the fourth year onwards; and (iii) a portfolio maintained at a very high quality, with an 

average default rate of 4% as from the fourth year of operation.  

3.2 Environmental and Social Impact 

3.2.1 Environmental Impact (TA B7) 

3.2.1.1 By nature, PACBA is a financial sector project. The sub-projects to be financed by BADF 
will be projects with medium, minimal and/or no negative social or environmental impacts (agrifood, 

services, and soft services). Consequently, it has been classified under Category 4 (2) by the teams in 

charge of verifying the environmental and social compliance of Bank projects (SNSC). BADF is in 

the start-up phase and has not yet started its operations. However, as recommended by SNSC, the 

project will establish an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) in close 



18 

 

collaboration with SNSC teams. BADF will submit the final ESMS to the Bank for opinion and 

approval. 

3.2.2 Impact on Climate Change 

3.2.2.1 Since the project is in the financial sector, it is not in itself vulnerable to climate change, 
neither is it eligible for categorisation by the Bank's Climate Protection System. The sub-projects are 

in the agricultural sector, which is highly exposed to climatic hazards – droughts and floods caused 

by heavy rains and successive rainy days. Local measurements of these climatic hazards will 

contribute to measuring them more appropriately and providing proportional insurance. There are 

risks that other hazards that affect agricultural production may not be taken into account. Such is the 

case with capricious and staggered rainy seasons, their abrupt end not allowing for full maturation of 

crops (shorter duration of the rainy season). 

3.2.3 Social Impact 

3.2.3.1 The social impact of PACBA has many dimensions. First, by increasing agricultural 
productivity and production, it will increase the income of farmers, many of whom are young people 

and women, as well as enhance food security. Better still, not only will income increase but it will 

also be stabilised through agricultural insurance. Similarly, the number of jobs created is expected to 

increase and, thanks to the securing of agricultural income, the jobs will steadily become less 

precarious. These are key factors for settling the rural population, and thereby avoiding massive rural 

exodus due mainly to poverty, droughts or sudden floods. Finally, PACBA opens new windows of 

investment opportunities for the private sector.  

3.2.4 Gender (TA A5) 

3.2.4.1 Burkina Faso ranked 146th under the Gender Equality Index in the 2016 Human 

Development Report, out of 188 countries surveyed. This is due to inequalities based on social 

perceptions and practices that restrict women's rights and reduce their access to economic and social 

opportunities in comparison to men (financial inclusion or political involvement). Women make up 

55% of the agricultural labour force, but only 40% of them own land. Consequently, access to 

property likely to be mortgaged as collateral with the banking system is a discriminatory factor against 

women's access to credit, as well as lack of knowledge of the procedures for obtaining credit. As a 

result, women have less access to credit than men (8% compared to 15% for men). 

3.2.4.2. The PACBA project is classified in Category 3 of the Bank's gender categorisation system. 

Specifically the project will: (i) improve women's access to financing, as well as financial and non-

financial services; (ii) increase women farmers' productivity and income; and (iii) facilitate women's 

financial inclusion by supporting access to credit and financial education programmes for women. 

During the start-up period of the bank's activities, it is expected that 20% of the loans will be allocated 

to women. This figure is expected to double rapidly as BADF intends to introduce a specific product 

for women. In this regard, BADF plans to apply for a line of credit from potential donors. Under the 

project, efforts would be made to collaborate with AFAWA to provide strategic advice and services 

to BADF for better access for women.  

3.2.5 Involuntary Settlement 

3.2.5.1. The PACBA project will not lead to involuntary population displacements. However, the 

ESMS will allow for environmental and social screening of sub-projects that will subsequently be 

financed by AfDB to determine whether they will eventually lead to involuntary population 

displacements requiring the preparation of a resettlement action plan in line with AfDB's integrated 

safeguards system. 



19 

 

 IMPLEMENTATION 

4.1 Implementation Arrangements  

4.1.1 Institutional Arrangements (TA B3)   

4.1.1.1  The institutional framework is based on Decree No. 2018-0092/PRES/PM/MINEFID of 15 

February 2018 defining general regulations governing development projects and programmes 

implemented in Burkina Faso. 

4.1.1.2  Financial supervision of the project will be provided by the Ministry of Economy, Finance 

and Development (MINEFID) through the General Directorate of the Treasury and Public 

Accounting (DGTCP). Its role is to mobilise financial resources required for project implementation. 

Technical supervision will be provided by the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Management 

(MAAH) through the General Directorate for Promotion of the Rural Economy (DGPER), which will 

be in charge of the project management. Therefore, it will ensure its effective implementation. The 

project is linked to the "Agricultural Economy" budget programme, one of the operational 

objectives of which is to improve access to financing. 

4.1.1.3  The Budget Programme Officer will be the Project Coordinator. He/she will ensure 

permanent monitoring of project implementation, particularly the expected outcomes. 

4.1.1.4  The Review Committee will steer the project. It will contribute to project implementation by 

adopting and approving key documents. In this capacity, it will be the project’s decision-making 

body. 

4.1.2. Applicable Procurement Policy and Framework (TA B4) 

4.1.2.1  All goods and consultancy services financed by the Bank's resources will be procured in 

accordance with the Procurement Framework for operations financed by the Bank Group approved 

in October 2015. In accordance with the framework and following various evaluations conducted, it 

was agreed that all goods and consultancy services will be procured in accordance with the Bank's 

procurement system using the Standard Bidding Documents (SBD) provided for that purpose and 

based on the Bank's Procurement Methods and Procedures (PMP) specified in the Procurement Plan. 

More specifically, procurements will be made as follows: 

(i) All goods required for the project and to be procured using the PMP will be in 

accordance with the provisions of Article 8.5 of the Bank Group Procurement Policy 

document; and 

(ii)  All consultancy services required for the project and to be procured using the PMP 

will be in accordance with the provisions of Article 8.6 of the Bank Group 

Procurement Policy document. 

4.1.2.2  Procurement Risks and Capacity Assessment (PRCA): To take into account the specific 

aspects of the project, the Bank has assessed: (i) the risks at national, sector and project level; and (ii) 

the capacity of the executing agency. The results of the assessments showed that the procurement risk 

was "moderate" and helped to determine the appropriate risk mitigation measures included in the 

PRCA action plan indicated in para. B.5.9 of Annex B5.    

4.1.3. Financial Management Arrangements 

4.1.3.1  PACBA financial management will be provided by the General Directorate for Promotion 

of the Rural Economy (DGPER) of the Ministry of Agriculture, Water and Fisheries Resources, 



20 

 

which has been appointed the Project Executing Agency. The project will be managed by a DGPER 

Project Implementation Unit that will be established and its capacity strengthened in terms of project 

management and compliance with Bank rules and procedures. The DGPER Director General will be 

responsible for the overall project financial management, and will be assisted in this regard by the 

DGPER Administrative and Financial Director. The fiduciary risk following the assessment is 

deemed substantial (See the Technical Annex for more details).   

4.1.3.2. The project will prepare and submit quarterly reports (financial and technical) to the Bank 

within 45 days following the end of each quarter. The Internal Accounts Inspectorate of the 

supervisory Ministry should include the financial operations of the project in its annual audit 

programme as part of its role as the project internal auditor.   

4.1.4  Disbursement Arrangements   

4.1.4.1   Throughout the component 1, the Bank’s support will be through the reinboursment method. 

Sice obtaintion the approval of the new bank is a prerequisite for the support provided by the Bank 

through the PACBA, the reinboursement method will be used to enable the Bank repay, up to five (5) 

billion FCFA, the State of Burkina Faso for the expenses it incurred as part of its participation in the 

capital of BADF. These expenses concern those incurred in order to obtain the favourable opinion of 

the WAMU Banking Commission obtained on March 14, 2018 and the approval of the Minister in 

charge of Finance obtained on April 16, 2018 by Order N ° 183/MINEFID/DGTCP/DAMOF which 

dedicates the effective creation of the BADF. It should be recalled the the Bank's support was 

requested to reimburse the State of Burkina Faso's stake in the capital of a bank, called Banque 

Agricole du Faso. Since the Agricultural Bank of Burkina Faso started to exist as a bank only after 

the authorization obtained on April 16, 2018, this date is used as the date on which the Burkinabe 

State's expenditure on the operation acquisition of a stake in the capital of BADF was incurred. For 

all intents and purposes, the timeline for the creation of the Agricultural Bank of Faso was as follows: 

i. On October 4, 2017 and September 21, 2017, the Burkinabe State, like the other shareholders, 
disbursed the amount corresponding to its planned share in the capital of BADF in two 

blocked bank accounts registered in the name of the "Société en formation (company in 

constitution) Banque Agricole du Faso"; 

ii. On October 13, 2017, Banque Agricole du Faso was created as a public limited company. 
This step is a prerequisite for the review of the BADF application by the UEMOA Banking 

Commission. Thus, at this stage, the BADF does not yet have the status of a bank and is not 

yet registered on the list of WAEMU banks. 

iii. On April 16, 2018, the limited company Banque Agricole du Faso is approved as a bank and 
registered under the number C 0207 J on the list of banks of the UEMOA. 

 

4.1.4.2. Disbursements and Cash Flows: Disbursements from ADF resources will be made in 

accordance with the Bank’s disbursement prodecedures. Three (3) disbursement methods will be 

used:  

1) The reimbursement method: it will be used to enable the State of Burkina Faso to request 
repayment to the Bank of the exepenses, ocuring starting April 16, 2018, related to its 

participation in the capital of the BADF for a total amount not exceeding UA 6,368 million as 

stipulated in the paragraph 4.1.4.1 of the evaluation report referring to the retroactive financing. 

Repayment by the Bank may be made upon receipt of a request for reimboursement 

accompanied by evidence of pre-financing by the State of its participation in the capital of 

BADF. The amount reimboursed will be up to the amount of shares owned by the State of 

Burkina Faso and held in the capital of the BADF. 



21 

 

2) The special account method: it will be used to finance the operation and the training and 
workshop activities organized by the project implementation unit. The provisions of the 

disbursement manual will be fully applicable for the management and justification of resources 

disbursed to the special account. A special account will be opened at the National Treasury with 

the Central Bank of West African States (BCEAO) for the Bank financing. The special account 

will operate under the principle of double signature. This account will receive the funds to pay 

the eligible expenses on the counterparty. 

3) The direct payment method: it will be used for the payment of contracts and for expenses related 
to the implementation of component 2 "Support for Securing the Agricultural Financing 

Ecosystem", notably for payments in respect of the procurement of the weather stations and 

their maintenance contract. 

4.1.4.3. In addition, disbursements from counterpart funds will be made at national level through a 

special counterpart funds account opened at the treasury and operating under the double signature 

principle. The account will receive the funds intended to pay for eligible expenses from the 

counterpart funds.  

4.1.5 Audit Arrangements  

The project's financial statements will be audited yearly by an independent audit firm acceptable to 

the Bank. The audit report, together with a management letter, will be submitted to the Bank within 

six months following the end of the fiscal year in accordance with the Bank's terms of reference. The 

cost of the audit will be borne by the project.  

4.2 Monitoring and Evaluation 

4.2.1 The physical implementation of the project will cover 25 months, from December 2018 to 

December 2020.  

4.2.2  Upon effectiveness of the loan agreement, a launching mission will be organised to train 

BADF officials in the Bank's procedures. Supervision missions will be organised at least twice a year. 

Quarterly and annual activity reports will also be prepared and submitted to the Bank.  

4.3 Governance 

Burkina Faso has made significant progress in governance over the past three years. At the political 

level, the progress made is in terms of the creation and strengthening of republican institutions, the 

consolidation of the rule of law, and the reinforcement of human rights. As regards corruption, 

according to Transparency International's Corruption Perception Index in 2016, the country is ranked 

72nd out of 172 countries in the world, and among the top 10 least corrupt African countries. With 

respect to public financial governance, Burkina Faso has, with IMF support, implemented major 

reforms to improve transparency and efficiency in public resource management. With regard to 

BADF, it should be noted that as a bank approved by BCEAO, it will be subject to the supervision of 

the WAEMU Banking Commission and will have to comply with the banking regulations in force in 

WAEMU.   

4.4 Sustainability 

4.4.1 PACBA will naturally be sustainable because, given its agricultural insurance mechanism, 

it comprises major actions to reinforce the sustainability of BADF in particular, and agricultural 

financing in general. In addition, the authorities' clear intention to consolidate the PACBA mechanism 



22 

 

by establishing an Agricultural Credit Security Fund, namely the Natural Disasters Fund and the 

Interest Rate Subsidy Fund, will strengthen, complement and replicate the impact of PACBA. 

4.5 Risk Management 

Table 4.5 

Potential Risks and Mitigation Measures 

Risks Level Mitigation Measures 

Rising socio-political unrest Moderate Government commitment to continue negotiations with a view to taking socio-

economic and political demands into account. 

Increased security risks 
Moderate 

The Government has redoubled its efforts to provide strong and sustainable 

responses, and has resolutely embraced a regional antiterrorism framework (G5 

Sahel) to address the various threats. 

BADF’s weak human and 

institutional capacity to properly 

manage the bank 

Moderate 
BADF's managers have extensive experience in banking and, particularly, in 

agricultural financing. In addition, the technical assistance contract with CNCA 

of Senegal will provide support to BADF in various areas, including IT systems 

management and risk management systems and procedures. Similarly, the entry 

of a technical and financial partner into BADF's capital is still under 

consideration.  

Governance: Strong Government 

participation in the bank’s capital 

following the Central Bank's 

request to pull out shareholders 

deemed financially unsound.  

Moderate  
The Burkinabe Fund for Economic and Social Development (FBDES) holds the 

Government’s participation and additional shares owned by organisations 

considered weak by the Central Bank; the Central Bank has requested the 

organisations to pull out of BADF capital. FBDES is also requested to gradually 

transfer the shares, as well as the Government’s participation, to stakeholders in 

line with its area of activity as soon as possible. In addition, the entry of a 

technical and financial partner is still being considered. Independent directors 

will also be co-opted to the Board of Directors to improve the quality of the 

management structure. 

Risk of strong pressure on 

management from farmers’ 

cooperatives who consider BADF 

as a bank established on their 

initiative and dedicated to them 

Moderate  
Strong ownership of the project establishing BADF from the outset by farmers’ 

organisations, and therefore their willingness to ensure the bank's viability. In 

addition, the continued and strong sensitisation of farmers’ organisations on the 

need to ensure the bank's sustainability. BADF will give priority to organised 

farmers' networks that will help to gather customer information and, if necessary, 

collect unpaid debts.  

Strong competition from existing 

banks 

Moderate  BADF will address segments not covered by existing banks. Given the strong 

ownership by farmer organisations, BADF will rely on farmers’ networks to attract 

agricultural customers. The bank will also diversify its activities by financing non-

agricultural sectors.  

4.6 Knowledge Building 

PACBA implementation will help to build several types of knowledge, particularly: (i) best practice 

in agribusiness investment financing within an innovative context; (ii) the adoption of appropriate 

instruments and an attractive deposit remuneration system to substantially improve the mobilisation 

of national savings; (iii) the creation of agribusiness project databases to promote the emergence of 

agricultural processing units and improve agricultural value chains in Burkina Faso; and (iv) studies 

to be conducted on agricultural insurance and warrantage. The practices will be disseminated within 

the administration and to non-State actors through the documents and procedures manuals produced, 

procedures manuals, as well as training sessions that will be organised under the project. The 

knowledge will be acquired through producing the following reports: technical assistance reports, 

activity reports prepared by the executing agency, supervision reports, project completion report, and 

"discussion and working documents" of the Bank's Office in Burkina Faso. Finally, the knowledge 

and lessons learned will be disseminated within the Department, the Bank and in the host country by 

the AfDB through seminars and IDEV reports. 



23 

 

 LEGAL FRAMEWORK 

5.1 Legal Instrument 

PACBA will be financed from ADF resources by a loan of UA 7.5 million, for which a loan agreement 

will be concluded between the African Development Fund and Burkina Faso (the Borrower). 

5.2 Conditions for Intervention by the African Development Fund 

 Conditions Precedent to Effectiveness 

Effectiveness of the loan agreement shall be subject to the Borrower's fulfilment of Section 12.01 of 

the General Conditions Applicable to Loan Agreements and Guarantee Agreements of the Fund 

(Sovereign Entities). 

 Conditions Precedent to First Disbursement of the Loan  

In addition to effectiveness of the loan agreement, the first disbursement of loan resources shall be 

subject to the Borrower's fulfilment of the following conditions: 

(i) Provide evidence of the appointment of the Project Coordinator whose experience and 
terms of reference would have been deemed satisfactory by the Fund; and 

(ii) Provide evidence of the attachment of the project to the review committee of the 
program “Agricultural economy” (écnomie agricole) which will ensure continuous 

monitoring of project implementation, particularly the adoption and approval of key 

documents and the expected outcomes. 

 Environmental and Social Safeguard Clauses 

The Borrower undertakes to implement an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) 

to ensure that the new Banque Agricole du Faso (Agricultural Bank of Burkina Faso) identifies and 

implements environmental and social management measures for its sub-projects before the loans or 

investments are approved by BADF, and that BADF also applies the required level of sub-project 

control during the loan period.  

 Other Undertakings 

(i) Provide evidence of BADF’s establishment of a computerised management system 
(accounting and financial management software) and training staff in its use latest by 

31 March 2019; 

(ii) Prepare and submit to the Fund an Administrative, Accounting and Financial 
Procedures Manual for the project unit, and train staff in its use latest by 31 March 

2019; 

(iii) Prepare and submit to the Fund a BADF Operational Business Plan latest 30 
September 2019; and 

(iv) Provide to the Fund, by December 31st of each year, evidence of the budgeting of the 
annual tranche for the following year of the borrower's contribution to the starting 

fiscal year 2020.  



24 

 

5.3 Compliance with Bank Policies 

This project complies with applicable Bank policies. 

 RECOMMENDATION 

Management recommends that the Board of Directors approve the proposal to grant Burkina Faso an 

ADF loan of UA 7.5 million to finance the Support Project for Establishing an Agribusiness Bank 

(PACBA) under the conditions set out in this report. 

 




