












































Loan Agreement (Special Operations) for Southwest Area Integrated Water Resources Planning and Management Project (Additional Financing to Loan No. 2200-BAN[SF])


 

 

 
 LOAN NUMBER 3302-BAN (SF) 

(Additional Financing to Loan No. 2200-BAN[SF]) 
 
 
 
 
 

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Special Operations) 

 
(Southwest Area Integrated Water Resources Planning and Management Project 

-Additional Financing) 
 
 
 
 
 

between 
 
 
 
 
 

PEOPLE’S REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH 
 
 
 
 
 

and 
 
 
 
 
 

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 
 

DATED 13 DECEMBER 2015 
 
 
 
 

 
BAN 34418 



 

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Special Operations) 

 
 

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 13 December 2015 between PEOPLE’S 
REPUBLIC OF BANGLADESH (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”). 

 
WHEREAS

 
 

 
(A) by a loan agreement dated 10 May 2006 between the Borrower and 

ADB (“Initial Special Operations Loan Agreement”), ADB provided the Borrower a loan from 
ADB’s Special Funds resources in an amount equivalent to thirteen million eight hundred 
sixty three thousand Special Drawing Rights (SDR13,863,000) for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to the Initial Special Operations Loan Agreement (“Initial 
Project”);  
 

(B) by Administration Arrangement agreed on 30 July 2002 between ADB 
and the Government of Netherlands (“Administration Arrangement”), the Government of 
Netherlands agreed to provide and ADB agreed to administer, a grant in the amount of 
twelve million five hundred thousand Dollars ($12,500,000) upon the terms and conditions of 
the Administration Arrangement for the purposes of cofinancing expenditures under the Initial 
Project; 
 

(C) the Borrower has applied for an additional loan from ADB’s Special 
Funds resources for the purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan 
Agreement;  
 
 (D) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB (“Grant Agreement”), ADB has agreed to make available to the Borrower a grant from 
the Government of Netherlands in the amount of seven million Dollars ($7,000,000) (“Grant”), 
for the purpose of cofinancing expenditures under the Project; 
 
 (E) the Project will be carried out by the Bangladesh Water Development 
Board (“BWDB”), and for this purpose the Borrower will make available to BWDB the 
proceeds of the loan provided for herein upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB; and 

 
(F) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB's Special 

Funds resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the Project 
Agreement of even date herewith between ADB and BWDB; 

 
 
NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows: 

 
 

 



  2 

ARTICLE I 
 

Loan Regulations; Definitions 
 
 

Section 1.01.  All the provisions of the Special Operations Loan 
Regulations of ADB, dated 1 January 2006 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby made 
applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set 
forth herein. 

 
Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 

terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings: 

 
(a) “BWDB” means the Bangladesh Water Development Board; 
  
(b) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 

Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as amended from time to 
time); 
 

(c) “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan and/or the Grant as described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to this 
Loan Agreement; 

 
(d) “Environmental Management Plan” or “EMP” means the environmental 

management plan for the Project, including any update thereto, incorporated in the IEE;  
 

(e) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the SPS; 

 
(f) “GAP” means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, 

including any update thereto, and agreed between the Borrower and ADB; 
 

(g) “Goods” means equipment and materials to be financed out of 
the proceeds of the Loan and/or the Grant, including related services such as transportation, 
insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance, but excluding 
Consulting Services; 

 
(h) “Grant” has the meaning given thereto in recital (D) of this Loan 

Agreement;  
 

(i) “Grant Agreement” has the meaning given thereto in recital (D) of this 
Loan Agreement;  

 
(j) “Initial Environmental Examination” or “IEE” means the initial 

environmental examination, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the 
Borrower through the EA and cleared by ADB; 

 
(k) “Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 

requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the SPS; 



  3 

 
(l) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 

Handbook (2015, as amended from time to time); 
 

(m) “OCWM” means the Office of Chief Water Management under BWDB; 
 

(n) “O&M” means operation and maintenance; 
 

(o) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated   
5 August 2015 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated from time to time in 
accordance with the respective administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;  
 

(p) “PMO” means project management office;  
 

(q) “Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time); 
 

(r) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
5 August 2015 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated from time to time in 
accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, the Consulting Guidelines, and other 
arrangements agreed with ADB;  
 

(s) “Project Executing Agency” or “EA” for the purposes of, and within the 
meaning of, the Loan Regulations means the BWDB or any successor thereto acceptable to 
ADB, that is responsible for carrying out the Project;  

 
(t) “Project facilities” means the facilities to be improved, rehabilitated, 

modernized, constructed, and/or maintained, and the equipment to be installed and 
maintained under the Project;  

 
(u) “Resettlement Framework” or “RF” means the resettlement framework 

for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and 
cleared by ADB;

 
 

 
(v) “Resettlement Plan” or “RP” means each resettlement plan for a 

Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant 
to the requirements set forth in the RF and cleared by ADB; 

 
(w) “Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS” means ADB's Safeguard Policy 

Statement (2009);  
  
(x) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 

submitted by the Borrower through the EA to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the EMP and the RP, including any corrective and 
preventative actions;  

 
(y) “SMO” means subproject management offices;  

 
(z) “Subproject” means each subproject identified and to be implemented 

under the Project in accordance with the provisions of the PAM;  
 



  4 

(aa) “WMA” means water management association; 
 

(bb) “WMG” means water management group; 
 

(cc) “WMO” means water management organization; and  
 

(dd) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan and/or the Grant, including services such as drilling or mapping, and 
project related services that are provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract, 
but excluding Consulting Services.  
 
 

 
ARTICLE II 

 
The Loan 

 
 

Section 2.01.  ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's Special 
Funds resources an amount in various currencies equivalent to thirty two million two hundred 
sixty five thousand Special Drawing Rights (SDR32,265,000). 

 
Section 2.02.  (a) The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest 

charge at the rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter, on the amount of 
the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time. 

 
(b)  The term “grace period” as used in subsection (a) hereinabove 

means the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the 
amortization schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement. 

 
Section 2.03.  The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 

shall be payable semiannually on 15 March and 15 September in each year. 
 
Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 

Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement. 

 
Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of 

the Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 
4.03(a) and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be Dollar. 
 
 
 



  5 

ARTICLE III 
 

Use of Proceeds of the Loan 
 
 

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall make the proceeds of the Loan 
available to BWDB upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB and shall cause BWDB to 
apply such proceeds to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement. 
 

Section 3.02.  The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB. 

 
Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 

shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement. 

 
Section 3.04. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 

shall cause all items of expenditure financed out of the proceeds of the Loan to be used 
exclusively in the carrying out of the Project. 

 
Section 3.05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 

of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 December 2022 or such other date as may from time to 
time be agreed between the Borrower and ADB. 
 
 

 
ARTICLE IV 

 
Particular Covenants 

 
 

Section 4.01. In the carrying out the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement. 

 
Section 4.02. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 

inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.  
 
Section 4.03. ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial 

statements for the Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 
30 days of the date of their receipt by posting them on ADB’s website. 
 

Section 4.04. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable BWDB to perform its obligations under the Project 
Agreement, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the 
performance of such obligations. 

 
 



  6 

ARTICLE V  
 

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity 
 
 

Section 5.01. The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01(m) of the Loan Regulations: 

 
(a) the Borrower shall have failed to perform one or more of its obligations 

under the Grant Agreement; and  
 

(b) the Bangladesh Water Development Board Act, 2000 shall have been 
repealed, suspended or amended in any manner which, in the 
reasonable opinion of ADB, may adversely affect the carrying out of 
the Project or the operation of the Project facilities. 

 
Section 5.02.  The following is specified as an additional event for 

acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: any of 
the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.  

 
 

 
ARTICLE VI 

 
Effectiveness 

 
 

Section 6.01. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of the Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations. 

 
 
 

ARTICLE VII  
 

Delegation of Authority 
 
 

Section 7.01. The Borrower hereby designates the BWDB as its agent 
for the purposes of taking any action or entering into any agreement required or permitted 
under Sections 3.02 and 3.03 of this Loan Agreement and under Sections 5.01, 5.02, 5.03 
and 5.04 of the Loan Regulations.  

 
Section 7.02. Any action taken or any agreement entered into by the 

BWDB pursuant to the authority conferred under Section 7.01 of this Loan Agreement shall 
be fully binding on the Borrower and shall have the same force and effect as if taken by the 
Borrower. 

 



  7 

Section 7.03. The authority conferred on the BWDB under Section 
7.01 of this Loan Agreement may be revoked or modified by agreement between the 
Borrower and ADB. 

 
 
 

ARTICLE VIII 
 

Miscellaneous 
 
 

 Section 8.01. The Senior Secretary of the Economic Relations 
Division, of the Ministry of Finance of the Borrower is designated as representative of the 
Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations. 

 
Section 8.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 

of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations: 
 
 
 For the Borrower 
 
  Economic Relations Division  
  Ministry of Finance 
  Government of the People’s Republic of Bangladesh 
  Sher-e-Bangla Nagar 
  Dhaka 1207, Bangladesh 
  
  Facsimile Number: 
 
   +880 2 918-0788. 
 
 For ADB 
 
  Asian Development Bank 
  6 ADB Avenue 
  Mandaluyong City 
  1550 Metro Manila 
  Philippines 
 
 Facsimile Numbers: 
 
  (632) 636-2444 
  (632) 636-2391.  
 
 
 





9 

 

SCHEDULE 1 
 

Description of the Project 
 
 
1. The objective of the Project is to enhance productivity and sustainability of the 
flood control and drainage/irrigation schemes in the Subproject area. 
 
2. The Project shall comprise the following: 
 
 Part A - Capacity Development of WMOs on sustainable water resources 

planning and management through: 
  

(a) formulation of WMOs, WMAs and WMGs within each Subproject;  
 

(b) preparation of integrated water management plans for implementation 
in the Subprojects; 
 

(c) preparation of two additional integrated water management plans for 
future project; 

 
(d) endorsement and implementation of a subunit implementation plan by 

the relevant WMA for each Subproject;  
 

(e) capacity development support for the WMAs and WMGs in the 
Subprojects;  

 
(f) capacity development support for the existing WMAs and WMGs in the 

two ongoing Subprojects; and  
 

(g) operationalization of the O&M fund at each WMO level.   
 
 Part B - Restoration or construction of infrastructure functions of flood control 

and drainage/irrigation schemes in the Subproject area through rehabilitation 
and construction of water management infrastructure planned in respective 
subunit implementation plans.   

 
Part C - Strengthening institutional capacity of BWDB for sustainable 
participatory water resources planning and management. 

  
3. The Project will include Consulting Services for the above components.  
 
4. The Project is expected to be completed by 30 June 2022. 
 
 
 



10 

 

SCHEDULE 2 
 

Amortization Schedule 
 

(Southwest Area Integrated Water Resources Planning and Management Project 
-Additional Financing) 

 
 

Date Payment Due Payment of Principal 
   (expressed in Special  
  Drawing Rights)*  
 

15 Mar 2021 806,625.00 
15 Sep 2021 806,625.00 
15 Mar 2022 806,625.00 
15 Sep 2022 806,625.00 
15 Mar 2023 806,625.00 
15 Sep 2023 806,625.00 
15 Mar 2024 806,625.00 
15 Sep 2024 806,625.00 
15 Mar 2025 806,625.00 
15 Sep 2025 806,625.00 
15 Mar 2026 806,625.00 
15 Sep 2026 806,625.00 
15 Mar 2027 806,625.00 
15 Sep 2027 806,625.00 
15 Mar 2028 806,625.00 
15 Sep 2028 806,625.00 
15 Mar 2029 806,625.00 
15 Sep 2029 806,625.00 
15 Mar 2030 806,625.00 
15 Sep 2030 806,625.00 
15 Mar 2031 806,625.00 
15 Sep 2031 806,625.00 
15 Mar 2032 806,625.00 
15 Sep 2032 806,625.00 
15 Mar 2033 806,625.00 
15 Sep 2033 806,625.00 
15 Mar 2034 806,625.00 
15 Sep 2034 806,625.00 
15 Mar 2035 806,625.00 
15 Sep 2035 806,625.00 
15 Mar 2036 806,625.00 
15 Sep 2036 806,625.00 
15 Mar 2037 806,625.00 
15 Sep 2037 806,625.00 
15 Mar 2038 806,625.00 
15 Sep 2038 806,625.00 

  



  11 

Date Payment Due Payment of Principal 
   (expressed in Special  
  Drawing Rights)*  
 

15 Mar 2039 806,625.00 
15 Sep 2039 806,625.00 
15 Mar 2040 806,625.00 
15 Sep 2040 806,625.00 
 

TOTAL 
 

32,265,000.00 
 


 The arrangements for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 4.03 of the Loan Regulations. 



12 

 

SCHEDULE 3 
 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds 
 
 
General 
 
1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of 
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.) 
 
Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account 
 
2.  Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be 
disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for each item of expenditure set forth in 
the Table. 
 
Interest Charge 
 
3. The amount allocated to Category 7 is for financing the interest charge on the 
Loan during the implementation period of the Project.  
 
Reallocation 
 
4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal 
percentages set forth in the Table, 
 
 (a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the extent required to meet the estimated 
shortfall, amounts of the Loan which have been allocated to another Category but, in the 
opinion of ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such reallocation 
cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the withdrawal percentage applicable to 
such expenditures in order that further withdrawals under such Category may continue until 
all expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and 
 
 (b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the Borrower, reallocate 
such excess amount to any other Category. 
 

Disbursement Procedures 
 
5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in 
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.  
 
Retroactive Financing 
 
6. Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made for reimbursement of 
eligible expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 



 
Schedule 3 

 
 

13 

12 months before the date of this Loan Agreement, subject to a maximum amount equivalent 
to 20% of the Loan amount. 



14 
Attachment to Schedule 3 

 
 

 

TABLE 
 

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS 

(Southwest Area Integrated Water Resources Planning and Management Project 

- Additional Financing) 

 

Number 

 

Item 

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing Basis for Withdrawal 

from the Loan Account (SDR) 

Category Subcategory 

1 Works 16,125,000  
85% of total expenditure 
claimed 

2 Vehicles and Equipment  914,000   

2A Vehicles  710,000 
100% of total expenditure 
claimed* 

2B Equipment   204,000 
100% of total expenditure 
claimed* 

3 Resettlement 269,000  
100 % of total expenditure 
claimed 

4 
Training and capacity 
building  

6,059,000  
60% of total expenditure 
claimed 

5 Consulting Services  2,861,000  
49% of total expenditure 
claimed 

6 Project Management 2,244,000  
86% of total expenditure 
claimed 

7 Interest Charge 2,524,000  100% of amounts due 

8 Unallocated 1,269,000   

 Total 32,265,000   

* Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower. 



15 

 

SCHEDULE 4
 

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services 
 
 

General 
 
1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to 
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively. 
 
2. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan 
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the 
Consulting Guidelines, as applicable.  
 
Goods and Works 
 
3. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall only be 
procured on the basis of the methods of procurement set forth below:  
 

(a) International Competitive Bidding; 
(b) National Competitive Bidding; and 
(c) Shopping. 

 
4. The methods of procurement are subject to, among other things, the detailed 
arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan. The Borrower may 
only modify the methods of procurement or threshold values with the prior agreement of 
ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates to the Procurement Plan. 
 
National Competitive Bidding 
 
5. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any 
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower’s national competitive 
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in 
the Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications 
shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB. 
 
Community Participation in Procurement.  
  
6. The Borrower may use community participation in procurement for Works 
contracts for earth works in accordance with the agreed procedures set out in the 
Procurement Plan. 
 
Conditions for Award of Contract 
 
7. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract which involves 
environmental impacts until: 

 
(a) Department of Environment, under the Ministry of Environment and 

Forest has granted the final approval of the IEE; and 
 



 
Schedule 4 

 
 

16 

(b) the Borrower has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP 
into the Works contract.  

 
8. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract which involves involuntary 
resettlement impacts for a Subproject, until the Borrower has prepared and submitted to ADB 
the final RP for such Subproject based on the Subproject's detailed design, and obtained 
ADB's clearance of such RP. 
 
Consulting Services 
 
9. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, and except as set forth in the paragraph 
below, the Borrower shall apply quality- and cost-based selection for selecting and engaging 
Consulting Services. 
 
10. The Borrower shall apply the following method for selecting and engaging the 
specified Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set 
forth in the Procurement Plan: Consultants’ Qualifications Selection for hydraulic studies, GIS 
WMO database development, hydrological studies, benefit monitoring and evaluation, 
information management system development, and resettlement plan survey and 
implementation. 
 
Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights 
 
11. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured 
(including without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether 
separately procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate 
or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party. 
 
 (b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph. 
 
12. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants 
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party. 
 
ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions 
  
13. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and 
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan. 



17 
 

 

SCHEDULE 5 
 

Execution of Project; Financial Matters 
 
 
Implementation Arrangements 
 
1. The Borrower and BWDB shall ensure that the Project is implemented in 
accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to 
the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and 
ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan Agreement, the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.  
 
2. The Borrower and BWDB shall ensure that the PMO and the SMOs employ 
sufficient staff for the duration of the Project with adequate and relevant expertise in the field 
of project management, financial management, engineering, procurement, agriculture 
extensions, and environmental and social safeguards implementation. The Borrower and 
BWDB shall keep the PMO and the SMOs equipped with the necessary office space, 
facilities, equipment, support staff and management information systems for the entire 
duration of the Project. 

 
3. The Borrower and BWDB shall (a) ensure that all counterpart staff assigned to 
the PMO are assigned to the Project on a fulltime basis; and (b) undertake best efforts to 
ensure that they remain in their positions for a reasonable period of time, and that staff 
replacements do not unduly disrupt implementation of the Project. The Borrower and BWDB 
shall notify ADB of any proposed appointment of persons to key positions in the PMO and 
the SMOs, including the PMO project director and the SMO subproject manager. 

 
4. The PMO project director shall hold a rank of at least superintending engineer. 
Each SMO shall be led by an executive engineer. 
 
Counterpart Support 
 
5. Borrower shall make available to BWDB all counterpart fund required for 
timely and effective implementation of the Project, including, without limitation, any funds 
required to keep the PMO and SMOs fully equipped and fully staffed in accordance with the 
requirements set out in the PAM, to mitigate unforeseen environmental and social impacts, 
and to meet additional costs arising from design changes, price escalation in construction 
costs and/or other unforeseen circumstances. The Borrower shall make the resources thus 
required available to BWDB on a quarterly basis for each fiscal year. 
 
6. The Borrower shall reimburse BWDB for any taxes and duties imposed in the 
territory of the Borrower for Goods, Works and Consulting Services used in the carrying out 
of the Project no later than the fiscal year after the year in which the taxes and duties were 
incurred. 
 
Environment 
 
7. The Borrower shall ensure or cause BWDB to ensure that the preparation, 
design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and all 
Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 



 
Schedule 5 

 
 

18 

environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the IEE, the EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions set 
forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report. 
 
Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement 
 
8. The Borrower shall ensure or cause BWDB to ensure that all land and all 
rights-of-way required for the Project are made available to the Works contractor in 
accordance with the schedule agreed under the related Works contract and all land 
acquisition and resettlement activities are implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable 
laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; 
(b) the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; (c) the RF; and (d) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the respective RP, and any corrective or preventative actions set 
forth in the Safeguards Monitoring Report. 
 
9. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards, 
the RF or the RP, the Borrower shall ensure or cause BWDB to ensure that no physical or 
economic displacement takes place in connection with the Project until: 
 

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the RP; and 

 
(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 

established in accordance with the RP. 
 
 Tribes, Minor Races, Ethnic Sects and Community Peoples 
10. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project does not involve any risks or 
impacts to the tribes, minor races, ethnic sects and community peoples within the meaning of 
the SPS. If due to unforeseen circumstances, the Project involves any such impacts, the 
Borrower and BWDB shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies with all 
applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS. 
 
Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements  
 
11. The Borrower shall make available or cause BWDB to make available 
necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMP and the RP. 
 
Safeguards – Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts  
 
12. The Borrower shall ensure or cause BWDB to ensure that all bidding 
documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to: 
 

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the 
IEE, the EMP, and the RP (to the extent it concerns impacts on 
affected people during construction), and any corrective or 
preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;  
 

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;  
 



 
Schedule 5 

 
 

19 

(c) provide BWDB with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts 
that arise during construction, implementation or operation of the 
Project that were not considered in the IEE, the EMP, and the RP;  

 
(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 

infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and  

 
(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 

least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.  
 

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting  
 
13. The Borrower shall do the following or cause BWDB to do the following: 
 

(a) Submit Safeguards Monitoring Reports semiannually for Involuntary 
Resettlement Safeguards and annually for Environmental Safeguards 
to ADB and disclose relevant information from such reports to affected 
persons promptly upon submission;  

 

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project 
that were not considered in the IEE, the EMP, and the RP, promptly 
inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed 
description of the event and proposed corrective action plan; and 

 
(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 

and requirements set forth in the EMP, or the RP promptly after 
becoming aware of the breach. 

 
Prohibited List of Investments 
 
14. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan and/or the Grant are 
used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in 
Appendix 5 of the SPS. 
 
Labor Standards, Health and Safety 
  
15. The Borrower shall ensure that the core labor standards

 and the Borrower’s 
applicable laws and regulations are complied with during project implementation. The 
Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed 
by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with 
the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 
occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in 
respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of 
association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; and (f) disseminate, or 
engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually 
transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under 
the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area, 



 
Schedule 5 

 
 

20 

particularly women. 
 
16. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set forth 
in paragraph 15 above and provide ADB with regular reports. 
 
Gender and Development 
 
17. The Borrower shall ensure that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance 
with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include relevant provisions for 
contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) adequate resources are 
allocated for implementation of the GAP; and (d) progress on implementation of the GAP, 
including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets, are regularly 
monitored and reported to ADB. 
 
Institutional Development 
 
18. BWDB shall ensure that the OCWM becomes fully operationalized after 
undergoing institutional restructuring to strengthen its functions, especially in terms of WMO 
registration and management. BWDB shall ensure that adequate resources, in terms of both 
staffing and funding, will be provided to OCWM during project implementation and thereafter 
to ensure its organizational sustainability. 
 
Decentralized Water Management  
 
19. Within 24 months of the Effective Date, the Borrower shall have reviewed 
implementation of its Guidelines for Participatory Water Management 2001 and the 
Participatory Water Management Rules 2014, and have explored further options and actions 
satisfactory to ADB to improve the performance of participatory water management.  
 
Operation and Maintenance 
 
20. For each subunit with command area of less than 2,500 hectare, the Borrower 
shall transfer to the concerned WMO, the responsibility of O&M for such subunit’s water 
management structures pursuant to an O&M agreement, upon terms and conditions 
acceptable to ADB as set forth in Appendix 2 to the PAM. The WMO’s responsibility of O&M 
shall include ensuring that adequate O&M funds are available to cover the expected costs of 
minor O&M work at all times, as set forth in the O&M agreement.     
 
21. The Borrower shall allocate in its annual budget adequate resources for 
BWDB to carry out any major O&M works for the Project facilities as set out in the O&M 
agreement, and make the resources thus allocated available to BWDB on a quarterly basis. 

 
22. In accordance with the requirements of the Participatory Water Management 
Rules, 2014, the BWDB shall ensure the sustainability of WMOs, including monitoring proper 
implementation of WMOs’ obligations under the O&M agreement and conducting regular 
audits of O&M funds. 

 
23. In processing any lease request, the PMO and/or SMOs shall prioritize WMOs 
over other users, if any WMO requests to lease the land and/or water bodies owned by 
BWDB. 



 
Schedule 5 

 
 

21 

 
Public Awareness and Communication 
 
24. The Borrower and BWDB shall comply with and implement the stakeholder 
communication strategy developed for the Project and allocate adequate resources for such 
implementation. 
 
Inter-agency Coordination 
  
25. Borrower shall be fully committed to the Project and shall ensure that all of the 
ministries, agencies and divisions involved in the implementation of the Project, including the 
Ministry of Water Resources, Department of Agriculture Extension, Department of Fisheries, 
Department of Public Health Engineering, and any other relevant authority, give their full 
cooperation to ensure smooth implementation of the Project.  
 
Policy Dialogue and Coordination with Development Partners 
 
26. The Borrower and BWDB shall keep ADB informed of discussions (a) among 
government and semi-government bodies with responsibility for water sector development; 
and (b) with Japan International Cooperation Agency, the Kingdom of the Netherlands, World 
Bank and other multilateral and bilateral agencies, that have implications for the 
implementation of the Project, and shall provide ADB with an opportunity to comment on any 
proposed interventions in the water sector resulting from such discussions. The Borrower 
and BWDB shall take ADB’s views into consideration before finalizing and implementing any 
such proposals. 
 
Governance and Corruption 
 
27. The Borrower and BWDB shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anticorruption Policy 
(1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate 
directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice 
relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all 
necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.  
 
28. The Borrower and BWDB shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions 
acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions 
specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing 
and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service 
providers as they relate to the Project. 

 
29. The Borrower and BWDB shall announce the Project and business 
opportunities associated with the Project on their websites. In addition, the websites shall at 
least disclose the following information in relation to Goods, Works and Consulting Services 
procured for the Project: (a) the list of participating bidders; (b) the name of the winning 
bidder; (c) the amount of the contracts awarded; and (d) the Goods, Works and Consulting 
Services procured. 

 
30. The Borrower shall conduct periodic inspections and random spot checks of 
civil servants’ and contractors’ activities related to the procurement of Goods, Works and 
Consulting Services and to fund withdrawals and settlements under the Project. 



 
Schedule 5 

 
 

22 

 
Combating Money Laundering and Financing of Terrorism 

 
31. The Borrower and BWDB shall: (a) comply with applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower on combating money laundering and financing of terrorism and 
that Loan proceeds are not used, directly or indirectly, in money laundering or financing of 
terrorism; (b) formulate and implement internal control procedures, including customer due 
diligence procedures, to prevent violation of subparagraph (a) hereinabove; and (c) promptly 
inform ADB if there is any violation or potential violation of subparagraph (a) hereinabove. In 
the event that ADB informs the Borrower of its concern that there has been such an alleged 
violation, the Borrower and BWDB shall (i) cooperate in good faith with ADB and its 
representatives so that ADB can determine whether such a violation has occurred; (ii) 
respond promptly and in reasonable detail to any query from ADB; and (iii) furnish 
documentary support for such response upon ADB’s request. 
 
Grievance Redress Mechanism 
 
32. Within 12 months after the Effective Date, the Borrower shall ensure that the 
BWDB prepare a grievance redress mechanism, acceptable to ADB, to receive and resolve 
complaints/grievances or act upon reports from stakeholders on any irregularities, including 
grievances due to resettlement. The mechanism shall (a) make the public aware of the 
existence of this grievance redress mechanism; (b) receive, review and address 
complaints/grievances of stakeholders of the Project, in relation to the Project, any of the 
service providers, or any person responsible for carrying out any aspect of the Project; and 
(c) proactively and constructively respond to them. 
 
 



