












































Loan Agreement (Ordinary Operations [Concessional]) for Loan 3877-CAM: Irrigated Agricuture Improvement Project 


LOAN NUMBER 3877-CAM(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

{Irrigated Agriculture Improvement Project)

between

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 5 DECEMBER 2019

CAM 51159



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 5 December 2019 between KINGDOM OF 
CAMBODIA ("Borrower11) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK {"ADB*),

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB ("ADB Grant Agreement"), ADB has agreed to provide a grant in the amount of two million 
one hundred and sixty thousand Dollars ($2,160,000) from ADB's Special Funds resources to 
assist in financing a part of the Project;

(C) by a grant agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and 
ADB ("HLTF Grant Agreement "), ADB has agreed to administer a grant from the High-Level 
Technology Fund ("HLTF’) in the amount equivalent to one million and six hundred thousand 
Dollars ($1,600,000) for the purpose of cofinancing certain activities under the Project; and

(D) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB's ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows;

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (Loan Regulations’1), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) "Consulting Services" means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;

<b) “Data Center" means the National Water Resources Data Management 
Center to be established in MOWRAM, as further described in the PAM;



2

(c) “EIA" means the environmental impact assessment for the Stung Chinit 
South Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted 
by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(d) J,EMP"' means the environmental management plan for each Subproject, 
including any update thereto, incorporated In the EIA or IEE, as the case 
may be;

(e) 'Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(f) "FWUC1" means farmer water user communities;

(g) J'GAPJ" means the gender action plan for the Project, including any 
updates thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower, and cleared 
by ADB;

(h) ' Goods1’ means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance;

(i) "HIV/AIDS" means human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome;

(j) "IBBA"’ means the Important Bird and Biodiversity Area, as more fully 
described in the PAM;

(k) "IEE” means the initial environmental examination for the Subprojects 
other that Stung Chinit South Subproject, including any update thereto, 
prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(l) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards" means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(m) "Kam pi ng Pouy Subproject” means a subproject located in Battambang 
province, as further described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement and 
the PAM;

(n) "Loan Disbursement Handbook" means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(o) "MOWRAM" means the Ministry of Water Resources and Meteorology 
of the Borrower or any successor thereto;

(p) "Nonconsulting Services’" means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;



3

(q) "O&M" means operation and maintenance;

(r) PAM" means the project administration manual for the Project dated 7 
October 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

(s) "Procurement Manual" means the Procurement Manual under the 
standard operating procedures prepared by the Borrower and endorsed 
by ADB, which sets forth the procurement-related policies and 
procedures for externally-financed projects and programs;

(t) "Procurement Plan" means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
7 October 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Policy, the 
Procurement Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with ADB 
(which include the Standard Operating Procedures and the 
Procurement Manual as updated from time to time);

(u) 'Procurement Policy* means ADB's Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting Services (2017, as amended from 
time to time);

{v) ^Procurement Regulations” means ADB’s Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods, Works, Nonconsulting and Consulting 
Services {2017, as amended from time to time);

(w) “Project Executing Agency1’ for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of the Loan Regulations means MOWRAM or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for carrying out of the Project;

(x) “Project facilities” means ail facilities incorporating or using Goods or 
Works;

(y) “RP’1 means the resettlement plan for the Kamping Pouy Subproject, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(z) “Safeguards Monitoring Report" means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the BMP and the RP, including 
any corrective and preventative actions;

(aa) ’Services" means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services;

(bb) "SPS* means ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(cc) "SRP” means sustainable rice platform, a multi-stakeholder platform 
established by the United Nations Environment Program and the 
International Rice Research Institute in December 2011;



4

<dd) “Standard Operating Procedures” means the Standard Operating 
Procedures of the Borrower (sub-decree no. 74 ANK.BK dated 22 May 
2012, as amended from time to time) providing the procedures 
applicable to all externally financed projects and programs;

(ee) "Stung Chinit South Subproject" means the subproject located in 
Kampong Thom province, as further described in Schedule 1 to this 
Loan Agreement and the PAM;

(ff) ‘ Subproject' means a subproject under the Project, as further described
in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement and the PAM;

(gg) ‘Works” means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services and project related services that are 
provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract; and

(hh) WRIS” means the water resources information system to be developed 
under the Project, as further described in the PAM.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2 01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADBJs
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred seventeen million Dollars 
($117,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter

(c) The term "grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2.02 The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 1 June and 1 December in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.



5

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03{a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2025 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Bo Tower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02 (a) The Borrower shall cause the Project Executing
Agency (i) maintain separate accounts and records for the Project; (ii) pre pa re annual financial 
statements for the Project in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; 
(iii) have such financial statements audited annually by independent auditors whose 
qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, In accordance with 
auditing standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors 
prepare a report, which includes the auditors' opinion(s) on the financial statements and the 
use of the Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the 
internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) 
furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such 
audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, 
and such other information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall 
from time to time reasonably request



6

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of AD B’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADBJs website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon AD B’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods, Works and Services, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the Borrower shall have failed to perform 
any of its obligations under the ADB Grant Agreement or the HLTF Grant Agreement.

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8 07(d) of the Loan Regulations: the events 
specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6.01. The following are specified as additional conditions to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations:

{a) the ADB Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this 
Loan Agreement and the HLTF Grant Agreement) shall have been 
fulfilled; and

(b) the HLTF Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to 



7

their effectiveness (other then a condition requiring the effectiveness of 
this Loan Agreement) shall have been fulfilled.

Section 6.02 The following is specified as an additional matter, for the 
purposes of Section 9 02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB: the ADB Grant Agreement and the HLTF Grant Agreement shall have 
each been duly authorized, executed and delivered on behalf of the Borrower, and are legally 
binding in accordance with their terms.

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Minister of Economy and Finance of the Borrower is 
designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan 
Regulations

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Economy and Finance
St. 92, Sangkat Wat Phnom
Khan Daun Penh
Phnom Penh, Cambodia

Facsimile Numbers:

+355 23 427-798
+855 23 438-424

For ADB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers.

(632) 8636-2444
(632) 8636-2231.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

KINGDOM OF

By_________
H.E. DR. AON PORNMONIROTH

Deputy Prime Minister 
Minister of Economy and Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

SUNNIYA DURRANI-JAMAL
Country Director 

Cambodia Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to enhance water and agriculture productivity in 
the provinces of Battambang, Kampong Cham, Kampong Thom and Takeo {“Project Areas11).

2. The Project shall comprise the following:

Component 1: Efficiency and climate resilience of irrigation systems 
enhanced - this includes the modernization and climate-proofing of four 
irrigation Subprojects in each of the Project Areas through (a) remodeling and 
improving reservoir embankment, pumping stations, canals and drains as well 
as appurtenant structures; (b) improving water sharing arrangements between 
linked systems; (c) strengthening existing FWUCs and forming additional 
FWUCs to improve the sustain ability of the operations and maintenance 
scheme; (d) piloting an irrigation asset management information system to 
improve operations and maintenance budgeting and procedures; and (e) 
formulating an SRP for the Stung Chinit South Subproject. The Subprojects to 
be financed under this Component comprise:

(a) Kamping Pouy Subproject in Battambang province;

(b) Prek Po Subproject in Kampong Cham province;

(c) Stung Chinit South Subproject in Kampong Thom province; and

(d) Canal 15 Subproject in Takec Province.

Component 2: Water resources management improved - this includes (a) 
installing hydromet stations; (b) capacity training for government staff, including 
MOWRAM and fts provincial departments, and FWUCs; (c) establishing a Data 
Center; and (d) developing a WRIS.

3. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2024.



10

SCHEDULE 2

Amortization Schedule

Payment Due Payment of Principal 
(expressed in USD)

1 June 2028
1 December 2028
1 June 2029
1 December 2029
1 June 2030
1 December 2030
1 June 2031
1 December 2031
1 June 2032
1 December 2032
1 June 2033
1 December 2033
1 June 2034
1 December 2034
1 June 2035
1 December 2035
1 June 2036
1 December 2036
1 June 2037
1 December 2037
1 June 2033
1 December 2038
1 June 2039
1 December 2039
1 June 2040
1 December 2040
1 June 2041
1 December 2041
1 June 2042
1 December 2042
1 June 2043
1 December 2043
1 June 2044
1 December 2044
1 June 2045
1 December 2045
1 June 2046
1 December 2046

2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437.500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2.437,500
2,437,500
2,437.500
2,437,500
2,437,500



11

Schedule 2

The arrangements for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 4.03 of the Loan Regulations.

Payment Due Payment of Principal 
(expressed in USD)

1 June 2047
1 December 2047
1 June 2048
1 December 2048
1 June 2049
1 December 2049
1 June 2050
1 December 2050
1 June 2051
1 December 2051 
Total

2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500
2,437,500

117,000,000



12

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of 
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category ("Table”). (Reference to ‘'Category1' in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be 
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each Hem of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal 
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (I) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in 
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed in the territory of the Borrower.

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount 
Allocated for 

ADB 
Financing 
_____ ($1______ 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan 
Account

1 Works (Stung Chinit South
Subproject)

31,100,000 93.5% of total expenditure claimed

2 Works (Other Subprojects) 68,070,000 100% of total expenditures claimed

3 Consulting Services (the 
Data Center)

580,000 26.6% of total expenditures claimed*

4 Consulting Services 
(Others)

6,550,000 100% of total expenditures claimed*

5 Goods 7,450.000 100% of total expenditure claimed*

a
Capacity building, 
incremental operating 
costs

3,250,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

TOTAL 117,000,000
;■ ■. ____:. ■■!



14

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that the Project is implemented 
in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change 
to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower, through 
MOWRAM, and ADB, In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan 
Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Procurement

2. The Borrower shall cause MQWRAM to ensure that:

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in 
accordance with the Procurement Policy and the Procurement 
Regulations;

(b) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth in ths Procurement Plan, including the 
procurement and selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and 
AD B’s review requirements. The Borrower may modify the detailed 
arrangements set forth in the Procurement Plan only with the prior 
agreement of ADB, and such modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan; and

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all 
computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately 
procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do 
not violate or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right 
or claim of any third party; and (ii) all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods, Works and Services contain appropriate representations, 
warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the contractor, supplier, 
consultant or service provider with respect to the matters referred to in 
this subparagraph.

3. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM not to award any Works contracts which 
involves environmental impacts until MOWRAM has:

(a) obtained the final approval of the EIA or the I EE, as the case may be, 
from the Borrower’s relevant authority; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.

4. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM not to award any Works contracts for a 
Subproject involving involuntary resettlement impacts until the Borrower has prepared and 



15

Schedule 4

submitted to ADB the final RP based on the Subproject's detailed design and obtained ADB's 
clearance of such RP.

Environment

5. The Borrower shall cause MOW RAM to ensure that the preparation, design, 
construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and all Project 
facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the EIA or the 1EE, as the case may be, the EMP, and any corrective 
or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Reports

6. For the Stung Chinit South Subproject, the Borrower shall, and shall cause 
MOWRAM to, ensure that during and after the project implementation period, it (a) will not 
extend or permit the extension of any canals into the IBBA; and (b) will not permit any third 
party pumping from command area canals.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

7. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that all land and ail rights-of- 
way required for the Kamping Pouy Subproject and the Project facilities to be developed under 
the Kamping Pouy Subproject are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with 
the schedule agreed under the related Works contract and all land acquisition and resettlement 
activities are implemented in compliance with (a) all measures and requirements set forth in 
the RP based on all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land acquisition 
and involuntary resettlement; (b) the provisions of SPS relating to Involuntary Resettlement 
Safeguards; and (c) any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring 
Reports.

8. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards or 
the RP, the Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that no physical or economic 
displacement takes place in connection with the Kamping Pouy Subproject until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the RP; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the RP.

9. If voluntary land donation or negotiated settlement is required, the Borrower 
shall cause MQWRAM to ensure that such voluntary land donation or negotiated settlement 
shall be carried out in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and 
SPS.

Indigenous Peoples and Involuntary Resettlement for Concerned Subprojects

10. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that the Project does not have 
any indigenous peoples impacts and the Subprojects other than the Kamping Pouy Subproject 
do not have any involuntary resettlement impacts, both within the meaning of the SPS. In the 
event that the Project does have any such impact, the Borrower shall take all steps required 



16

Schedule 4

to ensure that the Project or any concerned Subproject complies with the applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Grievance Redress Mechanism

11. The Borrower shall ensure that a safeguards grievance redress mechanism 
acceptable to ADB is established at the project management unit in accordance with the 
provisions of the EIA, EMP and RP, within the timeframes specified in the relevant EIA, IEE, 
EMP and RP, to consider safeguards complaints.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

12. T he Bo rro wer shall make availa ble necessa ry bu d g eta ry a n d h uma n resou rces 
to fulfy implement any EMP and RP

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

13. The Borrower shall, and shall cause MOWRAM to, ensure that all bidding 
documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the EIA 
or the IEE, the EMP and the RP (to the extent they concern impacts on 
affected people during construction), and any corrective or preventative 
actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures; and

(c) provide the Project Executing Agency with a written notice of any 
unanticipated environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks 
or impacts that arise during construction, implementation or operation of 
the Project that were not considered in the EIA or the IEE, the EMP, and 
the RP.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

14. The Bo Tower shall, and shall cause MOWRAM to, do the following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB within one 
month after the reporting period at the end of each half of the calendar 
year, and disclose relevant information from such reports to affected 
persons promptly upon submission,

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered tn the EIA or the IEE, the EMP and RP, promptly inform 
ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description 
of the event and proposed corrective action plan in accordance with the 
SPS;



17

Schedule 4

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP and the RP promptly after 
becoming aware of the breach; and

(d) prior to the commencement of the Works, prepare and submit to ADB a 
handover letter which certifies that all activities, measures and 
requirements set forth in the RP are duly accomplished.

Prohibited List of Investments

15. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance 
any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the 
SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

16. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that the core labor standards 
and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project 
implementation. The Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents and 
contracts financed by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: 
(a) comply with the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable 
workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers 
tn respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) do not restrict the 
workers from developing a legally permissible means of expressing their grievances and 
protecting their rights regarding working conditions and terms of employment; and (f) 
disseminate information on the risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to 
the employees of contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the local 
communities surrounding the Project area, particularly women.

17. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to strictly monitor compliance with the 
requirements set forth in paragraph 16 above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

18. The Borrower shall ensure that (a) the GAP is implemented in accordance with 
its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include relevant provisions for contractors 
to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for 
implementation of the GAP; and(d) progress on implementation of the GAP, including progress 
toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets, are regularly monitored and reported 
to ADB using ADB's template.

Counterpart Support

19. The Borrower shall ensure that counterpart funds for the Project are provided 
on a timely basis. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that the Project 
Executing Agency has sufficient funds to satisfy its liabilities arising from any Goods, Works, 
Goods and Services contract.



18

Schedule 4

Operation and Maintenance of Project Facilities

20. The Borrower shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that the Project facilities are 
operated and maintained appropriately and in accordance with the standards and 
requirements prescribed by the applicable taws and regulations of the Borrower, and that 
adequate budgetary and other resources are promptly provided for such operation and 
maintenance.

Water Resources Management Scholarship. Internship, Training and Mentoring Program

21. The Borrower shall ensure compliance with the candidates’ selection criteria for 
the water resources management program, as further specified in the PAM.

Governance and Anticorruption

22. The Borrower shall (a) comply with ADB's Anticorruption Policy (1993, as 
amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directlyr or 
through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the 
Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for 
satisfactory completion of such investigation.

23. The Borrower shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB 
are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the right 
of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing and implementing 
agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service providers as they relate 
to the Project.



