





















































44328-013: Uplands Irrigation and Water Resources Management Sector Project


 

 

  
LOAN NUMBER CAM-3289(SF) 

 
 
 
 
 

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Special Operations) 

 
(Uplands Irrigation and Water Resources Management Sector Project) 

 
 
 
 
 

between 
 
 
 
 
 

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA 
 
 
 
 
 

and 
 
 
 
 
 

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 
 

DATED 10 NOVEMBER 2015 
 
 
 
 

 

 
CAM 44328 



 

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Special Operations) 

 
 

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 10 November 2015 between KINGDOM OF 
CAMBODIA (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”). 

 
WHEREAS 
 
(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 

Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement; and 
 

(B) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB's Special 
Funds resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein; 

 
NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows: 

 
 
 

ARTICLE I 
 

Loan Regulations; Definitions 
 
 

Section 1.01. All provisions of the Special Operations Loan 
Regulations of ADB, dated 1 January 2006 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby made 
applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set 
forth herein.  

 
Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 

terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires.  Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings: 

  

(a) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as amended from time to 
time); 
 

(b) “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan as described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;   
 

(c) “Environmental Assessment and Review Framework” or “EARF” 
means the environmental assessment and review framework for the Project, including any 
update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB; 
 

(d) “Environmental Management Plan” or “EMP” means each 
environmental management plan for a Subproject, including any update thereto, incorporated 
in the respective IEE; 

 
(e) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements 

set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the SPS; 



 2 

 
(f) “FWUC” means a farmer water user community; 

 
(g) “GAP” means the gender action plan for the Project, including any 

update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB; 
 

(h) “Goods” means equipment and materials to be financed out of 
the proceeds of the Loan, including related services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation, commissioning, training, and initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting 
Services; 
 

(i) “HIV/AIDS” means human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome; 
 

(j) “Initial Environmental Examination” or “IEE” means the initial 
environmental examination for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB; 
 

(k) “Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the SPS; 
 

(l) “Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2015, as amended from time to time); 
 

(m) “MOWRAM” means the Borrower’s Ministry of Water Resources and 
Meteorology, or any successor thereto; 
 

(n) “PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated   
12 August 2015 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated from time to time in 
accordance with the respective administrative procedures of the Borrower and ADB;  
 

(o) “PDWRAM” means the provincial department of water resources and 
meteorology of the Borrower; 
 

(p) “Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time); 
 

(q) “Procurement Manual” means the Procurement Manual under the 
Standard Operating Procedures prepared by the Borrower and endorsed by ADB, which sets 
forth the procurement-related policies and procedures for externally-financed projects and 
programs; 
 

(r) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
12 August 2015 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated from time to time in 
accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, the Consulting Guidelines, and other 
arrangements agreed with ADB (which include the Standard Operating Procedures and the 
Procurement Manual as updated from time to time);  
 

(s) “Project Executing Agency” for the purposes of, and within the 
meaning of, the Loan Regulations means MOWRAM or any successor thereto acceptable to 
ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the Project;  



 3 

 
(t) “Project facilities” means facilities to be constructed, procured, 

rehabilitated and/or maintained under the Project;  
 

(u) “Project Provinces” means Kampong Thom province and Battambang 
province within the territory of the Borrower where the Project is carried out; 
 

(v) “Resettlement Framework” or “RF” means the land acquisition and 
resettlement framework for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted 
by the Borrower and cleared by ADB; 

 
(w) “Resettlement Plan” or “RP” means each resettlement plan for a 

Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant 
to the requirements set forth in the RF and cleared by ADB; 

 
(x) “Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS” means ADB's Safeguard Policy 

Statement (2009);  
 

(y) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with implementation of, and 
compliance with, the EMPs and the RPs (as applicable), including any necessary corrective 
and preventative actions in compliance with EARF and RF; 

 
(z) “Standard Operating Procedures” means the standard operating 

procedures of the Borrower dated 22 May 2012 (as amended from time to time) providing 
procedures applicable to all externally-financed projects and programs; 

 
(aa) “Subproject” means a subproject to be selected and carried out in 

accordance with paragraph 21 of Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement and the relevant 
provisions of the PAM; and 
 

(bb) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, and project related 
services that are provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding 
Consulting Services.  

 
 
 

ARTICLE II 
 

The Loan 
 
 

Section 2.01.  ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's Special 
Funds resources an amount in various currencies equivalent to forty-three million one 
hundred twenty-one thousand Special Drawing Rights (SDR43,121,000). 

 
Section 2.02.  (a) The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest 

charge at the rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, 
on the amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to 
time. 



 4 

 
(b) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (a) hereinabove means 

the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement. 

 
Section 2.03.  The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 

shall be payable semiannually on 15 April and 15 October in each year. 
 

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement. 

 
Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of 

the Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 
4.03(a) and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.  

 
 
 

ARTICLE III 
 

Use of Proceeds of the Loan 
 
 

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to 
be applied to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement. 

 
Section 3.02.

 
 The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 

withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB. 

 
Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 

shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement.    

 
Section 3.04.  Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 

shall cause all items of expenditure financed out of the proceeds of the Loan to be used 
exclusively in the carrying out of the Project. 

 
Section 3.05. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of 

Goods, Works, and Consulting Services shall be made only on account of expenditures 
relating to: 

 
(a) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Works and 

Consulting Services which are supplied from such member countries of 
ADB as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as eligible 
sources for procurement; and 
 



 5 

(b) Goods, Works, and Consulting Services which meet such other 
eligibility requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time 
to time. 
 

Section 3.06.   The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 September 2021 or such other date as may from time to 
time be agreed between the Borrower and ADB. 

 
 
 

ARTICLE IV 
 

Particular Covenants 
 
 

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement. 

 
Section 4.02.  (a)  The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate 

accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project 
in accordance with accounting principles acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with international standards for 
auditing or the national equivalent acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have 
the auditors prepare a report (which includes the auditors’ opinion on the financial 
statements, use of the Loan proceeds and compliance with the financial covenants of this 
Loan Agreement as well as on the use of the procedures for imprest fund and statement of 
expenditures) and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control 
of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no 
later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial 
statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other 
information concerning  these documents  and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to 
time reasonably request. 
 
  (b)  ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 30 days of the date 
of their receipt by posting them on ADB’s website. 
 

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to 
the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such 
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted 
only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall 
otherwise agree. 

 
Section 4.03.  The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 

inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents. 
 
 



 6 

ARTICLE V  
 

Effectiveness 
 
 
Section 5.01.  A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 

specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations. 

 
 
 

ARTICLE VI 
 

Miscellaneous 
 
 

Section 6.01.  The Minister of Economy and Finance of the Borrower 
is designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the 
Loan Regulations. 

 
Section 6.02.  The following addresses are specified for the purposes 

of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations: 
 
 For the Borrower 
 
  The Ministry of Economy and Finance 
  St. 92, Sangkat Wat Phnom  
  Khan Daun Penh 
  Phnom Penh 
  Cambodia 
 
  Facsimile Numbers: 
 
   (855-23) 427 798 
   (855-23) 428 424. 
 
 
 For ADB 
 
  Asian Development Bank 
  6 ADB Avenue 
  Mandaluyong City 
  1550 Metro Manila 
  Philippines 
  
 Facsimile Numbers: 
 
  (632) 636-2444 
  (632) 636-2331. 
 





 8 

SCHEDULE 1 
 

Description of the Project 
 
 
1. The objective of the Project is to enhance water and agricultural productivity in the 
Project Provinces.  
 
2. The Project shall comprise the following outputs: 
 

Output 1: Enhanced efficiency and climate resilience of irrigation systems 
comprising the rehabilitation, modernization, and climate proofing of at least three 
irrigation systems to increase the cultivated area to approximately 29,500 hectares in 
the Project Provinces.  Specifically, this output shall: 
 

(a) rehabilitate undersluice and spillway of Taing Kraisang headworks, 
approximately 22 km main Taing Kraisang canal, and approximately 
48 km secondary and tertiary canals; 

 
(b) install pumping system and associated distribution channels to lift 

water by a maximum of 3 meters for area of approximately 2,960 
hectares of developed rain-fed land in Taing Kraisang command; 

 
(c) rehabilitate Prek Chik headworks (including rising of spillway by 

approximately 1.5 meters), approximately 28 km main Prek Chik canal, 
and approximately 70.2 km secondary and tertiary canals to cover 
approximately 10,400 hectares net irrigated area; 

 
(d) install structures and gauges for water measurement, control and 

distribution on Taing Krasaing and Prek Chik main and distribution 
canals;   

 
(e) improve drainage facilities for approximately 1,800 hectares for climate 

proofing of the irrigation facilities against floods; 
 
(f) laser land level approximately 2,000 hectares; and 
 
(g) conduct feasibility study, design and improvement works of O Kra 

Nahk irrigation system for approximately 1,500 hectares in Kampong 
Thom province and other non-core Subprojects. 

 
 

Output 2: Improved water resource management consisting of the following: 
 

(a) organization of FWUCs and provision of gender inclusive trainings to 
FWUCs’ members in the operation and maintenance of canals, 
management of FWUCs, issues related to climate variability and 
change, water management, and involve them in design and 
implementation of Subprojects; 
 



 9 

(b) installation of hydro-meteorological stations in the watersheds for 
water resource monitoring; 
 

(c) establishment of canals flow measurement system; 
 

(d) training staff of MOWRAM, Department of Farmer Water User 
Communities, PDWRAMs, FWUCs and Ministry of Agriculture, 
Forestry and Fisheries on modern canal operation techniques, 
irrigation scheduling, watershed management, water management and 
awareness on strengthening climate resilience in water resources 
management; 
 

(e) modernization of canal operations;  
 

(f) irrigation scheduling and integrating with canal flow gauging system to 
manage supplies particularly during droughts; and 
 

(g) designing of joint reservoir operation of Stung Chinit and Taing 
Krasaing reservoirs in Kampong Thom province and Bassac and 
Dauntri reservoirs in Battambang province to improve water sharing 
arrangements between linked systems and ensure equitable 
distribution particularly during droughts. 

 
3. The Project also includes the provision of consulting services for project management 
and implementation consultants and external monitoring agency for environmental 
safeguards. 
 
4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 March 2021. 



 

 

10 

SCHEDULE 2 
 

Amortization Schedule 
 

(Uplands Irrigation and Water Resources Management Sector Project) 
 

Date Payment Due  
Payment of Principal 

(expressed in Special Drawing Rights)* 
15 October 2023 898,354 
15 April 2024 898,354 
15 October 2024 898,354 
15 April 2025 898,354 
15 October 2025 898,354 
15 April 2026 898,354 
15 October 2026 898,354 
15 April 2027 898,354 
15 October 2027 898,354 
15 April 2028 898,354 
15 October 2028 898,354 
15 April 2029 898,354 
15 October 2029 898,354 
15 April 2030 898,354 
15 October 2030 898,354 
15 April 2031 898,354 
15 October 2031 898,354 
15 April 2032 898,354 
15 October 2032 898,354 
15 April 2033 898,354 
15 October 2033 898,354 
15 April 2034 898,354 
15 October 2034 898,354 
15 April 2035 898,354 
15 October 2035 898,354 
15 April 2036 898,354 
15 October 2036 898,354 
15 April 2037 898,354 
15 October 2037 898,354 
15 April 2038 898,354 
15 October 2038 898,354 
15 April 2039 898,354 
15 October 2039 898,354 
15 April 2040 898,354 
15 October 2040 898,354 
15 April 2041 898,354 
15 October 2041 898,354 
15 April 2042 898,354 
15 October 2042 898,354 
15 April 2043 898,354 
15 October 2043 898,354 
15 April 2044 898,354 
15 October 2044 898,354 



 11 

15 April 2045 898,354 
15 October 2045 898,354 
15 April 2046 898,354 
15 October 2046 898,354 
15 April 2047 898,362 
TOTAL 43,121,000 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*
 The arrangements for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 4.03 of the Loan 

Regulations. 

 
 
 



 

 

12 

SCHEDULE 3 
 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds 
 
 
General 
 
1.  The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of 
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”).  (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.) 
 
Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account 
 
2.  Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be 
disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for each item of expenditure set forth in 
the Table. 
 
Interest Charge 
 
3.  The amount allocated to Category 6 is for financing the interest charge on the 
Loan during the implementation period of the Project.  
 
Reallocation 
 
4.  Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal 
percentages set forth in the Table, 
 
  (a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the extent required to meet the estimated 
shortfall, amounts of the Loan which have been allocated to another Category but, in the 
opinion of ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such reallocation 
cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the withdrawal percentage applicable to 
such expenditures in order that further withdrawals under such Category may continue until 
all expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and 
 
  (b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the Borrower, reallocate 
such excess amount to any other Category. 
 
Disbursement Procedures 
 
5.  Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in 
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook. 
 
 
 

 
 
 



 
 

Attachment to Schedule 3 
 

 

13 

TABLE 
ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS 

(Uplands Irrigation and Water Resources Management Sector Project) 
 

 
Number 

 
Category 

Total Amount 
Allocated for ADB 

Financing 
(SDR) 

Percentage and Basis for 
Withdrawal from the Loan 

Account 

1 Works  29,481,000 
100% of total expenditure 
claimed* 

2 
Hydrometeorology 
Equipment  862,000 

100% of total expenditure 
claimed 

3 
Office Equipment, 
Furniture and Vehicle 719,000 

100% of total expenditure 
claimed 

4 Consulting Services  3,485,000 
100% of total expenditure 
claimed 

5 
Incremental Operating 
Cost  

180,000 
100% of total expenditure 
claimed 

6 
Interest During 
Implementation  

1,164,000 100% of amount due 

7 Unallocated 7,230,000 
 

 Total 43,121,000 
 

* Exclusive of taxes and duties imposed within the territory of the Borrower. 



 

 

14 

SCHEDULE 4
 

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services 
 
 

General 
 
1.   The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to 
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively. 
 
2.   All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan 
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the 
Consulting Guidelines, as applicable.  
 
Goods and Works 
 
3.  Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall only be 
procured on the basis of the methods of procurement set forth below:  
 

(a) International Competitive Bidding; 
(b) National Competitive Bidding; and 
(c) Shopping. 

 
4. The methods of procurement are subject to, among other things, the detailed 
arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan.  The Borrower may 
only modify the methods of procurement or threshold values with the prior agreement of 
ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates to the Procurement Plan. 
 
Domestic Preference 
 
5.  The Borrower may grant a margin of preference in the evaluation of bids 
under international competitive bidding in accordance with paragraphs 2.55(a) and 2.56 of 
the Procurement Guidelines for domestically manufactured Goods and paragraphs 2.55(b) 
and 2.56 of the Procurement Guidelines for domestic Works. 
 
National Competitive Bidding 
 
6.   The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any 
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower’s national competitive 
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in 
the Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications 
shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB. 
 
Conditions for Award of Contract 
 
7.   The Borrower shall not award any Works contracts until: 
 

(a) MOWRAM has obtained the final approval of the IEE from the 
Borrower’s Ministry of Environment; 
 



 

 
Schedule 4 

 
 

15 

(b) the respective Project Provinces have incorporated the relevant 
provisions from the EMP and RP into the concerned Works contracts; 
and 

 
(c) the Borrower has prepared and submitted to ADB the final RP (if 

applicable) based on the Project's detailed design, and obtained ADB's 
clearance of such RP. 

 
Consulting Services    
 
8. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, and except as set forth in the paragraph 
below, the Borrower shall apply quality- and cost-based selection for selecting and engaging 
Consulting Services. 
 
9.   The Borrower shall apply methods for selecting and engaging the specified 
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan. 
 
Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights 
 
10.   (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured 
(including without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether 
separately procured or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate 
or infringe any industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party. 
 
  (b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph. 
 
11.   The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants 
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party. 
 
ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions 
 
12. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and 
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan. 
 

 
 
 



 
 

 

16 

SCHEDULE 5  
 

Execution of Project; Environmental, Social and Financial Matters 
 
 
Implementation Arrangements 
 
1. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project is implemented in accordance with the 
detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM and RF, as applicable. Any subsequent change 
to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and 
ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan Agreement, the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

 
 

 

Environment 
 
2. The Borrower shall ensure or cause MOWRAM to ensure that the preparation, 
design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project and all 
Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
environment, health and safety; (b) the applicable principles and requirements sets forth in 
the SPS; and (c) all measures and requirements set forth in the EARF, IEE, the EMP, and 
any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

 
 

 

3. The Borrower shall ensure or cause MOWRAM to ensure that no Subproject with 
Category A environmental as defined in the SPS is financed under the Project. 
 
Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement 
 
4. The Borrower shall ensure or cause MOWRAM to ensure that all land and all rights-
of-way required for the Project are made available to the Works contractor in accordance 
with the schedule agreed under the related Works contract and all land acquisition and 
resettlement activities are implemented in compliance with the RF and/or RPs based on (a) 
all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land acquisition and involuntary 
resettlement; (b) the applicable principles and requirements set forth in the SPS; and (c) any 
necessary corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report as 
agreed by the Inter-Ministerial Resettlement Committee (IRC). 
 

5. Without limiting the application of the SPS or the RP(s), the Borrower shall ensure or 
cause MOWRAM to ensure that no physical or economic displacement takes place in 
connection with the Project until: 
 

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected people 
in accordance with the RP(s); and 

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program is in place in 
accordance with the RP(s). 

 
6. The Borrower shall ensure or shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that no Subproject 
with Category A involuntary resettlement is financed under the Project. 
 
 
 
 



 

 
Schedule 5 

 
 

17 

Indigenous Peoples 
 
7. The Borrower shall ensure or cause MOWRAM to ensure that the Project does not 
have any indigenous peoples impact, all within the meaning of the SPS.  In the event that the 
Project does have any such impact, the Borrower shall take all steps required to ensure that 
the Project complies with the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the 
SPS. 
 
Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements 
 

8. The Borrower shall make available or cause MOWRAM to make available necessary 
budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EARF, EMP, RF and RP(s). 
 
Safeguards – Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts 
 

9. The Borrower shall ensure or cause MOWRAM to ensure that all bidding documents 
and Works contracts contain provisions that require contractors to: 

 
(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the EMP and 

RP(s) (to the extent they concern impacts on affected people during 
construction), and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a 
safeguards monitoring report in compliance with EARF and RF;  

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social measures;  
(c) provide MOWRAM with a written notice of any unanticipated environmental, 

resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that arise during 
construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were not 
considered in the EMP and RP(s); 

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; and  

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at least 
their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.   

 
Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting  
 
10. The Borrower shall do the following or cause MOWRAM to do the following: 
 

(a) submit semi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly upon 
submission;  

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise during 
construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were not 
considered in the EMP and RP(s), promptly inform ADB of the occurrence of 
such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the event and proposed 
corrective action plan; and 

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures and 
requirements set forth in EMP or RP(s) promptly after becoming aware of the 
breach. 

 



 

 
Schedule 5 

 
 

18 

11. The Borrower shall ensure that within six months of the Effective Date an external 
monitoring agency acceptable to ADB is recruited from the counterpart funds for social 
safeguards monitoring.  
 
Prohibited List of Investments 
 
12. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the loans are used to finance any 
activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the 
SPS. 
 
Labor Standards, Health and Safety  
 
13. The Borrower shall ensure or cause MOWRAM to ensure that the core labor 
standards and the Borrower’s applicable laws and regulations are complied with during 
Project implementation. MOWRAM shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents 
and Works contracts requiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with the 
Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 
occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in 
respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of 
association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; and (f) disseminate, or 
engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually 
transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under 
the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area, 
particularly women. 
 

14. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set forth in 
paragraph 12 above and provide ADB with regular reports. 
 
Gender and Development 
 
15. The Borrower shall ensure or cause MOWRAM to ensure that (a) the GAP is 
implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and Works contracts 
include relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP, 
including a provision that requires contractors to recruit at least 25% women as unskilled 
labor; (c) adequate resources are allocated for implementation of the GAP; (d) progress on 
implementation of the GAP, including progress toward achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome 
and output targets include, but not limited to: (i) at least 30% of women participation during 
the presentation on project design and discussion and planning of water distribution and 
cropping plans; (ii) at least 30% women membership in FWUCs; (iii) at least 30% women 
representation in FWUC management committee; (iv) at least 25% of unskilled labor 
employed in Works construction at equal wages shall be women; (v) at least 50% of project 
training to FWUC be participated by women; and (vi) capacity building of women in 
management of FWUC affairs, operation and maintenance and water management. 
 
Counterpart Support  
 

16. The Borrower shall ensure that counterpart funds necessary for the Project is 
provided on a timely basis.     



 

 
Schedule 5 

 
 

19 

Operation and Maintenance 
 
17. At the time of the design and cost estimate of each Subproject, the Borrower shall 
ensure that operation and maintenance costs shall be estimated and maintenance plans 
shall be prepared by PDWRAM with support of the project management implementation 
consultants and involvement of the FWUCs, which shall form the basis of calculating the 
average annual irrigation service fees for the operation and maintenance of the distribution 
canals. 
 

18. After completion of each Subproject, the Borrower shall ensure that FWUCs collect 
adequate irrigation service fees to sustain the operation and maintenance of distribution 
canals in sound and functional order and provide additional counterpart funds to cover any 
shortfalls.   
 

19. Before and after the completion of the irrigation systems, the Borrower shall ensure 
that adequate counterpart funds are allocated each year and provided on a timely basis for 
the operation and maintenance of the main canals.  
 

20. Prior to award of the related Works contracts, PDWRAM shall sign MOUs with the 
respective FWUCs in accordance with the recently approved law on FWUCs.  Each MOU 
shall outline (a) role and responsibilities of the FWUC; and (b) amount of irrigation service 
fee per hectare, which shall be determined during the design and cost estimation of each 
Subproject. 
 

21. Prior to the completion of the Taing Krasang main canal works, the Borrower shall 
ensure that a tripartite water allocation agreement has been signed between PDWRAM-
Kampong Thom, FWUCs and private land owners, which agreement clearly specifies the 
quantity, timing and duration of water to be supplied to the private land owners and the water 
charges to be paid by them. 
 
Subproject Eligibility and Selection Criteria  
 
22. The Borrower shall ensure and shall cause MOWRAM to ensure that all Subprojects 
are selected in accordance with the procedures as described in the PAM, and shall meet the 
screening and eligibility criteria agreed between the Borrower and ADB and documented in 
the PAM.  Specifically, the Borrower shall ensure or cause MOWRAM to ensure that each 
Subproject meets the following criteria: 
 

(a) with category B or less in terms of environmental impact; 
(b) with category B or less in terms of involuntary resettlement impact; 
(c) with category C in terms of indigenous peoples impact; 
(d) irrigation system having low irrigation efficiency and water productivity, and 

scope for substantial enhancement of both irrigation efficiency and water 
productivity; 

(e) involving only rehabilitation of existing systems or related schemes and should 
not involve construction of new systems; 

(f) being located outside the Tonle Sap basin; 
(g) involving rehabilitation of both primary and secondary canals to ensure that 

water reached the farm; 



 

 
Schedule 5 

 
 

20 

(h) not being covered by other ongoing or proposed projects financed by ADB or 
any other development partners; 

(i) beneficiaries including sharecroppers, poor farmers, and women farmers; and 
(j) being economically viable; and technically, socially and environmentally 

feasible with the EIRR of each subproject being greater than 12%. 
 

Grievance Redress Mechanism 
 
23. Within six months of Effective Date, the Borrower shall ensure or cause MOWRAM to 
ensure that separate safeguards grievance redress mechanisms for environmental and 
social safeguards, acceptable to ADB, are established in accordance with the provisions of 
the EARF, IEE, EMP, RF and RP(s), within the timeframes specified in the relevant EARF, 
IEE, EMP, RF and RP(s), to consider safeguards complaints. 
 

Governance and Anti-Corruption 
 

24. The Borrower, MOWRAM and Project Provinces shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anti-
corruption Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right 
to investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation. 
 

25. The Borrower, MOWRAM and Project Provinces shall ensure that the anti-corruption 
provisions acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including 
provisions specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the 
executing and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other 
service providers as they relate to the Project. 
 



