





















































48098-002: Balochistan Water Resources Development Sector Project


LOAN NUMBER 3700-PAK(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional]) 

(Balochistan Water Resources Development Sector Project)

. between

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN 

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED

PAK 48098



LOAN AGREEMENT 
{Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 7 ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN ("Borrower") and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK ("ADB"). '

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan, and to the Japan Fund for 
Poverty Reduction ("JFPR") and the High-Level Technology Fund ("HLTF") for grants to be 
administered by ADB, for the purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan 
Agreement;

(B) by a grant agreement between the Borrower and ADB (“JFPR Grant 
Agreement”), ADB has agreed to make the proceeds of a grant from JFPR (“JFPR Grant”) in 
the amount of three million Dollars ($3,000,000) available to the Borrower for the purposes of 
financing expenditures under Part B of the Project;

(C) by a grant agreement between the Borrower and ADB (“HLTF Grant 
Agreement" and, together with the JFPR Grant Agreement, “Grant Agreements”), ADB has 
agreed to make the proceeds of a grant from HLTF (“HLTF Grant” and, together with the JFPR 
Grant, “Grants") in the amount of two million Dollars ($2,000,000) available to the Borrower for 
the purposes of financing expenditures under Part C of the Project;

(D) the Project will be carried out by Balochistan, and, for this purpose, the 
Borrower will make available to Balochistan the proceeds of the Grants and the loan provided 
for herein upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB; and

(E) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB's ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Project Agreement between ADB and Balochistan;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB's Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 ("Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein

Section 1.02. ' Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used In this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:



2

(a) “ACD" means the Agriculture and Cooperatives Department of 
Balochistan, or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB;

(b) "Balochistan” means the Province of Balochistan, or any successor 
thereto acceptable to ADB;

(c) "Consulting Guidelines" means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(d) "Consulting Services" means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan and the Grants as described in paragraph 3 of 
Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(e) "EARF" or "Environmental Assessment and Review Framework" means 
the environmental assessment and review framework for the Project,

' including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(f) ' "EIA" or "Environmental Impact Assessment" means the environmental
impact assessment for a Subproject, including any update thereto, 
prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the requirements 
set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

(g) "EMP" or "Environmental Management Plan" means the environmental 
management plan for a Subproject, including any update thereto, 
incorporated in the EIA or IEE, as the case may be, for the Subproject;

(h) "Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable), of the 
SPS;

(i) . "IEE” or "Initial Environmental Examination" means the initial
environmental examination for a Subproject, including any update 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

(j) "Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards" means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable), of the SPS;

(k) “GAP" means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, including 
any update thereto, and agreed to between the Borrower and ADB;

(l) "Goods" means equipment and materials to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan and the Grants, including related services such as 
transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and 
initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting Services;

(m) "ID” means the Irrigation Department of Balochistan, or any successor 
thereto acceptable to ADB;



3

(n) "LARF" or "Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework" means the 
land acquisition and resettlement framework for the Project, including 
any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and 
cleared by ADB;

(o) "LARP" or "Land Acquisition and Resettlement Plan" means the land 
acquisition and resettlement plan for a Subproject, including any update 
thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the LARF and cleared by ADB;

(p) “Loan Disbursement Handbook" means ADB's Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(q) “PAM" means the project administration manual for the Project dated 19 
July 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated from 
time to time in accordance with the respective administrative procedures 
of the Borrower and ADB;

(r) "Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(s) "Procurement Plan" means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
19 July 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, the 
Consulting Guidelines, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(t) "Project Executing Agency" for the purposes of, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations and the Grant Regulations (as this term is 
defined in the Grant Agreements) means Balochistan, acting through ID, 
or any successor thereto acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for 
the carrying out of the Project;

(u) "Project and Subproject facilities" means the facilities to be constructed, 
improved, upgraded, rehabilitated, established, piloted, protected or 
provided under the Project;

(v) "Safeguards Monitoring Report" means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower.to ADB that describes progress with the 
implementation of, and compliance with, the EMPs and the LARPs (as 
applicable), including any corrective and preventative actions;

(w) "SPS" or "Safeguard Policy Statement" means ADB's Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(x) "Subproject" means a subproject under the Project that meets the 
subproject eligibility criteria set out in the PAM; and

(y) “Works” means construction or- civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan and the Grants, including services such as drilling 
or mapping, and project related services that are provided as part of a 



4

single responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting 
Services,

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2,01, (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB’s
ordinary capital resources an amount of one hundred million Dollars ($100,000,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter,

(c) The term "grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 2% per annum during the grace period and thereafter on the amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 1 April and 1 October in each year.

Section 2.04, The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall make the proceeds of the Loan 
available 'to Balochistan upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB and shall cause 
Balochistan to apply such proceeds exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project 
in accordance with the provisions of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.



5

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement,

Section 3,04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 . 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2024 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4,01,. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project and Subproject facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all 
obligations set forth in Schedule 5.to this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

. Section 4.02. The Borrower shall enable .ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents. .

Section 4.03. ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial 
statements for the Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 
days of the date of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.

Section 4,04. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable Balochistan to perform its obligations under the Project 
Agreement, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the performance 
of such obligations.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following are specified as additional events for the 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations:

(a) the Borrower shall have failed to perform any of its obligations under the 
JFPR Grant Agreement; and

(b) the Borrower shall have failed to perform any of its obligations under the 
HLTF Grant Agreement,

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for the 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: either of 
the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.



6

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6.01. The following are specified as additional conditions to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations:

(a) the JFPR Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this 
Loan Agreement or the HLTF Grant Agreement) have been fulfilled; and

(b) the HLTF Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness (other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this 
Loan Agreement or the JFPR Grant Agreement) have been fulfilled.

Section 6.02. The following are specified as additional matters, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions . 
to be furnished to ADB:

(a) that the JFPR Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower and is legally binding on the 
Borrower in accordance with its terms; and

(b) that the HLTF Grant Agreement has been duly authorized, executed and 
delivered on behalf of the Borrower and is legally binding on the 
Borrower In accordance with its terms.

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Delegation of Authority

Section 7.01. The Borrower hereby designates Balochistan as its agent 
for the purposes of taking any action or entering into any agreement required or permitted 
under Sections 3.02, 3.03 and 3.04 of this Loan Agreement and under Sections 5.01, 5.02, 
5.03 and 5.04 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7,02. Any action taken or any agreement entered into by 
Balochistan pursuant to the authority conferred under Section 7.01 of this Loan Agreement 
shall be fully binding on the Borrower and shall have the same force and effect as if taken by 
the Borrower.



7

Section 7.03. The authority conferred on Balochistan under Section 
7.01 of this Loan Agreement may be revoked or modified by agreement between the Borrower 
and ADB.

ARTICLE VIII

Miscellaneous

Section 8.01. The Secretary, Economic Affairs Division, Ministry of 
Finance, Revenue and Economic Affairs of the Borrower is designated as representative of the 
Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 8.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.Q1 of the Loan Regulations: . ’

For the Borrower

Secretary
Economic Affairs Division
Ministry of Finance, Revenue and Economic Affairs
Islamabad, Pakistan

Facsimile Number:

(92-51) 910 4016.

For ADB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444
(632) 636-2424.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto,. acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is increased agricultural productivity in the Zhob 
and Mula river basins in the Province of Balochistan.

2. The Project shall comprise:

Part A

(a) the construction and rehabilitation of irrigation infrastructure and 
watershed protection, including the construction, upgrade and 
rehabilitation of the Siri Toi Dam with a storage of approximately 
36,000,000 cubic meters including a spillway and water intake; weirs 
and infiltration galleries; approximately 276 kilometers of irrigation 
network; infrastructure to reduce flood risks to irrigation canals and the 
command area; facilities to increase women’s access to water for 
domestic use; and watershed protection for approximately 4,145 
hectares;

(b) the establishment and improvement of command areas, including the 
development of approximately 16,592 hectares of command area 
(including approximately 1,839 hectares for rainwater harvesting 
(khuskaba) farming); and

(c) the strengthening of institutional capacity, including the provision of 
training to ID and ACD on project management, financial management, 
procurement, disbursement, gender and social and environmental 
safeguards, and the development of infrastructure for improved project 
management and training;

Part B

(d) . further to the establishment and improvement of command areas, the
pilot testing of approximately 130 hectares of high-value agriculture in 
the Project area; and

Part C

(e) further to the strengthening of institutional capacity, the procurement of 
hydrometeorological equipment to strengthen information collection and 
water use monitoring.

Part A shall be financed by ADB; Part B shall be financed by JFPR; and Part C shall be 
financed by HLTF, all In accordance with the terms and conditions of this Loan Agreement, the 
JFPR Grant Agreement, and the HLTF Grant Agreement.



10

Schedule 1

3. The Project shall include the provision of consulting services for detailed
engineering design, construction supervision, and implementation support, including the 
provision of training.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2023.



11

SCHEDULE 2

Amortization Schedule

Payment Due Payment of Principal 
(Expressed in Dollar*;

1 October 2023 2,500,000
1 April 2024 . 2,500,000
1 October 2024 2,500,000
1 April 2025 2,500,000
1 October 2025 2,500,000
1 April 2026 2,500,000
1 October 2026 2,500,000
1 April 2027 2,500,000
1 October 2027 2,500,000
1 April 2028 2,500,000
1 October 2028 2,500,000
1 April 2029 2,500,000
1 October 2029 2,500,000
1 April 2030 2,500,000
1 October 2030 2,500,000
1 April 2031 2,500,000
1 October 2031 2,500,000
1 April 2032 2,500,000
1 October 2032 2,500,000
1 April 2033 2,500,000
1 October 2033 2,500,000
1 April 2034 2,500,000
1 October 2034 2,500,000
1 April 2035 2,500,000
1 October ,2035 2,500,000
1 April 2036 2,500,000
1 October 2036 2,500,000
1 April 2037 2,500,000
1 October 2037 2,500,000
1 April 2038 2,500,000
1 October 2038 2,500,000
1 April 2039 2,500,000
1 October 2039 2,500,000
1 April 2040 2,500,000
1 October 2040 2,500,000
1 April 2041 2,500,000
1 October 2041 2,500,000
1 April 2042 2,500,000
1 October 2042 2,500,000
1 April 2043 2,500,000



The arrangements for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 4.03 of the Loan Regulations.

12

Schedule 2

Total 100,000,000



13

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of 
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table"). (Reference to "Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table).

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be 
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to the Category "Interest Charge" is for financing the 
interest charge on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project ADB shall be 
entitled .to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the 
amounts required to meet payments, when due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal 
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in 
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



14

Schedule'3

Retroactive Financing

6. Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible
expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 
months before the date of this Loan Agreement, in connection with the Consulting Services for 
detailed design, construction supervision and implementation support to the Project; Goods 
and Works; and provision of training, subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 20% of the 
Loan amount,



15
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

($) 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from 
the Loan Account

1 Civil Works 88,350,000 87.5% of total expenditure 
claimed

2 Goods 1,150,000 83% of total expenditure claimed

. 3 Consulting Services 
and Training 6,000,000

83% of total expenditure 
claimed

4 Recurrent Cost - Project Management 1,280,000
100% of total expenditure 
claimed

5 Interest Charge 3,220,000 100% of amounts due
TOTAL 100,000,000



16

SCHEDULE 4

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to 
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree. Goods and Works shall be procured and 
Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan. 
The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan.

3. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan 
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the Consulting 
Guidelines,'as applicable.

Eligible. Source of Procurement oJ Civil Works, Goods and Consulting Services

4. Civil Works, Goods and Consulting Services may also be procured under Parts 
A and C of the Project from non-member countries of ADB.

Goods and Works

5. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods 
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding;

(b) National Competitive Bidding;

(c) Shopping; and

(d) Community Participation in Procurement.

National Competitive Bidding

6. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of-any 
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrowers national competitive 
bidding procedures are .consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and-ADB shall be set out in the 
Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.



17

Schedule 4

Community Participation in Procurement

7. The Borrower may use community participation in procurement for Works 
contracts for command area development, watershed management, farmers managed small 
private irrigation systems and farm irrigation systems improvement, and high value agriculture 
as may be provided .in, and in accordance with the agreed procedures set out in, the 
Procurement Plan.

Conditions for Award of Contract

8. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract for a Subproject which 
involves environmental impacts until Balochistan has:

(a) obtained the final approval of the EIA or IEE, as the case may be, from 
the relevant environment authority of the Borrower; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.

9. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract involving involuntary 
resettlement impacts for a Subproject until the Borrower has prepared and submitted to ADB- 
the final LARP for such Subproject based on the Subproject's detailed design and obtained 
ADB's clearance of such LARP.

Consulting Services

10. The Borrower shall apply Quality- and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting 
Services.

11. The Borrower shall recruit the Individual consultants for the Siri Toi Dam panel 
of experts in, accordance with procedures acceptable to ADB for recruiting individual 
consultants.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

12. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured (including 
without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured 
or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts, for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.

13. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants 
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.



18

Schedule 4

APB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

14. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and 
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan,

15. In the case of a contract for Goods or Works, which is subject to ADB's prior 
review, the Borrower shall seek ADB’s prior approval of any modification or waiver of the terms 
and conditions of the contract, including:

(a) granting an extension of the stipulated time for completion of a contract 
for a period of 1 month or more, or which is likely to require an extension 
of the Loan Closing Date or the Grant Closing Date (as indicated in the 
Grant Agreements); and

(b) increases in aggregate of the original price by more than 5% (for the 
avoidance of doubt, such increase shall take into account any previous

. change under such contract).

16. In the case of a contract for Goods or Works, which is subject to ADB’s post 
review, ADB shall review the required contract modification or waiver and respond to the 
Borrower as soon as practicable, but not later than 1 month after the receipt of the required 
document.

17. The Borrower shall provide to ADB copies of all time extensions, modifications 
or waivers to the contracts (including change orders) within 1 month following amendment of 
the contract.



19

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project

implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower and Balochistan shall ensure that the Project is implemented in
accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to 
the PAM shall become effective only after the approval of such change by the Borrower and 
ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM, on the one hand, and this Loan 
Agreement, the Grant Agreements or the Project Agreement, on the other, the provisions of 
this Loan Agreement, the Grant Agreements and the Project Agreement shall prevail. As more 
particularly described in the PAM, Balochistan shall implement the Project through ID and ACD 
and their respective responsibilities shall be as set out in the PAM.

2. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that, within 3
months from the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement, (i) ID will appoint and engage a financial 
management specialist for the Project management office in ID; and (II) each of iD and ACD 
will adopt a financial management manual for the Project with detailed procedures on 
budgeting and planning, funds withdrawal and management, bank account management, 
expenditure management, accounting and bookkeeping, financial reporting, and fixed asset 
management, as may be acceptable to ADB.

3. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that ID and ACD 
will consult ADB regarding all significant matters related to the management and 
implementation of the Project, including the selection, appointment or change of the Project 
Director at the Project management office in ID or the Deputy Project Director at the Project 
implementation office in ACD to ensure continuity, transparency, and efficiency in the 
management of the Project.

Environment

4. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that the 
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the 
Project, each Subproject and all Project and Subproject facilities comply with (a) all applicable 
laws and regulations of the Borrower and Balochistan relating to environment, health, and 
safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; (c) the EARF; and (d) all measures and 
requirements set forth In the ElAs, I EEs and EMPs, and any corrective or preventative actions 
set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

5. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that all land and all 
rights-of-way required for the Project, each Subproject and all Project and Subproject facilities 
are made available to each Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed under 
the relevant Works contract and all land acquisition and resettlement activities are 
implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and 
Balochistan relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; (b) the Involuntary 
Resettlement Safeguards; (c) the LARF; and (d) all measures and requirements set forth in 
the relevant LARP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards 



20

Schedule 5

Monitoring Report. The Borrower shall also ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that all 
land acquisition and resettlement activities will comply with the specific Involuntary 
Resettlement Safeguards arrangements and requirements set out in the PAM. For the 
avoidance of doubt, the Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that no land 
is acquired, for the purposes of the Project or any Subproject, under the emergency acquisition 
provisions of the Borrower's Land Acquisition Act (1894), as amended from time to time.

6. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards, the
LARF or any LARP, the Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that no 
physical or economic displacement takes place in connection with any Subproject until:

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected 
people in accordance with the LARP for the Subproject; and

(b) a comprehensive income and livelihood restoration program has been 
established in accordance with the LARP for the Subproject.

7. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that the Project 
and all Subprojects do not have any indigenous peoples impact within the meaning of the 
Safeguard Policy Statement. In the event that the Project or any Subproject does have any 
such impact, the Borrower shall take and cause Balochistan to take all steps required to ensure 
that the Project or the Subproject, as the case may be, complies with the applicable laws and 
regulations of the Borrower and Balochistan and with the Safeguard Policy Statement.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

8. The Borrower shall make available or cause Balochistan to make available 
necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMPs and the LARPs.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

9. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that all bidding 
documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures and requirements relevant to the contractor 
set forth in the relevant EIA or IEE (as the case may be), EMP and LARP 
(to the extent they concern impacts, on affected people during 
construction), and any corrective or preventative actions set out in a 
Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental or resettlement risks or impacts that arise during 
construction, implementation or operation of the Project or any 



21

Schedule 5

Subproject that were not considered in the relevant EIA or I EE (as the 
case.may be), EMP or LARP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural (and and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

.. (e) fully reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land 
to at least their pre-project condition upon the completion of 
construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

10. The Borrower shall do the following or cause Balochistan to do the following:

(a) submit semi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB during the 
construction of the Project and the Subprojects and until their 
completion, and, thereafter, submit annual reports to ADB during their 
operation, and disclose the relevant information from such reports to 
affected persons promptly upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project or any 
Subproject that were not considered in the relevant EIA or IEE (as the 
case may be), EMP or LARP, promptly inform ADB of the occurrence of 
such risks or impacts, with detailed description of the event and 
proposed corrective action plan;

(c) no later than the date that is 3 months from and after the effectiveness 
of this Loan Agreement, engage qualified and experienced external 
experts or qualified NGOs under a selection process and terms of 
reference acceptable to ADB to verify information produced through the 
Project monitoring process, and facilitate the carrying out of any 
verification activities by such external experts;

(d) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in an EMP or LARP promptly after becoming 
aware of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

11. ■ The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that no proceeds
of the Loan or Grants are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited 
investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

12. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that the core labor 
standards and the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and Balochistan are 



22

Schedule 5

complied with during Project implementation. The Borrower shall include or cause Balochistan 
to include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by ADB under 
the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things, (a) comply with the applicable 
labor law and regulations of the Borrower and Balochistan and incorporate applicable 
workplace occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers 
in respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of 
association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining ; and (f) disseminate,, or 
engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually 
transmitted diseases, including H1V/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under the 
Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area and Subproject 
areas, particularly women.

13. The Borrower shall strictly monitor or cause Balochistan to strictly monitor 
compliance with the requirements set forth in paragraph 12 above and provide ADB with 
regular reports.

Gender and Development

14. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that (a) the GAP is 
implemented in accordance with its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include 
relevant provisions for contractors to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) 
adequate resources are allocated for the implementation of the GAP; (d) progress on the 
Implementation of the GAP, including progress towards achieving key gender outcome and 
output targets, are regularly monitored and reported to ADB; and (e) key gender outcome and 
output targets include: (i) at least 30% of all consultations held during the design and 
construction phase of each Subproject are held with women groups; (ii) at least 30% of all 
Subprojects have facilities for increased access by women to water for domestic use, for 
instance washing facilities and water collection points; (iii) at least 200 women and girls are 
trained in kitchen gardening skills; (iv) at least 250 women are trained for income-generating 
high-value agri-businesses; and (v) at least 22 women-led small-scale income-generating agri­
businesses are launched.

Counterpart Support

15. The Borrower shall cause Balochistan to make available all counterpart funds
required for the timely and effective implementation of the Project, including for any shortfall of 
funds or cost overrun, through providing annual budget allocations and releasing applicable 
funds in a timely manner. In addition, the Borrower shall provide all necessary support to 
Balochistan and ensure that Balochistan has sufficient funds to satisfy all liabilities arising from 
any Works, Goods and/or Consulting Services contract under the Project

Operational Covenants

16. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that the selection
of sites for the feasibility study of potential subprojects, and the selection of sites for the 
implementation of Subprojects, will be undertaken in accordance with such criteria and 
procedures as may be agreed upon between Balochistan and ADB. The Borrower shall cause 
Balochistan to select all Subprojects in accordance with the criteria and procedures set out in 
the PAM.



23

Schedule 5

17. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that no Subproject 
will involve, and no proceeds of the Loan or the Grants will be used to support, groundwater 
extraction by deep tubewells, turbine pumps, or tapping of karezes.

18. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that, for each 
Subproject, the local communities in the Subproject area will be fully involved in the planning, 
design, implementation and maintenance of the Subproject and related initiatives in the areas 
of integrated water resources management, command area development, and agricultural 
support services. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that both male 
and female members of the local communities will be consulted and involved.

19. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that the Project 
and each Subproject will be implemented in accordance with applicable design and technical 
specifications and construction norms satisfactory to ADB, and construction supervision, 
quality control and contract management shall be performed in accordance with international 
and national standards.

20. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure that, within 3 
months from the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement, ID will appoint an independent dam 
safety panel of eminent national engineers which will review the detailed design of proposed 
subprojects involving the construction of dams, oversee dam construction, and confirm to ADB 
that the design and construction of the dams meet international safety standards.

21. (a) The Borrower shall ensure and . cause Balochistan to ensure that all 
Project and Subproject facilities will be operated and maintained, in an effective and 
sustainable manner, in accordance with the applicable laws, regulations and standards of the 
Borrower and Balochistan and, in other respects not covered by such laws, regulations and 
standards, in accordance with best international industry practice.

(b) The Borrower shall cause Balochistan to develop, approve and adopt 
an operation and maintenance plan, including an annual budget, for all Works to be 
constructed, improved, upgraded, rehabilitated, established, piloted or protected under the 
Project, including the water resources information system to be established with assistance 
from the Project, prior to their completion.

(c) The Borrower shall cause Balochistan to ensure that budgetary and 
other resources are allocated timely and provided promptly as necessary and appropriate for 
the operation and maintenance of the Project and Subproject facilities, and, at any given time, 
the amount of such budgetary and other resources shall not be less than the total sum required, 
at that time, to cover and defray the operation and maintenance expenditures indicated in the 
then current annual budget referenced in sub-paragraph (b).

(d) The Borrower shall cause Balochistan to review its irrigation tariff policy 
and prepare draft reforms for the policy, which include the introduction of irrigation tariffs for 
small irrigation systems, on or before 31 December 2020.

(e) The Borrower shall cause Balochistan to timely and promptly prepare 
operation and maintenance manuals and provide operation and maintenance training to the 
farmer communities and organizations that will assume the operation and maintenance of the 



24

Schedule 5

small irrigation systems and on-farm irrigation facilities that will be constructed, improved, 
upgraded, rehabilitated, established, piloted or protected under the Project.

Security

22. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan to ensure (through the
political administration of the relevant local governments in the Project area and Subproject 
areas) that adequate security is provided for the smooth and uninterrupted implementation of 
the Project and the Subprojects. The Borrower shall ensure and cause Balochistan .to ensure 
that (I) all Works contracts under the Project include a security plan to ensure the safety of 
Project contractors’ personnel and consultants, and each such security plan allocates sufficient 
budget under the relevant Works contract or through Balochistan’s counterpart funding; and 
(II) all relevant permits are issued and all access and other necessary requirements are 
provided so that all security plans will be successfully implemented.

Governance and Anticorruption

23. The Borrower and Balochistan shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anticorruption Policy
(1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate 
directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice 
relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary 
assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

24. The Borrower and Balochistan shall' ensure that anticorruption provisions
acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions 
specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing 
and Implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service 
providers as they relate to the Project.

25. The Borrower shall cause Balochistan to provide updated information on the
Project on its website, including information on performance, business opportunities, bidding 
process and guidelines, outcome of biddings, and summary progress reports.



