

















































LOAN NUMBER 3724-MYA(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Climate-Friendly Agribusiness Value Chains Sector Project)

/■
I

between

THE REPUBLIC OF THE UNION OF MYANMAR

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 6 NOVEMBER 2018

MYA 48409



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 6 November 2018 between THE REPUBLIC OF 
THE UNION OF MYANMAR (“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Borrower has also applied to the Global Agriculture and Food 
Security Program (“GAFSP”) for a grant (“GAFSP Grant”) and GAFSP has agreed to provide 
the Borrower a grant in the amount of twenty-two million Dollars ($22,000,000) to assist in 
financing a part of the Project; and

(C) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein.

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “Consulting Guidelines” means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(b) “Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan as described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 to this 
Loan Agreement;

(c) “CSA" means climate smart agriculture;



2

(d) “Environmental Assessment and Review Framework” or “EARF” means 
the environmental assessment and review framework for the Project, 
including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
and cleared by ADB;

(e) “Environmental Management Plan” or “EMP" means each 
environmental management plan for a Subproject, including any update 
thereto, incorporated in the IEE;

(f) “Environmental Safeguards” means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of the 
SPS;

(g) “GAFSP Grant Agreement” means the grant agreement between ADB 
and the Borrower in relation to the GAFSP Grant;

(h) “GAP" means the gender action plan prepared for the Project, including 
any update thereto, and agreed to between the Borrower and ADB;

(i) “Goods” means equipment and materials to be financed out of 
the proceeds of the Loan, including related services such as 
transportation, insurance, installation, commissioning, training, and 
initial maintenance, but excluding Consulting Services;

(j) “Implementing Agencies” means (i) Department of Agriculture; (ii) 
Department of Planning; (iii) Department of Rural Development; (iv) 
Irrigation and Water Utilization Management Department; (v) 
Department of Agricultural Land Management and Statistics, each of 
MOALI; and (vi) Myanmar Trade Promotion Organization (MyanTrade) 
and Department of Consumer Affairs of the Ministry of Commerce, or 
any successor thereto acceptable to ADB, which are responsible for the 
implementation of the Project;

(k) “Indigenous Peoples Plan” or “IPP" means each indigenous peoples 
plan for a Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the requirements set forth in the 
IPPF;

(I) “Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework” or “IPPF” means the 
indigenous peoples planning framework for the Project, including any 
update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by 
ADB;

(m) "Indigenous Peoples Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 3, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

(n) "Initial Environmental Examination” or “IEE” means each initial 
environmental examination for a Subproject, including any update 



thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB;

“Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards” means the principles and 
requirements set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 2, and Appendix 4 (as 
applicable) of the SPS;

“Land Acquisition and Resettlement Framework” or “LARF” means the 
land acquisition and resettlement framework for the Project, including 
any update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower and 
cleared by ADB;

“Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

“MOALi” means the Borrower's Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and 
Irrigation or any successor thereto;

“PAM” means the project administration manual for the Project dated 
8 August 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the respective administrative 
procedures of the Borrower and ADB;

“Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

"Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
8 August 2018 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to time in accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, the 
Consulting Guidelines, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

“Project Executing Agency" or “EA" for the purposes of, and within the 
meaning of the Loan Regulations means MOALi or any successor 
thereto acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of 
the Project;

“Resettlement Plan" or “RP” means each resettlement plan for a 
Subproject, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Borrower pursuant to the requirements set forth in the LARF and 
cleared by ADB;

“Safeguard Policy Statement” or “SPS" means ADB’s Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

“Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of, and compliance with, the EMP, the RP and the IPP 
(as applicable), including any corrective and preventative actions;



4

(z) “Subproject” means a subproject under the Project that meets the 
subproject eligibility criteria set forth in the PAM; and

(aa) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan, including services such as drilling or mapping, 
and project related services that are provided as part of a single 
responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting Services.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of forty million five hundred thousand Dollars 
($40,500,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1 % per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 January and 15 July in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of the
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 4.03(a) 
and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar.



5

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be 
applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.04. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2026 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. (a) The Borrower shall (I) maintain separate
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in 
accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial 
statements audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and 
terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable 
to ADB; (iv) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the 
auditors1 opinion(s) on the financial statements and the use of the Loan proceeds, and a 
management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that 
were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB’s confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB’s website.



6

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB’s request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Sec tion 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB’s representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following are specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01 (m) of the Loan Regulations: the GAFSP Grant Agreement shall have 
become liable for suspension or cancellation.

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: the event 
specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6.01. The following is specified as an additional condition to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: the GAFSP Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered on 
behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness (other than the 
condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have been fulfilled.

Section 6.02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB: the GAFSP Grant Agreement has been duly executed and delivered 
on behalf of the Borrower, and all conditions precedent to their effectiveness (other than the 
condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) have been fulfilled.

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.



7

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7.01. The Union Minister of Planning and Finance of the 
Borrower is designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of 
the Loan Regulations.

Section 7.02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Planning and Finance
Building No. 26 Nay Pyi Taw
The Republic of the Union of Myanmar

Facsimile Number:

+95 67 410-198

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADB Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

+632 636-2444
+632 636-2231.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

THE REPUBLIC OF THE UNION OF 
MYANMAR

By______________________________
DAW SI SI PYONE 

Director General 
Treasury Department, Ministry of 

Planning and Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Country Director 
Myanmar Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to develop productive and resource efficient
agribusiness value chains.

2. The Project shall comprise Subprojects to achieve the following outputs:

Output 1: Critical agribusiness value chain infrastructure improved and 
made climate resilient - This includes (a) upgrading irrigation, farm roads, 
buildings, farm machinery, post-harvest equipment, seed testing equipment and 
agrometeorologicai stations, in seed farms; (b) rehabilitating tertiary canals and 
community reservoirs, and constructing shallow tube wells with some linked to 
drip and sprinkler technologies; (c) rehabilitating farm roads to climate resilient 
condition; and (d) upgrading the safety and quality testing equipment.

Output 2: Climate smart agriculture and agribusiness promoted - This 
includes (a) deploying climate resilient varieties of rice, beans, pulses and 
oilseeds; (b) strengthening capacity of seed growers, agro-dealers, and 
regional government staff on CSA technologies and production practices, 
certified seed production, farm mechanization and agribusiness plan 
development, and manufacturing practices; and (c) facilitating access to inputs, 
farm mechanization services and off farm rural livelihood opportunities.

Output 3: Enabling environment for climate friendly agribusiness 
enhanced - This includes (a) establishing an agribusiness policy cell within 
MOALl’s Department of Planning; (b) raising awareness and capacity of 
financial institutions to support climate friendly agribusiness; and (c) enhancing 
weather, market and credit information networks, and delivery of land 
administration services.

3. The Project will support Consulting Services to implement the above.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 31 December 2025.

SCHEDULE 3

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table"). (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Interest Charge

3. The amount allocated to Category “Interest Charge" is for financing the interest
charge on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to 
withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts 
required to meet payments, when due, of such interest charge.

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

5. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item
Total Amount Allocated 

for ADB Financing 
($) 

Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1

Civil Works, Machinery and 
Equipment, Feasibility and 
Design, and Project 
Implementation Support

34,490,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

2 Training, Workshops and Studies 2,010,000 45% of total expenditure claimed

3 Weather, Credit and Market Information Support 620,000 45% of total expenditure claimed

3 Consultants 2,020,000 36% of total expenditure claimed

4 Interest Charge 1,360,000 100% total amount due

TOTAL 40,500,000



14

SCHEDULE 4

Procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Goods, Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to
and governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, Goods and Works shall be procured and
Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement Plan. 
The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in updates 
to the Procurement Plan.

Eligible Source of Procurement

3. Goods, Works and Consulting Services may also be procured under the Project
from non-member countries of ADB.

4. All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the Consulting 
Guidelines, as applicable.

Goods and Works

5. Goods and Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods
set forth below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding;
(b) National Competitive Bidding; and
(c) Shopping.

National Competitive Bidding

6. The Borrower and ADB shall ensure that, prior to the commencement of any
procurement activity under national competitive bidding, the Borrower's national competitive 
bidding procedures are consistent with the Procurement Guidelines. Any modifications or 
clarifications to such procedures agreed between the Borrower and ADB shall be set out in the 
Procurement Plan. Any subsequent change to the agreed modifications and clarifications shall 
become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB.



15
Schedule 4

Conditions for Award of Contract

7. The Borrower shall not award any Works contracts for a Subproject which
involves environmental impacts until the Project Executing Agency has:

(a) obtained the final approval of the IEE/EMP, as relevant, from the 
Borrower’s Ministry of Natural Resources and Environmental 
Conservation; and

(b) incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the Works 
contract.

8. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract involving involuntary
resettlement impacts for a Subproject until the Borrower has prepared and submitted to ADB 
the final RP for such Subproject based on the Subproject’s detailed design and obtained ADB’s 
clearance of such RP.

9. The Borrower shall not award any Works contract for a Subproject which
involves impacts on indigenous peoples until the Borrower has prepared and submitted to ADB 
the final IPP, as relevant, and obtained ADB's clearance of such IPP.

Consulting Services

10. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, the Borrower shall apply Quality-
and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting Services.

11. The Borrower shall apply the following selection methods for the specified
Consulting Services, in accordance with, among other things, the procedures set forth in the 
Procurement Plan:

(a) Qualification Based Selection for monitoring and evaluation and land 
administration technical services; and

(b) Single Source Selection for variety development and dissemination 
services.

12. The Borrower shall recruit the individual consultants as needed in accordance
with procedures acceptable to ADB for recruiting individual consultants.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

13. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Goods and Works procured (including
without limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured 
or incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Goods and Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, 
indemnities from the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in 
subparagraph (a) of this paragraph.



16
Schedule 4

14. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

ADB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

15. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.



17

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project; Financial Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower, the Project Executing Agency and the Implementing Agencies
shall ensure that the Project is implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set 
forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after 
approval of such change by the Borrower and ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between 
the PAM and this Loan Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

Environment

2. The Borrower shall ensure that the preparation, design, construction,
implementation, operation and decommissioning of the Project, each Subproject and all 
Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to 
environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the EARF, each IEE, EMP, and any corrective or preventative actions 
set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report. The Borrower shall ensure that no Subproject 
categorized as Category A under the SPS is financed under the Project.

involuntary Resettlement

3. The Borrower shall ensure that all land and all rights-of-way required for the
Project, each Subproject and all Project facilities are made available to the Works contractor 
in accordance with the schedule agreed under the related Works contract and all land 
acquisition and resettlement activities are implemented in compliance with (a) all applicable 
laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; 
(b) Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards; and (c) all measures and requirements set forth in 
the LARF, RP and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring 
Report. The Borrower shall ensure that no Subproject categorized as Category A under the 
SPS is financed under the Project

4. Without limiting the application of the Involuntary Resettlement Safeguards, the
LARF or the RP, the Borrower shall ensure that no physical or economic displacement takes 
place in connection with the Project until: (a) compensation and other entitlements, as relevant, 
have been provided to affected people in accordance with the RP; and (b) a comprehensive 
income and livelihood restoration program has been established in accordance with the RP.

Indigenous Peoples

5. The Borrower shall ensure that the preparation, design, construction,
implementation and operation of the Project, each Subproject and all Project facilities comply 
with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to indigenous people; (b) 
the Indigenous Peoples Safeguards; (c) all measures and requirements set forth in the IPPF 
and any IPP, and any corrective or preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring 
Report. The Borrower shall ensure that no Subproject categorized as Category A under the 
SPS is financed under the Project.



18
Schedule 5

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

6. The Borrower shall make available necessary budgetary and human resources
to fully implement any EMP, RP and IPP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

7. The Borrower shall ensure that all bidding documents and contracts for Works
contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the I EE, 
the EMP, the RP and any IPP (to the extent they concern impacts on 
affected people during construction), and any corrective or preventative 
actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental, resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that 
were not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the RP and the IPP;

(d) adequately record the condition of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) fully reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land 
to at least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

8. The Borrower, through the Project Executing Agency, shall do the following:

(a) submit semiannual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise 
during construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were 
not considered in the IEE, the EMP, the RP, and the IPP, promptly 
inform ADB of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed 
description of the event and proposed corrective action plan in 
accordance with the SPS; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP, the RP or the IPP promptly after 
becoming aware of the breach.



19
Schedule 5

Prohibited List of Investments

9. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Loan are used to finance
any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities provided in Appendix 5 of the 
SPS.

Governance and Anticorruption

10. The Borrower shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anti corruption Policy (1998, as
amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or 
through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the 
Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for 
satisfactory completion of such investigation.

11. The Borrower shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB
are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the right 
of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing agency and all 
contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service providers as they relate to the Project. 
Individuals/entities on ADB’s anticorruption debarment lists are ineligible to participate in 
ADB-financed activity and may not be awarded any contracts under the Project. If the Borrower 
becomes aware or has a reasonable suspicion that any member of the Borrower or executing 
agency has engaged in corrupt or fraudulent practices (as defined in ADB’s Anticorruption 
Policy) under or in connection with the Project or the loan, the Borrower shall take such timely 
and appropriate action satisfactory to ADB to investigate and/or remedy the situation.

12. In addition to these requirements, to deter corruption and increase
transparency, the Borrower shall ensure that the Project Executing Agency shall make use of 
its existing website or create a Project website within 3 months from Effective Date, accessible 
by the public, to disclose various information concerning the Project including general 
information about the Project, public procurement related to the Project, Project progress and 
contact details in English and Myanmar language. The website shall also provide a link to 
ADB’s Integrity Unit for reporting to ADB any grievances or allegations or corrupt practices 
arising out of the Project and Project activities. For each contract, the website shall include 
information on, among others, (a) the list of participating bidders; (b) name of the winning 
bidder; (c) basic details on bidding procedures adopted; (d) amount of contract awarded; and 
(e) list of Goods, Works and Consulting Services. The Project Executing Agency shall permit 
any bidder to request an explanation as to why a bid was unsuccessful and the Project 
Executing Agency shall respond promptly. The website shall be updated regularly. In addition 
to the web-based disclosure, the stakeholders shall be provided by the Project Executing 
Agency with detailed information on procurement on public notice boards in their respective 
areas.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

13. The Borrower shall ensure that the core labor standards and the Borrower’s
applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project implementation. The 
Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by 
ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among others, (a) comply with all 
applicable labor laws and regulations of the Borrower; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not 
discriminate workers in respect of employment and occupation on the basis of age, gender, 



20
Schedule 5

ethnicity, religion or caste; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) do not restrict the workers from 
developing a legally permissible means of expressing their grievances and protecting their 
rights regarding working conditions and terms of employment; (f) advertise labor requirements 
in a timely manner prior to recruitment, in a venue that can reasonably be expected to be seen 
by interested men and women; (g) provide workers with written contract, adequate on-the-job 
training and safety training; (h) not restrict freedom of association of workers; and 
(i) disseminate, or engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the 
risks of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors 
engaged under the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project 
areas, particularly women. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the 
requirements set forth in this paragraph and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender Action Plan

14. The Borrower shall ensure that the (a) GAP is implemented in accordance with
its terms; (b) the bidding documents and contracts include relevant provisions for contractors 
to comply with the measures set forth in the GAP; (c) adequate resources are allocated for 
implementation of the GAP; and (d) progress on implementation of the GAP, including progress 
toward achieving key gender outcome and output targets are regularly monitored and reported 
to ADB.

Counterpart Support

15. The Borrower shall ensure that counterpart funds for the Project are provided
on a timely basis, including personnel cost. In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall 
ensure that the Project Executing Agency has sufficient funds to satisfy its liabilities arising 
from any Works, Goods and Consulting Services contract.

16. The Borrower shall ensure that all completed Subprojects have adequate
counterpart funds for operation and maintenance of infrastructure allocated to them on a yearly 
basis and made available on a timely basis. The Project Executing Agency shall further ensure 
that the farmer water user communities and water user groups collect adequate irrigation 
service fees to sustain the operation and maintenance of distribution canals in accordance with 
the Borrower's decree on farmer water user communities.

Subproject selection

17. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project Executing Agency to ensure
that all Subprojects selected for financing under the Project meet the screening and eligibility 
criteria as agreed between the Borrower and ADB and documented in the PAM.





