






























































(Agriculture and Rural Development Project - Additional Financing) 

between

MONGOLIA 

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED fC'

MON 39229



LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations)

LOAN AGREEMENT dated between MONGOLIA (“Borrower”) and 

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB”).

WHEREAS

(A) by a grant agreement dated 24 October 2008 between the Borrower 
and ADB (“Grant Agreement”), ADB agreed to provide a grant to the Borrower from ADB’s 
Special Funds resources in an amount of fourteen million seven hundred twenty thousand 
Dollars ($14,720,000) for the purposes of the project described in Schedule 1 to the Grant 
Agreement (“Original Project”);

(B) by an agreement of even date herewith entered into between the 
Borrower and ADB (“Special Operations Loan Agreement”), ADB has agreed to provide the 
Borrower a loan from ADB’s Special Funds resources in various currencies equivalent to ten 
million seven hundred nineteen thousand Special Drawing Rights (SDR10,719,000) for the 
purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to the Special Operations Loan Agreement;

(C) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to the Special Operations Loan Agreement; and

(D) ADB has agreed to make a loan to the Borrower from ADB’s ordinary 
capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of the Ordinary Operations Loan 
Regulations Applicable to LIBOR-Based Loans Made from ADB’s Ordinary Capital 
Resources, dated 1 July 2001 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby made applicable to this Loan 
Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein, subject, 
however, to the following modifications:

(a) Section 3.03 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

Commitment Charge; Credit; Maturity Premium.
(a) The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge

on the unwithdrawn amount of the Loan at the rate and on the 
terms specified in the Loan Agreement.

(b) ADB shall provide to the Borrower a credit at 
the rate specified in the Loan Agreement, which credit shall



2 
 
 

 

remain fixed for the term of the Loan.  ADB shall apply the 
credit against the interest payable by the Borrower.   
 

(c) The Borrower shall pay a maturity premium at 
the rate specified in the Loan Agreement, which maturity 
premium shall remain fixed for the term of the Loan.  ADB 
shall add the maturity premium to the interest payable by the 
Borrower. 

 
(b) Section 3.06 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor: 
 
  Rebate. (a) Following any announcement by 

ADB that the Fixed Spread applicable to new Loans shall be 
reduced, ADB shall provide a Rebate to any Borrower with an 
outstanding Loan on which a higher Fixed Spread is 
applicable. The amount of the Rebate shall be determined by 
multiplying (i) the difference between the Fixed Spread 
applicable to the outstanding Loan and the Fixed Spread that 
will be applied to new Loans (expressed as a percentage per 
annum), by (ii) the principal amount of the outstanding Loan on 
which the Borrower shall pay interest for all interest periods 
commencing on and after the effective date of the lower Fixed 
Spread that will be applied to new Loans. 

 
(b) Following any announcement by ADB that its 

Funding Cost Margin calculations with respect to any Loan 
Currency (or Approved Currency) in any Semester resulted in 
ADB achieving savings, ADB shall provide a Rebate to the 
Borrower.  The amount of the Rebate shall be determined by 
multiplying (i) the Funding Cost Margin (expressed as a 
percentage per annum) by (ii) the principal amount of the Loan 
on which the Borrower shall pay interest for the Interest Period 
commencing immediately after the Semester for which the 
Funding Cost Margin was calculated.  ADB shall apply the 
amount of the Rebate against the interest payable by the 
Borrower for the Interest Period commencing immediately after 
the Semester for which the Funding Cost Margin was 
calculated. 

 
(c) Section 3.07 is deleted and the following is substituted therefor: 
 
  Surcharge. (a) Following any announcement by 

ADB that the Fixed Spread applicable to new Loans shall be 
increased, any Borrower with an outstanding Loan on which a 
lower Fixed Spread is applicable shall pay ADB a Surcharge. 
The amount of the Surcharge shall be determined by 
multiplying (i) the difference between the Fixed Spread that will 
be applied to new Loans and the Fixed Spread applicable to 
the outstanding Loan (expressed as a percentage per annum), 
by (ii) the principal amount of the outstanding Loan on which 
the Borrower shall pay interest for all interest periods 



3 
 
 

 

commencing on and after the effective date of the higher Fixed 
Spread that will be applied to new Loans. 

 
(b) Following any announcement by ADB that its 

Funding Cost Margin calculations with respect to any Loan 
Currency (or Approved Currency) in any Semester resulted in 
ADB incurring additional costs, the Borrower shall pay ADB a 
Surcharge.  The amount of the Surcharge shall be determined 
by multiplying (i) the Funding Cost Margin (expressed as a 
percentage per annum) by (ii) the principal amount of the Loan 
on which the Borrower shall pay interest for the Interest Period 
commencing immediately after the Semester for which the 
Funding Cost Margin was calculated.  ADB shall add the 
amount of the Surcharge to the interest payable by the 
Borrower for the Interest Period commencing immediately after 
the Semester for which the Funding Cost Margin was 
calculated. 

    
  Section 1.02.  Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations, the Grant Agreement and the Special Operations 
Loan Agreement have the respective meanings therein set forth unless modified herein or 
the context otherwise requires.   
 
 
 

ARTICLE II 
 

The Loan 
 
 
  Section 2.01.   (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's 
ordinary capital resources an amount of thirty-five million dollars ($35,000,000) as such 
amount may be converted from time to time through a Currency Conversion in accordance 
with the provisions of Section 2.06 of this Loan Agreement.  
 

(b) The Borrower shall onlend a portion of the proceeds of the Loan to the 
Participating Banks for the purposes of Output 1(c) of the Project, under the Onlending 
Agreements, upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB. 
 

(c) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (d) hereinafter.  
 

(d) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (c) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement. 
 
  Section 2.02.    The Borrower shall pay to ADB interest on the principal 
amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to time at a rate for each Interest 
Period equal to the sum of: 
 
 



4 
 
 

 

(a) LIBOR; 
 

(b) 0.60% as provided by Section 3.02 of the Loan Regulations less a 
credit of 0.10% as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan Regulations 
and; 

 
(c) a maturity premium of 0.10 as provided by Section 3.03 of the Loan 

Regulations. 
 

  Section 2.03.   The Borrower shall pay a commitment charge of 0.15% 
per annum.  Such charge shall accrue on the full amount of the Loan (less amounts 
withdrawn from time to time), commencing 60 days after the date of this Loan Agreement. 

    
  Section 2.04.   Interest and other charges on the Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 15 March and 15 September in each year. 
 
  Section 2.05.   The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 1 to 
this Loan Agreement. 
 
  Section 2.06.  (a) The Borrower may at any time request any of 
the following Conversions of the terms of the Loan in order to facilitate prudent debt 
management: 
 

(i) a change of the Loan Currency of all or any portion of the 
principal amount of the Loan, whether withdrawn and 
outstanding or unwithdrawn, to an Approved Currency; 

 
(ii) a change of the interest rate basis applicable to all or any 

portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 
outstanding from a Floating Rate to a Fixed Rate, or vice versa; 
and 

 
(iii) the setting of limits on the Floating Rate applicable to all or any 

portion of the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and 
outstanding by the establishment of an Interest Rate Cap or 
Interest Rate Collar on said Floating Rate. 

 
(b) Any conversion requested pursuant to subsection (a) hereinabove that 

is accepted by ADB shall be considered a “Conversion”, as defined in Section 2.01(6) of the 
Loan Regulations, and shall be effected in accordance with the provisions of Article V of the 
Loan Regulations and the Conversion Guidelines.  

 
 



5 
 
 

 

ARTICLE III 
 

Use of Proceeds of the Loan 
 

 
  Section 3.01.  The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to 
be applied to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement and the Special Operations Loan Agreement. 
 
  Section 3.02.   The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB. 
 
  Section 3.03.  Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 of the Special 
Operations Loan Agreement. ADB may refuse to finance a contract where any such item has 
not been procured under procedures substantially in accordance with those agreed between 
the Borrower and ADB or where the terms and conditions of the contract are satisfactory to 
ADB. 
 
  Section 3.04.  Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall cause all items of expenditure financed out of the proceeds of the Loan to be used 
exclusively in the carrying out of the Project. 
   

Section 3.05.   The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 9.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 June 2021 or such other date as may from time to time 
be agreed between the Borrower and ADB. 

 
 
 

ARTICLE IV 
 

Particular Covenants 
 

 
  Section 4.01.   (a)   The Borrower shall cause the Project to be 
carried out with due diligence and efficiency and in conformity with sound applicable 
technical, financial, business, and development practices. 
 
  (b) In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the Project facilities, 
the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth in Schedule 5 
to the Special Operations Loan Agreement. 
 
  Section 4.02.   The Borrower shall make available, promptly as needed 
and on terms and conditions acceptable to ADB, the funds, facilities, services, land and other 
resources, as required, in addition to the proceeds of the Loan, for the carrying out of the 
Project and for the operation and maintenance of the Project facilities. 
 
 



6 
 
 

 

  Section 4.03.  (a)  Whenever applicable, in the carrying out of the 
Project, the Borrower shall cause competent and qualified consultants and contractors, 
acceptable to ADB to be employed to an extent and upon terms and conditions satisfactory 
to the Borrower and ADB. 
 
  (b)  The Borrower shall cause the Project to be carried out in accordance 
with plans, design standards, specifications, work schedules and construction methods 
acceptable to the Borrower and ADB, as applicable.  The Borrower shall furnish, or cause to 
be furnished, to ADB, promptly after their preparation, such plans, design standards, 
specifications and work schedules, and any material modifications subsequently made 
therein, in such detail as ADB shall reasonably request. 
 
  Section 4.04.    The Borrower shall ensure that the activities of its 
departments and agencies with respect to the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities are conducted and coordinated in accordance with sound administrative 
policies and procedures. 
 

Section 4.05.  (a)  The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate 
accounts and records for the Project; (ii) cause each Participating Bank to maintain the 
Special Account and other separate accounts and records for the Subloan(s); (iii) prepare 
annual financial statements for the Project in accordance with accounting principles 
acceptable to ADB; (iv) cause each Participating Bank to prepare and submit to the Borrower 
a statement of utilization of funds for the Subloan(s) in accordance with accounting principles 
acceptable to ADB; (v) have such financial statements, including the statement of utilization 
of funds for the Subloan(s) prepared by each Participating Bank, audited annually by 
independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable 
to ADB, in accordance with international standards for auditing or the national equivalent 
acceptable to ADB; (vi) as part of each such audit, have the auditors prepare a report (which 
includes the auditors’ opinion on the financial statements, statements of utilization of funds, 
use of the Loan proceeds and compliance with the financial covenants of this Loan 
Agreement and the Onlending Agreements as well as on the use of the procedures for the 
imprest funds and statement of expenditures) and a management letter (which sets out the 
deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, 
if any); and (vii) furnish to ADB, no later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal 
year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, all in 
the English language, and such other information concerning these documents and the audit 
thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably request. 
 

(b)   The Borrower shall cause each Participating Bank to (i) 
prepare its own entity-level annual financial statements in accordance with national accrual-
based financing reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (ii) have such financial statements 
audited annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and terms of 
reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with international standards for auditing or 
the national equivalent acceptable to ADB; (iii) as part of each such audit, have the auditors 
prepare a report (which includes the auditors’ opinion on the financial statements) and a 
management letter; and (iv) furnish to ADB through the Borrower, no later than 6 months 
after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit 
report and management letter, all in the English language, and such other information 
concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall from time to time reasonably 
request; 

 



7 
 
 

 

 
  (c)  ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements referred to in Section 
4.05(a) hereinabove within 30 days of the date of their receipt by posting them on ADB’s 
website. 
 

(d) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to 
the Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(v) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such 
discussions requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted 
only in the presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall 
otherwise agree. 
 
  (e)  The Borrower shall cause each Participating Bank to enable ADB, 
upon ADB's request, to discuss the entity-level annual financial statements and the 
Participating Bank’s financial affairs where they relate to the Subproject(s) with the auditors 
appointed pursuant to subsection (b)(ii) hereinabove, and shall authorize and require any 
representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions requested by ADB. 
This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the presence of an 
authorized officer of the Participating Bank, unless the Participating Bank shall otherwise 
agree. 
 
  Section 4.06.  The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project, the Goods and Works, and any relevant records and documents. 
 
  Section 4.07.  The Borrower shall ensure that any facilities relevant to 
the Project are operated, maintained and repaired in accordance with sound applicable 
technical, financial, business, development, operational and maintenance practices. 
 
 
 

ARTICLE V 
 

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity 
 
 
  Section 5.01.   The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 9.01(l) of the Loan Regulations: 
 

(a) a party to an Onlending Agreement shall have failed to perform one or 
more of its obligations under an Onlending Agreement;  

 
(b) the Borrower shall have failed to perform one or more of its obligations 

under the Grant Agreement; and 
 
(c) the Borrower shall have failed to perform one or more of its obligations 

under the Special Operations Loan Agreement.  
 



8 
 
 

 

Section 5.02.   The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 9.07(a)(iv) of the Loan Regulations: any 
of the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.  
 
 
 

ARTICLE VI 
 

Effectiveness 
 

 
  Section 6.01.   A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 10.04 of 
the Loan Regulations. 
 
 



10

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

MONGOLIA

By
BOLOR BAYARBAATAR

Minister
Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Authorized Representative



 
 
 
 

 

11 

SCHEDULE 1 
 

Amortization Schedule 
 

(Agriculture and Rural Development Project - Additional Financing) 
 

 
1.  The following table sets forth the Principal Payment Dates of the Loan and the 
percentage of the total principal amount of the Loan payable on each Principal Payment Date 
(Installment Share).  If the proceeds of the Loan shall have been fully withdrawn as of the 
first Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on 
each Principal Payment Date shall be determined by ADB by multiplying: (a) the total 
principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding as of the first Principal Payment 
Date; by (b) the Installment Share for each Principal Payment Date, such repayment amount 
to be adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this 
Schedule, to which a Currency Conversion applies. 
   
 
2. If the proceeds of the Loan shall not have been fully withdrawn as of the first  
Principal Payment Date, the principal amount of the Loan repayable by the Borrower on each 
Principal Payment Date shall be determined as follows: 
 

(a) To the extent that any proceeds of the Loan shall have been withdrawn 
as of the first Principal Payment Date, the Borrower shall repay the amount withdrawn and 
outstanding as of such date in accordance with paragraph 1 of this Schedule. 
 

(b) Any withdrawal made after the first Principal Payment Date shall be 
repaid on each Principal Payment Date falling after the date of such withdrawal in amounts 
determined by ADB by multiplying the amount of each such withdrawal by a fraction, the 
numerator of which shall be the original Installment Share specified in the table in paragraph 
1 of this Schedule for said Principal Payment Date (the Original Installment Share) and the 
denominator of which shall be the sum of all remaining Original Installment Shares for 
Principal Payment Dates falling on or after such date, such repayment amounts to be 
adjusted, as necessary, to deduct any amounts referred to in paragraph 4 of this Schedule, 
to which a Currency Conversion applies. 

 
3.  Withdrawals made within two calendar months prior to any Principal Payment 
Date shall, for the purposes solely of calculating the principal amounts payable on any 
Principal Payment Date, be treated as withdrawn and outstanding on the second Principal 
Payment Date following the date of withdrawal and shall be repayable on each Principal 
Payment Date commencing with the second Principal Payment Date following the date of 
withdrawal. 
 
4.  Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Schedule, upon a 
Currency Conversion of all or any portion of the withdrawn principal amount of the Loan to an 
Approved Currency, the amount so converted in said Approved Currency that shall be 
repayable on any Principal Payment Date occurring during the Conversion Period, shall be 
determined by ADB by multiplying such amount in its currency of denomination immediately 
prior to said Conversion by either: (i) the exchange rate that reflects the amounts of principal 
in said Approved Currency payable by ADB under the Currency Hedge Transaction relating 
to said Conversion; or (ii) if ADB so determines in accordance with the Conversion 
Guidelines, the exchange rate component of the Screen Rate.  



 
Schedule 1 

 
 

 

13 

 
5.  If the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn and outstanding from time to 
time shall be denominated in more than one Loan Currency, the provisions of this Schedule 
shall apply separately to the amount denominated in each Loan Currency, so as to produce a 
separate amortization schedule for each such amount. 



14 
 

 

 

SCHEDULE 2 
 

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds 
 
 
General 
 
1.  The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of 
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”).  (Reference to “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.) 
 
Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account 
 
2.  Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be 
disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for each item of expenditure set forth in 
the Table. 
 
Interest and Commitment Charges 
 
3.  The amount allocated to Category 2 is for financing interest and commitment 
charges on the Loan during the implementation period of the Project.  ADB shall be entitled 
to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf of the Borrower, the amounts 
required to meet payments, when due, of such interest and commitment charges. 
 
Reallocation 
 
4.  Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal 
percentages set forth in the Table, 
 
  (a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the extent required to meet the estimated 
shortfall, amounts of the Loan which have been allocated to another Category but, in the 
opinion of ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such reallocation 
cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the withdrawal percentage applicable to 
such expenditures in order that further withdrawals under such Category may continue until 
all expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and 
 
  (b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the Borrower, reallocate 
such excess amount to any other Category. 
 
Disbursement Procedures 
 
5.  Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in 
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook. 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 
Schedule 2 

 
 

 

15 

Conditions for Withdrawals from Loan Account 
 
6.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals 
shall be made from the Loan Account to the Special Account of a Participating Bank until 
MOF and such Participating Bank shall have duly entered into an Onlending Agreement 
which shall include the terms and conditions set forth in paragraph 4 of Schedule 5 to the 
Special Operations Loan Agreement and such Onlending Agreement shall have become 
legally binding upon the Borrower and such Participating Bank in accordance with its terms.  

 
 



16 

Attachment to Schedule 2 
 
 

 

TABLE 
 

 
ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS 

(Agriculture and Rural Development Project – Additional Financing) 
 

 
Number 

 
Item 

Total Amount 
Allocated for ADB 

Financing 
Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan 

Account 
($) 

Category 

1 Value Chain Investment
a
 32,950,000 100% of total expenditure 

2 
Interest and Commitment 
Charges 2,050,000 100% of amounts due 

 Total 35,000,000 
 

a
Subject to the conditions for withdrawal described in paragraph 6 of Schedule 2.  







