

















































LOAN NUMBER 3668-BHU(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Phuentsholing Township Development Project)

between

KINGDOM OF BHUTAN

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 3 JULY 2018

BHU 50165



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 3 July 2018 between KINGDOM OF BHUTAN 
(“Borrower”) and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK (“ADB").

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower has applied to ADB for a loan and a grant for the 
purposes of the Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Project will be carried out by Druk Holdings and Investments
Limited (“DHI”), and for this purpose the Borrower will make available to DHI the proceeds of 
the loan provided for herein and the grant provided for the Grant Agreement (as hereinafter 
defined) (together, the “Financings") upon terms and conditions satisfactory to ADB;

(C) by a grant agreement of even date herewith (“Grant Agreement”), ADB
has agreed to make the proceeds of a grant in the amount of twenty-four million two hundred 
sixty thousand Dollars ($24,260,000) available to the Borrower for the purposes of financing 
the Project; and

(D) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from
ADB’s ordinary capital resources upon the terms and conditions set forth herein and in the 
Project Agreements of even date herewith between ADB and each of DHI and Construction 
Development Corporation Limited ("CDCL”);

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01. All the provisions of ADB’s Ordinary Operations
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 (“Loan Regulations”), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject, however, to the following modifications:

(a) Section 2.01 (w) is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

“Project Agreement" means the project agreements of even date 
herewith between ADB and each of DHI and CDCL, as each such 
agreement may be amended from time to time; and such project 
agreement includes all schedules to the project agreement;

(b) The term “Project Executing Agency" appearing in Sections 6.01(a), 
8.01(d), 8.01(f), 8.01(k), 9.01(c) and 9.02(c) of the Loan Regulations 
shall be substituted by the terms "DHI” and “CDCL”.



2

Section 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
terms defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) “Consulting Guidelines" means the Guidelines on the Use of 
Consultants by Asian Development Bank and its Borrowers (2013, as 
amended from time to time);

(b) "Consulting Services” means the services to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Financings aS described in paragraph 3 of Schedule 1 
to this Loan Agreement;

(c) "Environmental Impact Assessment” or “EIA” means the environmental 
impact assessment for the Project, including any update thereto, 
prepared and submitted by the Borrower and cleared by ADB;

(d) "Environmental Management Plan” or “EMP” means the environmental 
management plan for the Project, including any update thereto, 
incorporated in the EIA;

(e) “Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements 
set forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1, and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of 
theSPS;

(f) “Loan Disbursement Handbook" means ADB’s Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (2017, as amended from time to time);

(g) "Ngultrum” means the Borrower’s currency;

(h) “Procurement Guidelines” means ADB’s Procurement Guidelines 
(2015, as amended from time to time);

(i) “Procurement Plan” means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
24 July 2017 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB, as updated 
from time to. time in accordance with the Procurement Guidelines, the 
Consulting Guidelines, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(j) “Project Administration Manual” or “PAM" means the Project’s 
administration manual for the Project dated 24 July 2017 and agreed 
between the Borrower and ADB, as updated from time to time in 
accordance with the respective administrative procedures of the 
Borrower and ADB;

(k) “Project Advisory Committee” or "PAC” means the Project's advisory 
committee chaired by DHI’s Chief Executive Officer and comprising 
representatives as stated in the PAM;

(I) “Project Implementation Unit" or “PIU" means the Project 
implementation unit comprising persons as stated in the PAM;



3

(m) “Project Management Unit” or “PMU” means the Project management 
unit comprising persons as stated in the PAM;

(n) "Safeguard Policy Statement" or “SPS” means ADB’s Safeguard Policy 
Statement (2009);

(o) “Safeguards Monitoring Report” means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of and compliance with the EMP, including any 
corrective and preventive actions;

(p) “Strategic Action Plan” or “SAP" means the strategic action plan for 
sustainable township management in form and substance acceptable 
to ADB referred to in paragraph 5 of Schedule 5 to this Loan 
Agreement;

(q) “Subsidiary Financing Agreement” means the agreement referred to in 
Section 3.01 of this Loan Agreement and Section 3.01 of the Grant 
Agreement;

(r) “Subsidiary Loan" means the loan from the Borrower to CDCL under 
the Subsidiary Financing Agreement; and

. (s) “Works” means construction or civil works to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Financings, including services such as drilling or 
mapping, and project related services that are provided as part of a 
single responsibility or turnkey contract, but excluding Consulting 
Services.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01. (a) ADB agrees to lend to the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital resources an amount of twenty-eight million seven hundred forty thousand 
Dollars ($28,740,000).

(b) The Loan has a principal repayment period of 24. years, and 
additionally, a grace period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period” as used in subsection (a) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1.5% per annum thereafter, on the 
amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.



4

Section 2.03. The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan
shall be payable semiannually on 1 February and 1 August in each year.

Section 2.04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the 
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 2.05. The currency of repayment of the principal amount of 
the Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes of Sections 
4.03(a) and 4.04 of the Loan Regulations shall be Dollar.

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. (a) The Borrower shall relend the proceeds of the
Loan in Ngultrum to DHI under a Subsidiary Financing Agreement upon terms and conditions 
satisfactory to ADB (and DHI shall provide same to CDCL). Except as ADB shall otherwise 
agree, the terms for relending the proceeds of the Loan shall include interest at the rate of 
1% per annum during the grace period and 2.55% per annum thereafter, on the amount of 
the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time, and a term of 
32 years including a grace period of 8 years. The Borrower shall bear the risk associated 
with exchange mismatch between the Loan and the Subsidiary Loan.

(b) The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be applied 
exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions 
of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.02. The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower 
shall procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the 
proceeds of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan 
Agreement.

Section 3.04. Withdrawals from the Loan Account in respect of Works 
and Consulting Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to:

(a) Works and Consulting Services which are supplied from such member 
countries of ADB as shall have been specified by ADB from time to 
time as eligible sources for procurement; and

(b) Works and Consulting Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time.



5

Section 3.05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 
of the Loan Regulations shall be 31 December 2025 or such other date as may from time to 
time be agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set 
forth in Schedule 5 to this Loan Agreement.

Section 4.02. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project and Works, and any relevant records and documents.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable DHI and CDCL to perform their respective obligations under 
the Project Agreements, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with 
the performance of such obligations.

Section 4.04. (a) The Borrower shall exercise its rights under the
Subsidiary Financing Agreement in such a manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower 
and ADB and to accomplish the purposes of the Loan.

(b) No rights or obligations under the Subsidiary Financing Agreement 
shall be assigned, amended, or waived without the prior concurrence of ADB.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01. The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01(m) of the Loan Regulations:

(a) the Borrower shall have failed to perform any of its obligations under 
the Grant Agreement; and

(b) the Borrower or DHI shall have failed to perform any of their respective 
obligations under the Subsidiary Financing Agreement.

Section 5. 02. The following are specified as additional events for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the Loan Regulations: either of 
the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred.



6

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following are specified as additional conditions to 
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations:

(a) the Grant Agreement shall have been duly executed and delivered on 
behalf of the Borrower and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness 
other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this Loan 
Agreement shall have been fulfilled; and .

(b) the Subsidiary Financing Agreement, in form and substance 
satisfactory to ADB, shall have been duly executed and delivered on 
behalf of the Borrower and DHI and all conditions precedent to its 
effectiveness other than a condition requiring the effectiveness of this 
Loan Agreement shall have been fulfilled.

Section 6. 02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for 
the purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the Loan Regulations, to be included in the opinion or 
opinions to be furnished to ADB: that the Subsidiary Financing Agreement has been duly 
authorized or ratified by, and executed and delivered on behalf of each of the Borrower and 
DHI and is legally binding upon each of them in accordance with its terms.

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of the Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated 
as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the Loan Regulations.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes 
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations:

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
Royal Government of Bhutan
Thimphu, Bhutan



7

Facsimile Number:

+975 2 330-113

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 636-2444 
(632) 636-2293.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the 
principal office of ADB.

LYONPO NAMGAY DORJI 
Minister

Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

KANOKPAN LAO-ARAYA 
Country Director 

Bhutan Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of the Project

1. The objective of the Project is to sustainably increase the urban area of
Phuentsholing.

2. The Project shall comprise (i) development of climate and flood resilient land;
(ii) construction of municipal infrastructure; and (iii) installation of sustainable township 
management systems.

3. Consulting Services shall be provided in connection with the above activities.

4. The Project is expected to be completed by 30 June 2025.



Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category ("Table"). (Reference to. “Category” in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage 
for each item of expenditure set forth in the Table.

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook.

Retroactive Financing

5. Withdrawals from the Loan Account may be made to finance eligible
expenditures incurred under the Project before the Effective Date, but not earlier than 12 
months before the date of this Loan Agreement in connection with Works and Consulting 
Services, subject to a maximum amount equivalent to 20% of the Loan amount.



13
Attachment to Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

(USD) 
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Works 10,360,000 57% of total expenditure claimed

2 Consulting Services 7,420,000 98% of total expenditure claimed

3 Unallocated 10,960,000

TOTAL 28,740,000



14

SCHEDULE 4

Procurement of Works and Consulting Services

General

1. The procurement of Works and Consulting Services shall be subject to and
governed by the Procurement Guidelines, and the Consulting Guidelines, respectively.

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree and Works shall be procured and
Consulting Services shall be selected and engaged only on the basis of the procurement 
methods and the selection methods set forth below. These methods are subject to, among 
other things, the detailed arrangements and threshold values set forth in the Procurement 
Plan. The Borrower may only modify the procurement methods and the selection methods or 
threshold values with the prior agreement of ADB, and modifications must be set out in 
updates to the Procurement Plan.

3. , All terms used in this Schedule and not otherwise defined in this Loan
Agreement have the meanings provided in the Procurement Guidelines and/or the 
Consulting Guidelines, as applicable.

Works

4. Works shall be procured on the basis of the procurement methods set forth
below:

(a) International Competitive Bidding;

(b) Force Account; and

(c) Shopping.

Conditions for Award of Contract

5. CDCL shall not award any Works contract which involves environmental
impacts until:

(a) The Borrower’s National Environment Commission has granted the 
final approval of the EIA; and

(b) CDCL has incorporated the relevant provisions from the EMP into the 
Works contract.

Consulting Services

6. The Borrower shall apply Quality- and Cost-Based Selection for Consulting
Services.

7. The Borrower shall recruit the individual consultants for independent
environmental monitoring expert, urban management advisor and investment promotion 



15
Schedule 4

advisor in accordance with procedures acceptable to ADB for recruiting individual 
consultants.

Industrial or Intellectual Property Rights

8. (a) The Borrower shall ensure that all Works procured (including without
limitation all computer hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured or 
incorporated within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

(b) The Borrower shall ensure that all contracts for the procurement of 
Works contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from 
the contractor or supplier with respect to the matters referred to in subparagraph (a) of this 
paragraph.

9. The Borrower shall ensure that all ADB-financed contracts with consultants
contain appropriate representations, warranties and, if appropriate, indemnities from the 
consultants to ensure that the Consulting Services provided do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party.

APB’s Review of Procurement Decisions

10. Contracts procured under international competitive bidding procedures and
contracts for Consulting Services shall be subject to prior review by ADB, unless otherwise 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB and set forth in the Procurement Plan.



16

SCHEDULE 5

Execution of Project

Implementation Arrangements

1. The Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall ensure that the Project is implemented in
accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM. Any subsequent change to 
the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by the Borrower and 
ADB. In the event of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan Agreement, the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement shall prevail.

2. The Borrower shall ensure that DHI and CDCL employ sufficient staff for the
PMU and PIU for the duration of the Project, with adequate and relevant expertise in the field 
of project management, financial management, engineering, procurement, and 
environmental and social safeguards implementation. The PMU Project Director and PIU 
Project Director shall hold the position not less than the rank of Class 1 engineer, or 
equivalent, Officers, unless otherwise acceptable to.ADB.

3. The Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall (a) ensure that the majority of counterpart
staff assigned to the PMU and PIU are assigned to the Project on a full-time basis; and (b) 
undertake best efforts to ensure that they remain in their positions for a reasonable period of 
time, and that staff replacements do not unduly disrupt implementation of the Project. The 
Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall provide ADB reasonable opportunity to comment on any 
proposed appointment of persons to key positions in the PMU and PIU, including the Project 
Director for the PMU and the Project Directors for PIU.

4. The Borrower shall remain fully committed to the Project and shall ensure that
all its ministries, agencies and divisions involved in the implementation of the Project give 
their full cooperation to ensure smooth implementation of the Project. Specifically, the 
Borrower shall cause DHI and CDCL to give full, timely and efficient cooperation in obtaining 
any licenses, permits or approvals required in connection with infrastructure work. The 
Borrower shall also ensure that Bhutan Power Corporation and Bhutan Telecom will provide 
the necessary connections in the developed areas.

Strategic Action Plan

5. Within 36 months of the Effective Date, the Borrower though DHI shall
develop and finalize, and ensure approval by the relevant government agency and 
implementation of, the SAP, which shall include, among other matters, (i) the required legal, 
policy and operational frameworks for operation of the new township that will establish 
institutional arrangements for sustainable township management, including the required 
approval process, and the allocation of roles and responsibilities between the municipality 
and CDCL; (ii) the allocation of sufficient municipal and CDCL human resources; (iii) a plan 
on the development of the surrounding area adjacent to the newly developed township, 
including plans for raising grounds level for the protection for surface flooding; and (tv) a time 
bound plan for the operation and maintenance of the newly developed township.



17
Schedule 5

Environment

6. The Borrower shall ensure or cause DHI and CDCL to ensure that the
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of the 
Project and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Recipient relating to environment, health and safety; (b) the Environmental Safeguards; and 
(c) all measures and requirements set forth in the EIA and the EMP, and any corrective or 
preventative actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report.

Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement

7. The Borrower shall ensure that all land and all rights-of-way required for the
Project are made available to the Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed 
under the related Works contract.

8. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project does not involve any involuntary
resettlement impacts within the meaning of the SPS. In the event the Project involves any 
such impacts, the Borrower shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies 
with the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Indigenous Peoples

9. The Borrower shall ensure that the Project does not involve any indigenous
peoples’ impacts within the meaning of the SPS. In the event the Project involves any such 
impacts, the Borrower shall take all steps required to ensure that the Project complies with 
the applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower and with the SPS.

Labor Standards, Health and Safety

10. The Borrower shall ensure that the core labor standards and the Borrower’s
applicable laws and regulations are complied with during Project implementation. The 
Borrower shall include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed 
by ADB under the Project requiring that the contractors, among other things: (a) comply with 
the Borrower’s applicable labor law and regulations and incorporate applicable workplace 
occupational safety norms; (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in 
respect of employment and occupation; (d) do not use forced labor; (e) allow freedom of 
association and effectively recognize the right to collective bargaining; and (f) disseminate, or 
engage appropriate service providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually 
transmitted diseases, including HIV/AIDS, to the employees of contractors engaged under 
the Project and to members of the local communities surrounding the Project area, 
particularly women. The Borrower shall strictly monitor compliance with the requirements set 
forth above and provide ADB with regular reports.

Gender and Development

11. The Borrower shall ensure that the principles of gender equality aimed at
increasing Project benefits, and impact on women in the Project area are followed during 
implementation of the Project. These include (a) equal pay to men and women for work of 
equal value; (b) enabling working conditions for women workers; and (c) taking necessary 



18
Schedule 5

actions to encourage women living in the Project area to participate in the design and 
implementation of Project activities.

Human and Financial Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

12. The Borrower shall make available, or cause DHI and CDCL to make
available, necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMP.

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

13. The Borrower shall ensure, or cause DHI and CDCL to ensure, that all bidding
documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require contractors to:

(a) comply with the measures relevant to the contractor set forth in the EIA 
and the EMP (to the extent they concern impacts or affected people 
during construction), and any corrective or preventative actions set 
forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report;

(b) make available a budget for all such environmental and social 
measures;

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated 
environmental risks or impacts that arise during construction, 
implementation or operation of the Project that were not considered in 
the EIA and the EMP;

(d) ■ adequately record the condition, of roads, agricultural land and other 
infrastructure prior to starting to transport materials and construction; 
and

(e) reinstate pathways, other local infrastructure, and agricultural land to at 
least their pre-project condition upon the completion of construction.

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

14. The Borrower shall to do the following:

(a) submit bi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly 
upon submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts 
arise during construction, implementation or operation of the Project 
that were not considered in the EIA and the EMP, promptly inform ADB 
of the occurrence of such risks or impacts, with detailed description of 
the event and proposed corrective action plan;

(c) no later than six months of the Effective Date, engage qualified and 
experienced external experts or qualified NGO[sj under a selection 
process and terms of reference acceptable to ADB, to verify 



19
Schedule 5

information produced through the Project monitoring process, and 
facilitate the carrying out of any verification activities by such external 
experts; and

(d) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures 
and requirements set forth in the EMP promptly after becoming aware 
of the breach.

Prohibited List of Investments

15. The Borrower shall ensure that no proceeds of the Financings are used to
finance any activity included in the list of' prohibited investment activities provided in 
Appendix 5 of the SPS.

Counterpart Support

16. The Borrower through DHI will provide all counterpart funds, land and facilities
required for timely and effective implementation of the Project, including without limitation, 
any funds required to (a) to meet any shortfall between cost and revenues for the operation 
and maintenance of the facilities developed under the Project, (b) to mitigate any unforeseen 
environmental and social impacts, and (c) to meet additional costs arising from design 
changes, price escalation in construction costs and/or unforeseen circumstances. The 
Borrower will make the resources thus required available on an annual basis for each fiscal 
year. In addition to the foregoing, the. Borrower shall ensure that DHI and CDCL have 
sufficient funds to satisfy their liabilities arising from any Works and/or Consulting Services 
contract.

Governance and Corruption

17. The Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall (a) comply with ADB’s Anticorruption
Policy (1998, as amended to date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to 
investigate directly, or through its agents, any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or 
coercive practice relating to the Project; and (b) cooperate with any such investigation and 
extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory completion of such investigation.

18. The Borrower, DHI and CDCL shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions
acceptable to ADB are included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions 
specifying the right of ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing 
and implementing agencies and all contractors, suppliers, consultants, and other service 
providers as they relate to the Project.

Operation and Maintenance

19. The Borrower shall develop and implement a program for regular and periodic
maintenance of the facilities to be financed by the Project in accordance with international 
best practices acceptable to ADB, and make adequate resources available, through 
budgetary allocations or otherwise, for this purpose.



20
Schedule 5

Exemption of Import Duties

20. The Borrower shall exempt the cost of Works contracts from otherwise
applicable customs duties.





