






























































50264-002: Agricultural Value Chain Competitiveness and Safety Enhancement Project


LOAN NUMBER 8389-CAM

LOAN AGREEMENT 

(Agricultural Value Chain Competitiveness and Safety Enhancement Project)

between

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

dated 0 7 DEC 2020

CAM 50264



LOAN AGREEMENT

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 0 7 DEC 2020 between KINGDOM OF 
CAMBODIA (“Borrower") and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK ("ADB")

WHEREAS

(A) by a loan agreement of even date herewith between the Borrower and ADB 
("A Loan Agreement"), ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from ADB's 
ordinary capital resources in an amount of seventy million Dollars ($70,000,000) ("A Loan') for 
the purposes of the project described in Schedule 1 to the A Loan Agreement (“Project”).

(B) the Borrower has also applied to Agence Franpaise de D6veloppement 
(“AFD”) for a loan ("AFD Loan") in Euros which is equivalent to twenty-five million Dollars 
($25,000,000) to assist in cofinancing a part of the Project, upon the terms and conditions 
set forth in a loan agreement between the Borrower and AFD (“AFD Loan Agreement");

(C) by an externally financed grant agreement of even date herewith between 
the Borrower and ADB ("JFPR Grant Agreement’), the Borrower has also applied to the Japan 
Fund for Poverty Reduction for a grant (“Grant") in the amount of three million Dollars ($3,000,000) 
to be administered by ADB for the purpose of the Project.

(D) the Borrower has also applied to ADB for a loan ("B Loan") for the purposes 
of the Project to be funded by ADB entirely from a participation by ASEAN Infrastructure Fund 
Limited (“AIF");

(E) by a participation agreement of even date herewith between ADB and AIF 
("Participation Agreement"), ADB has agreed to grant to AIF a participation in the B Loan 
(“Participation") on the terms and conditions set forth therein; and

(F) ADB has agreed to make a B Loan to the Borrower upon the terms and 
conditions set forth herein and in the Project Agreement of even date herewith between ADB and 
the respective PFIs;

NOW THEREFORE the parties hereto agree as follows:

ARTICLE I

General Conditions; Definitions

Section 1 01 All the provisions of the General Conditions Applicable to 
Loans made by ADB Funded Through Participations of ASEAN Infrastructure Fund Limited, dated 
9 May 2017 ("General Conditions ), are hereby made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the 
same force and effect as if they were fully set forth herein, subject, however, to the following 
modifications:

(a) Section 2.01 (dd) is deleted and the following is substituted therefor



2

“Project Agreement’ means the project agreement of even date 
herewith between ADB and a PFI, as such agreement may be 
amended from time to time; and such project agreement includes all 
schedules to the Project Agreement.

(b) The term "Project Executing Agency" appearing in Sections 6.01 (a)(i), 
8.01(d). 8.01(f). 8.01 (k). 9.01(c) and 9.02(c) of the General Conditions shall 
be substituted by the term “PFI".

(c) Section 3.02 (Interest) is deleted and the following is substituted therefor:

Interest Charge. An interest charge at the rate specified in the 
Loan Agreement shall be payable on the principal amount of the Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time. 
The interest charge shall accrue from the respective dates on which 
amounts shall be withdrawn from the Loan Account. ADB shall be 
entitled to withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itself, on behalf 
of the Borrower, the amounts required to meet interest charge 
payments, when and if due.

(d) Section 3.03 (Commitment Charge; Maturity Premium) is deleted and the 
following is substituted therefor.

Computation of Interest Charge. The interest charge shall be 
computed on the basis of a 360-day year of twelve 30-day months.

(e) Section 3.04 (Computation of Interest and Other Charges) is deleted and 
the following is substituted therefor:

Repayment and Prepayment. (a) The Borrower shall pay 
the principal amount of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in 
accordance with the amortization schedule to the Loan Agreement.

(b) After giving not less than 45 days' written notice to ADB, the 
Borrower shall have the right to repay in advance of maturity, as of a 
date acceptable to ADB (provided, that the Borrower shall have paid 
all amounts due under the Loan Agreement as of such date): (i) all of 
the principal amount of the Loan then outstanding; or 
(ii) all of the principal amount of any one or more maturities of the 
Loan.

(c) If ADB shall at any time receive from the Borrower any amount 
which is (i) less than the full amount then due and payable to ADB in 
accordance with paragraph (a) of this Section; or (ii) less than the full 
amount repayable to ADB in accordance with paragraph (b) of this 
Section, ADB shall have the right to allocate and apply the amount so 
received in any manner and for such purposes under the Loan 
Agreement as ADB shall in its sole discretion determine.



3

(f) Sections 3.05 (Repayment and Prepayment), 3.06 (Rebate). 3.07 
(Surcharge) are hereby deleted.

(g) Sections. 3.08 (Place of Payment). 3.09 (Sale of Loan) and 3.10 (Change 
of Law) shall be renumbered as Sections 3.05. 3.06 and 3.07, respectively.

Sec tion 1.02. Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several terms 
defined in the General Conditions and in the A Loan Agreement have the respective meanings 
therein set forth unless modified herein or the context otherwise requires. Additional term used in 
this Loan Agreement have the following meaning: “interest charge ’ means a charge made on the 
B Loan pursuant to Section 2.02

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01 (a) ADB agrees to make to the Borrower the B Loan in
an amount of five million Dollars ($5,000,000), with funds to be obtained entirely through the 
Participation in the B Loan by AIF

(b) The B Loan has a principal repayment period of 20 years, and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (c) hereinafter.

(c) The term “grace period" as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means the 
period prior to the first Principal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization schedule set 
forth in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2.02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the rate 
of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1 5% per annum thereafter on the on the amount 
of the B Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time to time.

Section 2.03. Interest and other charges on the B Loan shall be payable 
semiannually on 15 May and 15 November in each year.

Section 2 04. The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the B Loan 
withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 1 to this Loan 
Agreement

ARTICLE III 

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3 01. The Borrower shall relend a portion of the proceeds of the 
B Loan to each of the PFIs under a separate Subsidiary Loan Agreement for purposes of the 
Component 1 Each Subsidiary Loan Agreement shall provide inter alia for the relending of the 



4

proceeds of the B Loan to each of the PFIs, the carrying out of the Project, and the rights of the 
Borrower and ADB with respect thereto. Such Subsidiary Loan Agreement shall be in form and 
on terms and conditions acceptable to ADB, and shall be without prejudice to. and without 
limitation on. the obligations of the Borrower under this Loan Agreement.

Section 3.02 (a) Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds
of the B Loan made available to the PFIs shall be used only for making AIF Subloans to Eligible 
Sub-borrowers for AIF Eligible Activity and shall be applied exclusively to the cost of Goods, 
Works and Services and other items of expenditure required to carry out such AIF Eligible Activity.

(b) The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the B Loan made applicable to 
the PFIs to be applied exclusively to the financing of expenditures on the Project, specifically for 
purposes of the AIF Eligible Activity by the Eligible Sub-borrowers, in accordance with the 
provisions of this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3.03 The proceeds of the B Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB.

Section 3.04 Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of 
the B Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to the A Loan Agreement.

Section 3.05. The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8.02 of 
the General Conditions shall be 30 August 2027 or such other date as may from time to time be 
agreed between the Borrower and ADB.

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01 In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the Project 
facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed, all obligations set forth in 
Schedule 4 to the A Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 4.02. In addition to the information and reports set forth in 
Sections 6 01 and 6 04 of the General Conditions, the Borrower shall furnish, or cause to be 
furnished, to ADB all such reports and information as ADB shall reasonably request concerning 
(a) the Eligible Sub-borrowers, the AIF Eligible Activity and the AIF Subloans; and (b) the 
administration, operations and financial condition of each PFI.

Section 4.03. The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to inspect 
the Project, any Eligible Sub-borrower, any Eligible Activity, the Goods and Works, and any 
relevant records and documents

Section 4.04. (a) The Borrower shall (i) maintain separate accounts
and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual financial statements for the Project in accordance 
with financial reporting standards acceptable to ADB; (iii) have such financial statements audited 



5

annually by independent auditors whose qualifications, experience and terms of reference are 
acceptable to ADB, in accordance with auditing standards acceptable to ADB; (iv) as part of each 
such audit, have the auditors prepare a report, which includes the auditors' opinion(s) on the 
financial statements and the use of the B Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which sets 
out the deficiencies in the internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the 
audit, if any); and (v) furnish to ADB. no later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal 
year, copies of such audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, all in the 
English language, and such other information concerning these documents and the audit thereof 
as ADB shall from time to time reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the Project 
and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date of ADB's 
confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB's website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB. upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower’s financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall authorize 
and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions requested 
by ADB This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the presence of an 
authorized officer of the Borrower, unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree

Section 4.05 The Borrower shall not take or permit any action which 
would interfere with the performance of PFI's obligations under this Loan Agreement or under the 
Project Agreement.

Section 4.06. (a) The Borrower shall exercise its rights under the
Subsidiary Loan Agreement in such a manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower and ADB 
and to accomplish the purposes of the B Loan.

(b) No rights or obligations under the Subsidiary Loan Agreement shall be 
assigned, amended, abrogated or waived without the prior concurrence of ADB

Section 4.07. ADB's obligation to disburse any amount from the Loan 
Account shall be subject to ADB's receipt of a corresponding amount from AIF in accordance with 
the terms of the Participation Agreement. In the event AIF does not pay any amount of the 
Participation in the B Loan to ADB. ADB. by notice to the Borrower, shall cancel the corresponding 
amount of the B Loan.

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5.01 The following are specified as additional events for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01(m) of the General Conditions:



6

(a) The Borrower shall have failed to perform any of its obligations under the 
A Loan and shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation or 
shall have become repayable prior to its agreed maturity date; and

(b) The Borrower shall have failed to perform any of its obligations under the 
AFD Loan and shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation or 
shall have become repayable prior to its agreed maturity date.

Section 5. 02 The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8.07(d) of the General Conditions: either of 
the events specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6. 01. The following is specified as an additional condition to the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the General 
Conditions: the A Loan agreement will have been duly executed and delivered on behalf of, the 
Borrower, and all conditions precedent to its effectiveness, other than a condition requiring the 
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement, shall have been fulfilled

Section 6.02. The following is specified as an additional matter, for the 
purposes of Section 9.02(d) of the General Conditions, to be included in the opinion or opinions 
to be furnished to ADB: the A Loan Agreement has been duly authorized or approved by. and 
executed and delivered on behalf of, the Borrower and is legally binding upon the Borrower in 
accordance with its terms.

Section 6.03. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
General Conditions.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7. 01. The Minister of Economy and Finance of the Borrower is 
designated as representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11.02 of the General 
Conditions.

Section 7. 02. The following addresses are specified for the purposes of 
Section 11.01 of the General Conditions:



7

For the Borrower

Ministry of Economy and Finance 
St. 92. Sangkat Wat Phnom 
Khan Daun Penh
Phnom Penh, Cambodia

Facsimile Numbers:

(855) 23 427-798
(855) 23 428-424

For APB

Asian Development Bank 
6 ADB Avenue 
Mandaluyong City 
1550 Metro Manila 
Philippines

Facsimile Numbers:

(632) 8636-2444
(632) 8636-2231.



8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their representatives 
thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in their respective 
names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered at the principal office of ADB.

Deputy Prime Minister 
Minister of Economy and Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

Country Director 
Cambodia Resident Mission



9

nts for payment are subject to the provisions of Sections 3.04 and 4 03 of 
the General Conditions.



SCHEDULE 2

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the B Loan and the allocation of the B Loan 
proceeds to each such Category (“Table”). (Reference to “Category" in this Schedule is to a 
Category of the Table).

Basis for Withdrawal from the Loan Account

2. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the B Loan shall be
allocated to items of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis of the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure set forth in the Table

Reallocation

3. Notwithstanding the allocation of B Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table.

(a) if the amount of the B Loan allocated to any Category appears to be 
insufficient to finance all agreed expenditures in that Category. ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the B Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB. are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (ii) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall, reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made; and

(b) if the amount of the B Loan allocated to any Category appears to exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category. ADB may. by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category.

Disbursement Procedures

4 Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the B Loan proceeds shall be disbursed
in accordance with the Loan Disbursement Handbook

Condition for Withdrawals from Loan Account

5 . Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals
shall be made from the Loan Account for [Financial services Category] until Subsidiary Loan 
Agreements with both PFIs. in form and substance satisfactory to ADB. shall have been duly 
executed and delivered on behalf of respective PFI, and shall have become fully effective and 
binding on the parties thereto in accordance with their terms.



12
Attachment to Schedule 2

TABLE

• Subject to the condition for withdrawal described in paragraph 5 of Schedule 2

ALLOCATION A ND WITHDRAWAL OF B LOAN PROCEEDS

Number Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for AIF Financing 

($)
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Cooperative support 2,772.000 100% of total expenditure claimed*
2 Financial services 2.000,000 100% of total expenditure claimed
3 Unallocated 228,000

TOTAL 5,000,000





