






























































Loan Agreement (Ordinary Operations [Concessional]) for Loan 3817-LAO: Sustainable Rural Infrastructure and Watershed Management Sector Project


LOAN NUMBER 3317-I.AO(COL)

LOAN AGREEMENT 
(Ordinary Operations [Concessional])

(Sustainable Rural Infrastructure and Watershed Management Sector Project!

between

LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC

and

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

DATED 30 OCTOBER 2019

LAO 5023G



LOAN AGREEMENT
(Oidinary Operations [Concessional])

LOAN AGREEMENT dated 30 October 2019 between LAO PEOPLES 
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC ('Borrower") and ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK {"ADB').

WHEREAS

(A) the Borrower rias applied to ADB for a loan for the purposes of the 
Project described in Schedule 1 to this Loan Agreement;

(B) the Project will be partly carried out hv the provinces of Houaphan, 
Louangphabang. XalgnaboUji and Xiangkhouang ("Project provinces'), and for this purpose 
the Borrower will make available to the Project provinces a portion of the proceeds of the loan 
provided for herein upon terms and conditions acceptable to ADB:

(C) the Borrower has also applied to ADB tor a grant in an amount Oi five 
million Dollars ($5,000,000) from ADB's Disaster R^sk Reduction Fund ("DRRF Grant") for the 
purposes of the Project;

(D) the Borrower has also applied to the European Union for a grant ("Ei1 
Grant". together with DRRF Grant. "Grants") in an amount in Euro equivalent to four million 
four hundred sixty thousand Dollars ($4,460,090) for the purposes el the Project, and

(E) ADB has agreed to make a concessional loan to the Borrower from 
ADR's ordinary capital resources upon the tomia and conditions sei forth herein and in rhe 
Project Agreement between ADB and Project provinces;

NOW THEREFORE the parties agree as foilawe:

ARTICLE I

Loan Regulations; Definitions

Section 1.01 All provisions of ADB's Ordinary Operations 
(Concessional) Loan Regulations, dated 1 January 2017 ("Loan Regulations"), are hereby 
made applicable to this Loan Agreement with the same force and effect as if they were fully 
set forth herein, subject, however, to the following modifications:

(a) Section 2.01(uu) is deleter! and the following is substituted therefor

"Project Agreement" means rhe Project Agreement between ADB of one 
part, and Houaplian Province, Louangphabang Province. Xaignabouii 
Province and Xiangkhouang Province of the other part, as such 
agreement may be amended from time to time.



2

(b) The [erm "Project Executing Agency" appearing in Section G.01(3)0), 
8.01 (d), 8.01(f), 8.01 (k). 9.01(c) and 9.02(c) of the Loan Regulations 
shall be substituted by the term "Houaphan Province, Louangphabang 
Province, X^Qmaboujj Province and Xiariglchouang Province"

Section 1^1 Wherever used in this Loan Agreement, the several 
ternis defined in the Loan Regulations have the respective meanings therein set forth unless 
modified herein or I he context otherwise requires. Additional terms used in this Loan 
Agreement have the following meanings:

(a) "Consulting Services" means consulting services as described in the 
Procurement Regulations and set nut in the Procurement Plan, and to 
be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan.

(b) "EARP" means the environmental assessment and review framework 
for the Project, including any update thereto, prepared and submitted by 
the Borrower and cleared by ADB,

(c) 'EM?" means an environmental management plan developed for a
Subproject and approved by ADB:

(di "Environmental Safeguards" means the principles and requirements set 
forth in Chapter V, Appendix 1. and Appendix 4 (as applicable) of Ihe 
SPS,

(e) "Goods" means equipment and materials as set out in the Procurement 
Plan and to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan, including any 
related Nonconsulting Services such as transportation, insurance, 
installation commissioning, training. and initial maintenance,

(f) "HIV/AIDS" means human immunodeficiency virus/acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome;

(g) "IEE" means each initial environmental examination for a Subproject, 
including any update thereto prepared and submitted by the Borrower 
pursuant to the requirements set forth in the EARF and cleared by ADB

(h) "List of Eligible Subprojects" means a list which provides all candidate 
subprojects pre-screened in accordance with the criteria set forth in the 
PAM;

(I) 'Loan Disbursement Handbook” means ADB's Loan Disbursement 
Handbook (SOI7, as amended from time to lime):

(I) 'MAF means the Borrower's Ministry of Agriculture and F nrestry, or any 
successor(hereto

(k i "NonconsLilling Services" means nonconsulting services as described in 
the Procurement Regulations and set out in the Procurement Plan, and 
to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan;



3

l it "PAFO' moans a provincial agriculture and Forestry office in a Project 
province or any successor thereto;

r। r।j "PAM" means the project administration manual for Uie Project dated 26 
July 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB. as updated from 
time to time in accordance will i the respective administrative procedures 
of the Borrower arid ADB;

(n) "Procurement Plan1' means the procurement plan for the Project dated 
26 July 2019 and agreed between the Borrower and ADB as updated 
from time to time in accordance with Hie Procurement Policy, the 
Procuremient Regulations, and other arrangements agreed with ADB;

(o) ‘‘Procurement Policy" means ADB's Procurement Policy - Goods, 
Works. Nonconsulting and Consuliing Services (2017 as amended from 
time to time),

(pi 'Procurement Regulations'" means ADBJs Procurement Regulations for 
ADB Borrowers - Goods. Works Nonconsulling and Consulting 
Services (2017. as amended from time to time).

(q) "Project Executing Agency' for the purposes ol, and within the meaning 
of, the Loan Regulations means MAF or any successor thereto 
acceptable to ADB, which is responsible for the carrying out of the 
Project;

(r) "Project facilities" means facilities to be provided, constructed or 
operated and maintained under the Project;

(s) "Project province" means each of the Borrower's provinces of 
Houaphan, Louangphabang. Xaignabouli and Xiangkhouang, or any 
successors thereto:

(t) "’REGDF" means the resettlement and ethnic group development 
Framework tor the Project, as agreed between the Borrower and ADB;

(u) "RP" means each resettlement plan For a Subproject, including any 
update thereto, prepared and submitted by the Borrower pursuant to the 
requirements set forth in the REGDF and cleared by ADB:

(vj "RSP" means a representative subproject selected among the 
Subprojects, more fully described in the PAM;

(w) "SPS" means ADB's Safeguard Policy Statement (2009);

(X) "Safeguards Monitoring Report" means each report prepared and 
submitted by the Borrower to ADB that describes progress with 
implementation of. and compliance with, the EMP and the RP (as 
applicable), including any corrective and preventative actions;

(y) "Services" means Consulting Services and Nonconsulting Services'



■I

(z) 'SubprajeGf means a subproject to be financed under the Project, as 
selected In accordance with paragraphs 18 to 26 of Schedule 4 to this 
Financing Agreement.

taa) 'UXO' means Lmexploded ordinance:

(bb) Works" means construction or civil works as set out in the Procurer nt’rd 
Rian and to be financed out of the proceeds ot the Loan and Grants, 
including any related Nonconsulling Services and project related 
services thai are provided as part of a single responsibility or turnkey 
contract;

(cc) WUA" means a water user association; and

(dd) "WUG" means a Water user group.

ARTICLE II

The Loan

Section 2.01 (a) ADB ogress to lend Io the Borrower from ADB's
ordinary capital lesources an amount of forty million Collars ($40 000,000}.

(b) T he Loan has a principal repayment period of 24 years and a grace 
period as defined in subsection (cj hereinafter

(c) The term "grace period' as used in subsection (b) hereinabove means 
the period prior to the first Pnncipal Payment Date in accordance with the amortization 
schedule set forth in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2 02. The Borrower shall pay to ADB an interest charge at the 
rate of 1% per annum during the grace period, and 1 5% per annum (hereafter, on the amount 
of the Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account and outstanding from time io time.

Section 2.02 The interest charge and any other charge on the Loan 
shall be payable semiannually on 15 March and 15 September in each year.

Section 2.04 The Borrower shall repay the principal amount of the
Loan withdrawn from the Loan Account in accordance with the amortization schedule set forth 
in Schedule 2 to this Loan Agreement

Section 2.05 The currency of repayment of the principal amount Of the 
Loan and the currency of payment of the interest charge for the purposes Of Sections 4 03(a) 
and 4 04 pif the Loan Regulations shall be the Dollar



5

ARTICLE III

Use of Proceeds of the Loan

Section 3.01. (a) The Borrower shall make available a portion of
the proceeds of the Loan to the Project provinces upon terms and conditions satisfactory to 
ADB

(b) The Borrower shall cause the proceeds of the Loan to be applied 
exclusively tn the financing of expenditures on the Project in accordance with the provisions of 
this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement.

Section 3 02 The proceeds of the Loan shall be allocated and 
withdrawn in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 3 to this Loan Agreement, as such 
Schedule may be amended from time to time by agreement between the Borrower and ADB

Section 3.03. Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Borrower shall 
procure, or cause to be procured, the items of expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds 
of the Loan in accordance with the provisions of Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement

Section 3,04 (a) Withdrawals from the Laan Account in respect of
Goods, Works, and Services shall be made only on account of expenditures relating to

(I) Goods which are produced in and supplied from and Warks and 
Services which are supplied from such member countries of ADB as 
shall have been specified by ADB from time to time as eligible sources 
for procurement; and

(H) Goods, Works, and Services which meet such other eligibility 
requirements as shall have been specified by ADB from time to time

(b) For purposes of subparagraph (a)(ii), Goods, Works, and Services may 
also be procured under the Project from non-member countries of ADB

Section 3.05 The Loan Closing Date for the purposes of Section 8 02
of the Loan Regulations shall be 30 September 2027 or such other date as may from time to 
time be agreed between the Borrower and ADB

ARTICLE IV

Particular Covenants

Section 4.01. In the carrying out of the Project and operation of the 
Project facilities, the Borrower shall perform, or cause to be performed all obligations set forth 
in Schedule 4 to this Loan Agreement and the Project Agreement



6

Sec tion 4.02 (a) The Borrower shall, or shall cause the Project
provinces to, (I) maintain separate accounts and records for the Project; (ii) prepare annual 
financial statements for the Project in accordance with financial reporting standards acceptable 
to ADB; (III) have such financial statements audited annually Dy independent auditors whose 
qualifications, experience and terms of reference are acceptable to ADB, in accordance with 
auditing standards acceptable to ADB. (iv) as part of each such audit have the auditors 
prepare a report, which includes the auditors' opinion^) on the financial statements and the 
use of the Loan proceeds, and a management letter (which sets out the deficiencies in the 
internal control of the Project that were identified in the course of the audit, if any); and (v) 
furnish to ADB. no later than 6 months after the end of each related fiscal year, copies of such 
audited financial statements, audit report and management letter, all in the English language, 
and such other information concerning these documents and the audit thereof as ADB shall 
from time to time reasonably request.

(b) ADB shall disclose the annual audited financial statements for the 
Project and the opinion of the auditors on the financial statements within 14 days of the date 
of ADB's confirmation of their acceptability by posting them on ADB's website.

(c) The Borrower shall enable ADB, upon ADB's request, to discuss the 
financial statements for the Project and the Borrower's financial affairs where they relate to the 
Project with the auditors appointed pursuant to subsection (a)(iii) hereinabove, and shall 
authorize and require any representative of such auditors to participate in any such discussions 
requested by ADB. This is provided that such discussions shall be conducted only in the 
presence of an authorized officer of the Borrower , unless the Borrower shall otherwise agree.

Section 4. 03 The Borrower shall enable ADB's representatives to 
inspect the Project the Goods, Works and Services, and any relevant records and documents.

Section 4.04. The Borrower shall take all actions which shall be 
necessary on its part to enable the Project provinces to perform their obligations under the 
Project Agreement, and shall not take or permit any action which would interfere with the 
performance of such obligations

ARTICLE V

Suspension; Acceleration of Maturity

Section 5. 01. The following is specified as an additional event for 
suspension of the right of the Borrower to make withdrawals from the Loan Account for the 
purposes of Section 8.01(m) of the Loan Regulations: any of the DRRF Grant arid ELI Grant 
shall have become liable for suspension or cancellation

Section 5.02. The following is specified as an additional event for 
acceleration of maturity for the purposes of Section 8 07(d) of the Loan Regulations: the event 
specified in Section 5.01 of this Loan Agreement shall have occurred



7

ARTICLE VI

Effectiveness

Section 6 01 The following is specified as an additional condition to the
effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.01(f) of the Loan 
Regulations: all of DRRF Grant and EU Grant Agreements shall have been duly executed and 
delivered, and all conditions precedent to their effectiveness (other than a condition requiring 
the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement) shall have been fulfilled

Section 6.02. A date 90 days after the date of this Loan Agreement is 
specified for the effectiveness of this Loan Agreement for the purposes of Section 9.04 of the 
Loan Regulations.

ARTICLE VII

Miscellaneous

Section 7 01. The Minister of Finance of the Borrower is designated as 
representative of the Borrower for the purposes of Section 11 02 of the Loan Regulations

Section 7 02 The following addresses are specified for the purposes
of Section 11.01 of the Loan Regulations

For the Borrower

Ministry of Finance
23rd Singha Road
P.O Box 46
Vientiane Capital
Lao People's Democratic Republic

Facsimile Number:

(856-21)412142

For APB

Asian Development Bank
6 ADS Avenue
Mandaluyong City
1550 Metro Manila
Philippines



8

Facsimile Numbers

(632) 636-2444
(632) 636-2366

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto, acting through their 
representatives thereunto duly authorized, have caused this Loan Agreement to be signed in 
their respective names as of the day and year first above written and to be delivered st the 
principal office of ADB

LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC

Deputy Minister
Ministry of Finance

ASIAN DEVELOPMENT BANK

By
ASUSHi NEGISHI
Country Director

Lao Resident Mission



9

SCHEDULE 1

Description of Lhe Project

1 The objective of the Project is to improve high value agricultural production,
natural resources management ®nd community nutrition

2 The Project shall comprise th§ following outputs.

Output 1: Market-oriented agricultural production increased.

(a) Completing and confirming market demand assessments for all 
additional subproiect:

(b) Starling market connectivity forums and meetings in the RSPs;

(c) Confirming enterprise grants procedures and implementation 
arrangements and completing grant awards.

(d) Implementing Subproject farm to farm extension, and

(e) Operation a bzing market produce quality assurances systems

Out put 2: Watershed ecological services protected.

(a) Preparing Provincial land use plans (PLUPs) for catchments in four 
Xiangkhouang province and five Houaphan province productive rural 
infra structure subprojects (PRIs);

(b) Preparing PLUP associated land use behavioral change programs with 
supporting community agreements including female participation' and

(c) Implementing PLUPs land use behavior change action plans

Out put 3: Command area irrigation reliability improved.

(a) Contracting and completing RSP works:

(b) Designing and contracting additional PRI subprojects in batches 2 and 
3 with batch 3 being the final processing deadline, and contracting and 
completing Works with handover for batches 2 and 3;

(c) Farming WUGs and WUAs, including 507a participation by females, 
and water user management wilh 25% of female representation: and

(d) Organizing Subproject WUG into WUAs.

Out put 4 Nutrition awareness and facilities improved

(a) Forming and operationalizing district nutrition committees;



in
Schedule 1

(bj Implementing village nutrition schools, and

(c) Implementing Water sanitation and hygiene facilities In targeted 
villages.



SCHEDULES

Allocation and Withdrawal of Loan Proceeds

General

1. The table attached to this Schedule sets Forth the Categories of items of
expenditure to be financed out of the proceeds of the Loan and the allocation of the Loan 
proceeds to each such Category ("Table") (Reference lo "Caregory" in this Schedule is to a 
Category or Subcategory of the Table.)

Basis for Withdrawal from the I. nan Account

2. Except as adb may otherwise agree, the proceeds of the Loan shall be
allocated to items Of expenditure, and disbursed on the basis oi the withdrawal percentage for 
each item of expenditure sei forth in the Table.

Kite re stC barge

3. The amount allocated to Category "Interest Charge' is for financing the interest
charge on the Loan during I he implementation period of the Project. ADB shall be entitled to 
withdraw from the Loan Account and pay to itseft. on behalf of the BorroWef the amounts 
required to meet payments, when due. of such interest charge

Reallocation

4. Notwithstanding the allocation of Loan proceeds and the withdrawal
percentages set forth in the Table,

(a) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears to he 
insufficient to finance ail agreed expenditures in that Category ADB 
may, by notice to the Borrower, (i) reallocate to such Category, to the 
extent required to meet the estimated shortfall, amounts of the Loan 
which have been allocated to another Category but, in the opinion of 
ADB, are not needed to meet other expenditures, and (1i) if such 
reallocation cannot fully meet the estimated shortfall reduce the 
withdrawal percentage applicable to such expenditures in order that 
further withdrawals under such Category may continue until all 
expenditures thereunder shall have been made: and

(b) if the amount of the Loan allocated to any Category appears lo exceed 
all agreed expenditures in that Category, ADB may, by notice to the 
Borrower, reallocate such excess amount to any other Category

Dis burse pre nt Procedures

5 Except as ADB may otherwise agree, the Loan proceeds shall be disbursed in
accordance with the Loan Disburse men! Handbook



Schedule 3

'condition,for Withdrawals 'mm Lnan Account

3, Notwithstanding any other provision of this Loan Agreement, no withdrawals
shall be made from the Loan Account for Category 3 until the Borrower has issued guidelines 
lor usage of matching grant, in a form and substance satisfactory to ADB, including selection 
criteria and selection procedures for activities in accordance wiih the PAM.



15
Attachment lo Schedule 3

TABLE

ALLOCATION AND WITHDRAWAL OF LOAN PROCEEDS

Num her Item

Total Amount Allocated 
for ADB Financing 

(Dollar) _
Category

Basis for Withdrawal from the 
Loan Account

1 Works for RSPs 2.316,170 34.7% of total expenditure claimed

2
Project Costs Other 
Than Category 1 above 
and Category 3 below

33,696,275 100% of total expenditure claimed

3 Matching Grant* 180,000 100% of total expenditure claimed

4 Interest Charge 1,523,445 100% of amounts due

5 Unallocated 2,284,110

TOTAL 40.000,000

Snt। eel to the cond lion tor withdrawal described >n paragraph 5 of Schedule 3



16

SCHEDULE 4

Execution of Project; Implementation, Environmental, Social and Other Matters

Implementation Arrangements

1 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project provinces to ensure that the Project is 
implemented in accordance with the detailed arrangements set forth in the PAM Any 
subsequent change to the PAM shall become effective only after approval of such change by 
the Borrower and ADB. In the even I of any discrepancy between the PAM and this Loan 
Agreement, the provisions of this Loan Agreement, and DRRF Grant and EU Grant 
Agreements shall prevail.

Procurement

2 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project provinces to ensure that.

(a) the procurement of Goods, Works and Services is carried out in accordance 
with the ADB Procurement Policy and the Procurement Regulations,

(to) Goods, Works and Services shall be procured based on the detailed 
arrangements set forth (he Procurement Plan including the procurement and 
selection methods, the type of bidding documents, and ADB's review 
requirements The Borrower may modify the detailed arrangements set forth in 
the Procurement Plan only with the prior agreement of ADB. and such 
modifications must be set out ip updates to the Procurement Plan: and

(c) (i) all Goods and Works procured and Services obtained (including all computer
hardware, software and systems, whether separately procured or incorporated 
within other goods and services procured) do not violate or infringe any 
industrial property or intellectual property right or claim of any third party: and 
(iij all contracts for the procurement of Goods. Works and Services contain 
appropriate representations, warranties and. if appropriate, indemnities from 
the contractor supplier consultant or service provider with respect to the 
matters referred to in I his subparagraph

Environment

3 . The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project provinces to ensure that the 
preparation, design, construction, implementation, operation and decommissioning of each 
Subproject and all Project facilities comply with (a) all applicable laws and regulations of the 
Borrower relating to environment, health, and safety; (b) the EARF: and (c) all measures and 
requirements set forth in the respective 1EE and EMP, and any corrective or preventative 
actions set forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report

4 The Eiorrower shall ensure the following measures are taken: (a) coordinate with the 
regulatory authorities to ensure agrichemicals are used in accordance with national laws and 
regulations and international conventions to which the Borrower is a signatory, (b) ensure that 
pest and/or vector management activities related to the subproject sites are based on 
integrated pest management approaches; (c) implement the training and related measures 



17
Schedule j

included rn the project's good agricultural practice capacity building program, and rd) Include 
a specific section in the semi-annual envi^riment safeguard reports on the application of 
agrichemicals.

5 The Borrower shall ensure that no subproject which meets the ADBs Category A 
environmental criteria as defined under the SPS, is included in the List of Eligible Subprojects, 
and that no subproject with Category A environ mental criteria is financed under ihe Project

6 The Borrower shall cause each Project province to establish river how gauging plates 
and lo provide, for each year, fortnightly readings of nvei flow during the dry season between 
1 October and 1 May throughout Project implementation

Inyoji1 nlary Resettlemerit

7 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project provinces to ensure that ail land and 
all rights-of-way required for each subproject and all Project facilities are made available to the 
Works contractor in accordance with the schedule agreed under ihe related Works contract 
and all iand acquisition and re sett Ie me nt activities are implemented in compliance with (a) ad 
applicable laws and regulations of the Borrower relating to land acquisition and fnvpluntafy 
rose tile meni^ (b) the REG DE and (c)al) measures and requirements set forth mtha respective 
RP. and any corrective or preventative actions set Forth in a Safeguards Monitoring Report

8 . The Borrower shall ensure that no subproject which meets the ADB's Category A 
resettlement criteria as defined under the SPS. is included in the List of Eligible Subprojects, 
and that no subproject with the Category A resettlement criteria is financed under me Project.

9 Without) jimrtihg the apptication of the REGDF or the RP, the Borrower shall ensure or 
cause the Project provinces lo ensure that no physical or economic displacement takes place 
m connection with the Subprojects until

(a) compensation and other entitlements have been provided to affected people 
in accordance with the RP. and

Jb) a comprehensive income arid livelihood restoration program have been 
established in accordance with the RP.

10 The Borrower shall dlSO ensure that a grievance redress mechanism acceptable to 
ADB is established for affected people in the districts where the resettlement activities under 
the Project are carried out.

'indigenous Peoples arid Vulnerable Groups

11 . The Borrower shall ensure that subprojects do not adversely affect ethnic groups, 
households headed by women disabled, elderly or other similarly vulnerable groups, and that 
rights and needs of ethnic groups are fully addressed in accordance with ADS's Policy on 
Gender and (development (1998) and SPS. in particular the Project shall be carried out in 
accordance with the REGDF.

12 The Borrower shall ensure that no subprojects which have significant impacts on ethnic 
groups, is included in the List of L-ligible Subprojects, and that no Subproject with such impacts 



10
jr,neoule 4

is financed under the Project. For Subprojects In which ethnic groups are present and affected, 
an tn dig eno us peoples plan shall be prepared in accordance with the REGDF

Safeguards - Related Provisions in Bidding Documents and Works Contracts

13 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Prelect provinces to ensure that all bidding 
documents and contracts for Works contain provisions that require con tractors to

(a) comply with the measures and requirements relevant to the contractor set forth 
in the IEE, the EMP, and the RP (to the extent they concern Impacts on affected 
people during construction}, and any corrective or preventative actions set out 
in a Safeguards Monitoring Report

(b) make available a budget for all such environ mental and social measures, and

(c) provide the Borrower with a written notice of any unanticipated environmental, 
resettlement or indigenous peoples risks or impacts that arise during 
construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were not 
considered in the IEE, the EMP or the RP

Safeguards Monitoring and Reporting

14 The Borrower shall do the following or shall cause the Project provinces to do the 
following.

(a) submit semi-annual Safeguards Monitoring Reports to ADB and disclose 
relevant information from such reports to affected persons promptly upon 
submission;

(b) if any unanticipated environmental and/or social risks and impacts arise during 
construction, implementation or operation of the Project that were not 
considered in the IEE. the EMP or the RP. promptly inform ADB of the 
occurrence of such risks Or impacts, with detailed description of the event and 
proposed corrective action plan; and

(c) report any actual or potential breach of compliance with the measures and 
requirements set forth in the EMP or the RP promptly after becoming aware of 
the breach.

Human and Fmoncla! Resources to Implement Safeguards Requirements

15 . The Borrower shall make available or shall cause the Project provinces Io make 
available necessary budgetary and human resources to fully implement the EMP and the RP 
In particular. The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project provinces to ensure dial the 
environment consultants, whose qualification are acceptable to ADB, are engaged and 
deployed in a timely manner



19
Schedule 4

Prohibited List of Investments

16 The Borrower shall ensure or cause the Project provinces to ensure that no proceeds 
of the Loan are used to finance any activity included in the list of prohibited investment activities 
provided in Appendix 5 of the SPS

Gender and Development

17 The Borrower, through MAF, shall ensure that me gencfer mainstreaming activities are 
(a) incorporated into the Project design and undertaken during Project implementation, and (b) 
monitored by the Division Advancement of Women within MAF

Grievance Redress Mechanism

16 . The Borrower shall ensure that safeguards grievance redress mechanisms acceptable 
to ADB are established in accordance with Ihe provisions of the EARF, EMP and RP at the 
project management office, within the timeframes specified in the relevant IEE EMP and RP 
to consider safeguards complaints.

Subproject Eligibility and Priority

19 , i he Borrower shall ensure that only candidate subprojects listed in the List of Eligible 
Subprojects are considered for financing under the Project

20 The Borrower shall ensure that candidate subprojects m each Project province are 
taken up in the order of priority indicated in the List of Eligible Subprojects and shall cari^y out 
feasibility studies and detailed design for such candidate subprojects

21 . The Borrower shall require oi cause the Project Provinces to require certification of 
UXO safety to be issued lor each Subproject through the office of Provincial Governor. Where 
UXO clearance is required, the Borrower shall arrange and finance this work, using the 
Borrower's UXO trust fund in accordance with its standard procedures. The UXO clearance 
requires a 12-month notification for inclusion in the Borrower programs.

Feasibility Study and Detailed Engineering Design Review

22 . After completion of the combined feasibility studies and detailed engineering designs 
(design report), candidate subprojects shall be reviewed by PAFO who shall report to the 
Provincial Steering Committee, and shall be taken up for physical implementation only if (a) 
the concerned WUGs commit to paying the irrigation service fees at a level that meet the 
requirement ol the operation and maintenance plans as approved by the Loan Implementation 
Consultant: and (b) they meet the selection criteria as provided in the PAM

23 . In case that a candidate subproject does not meet the criteria provided rn the PAM, it 
shall be replaced by the next priority candidate subproject for the respective Project province 
under the List of Eligible Subprojects If candidate subprojects not listed in the l.ist of Eligible 
Subprojects are to be considered for financing under the Project, they shall be examined and 
screened by MAF with the support from an independent consultant acceptable to both ADB 
and the Borrower and submitted to ADB for approval



2D
Schedule 4

Proiect Irrigation Scheme

2*1. fhe Borrower shall ensure that (a) each irrigation scheme to be developed under the 
Project shall ho longer be included in the prowincial or national register of required rice 
production aieas for the dry season, (b) the irrigation schemes io the Project shall have 
completed irrigation management transfer processes with both WUG and WUAs established 
prior to the award of any related Works contract and shall toimaily Identify the required 
irrigation service fee to enable operation and maintenance Of the irrigation command area, and 
(cj the use of the irrigation service tee collected by WUAs in the Project irrigation schemes 
Shall be limited to the operation and maintenance requirement of the scheme until such time 
when the WUAs' bank account has a year-end balance of a! least two years operational and 
maintenance requirements, and the WUAs. based on majority member, will distribute to village 
or district officials any funds in excess of this amounl

l abor Standards, Health, and Safety

25 . The Borrower shall ensure that the core labor standards and the Borrower's applicable 
laws and regulations are complied with during Project implementation The Borrower shall 
include specific provisions in the bidding documents and contracts financed by ADB under the 
Project requiring that the contractors, among other things, (a) comply with the Borrower's 
applicable labor law and regulahons and incorporate applicable workplace occupational safety 
norms, (b) do not use child labor; (c) do not discriminate workers in respect of employment and 
occupation, (d) do not use forced labor (e)do not restrict the workers from developing a legally 
permissible means of expressing their grievances and protecting their rights regarding working 
conditions and terms of employment, and (fl disseminate, of engage appropriate service 
providers to disseminate, information on the risks of sexually transmitted diseases incktding 
HIV/AID8, to rhe employees of contractors engaged under the Project and to members of the 
local communities surrounding the Project area particularly women The Borrower shall strictly 
monitor compliance with the requirements set forth in this paragraph and provide ADB with 
regular reports.

Counterpart Support

26 . The Borrower shall ensure that the counterpart funding required tor successful Project 
implementation is timely allocated and provided The Borrower through MAP and Project 
provinces, shall ensure that qualified staff are added to the project management units in a 
timely manner

27 . In addition to the foregoing, the Borrower shall ensure that MAP and the Project 
provinces have sufficient funds to satisfy 'heii liabilities arising from any Works. Goods pnd/or 
Services contract.

Financial Ma nag en lent

26 . The Borrower shall implement the financial management plan as agreed with ADB and 
set forth in the PAM. In particular, the Borrower shall {a) make available the government staff 
in sufficient numbers and with the required academic background and/or experience, as per 
the positions and the timelines in accordance with the PAM; (b) ensure that he standardized 
financial management manual for Project is developed and agreed by the Borrower's 
concerned ministries prior to the commencement of any activities under the Project, and (c) 
undertake monitoring of the implementation of the financial management plan.



21
Schedule 4

Malching Grant

29 rhe Borrower shall implement activities to be financed by the matching grant tn 
accordance with its guidelines, and report to ADB details of the activities on an annual basis.

Governance and Anti corruption

30 . The Borrower shall (a) comply with ADB's Anti corruption Policy (1998, as amended to 
date) and acknowledge that ADB reserves the right to investigate directly, or through its agents 
any alleged corrupt, fraudulent, collusive or coercive practice relating to the Project, and 
(b) cooperate with any such investigation and extend all necessary assistance for satisfactory 
completion of such investigation

31 The Borrower shall ensure that the anticorruption provisions acceptable to ADB are 
included in all bidding documents and contracts, including provisions specifying the light of 
ADB to audit and examine the records and accounts of the executing and implementing 
agencies and all contractors suppliers, consultants, and other service providers as they relate 
to the Project.





