















































 

PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

 
 
 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

GUYANA 
 
 
 
 
 
 

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 
 
 

(GY-L1060) 
 
 
 
 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Juan de Dios Mattos (CSD/RND) and Sybille 
Nuenninghoff (RND/CBL), Project Co-Team Leaders; Onil Banerjee (CSD/RND); Jamie Cotta (CSD/RND); 
Alan Mentis (CCB/CGY); Paula Louis–Grant (FMP/CGY); Emilie Chapuis (FMP/CGY); María Camila Padilla 
(FMP/CBA); Graham Watkins (CSD/CCS); Rachel Atkinson (VPS/ESG); Claudia Stevenson (IFD/CTI); 
Escarlata Baza (LEG/SGO); David Cotacachi (SCL/GDI); Maja Schling (SPD/SDV); and Lisa Restrepo 
(CSD/RND). 

 
In accordance with the Access to Information Policy, this document is being released to the public and 
distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors simultaneously. This document has not been 
approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be 
made available to the public, thus superseding and replacing the original version.

 



 

CONTENTS 
 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY ............................................................................................................ I 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING .................................................................. 2 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, Justification .............................................. 2 
B. Objective, Components and Cost .................................................................. 8 
C. Key Results Indicators ..................................................................................11 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ..................................................................11 

A. Financing Instruments...................................................................................11 
B. Economic viability .........................................................................................12 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Risks .................................................12 
D. Fiduciary Risk ...............................................................................................13 
E. Other Risks ...................................................................................................14 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ..............................................................14 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements ..................................................14 
B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results ........................................17 

 
 
 
 
  



- ii - 

 

 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) - Summary 

Annex II Results Framework 

Annex III Fiduciary Arrangements  

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED 

1. Pluri-annual Execution Plan (PEP) 

2. Annual Operational Plan (AOP) 

3. Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 

4. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) 

5. Procurement Plan  

OPTIONAL 

1. Technical design Component 1 

2. Diagnostic of the Agricultural Information System 

3. Technical design Component 2 

4. Institutional Capacity Assessment (ICAS) 

5. Technical design Component 3 

6. Analysis of gender and diversity inclusion  

7. Review of infrastructure proposals and ToR for design and supervision 

8. Impact evaluation proposal 

9. Ex ante economic analysis 

10. Environmental and Social Analysis and Management Plan  

11. Agricultural household survey in Regions 5, 9 and 10 

12. Draft Program Operating Manual 

13. Safeguard Policy Filter (SPF) and Safeguard Screening Form (SSF) 

  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40564707
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40586954
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40564750
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40647394
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40564551
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40588762
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40663628
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40663634
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40588559
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40589854
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40587422
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40590131
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40587606
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40588061
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40664054
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40590454
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40588248
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40280490


- iii - 

 

 

ABBREVIATIONS 

AIS Agricultural Information System 

ASDU Agricultural Sector Development Unit 

EPA Environment and Protection Agency 

ESMP Environmental and Social Management Plan 

ESMR Environmental and Social Management Report 

ESS Environmental and Social Strategy 

FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 

GBS Guyana Bureau of Statistics 

GDP Gross Domestic Product 

GMC Guyana Marketing Corporation 

GL&SC Guyana Land and Survey Commission 

GLDA Guyana Livestock Development Agency 

GoG Government of Guyana 

GRDB Guyana Rice Development Board 

GRIF Guyana REDD+ Investment Fund 

GSA Guyana School of Agriculture 

GUYSUCO Guyana Sugar Corporation 

IDB Inter-American Development Bank 

IFAD International Fund for Agricultural Development 

IFPRI International Food Policy Research Institute 

LAC Latin America and the Caribbean 

M&E  Monitoring and Evaluation  

MIF Multilateral Investment Fund 

MoA Ministry of Agriculture 

MRV Monitoring, Reporting and Verification 

NAREI National Agriculture Research and Extension Institute 

NDIA National Drainage and Irrigation Authority 

NSC National Steering Committee 

OECD Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 

POM Program Operations Manual 

PS Permanent Secretary 

RLPA Rupununi Livestock Association  

RMC Regional Management Committee 

SPF Safeguard Policy Filter 

SPS Sanitary and Phytosanitary 

SSF Safeguard Screening Form 

TFP Total Factor Productivity 

WBSGA West Berbice Sheep and Goat Association 

 
  



 

PROJECT SUMMARY  
GUYANA 

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 

(GY-L1060) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Co-operative Republic of 

Guyana 

 

 OC FSO 

Amortization Period: 30 years 40 years 

Executing Agency: Ministry of Agriculture    

Disbursement Period: 5.5 years 5.5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace Period: 6 years 40 years 

IDB (OC): 7,500,000 50 Supervision and Inspection Fee: (a)  NA 

IDB (FSO): 7,500,000 50 Interest rate: FU fixed (b)  0.25% 

Total: 15,000,000 100 
Credit Fee: (a)  NA 

Currency of Approval: US$ US$ 

Project at a Glance 

Project Objective/Description: Increase productivity of the agricultural sector while maintaining a sustainable 

and climate resilient use of natural resources in Guyana. The specific objectives are: (i) produce high quality data 
for the agricultural sector; (ii) increase productivity, especially for medium and small farmers; and (iii) increase 
sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) standards and access to meat processing facilities. Higher productivity will also 
contribute to reduce pressure on forest and fragile ecosystems, and at the same time, increase income for small 
and medium-sized farmers. 

Special contractual conditions prior to the first disbursement of the financing: (i) the presentation of 

evidence that the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) has selected a program coordinator, a financial officer and a 
procurement officer according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.1); (ii) approval 
and entry into effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms and conditions previously 
agreed with the Bank (¶3.4); and (iii) presentation of an initial report, including, the Program’s Pluri-annual 
Execution Plan (PEP), the Procurement Plan, the Financial Plan and the Results Matrix according to the terms 
and conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.12).  

Special contractual execution conditions: (i) prior to the implementation of the activities related to the Guyana 

Bureau of Statistics (GBS) under Component 1, the subscription and entry into effect of an agreement between 
the MoA and the GBS, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.2); (ii) prior to 
the bidding of infrastructure works under Components 2 and 3, the subscription and entry into effect of an 
agreement between the MoA and the EPA, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the 
Bank (¶3.2); (iii) prior to the building of infrastructure works related to the meat processing facilities financed 
under Component 3, the subscription and entry into effect of an agreement between the MoA and a producer’s 
association responsible for operating the abattoir, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with 
the Bank (¶3.7); and (iv) compliance with the environmental and social conditions established in Section VI of the 
Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR). 

Exceptions to Bank Policies: None 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges
(c)

: SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Cross-Cutting Themes
(d)

: GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a)
 The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors during 

its review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with the relevant policies. 
(b) 

   The borrower shall pay interests on the outstanding balance of the Ordinary Capital loan at a Libor based rate. Each time 
the outstanding balance reaches 25% of the net approved amount or $3 million, whichever is greater, the interest rate will 
be fixed. 

(c)
 SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 

(d)
 GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity 

and Rule of Law).
 



- 2 - 

 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, Justification
1
 

1.1 Guyana’s green economy development model. Guyana has 10 administrative 
regions and more than 75% of the territory is 
covered with forest. Savannahs represent 
10% of the territory. Forest and savannah 
ecosystems offer a wide range of goods and 
environmental services, necessary for 
agricultural development. Since 2009, 
Guyana in partnership with Norway started a 
payment-for-performance, forest conservation 
program. This partnership aims to maintain or 
reduce deforestation rates, currently at 
0.56%, one of the lowest in the world. 
Because agriculture is one of the drivers of 
deforestation in Guyana, increased 
production and productivity need to consider 
secondary effects on forests and savannahs.   

1.2 Agricultural Production. In 2014, agriculture represented almost 18% of total 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP), contributed 20% of employment (70% in rural 
areas), and is one of the main sources of foreign exchange earnings, representing 
19% of total exports (GBS, 2016). Coastal regions (2, 3, 4 and 5, mostly) 
concentrate in agricultural production especially export crops like sugar and rice. 
Although Guyana experienced high rates of economic growth between 2009 and 
2013 (4.5% annual average), the share of agriculture in GDP (and natural 
resources in general) has decreased consistently (Modeste, 2016). This is in part 
due to lower international prices for commodities, but also low productivity, 
especially among small farmers.  

1.3 Although small farmers produce most of the fruits and vegetables grown in Guyana 
(80% of the country’s grains, 60% of coconuts, and 40% of all coconut oil [FAO, 
2012]); productivity is still considered low compared to other countries with similar 
farm production systems (yields of corn, beans, and small scale rice, on average, 
are 40% lower than the Caribbean average). Livestock production is focused on 
poultry, with cattle and small ruminants produced mainly on small farms, with 
similarly low productivity (FAO, 2012). In the aggregate, as a result of the farming 
structure and low levels of agricultural services, the sector’s efficiency, as part of 
Total Factor Productivity (TFP) is one of the lowest in Latin America and the 
Caribbean (LAC) (Nin-Pratt, et al., 2015). As Fuglie and Rada (2013) have shown, 
45% of growth in productivity in the agricultural sector (global average) can be 
attributed to the adoption of better technologies.  

1.4 Low productivity is not the only challenge. Agriculture in Guyana is also affected by 
changes in weather patterns, particularly drought severity. The drought of      

                                                 
1
  References included in this document can be found in IDBDocs40279510 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40279510/R


- 3 - 

 

2014–2015 was one of the longest and most severe of the last two decades, 
extending the dry days from 145 to 189 (OCC-MP, 2016). Such drought poses 
enormous risk to farmers, and food security, particularly those in the hinterlands 
(Region 9), where water availability is one of the main constraints to agriculture 
and livestock development. Climate change impacts, including intensified drought 
as well as flooding, increase the need to facilitate the identification and adoption of 
adaptation measures, both for large and small farmers (IFPRI, 2009).  

1.5 Agricultural production in Regions 9 and 10 requires the adoption of practices 
tailored to ensure long–term conservation and ecosystem service supply in these 
environments. Although more than 90% of households in the hinterlands practice 
agriculture, most are subsistence–based with only 35% with agriculture as their 
main source of income. This low percentage is the function of precipitation patterns 
in the region (six months on average with less than 50mm of rainfall per month), 
little information on regionally appropriate agricultural practices and a lack of       
all-weather road connection with Georgetown. Improved technologies and 
practices for water management and use are critical in these regions where 
seasonal variation in precipitation induces drought stress as well as flooding.  

1.6 A study commissioned by the Bank (2016) analyzed the relative support to 
producers using the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD) methodology (Derlagen, 2016). The main findings show that the 
Government of Guyana employs various policy instruments in support of the 
agricultural sector, including trade policies, fiscal measures as well as public 
investment in infrastructure, research, extension services and marketing. During 
the preparation of the Program, a diagnostic of these services was clustered in 
three sections: (i) information systems; (ii) research, innovation and extension; and 
(iii) SPS standards and compliance. These sub–sectors represent the bulk of 
public goods and services provided by the Government. Through these services 
the Government has the opportunity to improve productivity and the sustainable 
use of natural resources.  

1.7 Agricultural information system (AIS). The MoA has a Monitoring and 
Evaluation (M&E) Unit created in 2014 that aggregates information produced by 
the Guyana Marketing Corporation (GMC); National Agricultural Research and 
Extension Institute (NAREI), the Guyana Livestock Development Agency (GLDA), 
the Guyana Sugar Corporation (GUYSUCO) and the Guyana Rice Development 
Board (GRDB), among others. An assessment carried out by the FAO in 2015 
showed that nine agencies of the MoA collect statistical data, but standards and 
consistency are lacking (see Optional Link 2). The last national agricultural census 
was implemented in 1952 and there is scant information on the current 
configuration of farmers, farming systems and cost structures across the country. 
Regional and national development plans are based on population censuses, with 
little or anecdotal information about production activities or productivity. The 
evidence and historical experience is clear and unambiguous: strategic 
investments in agricultural sector information increase productivity (Alston, 2010) 
and private sector investment (Fuglie, 2016). 

1.8 Limitations of the AIS. Because data from non-traditional crops are collected on 
an ad hoc basis, farmer characteristics, particularly in the hinterlands, are not well 
known and therefore provide little input into the preparation of regional 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663628/R


- 4 - 

 

development plans and policies. Land use and pressure on the environment can 
currently only be assessed on an anecdotal basis. Furthermore, as the 
assessment of the agricultural information system of the MoA shows, data 
collection, processing, and reporting protocols and standards need to be 
established and staff trained as a prerequisite to improving the AIS (see Optional 
Link 2). Lack of quality data present problems for suppliers, by also for users, like 
the Government, private investors and development agencies. Fundamentally, a 
comprehensive census is needed to provide the necessary basis for data-driven, 
evidence-based policy and decision making, robust survey design for commodity 
and sector specific analysis; and an accurate portrayal of agriculture’s contribution 
to economic growth. In the absence of this information, both the public and private 
sectors develop their policies and investments in an environment of high 
uncertainty and risk; they face higher costs as a result, and; their probabilities of 
success are much lower than in environments where information is available and 
credible. 

1.9 Research, innovation and technology transfer. NAREI, established in 2011, is 
the leading research and extension agency in Guyana. NAREI has 30 researchers 
(three PhD and four MSc) and 20 experiments under implementation, but no 
research programs. NAREI has released at least 10 new varieties of                 
non-traditional crops and five new technologies in the last five years, but adoption 
is difficult to assess or quality of the genetic material. NAREI has a budget of   
US$4 million annually. Also, GUYSUCO and GRDB have their own research 
facilities and personnel to develop technologies for the sugar and rice industries. 
Together they invest approximately US$0.5 million annually in research and 
innovation. NAREI and GLDA only have 35 technical staff dedicated to extension 
and technology transfer, which given the number of farmers in Guyana, this is well 
below international best practices (FAO, 2008). Medium and large sugar and rice 
farmers are the ones benefiting most from current investment in research and 
innovation.  

1.10 Analysis at the regional (Avila et. al, 2010) and global level (Heisey, 2001) show 
that a higher proportion of research, innovation and technology transfer of the 
agricultural GDP is correlated with higher productivity and incomes. On average, 
for LAC, an increase in 10% in public expenditure in public services (including 
research, innovation and technology transfer) results in a 5% increase in the 
agricultural sector value added per capita (Foster, et. al. 2016). However, the total 
research budget of Guyana represented just 0.86% of the agricultural GDP in 
2014, which is below the average of 1.15% observed for LAC and the Anglophone 
Caribbean (Stads, et. al., 2016). Based on a systematic review, Waddington et. al. 
(2014) reported that access to extension and innovation increases revenues and 
use of sustainable practices, by 25% and 60% respectively. Moreover, a World 
Bank study (2011) of 86 impact evaluations (15 in LAC), found strong effects of 
research and extension on yields, income and productivity. An increase in 
productivity may result in less area used for pastures, reducing pressure on forest 
and ecosystems. Furthermore a survey conducted during the preparation of this 
loan showed that only 3% of farmers reported having received some kind of 
technical assistance; only 8% have access to credit and do not have access to 
public infrastructure. IFPRI (2009) reports a likely 25% fall in yields for an average 
of three global models for Guyana. Experience in LAC (Salazar, 2015; Mullally and 
Maffioli, 2014) show that a combination of technical assistance with incentives for 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663628/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663628/R
http://www.fao.org/nr/gen/gen_081001_en.htm


- 5 - 

 

adoption of new technologies have a positive effect on productivity and incomes, 
especially for small farmers.  

1.11 Limitations of the research, innovation and extension services in Guyana. 
Guyana lacks the necessary infrastructure and research programs to promote 
agricultural production, especially for non–traditional crops. Furthermore, although 
NAREI and GLDA have access to research stations, the scientific rigor of research 
program design and implementation is unlikely to generate substantive gains (see 
Optional Link 3). Limitations to collaborate with international research programs 
and institutions need to be resolved to access genetic material and reduce costs of 
validation and technology transfer in Guyana. In addition, little agricultural research 
and extension has been carried out in the ecologically (and socially) distinct 
savannahs of Regions 9 and 10 and thus knowledge of appropriate technologies is 
similarly lacking. High transaction costs, associated with the lack of research and 
innovation and the size of the market, limit the exposure of small famers in the 
target area to new technologies (Agriculture SFD). Increased attention is needed 
toward the identification and adoption of sustainable and climate resilient practices 
which protect fragile ecosystems and watersheds (including pasture/crop rotation, 
fertilizer use, and improved water storage and management), and reduce the risks 
of losses and food insecurity. 

1.12 Animal Health and Sanitary and Phytosanitary framework. GLDA was 
established in 2010. Its main objective is to provide services and research for the 
livestock industry. The GLDA is a semi-autonomous organization of the MoA and 
has offices in all regions, except Regions 1 and 8. GLDA staff is comprised of 148 
people and provides inspection and technical assistance services. GLDA also has 
eight authorizing officers that enforce the Animal Health Act in the country; the 
Veterinarian Act; and the Guyana Livestock Development Authority Act. Although 
the Animal Health Act was approved in 2011, regulations are still pending.  

1.13 Guyana has 10 registered abattoirs all of which are in poor condition and do not 
comply with current standards (see Optional Link 5). The Georgetown abattoir is 
the main abattoir and slaughters approximately 60% of all animals slaughtered in 
Guyana. Small producers in Region 9 process 35 animals per month, out of a 
current potential of 100. Overall, opportunities for the export of meat from Guyana 
are severely constrained by lack of infrastructure, adequate regulations, trained 
inspectors and supporting policies. Noncompliance increases risks of animal 
diseases (like foot and mouth) and compromises human health and environmental 
quality. OVE (2015) reports that investments in sanitary and phytosanitary 
activities increased competitiveness and productivity in the countries analyzed. 
Better access to infrastructure and technical assistance will increase productivity 
and prices for small producers, through higher quality and better prices (Agriculture 
SFD, 2016).  

1.14 Problems with meat processing and SPS standards. Current standards in 
Guyana compromise human health and environmental quality, as well as access to 
revenue from export markets. Meat inspections are carried out under the authority 
of the Public Health Ordinance of 1915 with updates circa 1977, as well as 
sections of the Food and Drug Act of 1972, also updated in 1977. Waste disposal 
is also under the Public Health Ordinance and the Environmental Protection Act, 
1996, that created the Environmental Protection Agency. Regulations of this act 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40663634/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40589854/R


- 6 - 

 

are not available. Standards for abattoirs, are based on standards from India 
dating from 1979, and are outdated. A comprehensive analysis of the costs of 
complying with local and international standards is not available in Guyana. 
Practical implementation of standards and regulations is not readily available to the 
private sector to evaluate the feasibility of medium and large investments. There 
are important public goods associated with SPS standards, but small farmers also 
lack access to capital and knowledge to improve practices (Agriculture SFD). 
Access to processing facilities will generate incentives for higher productivity and 
quality, as demonstrated by Ding (2014). 

1.15 Bank interventions and other investments. The Bank has supported the country 
in the modernization of the agricultural sector since 2004 through operations 
1558/SF-GY and 1929/BL-GY. Also, operations 3106/BL-GY and 3422/BL-GY 
helped the Government to implement a Low Carbon Development Strategy, which 
included support for the agricultural sector. These two operations helped the 
Government of Guyana (GoG) to comply with agreements with the Government of 
Norway that aim to reduce the deforestation below 0.56% annually. 1558/SF-GY 
improved the competitiveness of the agricultural sector through investment in 
drainage and irrigation systems and 1929/BL-GY focused on non-traditional 
agricultural export like aquaculture, fruits, vegetables and livestock. It also 
facilitated the creation and startup of NAREI and GLDA. The MIF approved three 
projects for the agriculture sector (ATN/ME-12052-GY, ATN/ME-11699-GY and 
GY-L1062) and Compete Caribbean has financed two projects. The International 
Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) is preparing a new investment loan for 
up to US$9 million that will target Region 9 and Region 1. Also the European 
Union is financing a US$9 million project to facilitate the diversification of the sugar 
sector and the GRIFF is financing the land titling program in the hinterlands.  

1.16 Additionally, the Ministry of Business, with support from the Bank is preparing loan 
GY-L1059 (Enhancing the National Quality Infrastructure for Economic 
Diversification and Trade Promotion). Laboratories to be implemented with        
GY-L1059 funding will support a national system, for calibration and standards. 
Laboratories planned for Region 9 and Region 10 financed by the Program will be 
small facilities for soil analysis to support, mainly, research activities. However, 
investments in national standards and metrology supported by GY-L1059 will 
facilitate the implementation of Component 3 of this Program.  

1.17 Lessons learned. The proposed operation draws lessons from the final evaluation 
of loans 1929/BL-GY, 3106/BL-GY and 3422/BL-GY, and lessons from IFAD’s 
project 742-GY final evaluation – draft (see Table I-1). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 



- 7 - 

 

Table I-1. Lessons learned from projects implemented by the Bank and IFAD 

Lessons learned How it was addressed in the design 

Legal framework and regulations take 
time to be reviewed and agreed 

The Program will facilitate the update and drafting of legislation 
and regulations focusing on meat processing (¶1.26). 
Documents to be updated have been identified and activities 
financed by the Program will target specific parts of the 
legislation to facilitate the implementation of pilot facilities 
(¶1.26).  

Support to farmers and producers 
associations are part of the social 
capital needed for success 

Producers associations will manage pilot facilities. Two 
producers associations have been identified and strengthening of 
their administrative, institutional and technical capacities will be 
implemented before the infrastructure is delivered (¶3.7).  

Infrastructure is a basic input, but 
needs to be accompanied with training, 
management and maintenance 
provisions 

The Program will finance training and startup operations of 
agriculture centers and pilot facilities (¶1.24 and ¶1.26). 
Research programs have been prepared in collaboration with 
NAREI and GLDA (¶1.24) and will include collaboration with 
international research institutions.  

Enforcement of environment 
management and mitigation measures 
has to be included in the design 

To ensure compliance with local legislation and Bank’s policies, 
the Program will finance the monitoring and supervision of 
environmental impact evaluations (¶1.24). The Program will also 
include training for MoA staff to facilitate the preparation of ToR, 
bidding documents and supervision as it related to environmental 
management. 

Baseline and monitoring need to start 
implementation before the project is 
approved 

During the preparation of the Program, a survey was 
implemented in Regions 5, 9 and 10. This baseline provided 
valuable information to prepare the impact evaluation and 
economic analysis (¶1.21).  

1.18 Conceptualization. This Program will contribute to the MoA strategy for the 
development of Guyana’s agricultural sector. Most agriculture is concentrated in 
the coast, facing climate change risks and reduced availability of water and 
suitable land. The MoA wants to increase production in the hinterlands (Regions 
10 and 9) where natural resources are available. By generating the necessary 
capacity for data collection and analysis, the MoA will be in the position to propose 
policy and investments that generate the highest return for the country, in line with 
the National Strategy for Agriculture (2013 – 2020). This document includes 
objectives for the collection and analysis of statistical information. Preparation of 
agricultural policies and regional plans will benefit from better information. Better 
information will reduce uncertainty and risk in both public and private investments 
of all scales, and will result in higher production and incomes. Productivity gains 
will be achieved through scientifically rigorous research program design and 
implementation, and an expansion of Guyana’s capacity to transfer these 
technologies to farmers. Farmers will have access to genetic material, practices 
and technologies not currently available, which will increase yields, production, 
incomes and food security. Improved agriculture and livestock technology will 
reduce pressure on fragile ecosystem and facilitate adaptation to climate change if 
sufficient guidance and adequate support is provided. Guyana’s ability to produce 
livestock safe for domestic and export consumption will be enhanced, spurring 
investment and growth. Public goods supported by the Program (¶1.8, ¶1.11 and 
¶1.14) will be enhanced with incentives for technology adoption (¶1.25) and 
access to infrastructure to add value to production (¶1.26) that address the costs 
and access to knowledge in Regions 9 and 10.  

1.19 Gender and diversity inclusion strategy. Twenty-eight percent of households in 
the target area are headed by women. Only 1.9% of women head of households in 



- 8 - 

 

Regions 5, 9 and 10 reported access to technical assistance and a very low use of 
sustainable agricultural practices (23%). Extension services will be implemented at 
the community level and will include strategies to promote the participation of 
women (for example providing childcare and food for the participants). Members of 
livestock producers associations are more than 50% women and will receive 
training and technical assistance. The agriculture census will assess the 
involvement of women and other vulnerable groups in agriculture. Because a large 
share of households in Region 9 is comprised of Amerindian communities, a 
specific strategy for technology transfer has been prepared for this region.   

1.20 Strategic alignment. This operation is consistent with the IDB Country Strategy 
with Guyana (GN-2690) through the priority area “Natural resources management” 
and cross-cutting issues related to indigenous population in Guyana. The Program 
is consistent with the Update to the Institutional Strategy (UIS) 2010-2020         
(AB-3008) and is strategically aligned with the development challenge of 
productivity and innovation by increasing productivity of farmers in Guyana (impact 
indicators). The Program is also aligned with the cross-cutting themes of:              
(i) climate change and environmental sustainability by reducing the pasture area 
allocated to livestock production; and (ii) institutional capacity and rule of law by 
the improvement of SPS regulations. The Program also contributes to gender 
equality and diversity by increasing the participation of women in agricultural 
technical assistance. Additionally, the Program will contribute to the Corporate 
Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019 (GN-2727-6) by increasing the number of 
farmers that improve the use and management of natural capital. This operation is 
also consistent with: (i) the Food Security SFD (GN-2825-3), contributing to two 
sources of food security: (a) access, and (b) availability; (ii) the Agriculture and 
Natural Resources SFD (GN-2709-5); and (iii) Gender and Diversity SFD         
(GN-2800), promoting livelihood opportunities for indigenous peoples.  

B. Objective, Components and Cost 

1.21 The main objective of the Program is to increase productivity of the agricultural 
sector while maintaining a sustainable and climate resilient use of natural 
resources in Guyana. The specific objectives are to: (i) produce high quality data 
for the agricultural sector; (ii) increase productivity, especially for medium and 
small farmers; and (iii) increase SPS standards and access to meat processing 
facilities. Higher productivity will also contribute to reduce pressure on forest and 
fragile ecosystems, and at the same time, increase incomes for small and  
medium-sized farmers. 

1.22 Target population. The main beneficiaries of the Program will be farmers of 
Regions 5, 9 and 10 and the MoA and its agencies (see Optional Link 9). The 
Population Census 2012 identifies 29,457 households in these regions (13,847 in 
Region 5, 4,929 in region 9, 10,681 in Region 10), of which 35% are farmers 
according to the 2002 estimation provided by the Guyana Bureau of Statistics 
(GBS). A survey prepared for the design of this operation shows that farmers in 
these regions are small on average. The Program will target 5,000 farmers in 
these three regions (out of a total of 10,310), 89% of them, cultivating less than 
five Ha. The main annual crops are cassava, beans and corn. Average annual 
household income for these farmers is US$4,649, with agriculture, livestock and 
forestry production accounting for more than 25% (up to 50% in Region 9). 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40588061/R


- 9 - 

 

Agricultural productivity is low, averaging 260 USD/Ha/year (and only 200 
USD/Ha/year in Region 9), compared to other countries of similar development. 
Only 3.6% of interviewed farmers report technical assistance and 8% have access 
to finance or equipment for agricultural production. Forty-eight percent report to be 
part of Amerindian communities (93% in Region 9) and have some productive 
activities at the community level.   

1.23 Component 1: Information for policy making and natural resource 
management (US$4.17 million). This component will enhance the capabilities of 
the MoA for data collection, analysis and dissemination. Data collected will be 
based on a nationwide agricultural census. This new information will be used not 
only by the Government, but also by the private sector to develop investments in 
agriculture, in line with the Green Development Strategy.

2
 Land use plans and 

promotion of sustainable practices will draw from the results of the census. The 
census will also contribute to monitoring of other variables, for example Monitoring, 
Reporting and Verification (MRV) related to the Guyana REDD+ Investment Fund 
(GRIF). The MoA through the M&E Unit will produce reports based on the census 
and data collected with support of the Program. The Program will finance:            
(i) strengthening of the MoA’s Agricultural Information System. This will include 
strengthening of the MoA’s M&E Unit; update of regulations and legal framework, 
training of MoA and the Guyana Bureau of Statistics staff, purchase of equipment 
and software, and dissemination; and (ii) the implementation of a national 
agricultural census. The agricultural census will collect data from all regions of 
Guyana and will use the latest technology for collection, analysis and quality 
control. Among other topics, the census will assess the involvement of women and 
vulnerable groups in the agricultural sector. Field activities will include training, 
pilot testing and a communication strategy. The implementation of the census will 
require the training of more than 600 enumerators and interviewing more than 
120,000 households.  

1.24 Component 2: Strengthening the agricultural innovation and extension 
system (US$6.39 million). This component will finance the implementation of 
research programs in Region 9 and Region 10, including the setup of an extension 
strategy tailored to the different groups of beneficiaries. Adoption of sustainable 
practices will be promoted through an incentives scheme targeting small farmers / 
communities. The main activities to be financed are: (i) the design and construction 
of an agricultural center in Region 9. This agriculture center will house research 
programs to be implemented by NAREI, GLDA and the Hydrometeorological 
Service. The agriculture center will also have facilities for the Guyana School of 
Agriculture (GSA) and the National Drainage and Irrigation Authority (NDIA);       
(ii) design and construction of a water reservoir for the agricultural center in Region 
9. This reservoir will harvest rainfall that will facilitate irrigation and livestock 
research in the agriculture center in Region 9; (iii) design and upgrade of facilities 
in Region 10 to implement a fully functional agricultural center in Ebini;                 
(iv) implementation of soil laboratories in both Region 9 and Region 10 for 
research purposes. These laboratories will facilitate the preparation of fertility 
maps for Region 9 and Region 10 and support extension services;                       
(v) implementation of research programs in each agricultural center. During 

                                                 
2
  Guyana’s Green Development Strategy is the strategy being developed by the current Government. It has 

four pillars: energy, environment security, ecological services and enterprise and employment.  



- 10 - 

 

preparation of the loan the following crops/areas of research were identified, 
among others: cassava, peanuts; orchards, livestock (cattle and small ruminants); 
and pastures. The POM will describe eligibility criteria to include other crops/areas 
of research in the Program. The design of these research programs, include the 
financing for visiting researchers; inputs for agricultural research; equipment and 
training for NAREI and GLDA staff; (vi) preparation and implementation of an 
extension strategy that will include incentives for technology adoption for small 
farmers. This strategy will include specific activities to include women in training 
events. Extension will be based on individual visits and group activities, centered in 
demonstration plots; and (vii) support to the EPA for environmental monitoring.  
The MoA has already requested the lease of land for the agriculture center in 
Region 9 to the GL&SC, which indicated that it is available.  

1.25 This component will also finance incentives targeting individual small farmers, and 
will be complementary to investments being prepared with IFAD funding. The IFAD 
funded project will provide support at the group (producer association or 
cooperative) and individual levels. Incentives will facilitate technology adoption and 
enhance the probability of increases in productivity. Farmers / communities will 
receive an incentive for at least 50% of the cost of the technology package 
financed by the Program. The POM will detail the process to identify and 
implement the incentives strategy (see ¶3.6).  

1.26 Component 3: Support for compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary 
standards (US$2.8 million). This component will finance the provision of technical 
assistance to develop the legal and regulatory framework and specific investments 
to improve SPS standards for meat processing. These investments will increase 
the volume of meat processed in accord to sanitary standards and lead to the 
attainment of better prices. The validation of the enforcement process and control 
will improve the safety of meat products for Guyanese and visitors and in the 
longer term, position the Food Safety System to be recognized by international 
trading partners and open the opportunity for export of meat products. The 
Program will finance the: (i) development and implementation of a simplified 
grading system for beef; (ii) update of abattoir standards and preparation of legal 
framework; (iii) technical assistance for the adaptation of the International Codex 
Alimentarius to the Guyana context; (iv) provision of support to GLDA to enforce 
standards; (v) technical assistance for the preparation of regulations pertaining to 
the new Food Safety Act; (vi) financing of two meat processing centers (one in 
Region 9 and one in Region 5), that will include infrastructure for processing, 
waste management, and equipment. These facilities will be managed by producers 
associations, which are 50% women (¶3.7). The Rupununi Livestock Producers 
Association (RLPA) and the Weste Berbice Sheep and Goat Association (WBSGA) 
have been identified to manage these facilities. Processing facilities will include all 
environmental mitigation activities described in the ESMR; (vii) training of GLDA 
staff in meat inspection, effective enforcement and audit; and members of selected 
producers associations members in management; standards; best practices; and 
environment protection; and (viii) strengthening of producers associations to 
enhance management. 



- 11 - 

 

C. Key Results Indicators 

1.27 The MoA and the Bank have agreed on a Results Matrix for the Program. The 
principal results of the Program are: (i) higher private investment in the agricultural 
sector; (ii) regional development plans prepared based on the agricultural census; 
(iii) higher productivity at the farm level; (iv) adoption of sustainable agricultural 
practices; (v) higher value of products processed by pilot facilities; and                
(vi) increase in the use of practices that reduce pressure on ecosystems. At the 
end of the Program, productivity (measured as the gross value of production per 
hectare per year) will increase and pressure on fragile ecosystems will be reduced 
(see Annex 2).   

Table I-2. Principal indicators of the Program 

Impact indicators 
Proposed 

measurement 
Justification 

Gross value of farm’s agricultural 
production (increase expected) 

US$ per farm 
per year 

Higher gross value reflects higher productivity 
and lead to higher incomes 

Gross value of farm’s livestock 
production (increase expected) 

US$ per farm 
per year 

Higher gross value reflects higher productivity 
and lead to higher incomes 

Reduction of the area allocated to 
pastures for livestock production 

Area (hectares) Higher efficiency in land use reduces pressure 
on ecosystems and increases sustainability 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing Instruments 

2.1 The total Program amount is estimated at US$15,000,000 of which US$7,500,000 
will be financed by Ordinary Capital and US$7,500,000 will be financed by the 
FSO. The disbursement period will be 66 months. Table II-1 provides the cost 
summary by investment categories and components. The budget includes all costs 
associated with risks mitigation measures identified in the ESMP and the risk 
analysis. 

Table II-1. Costs and sources of financing (US$) 

 IDB Total % 

Component 1 4,170,000 4,170,000 27.8% 

Component 2 6,398,000 6,398,000 42.7% 

Component 3 2,800,000 2,800,000 18.7% 

Monitoring and Evaluation 400,000 400,000 2.7% 

Program Administration 1,232,000 1,232,000 8.2% 

Total 15,000,000 15,000,000 100% 

2.2 The Program is a specific investment operation and it is designed to be disbursed 
in five years and six months. The disbursement calendar is presented in Table II-2 
and it is based on the PEP (see Required Link 1).  

Table II-2. Disbursement projections (US$) 

 Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6
1
 Total 

IDB 1,326,935 3,633,645 5,218,345 3,163,525 1,111,475 546,075 15,000,000 

% 8.8% 24.2% 34.8% 21.1% 7.4% 3.6% 100% 

Total 1,326,935 3,633,645 5,218,345 3,163,525 1,111,475 546,075 15,000,000 
1 

Last year of implementation is only six months. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40647380/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40564707/R


- 12 - 

 

B. Economic viability 

2.3 The ex-ante economic evaluation includes all components of the Program, 
following the vertical logic (see ¶1.18). The analysis was undertaken in two stages 
and follows best practices (World Bank, 2011). In the first stage, a break-even 
analysis was conducted in an optimization and cost benefit analytical framework to 
estimate the minimum net economic return per adopting farming household 
required for the net present value (NPV) of the Program to be equal to zero at a 
12% discount rate (2017 to 2040). Costs follow directly from the PEP and include: 
Program costs estimated in the design stage, and operations and maintenance 
costs of the agricultural research centers and processing facilities. Costs also 
include opportunity costs of training for farmers. Key assumptions in the analysis 
are: the technological adoption ceiling, assumed to be 20% of the 5,000 targeted 
farming household beneficiaries, and the adoption path which is assumed to follow 
a logistical functional form. The minimum return per adopting household for the 
Program to be economically viable is US$2,196 per household/year.   

2.4 The second stage of the analysis characterized the current farming System 1 
based on the farming household survey described in Optional Link 11. Key 
variables include area planted, harvest output, prices, yields and costs. System 2 
is the potential farming system that the Program aims to achieve. The crops bora 
bean and cassava, as well as livestock were chosen to characterize System 2, 
based on Program design. Yields to characterize System 2 crops were extracted 
from statistics on actual national average yields supplied by NAREI and the 
Ministry of Agriculture (2014), while beef cattle yields were drawn from FAO 
(2013). 

2.5 Yields reported in the household farm survey are considerably lower than those 
reported by NAREI and FAO and therefore a conservative approach to scenario 
design was pursued. Three scenarios are evaluated: an average scenario where 
achieved yields are 35% of those reported by NAREI and FAO; an optimistic 
scenario where 50% of potential yields are achieved, and; a pessimistic scenario 
where only 25% of potential yields are achieved. Across scenarios, a low adoption 
ceiling of 20% of potential new beneficiaries and current farmers is used. The 
average scenario results in a net present value (NPV) US$1,531,706 and an 
internal rate of return (IRR) of 14%; the optimistic scenario generates a NPV of 
US$17,762,431 and an Internal Rate of Return (IRR) of 31%, and the pessimistic 
scenario resulted in a negative NPV of US$8,243,387. Sensitivity analysis around 
the adoption ceiling shows that the Program breaks even when the adoption 
ceiling is 16.25% or greater, which is considered low in comparison to similar 
investments in agricultural research, extension and information.    

C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Risks 

2.6 The Program is classified as Category “B” pursuant to the Bank's Environment and 
Safeguards Compliance Policy (OP-703) and an Environmental and Social 
Analysis (ESA) was conducted which incorporated inputs from consultations with 
stakeholders, via meetings and a public consultation. The main direct impacts of 
the project relate to inadequate siting, design and operation of the facilities, 
especially animal welfare and waste management from the abattoirs and the high 
water use for both the abattoir and research station. Additionally, given the 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40588061


- 13 - 

 

sensitive nature of the ecosystem (especially in Region 9) and the emphasis on 
sustainable agriculture there is a need to ensure that training and research does 
not lead to unsustainable agricultural development in the region. These programs 
must not lead to the introduction of invasive species, the excessive use of 
pesticides and herbicides or high water demands. These measures help reduce 
the Program’s indirect impacts.  

2.7 Based on the ESA, specific management actions and mitigation measures were 
recommended to address the Program’s direct and indirect impacts. The measures 
are incorporated into the procedures and requirements for execution as part of the 
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The main mitigation 
measures identified in the Plan include effective measures for site selection, 
design and construction to high standards for all new infrastructures, ensuring 
capacity for the supervision of construction and operation, and ensuring training 
courses are inclusive of indigenous groups and women, and do not result in the 
introduction of invasive species. The Environmental and Social Management 
Report (ESMR) provides a summary of the ESA and ESMP in relation to Bank 
policies.  

2.8 The ESMP describes how the Program complies with the Disaster Risk 
Management Policy (OP-704), the policies on Indigenous Peoples (OP-765) and 
on Gender and Equality (OP-761).

3
 The Program will promote risk reduction, 

climate change adaptation and the building of resilience to natural disasters and 
climate change. The Program also promotes opportunities and empowerment for 
low income women and indigenous peoples participating in agricultural activities. 

D. Fiduciary Risk 

2.9 The Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) has the lead responsibility for reporting on 
fiduciary matters and overall Program progress to the Ministry of Finance and the 
IDB. Based on discussions with the MoA during Program preparation, the 
Agricultural Service Development Unit (ASDU) will serve as the project 
implementation unit. As described in Annex III to the present POD, the fiduciary 
risk has been ranked as medium. The main fiduciary risks relate to:                        
(i) procurement processing delays due duplication of efforts to meet internal 
controls requirements for multiple approvals within the MoA and at the national 
level as per GoG national procurement regulations; (ii) most activities will be 
implemented in Region 9 and 10, which will require a high level of coordination;  
and (iii) budget and institutional capacity constraints due to ability to retain qualified 
technical  consultants (e.g., engineers, contractors) to provide technical assistance 
on some procurements.  

2.10 These are being addressed through: (i) the design of an Program Operating 
Manual (POM) which seeks to provide adequate guidance and mitigation 
measures to discharge all fiduciary duties in accordance with the Bank’s rules and 
procedures; (ii) continuous support to streamline the timely execution of all 
fiduciary activities; and (iii) providing continuous technical supervision and training 

                                                 
3
  Section 6 of the ESMP describes in detail expected impacts and proposed mitigating activities. Section 7 

describes the management plan for all mitigating activities.  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40664054
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40564651/R


- 14 - 

 

in financial management and procurement staff who will be responsible for 
fiduciary activities under the present Loan. 

E. Other Risks 

2.11 The design of the Program used the methodology “Program Risk Analysis for 
Sovereign Guaranteed Loans”. Besides environmental and fiduciary risks, this 
analysis identified the following risks: (i) coordination between agencies (a national 
and regional coordinating committees will support the MoA, ¶3.3); and (ii) delays in 
the design, environmental and social impact evaluation and procurement of 
infrastructure (two procurement specialists will support the ASDU in the 
implementation, ¶2.6).  

2.12 Agriculture centers in Regions 9 and 10 will be managed, maintained and 
supported by the MoA. Specific budget lines are available in NAREI and GLDA 
budgets.  

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements 

3.1 The Borrower is the Co-operative Republic of Guyana. The executing agency is 
the MoA, which will implement the Program through its ASDU. The ASDU is a 
specialized unit under the Permanent Secretary (PS) of the MoA. The ASDU will 
be responsible for all the fiduciary obligations to manage the Program, including:  
(i) planning of the technical and fiduciary aspects related to the Program activities; 
(ii) procurement of goods, works and services for the Program; (iii) the oversight 
and evaluation of Program activities; (iv) financial and accounting management of 
the Program, including the submission of disbursement requests and preparation 
of financial reports; and (v) risk management. The Program will strengthen the 
ASDU to facilitate the implementation of the Program, through the financing of 
specialized personnel dedicated to the Program, including among others; program 
coordinator; procurement officer; financial officer; civil engineer; and administrative 
assistant. The presentation of evidence that the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) 
has selected a program coordinator, a financial officer and a procurement 
officer according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the 
Bank will be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement of the 
financing.  

3.2 Support to partner agencies. Additionally, the Program aims at strengthening the 
capacity of GBS and EPA, through the financing of consulting services to support 
supervision and monitoring. For this purpose, the MoA will subscribe an agreement 
with each GBS and EPA, which shall include, inter alia, a description of the roles 
and responsibilities of each entity in the implementation of the Program activities. 
The subscription and entry into effect of an agreement between the MoA and the 
GBS, according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank will 
be a special contractual condition prior to the implementation of the agricultural 
census included in Component 1. The subscription and entry into effect of an 
agreement between the MoA and the EPA, according to the terms conditions 



- 15 - 

 

previously agreed with the Bank will be a special contractual condition prior to the 
bidding of infrastructure works under Components 2 and 3. 

3.3 Institutional coordination. Coordination at the national level will use the same 
structure proposed by the IFAD funded loan. A National Steering Committee 
(NSC) will be established, and it will include: (i) the MoA; (ii) the Ministry of 
Indigenous People’s Affairs; (iii) Ministry of Public Health; (iv) Ministry of Business;        
(v) Ministry of Natural Resources (MNR); (vi) the Office of Climate Change at the 
Ministry of the Presidency; and (vii) the Ministry of Finance. The responsibilities 
and composition of the NSC will be detailed in the POM, but it will include:             
(i) support the implementation of loan; (ii) provide institutional and technical advice 
and support; and (iii) coordinate field activities. At the regional level, technical 
coordination will be implemented through the establishment of a Regional 
Management Committee (RMC). This RMC will include: (i) Regional Chairman;    
(ii) Regional representative of the Ministry of Indigenous People’s Affairs;            
(iii) Regional representative of the MNRE; (iv) Regional representative of each 
NAREI or GLDA; and (v) a regional representative of the beneficiaries. The roles 
and responsibilities of each of the members of the RMC, composition and its 
functions will be detailed in the POM, which will include: (i) support the 
implementation of the Program at the Regional level; (ii) support the ASDU in the 
implementation of the AOP; (iii) provide guidance to the AOP; and (iv) collaborate 
in coordinating with local and community leaders. 

3.4 Program Operating Manual (POM). The POM; which establishes standards and 
procedures for the MoA with regard to programming activities, procurement audits, 
and monitoring and evaluation, among others, will govern Program execution. The 
POM will include: (i) a detailed description of the implementation agreement of 
each component; (ii) roles and responsibilities of the agencies involved in the 
implementation of the Program; (iii) criteria and procedures to select and contract 
goods, services and works; (iv) criteria and procedures for management and 
financial control of the Program; (v) monitoring and evaluation arrangements; and 
(vi) specific criteria for environmental and social management of the Program, as 
described in the ESMR. The approval and entry into effect of the POM 
according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank will 
be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement of the 
financing. 

3.5 Incentives for technology adoption. Research programs under Component 3 
will generate technology packages to be transferred to farmers. To increase the 
likelihood of adoption, the Program will finance incentives to adopt new 
technologies targeting small farmers. The eligibility criteria will be: (i) area under 
production / fallow; (ii) agriculture / forestry is the main source of income;            
(iii) farmer have farms located in Region 5, 9 or 10; and (iv) evidence that the 
farmer has the property rights, possession, community rights or rights of use of the 
land, as applicable. 

3.6 The steps to identify and select participants in the incentives program are detailed 
in the POM, and will be: 



- 16 - 

 

a. Farmers will be selected from the lists prepared by the MoA during the 
promotion of the Program. The target number of beneficiaries for the 
incentives is 2,000.   

b. Farmers will be selected from a random sample of communities. As a part of 
the registration process, each farmer will sign an implementation agreement 
with the MoA. However, during the preparation of the loan, a progression of 
500, 700, 800 farmers per year was suggested (see Optional Link 8 and 12).  

c. Farmers will select the technologies they want to implement from the 
packages offered by the MoA. Each package will include: (i) inputs; (ii) land 
preparation; (iii) equipment; and (iv) technical assistance. Packages will be 
designed for a specific unit of production. 

d. Each farmer will receive the incentive in designated bank accounts or 
through vouchers, based on verification of the implementation of the 
technologies, according to the conditions established in the POM. Vouchers 
will be redeemed by service providers after verification from the MoA. The 
MoA will verify the implementation of the technology in the field and prepare 
a report.  

e. Additionally, an external verification process will be implemented. This 
verification process will review, at random, the implementation of 
technologies; support provided by the MoA; and financial flows. 

3.7 Management of meat processing facilities. The implementation of the meat 
processing facilities under Component 3 requires the strengthening of the 
producers associations, which will manage these facilities. The associations will 
sign an agreement with the MoA to manage the facilities, that will include: (i) the 
length of the lease or other form of transfer; (ii) responsibilities of the association, 
in terms of payments or fees to be paid to the MoA, liabilities, limitations of the 
agreement in terms of responsibilities of the MoA; and penalties; and                  
(iii) monitoring and evaluation to be implemented by the MoA. The subscription 
and entry into effect of an agreement between the MoA and a producer’s 
association responsible for operating the abattoir, according to the terms and 
conditions previously agreed with the Bank will be a special contractual condition 
prior to the building of infrastructure works related to the meat processing facilities 
financed under Component 3. 

3.8 Procurement. All Program related procurement activities will be performed 
following Bank’s Procurement Policies: Policies for the Procurement of Goods and 
Works financed by the Bank (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and 
Contracting of Consultants financed by the Bank (GN-2350-9) as applicable.  

3.9 The Program is currently looking into the possibility of a Direct Contract with the 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) for a total of   
US$4 million. This Direct Contract would be based on the FAO’s experience in 
carrying out Agricultural Surveys as described in Component 1 of the present Loan 
and hence, the request for same would be grounded on Section 3.10 (d) of       
GN-2350-9, which foresees that “Single-source selection may be appropriate only 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40587606/R
pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40588248/R


- 17 - 

 

if it presents a clear advantage over competition: […] (d) when only one firm is 
qualified or has experience of exceptional worth for the assignment”

4
.  

3.10 Retroactive financing. The Bank may finance retroactively under the loan up to 
the amount US$350,000 (2.33% of the proposed loan amount), eligible expenses 
incurred by the Borrower prior to the date of loan approval to: (i) design, 
environmental and impact evaluation, and supervision of the infrastructure 
included in Components 2 and 3; (ii) contract specialized personnel of the ASDU 
dedicated to the Program; and (iii) finance the travel, per diem expenses and office 
supplies, provided that all the requirements substantially similar to those set out in 
the loan agreement requirements are adhered to. These expenses must have 
been incurred on or after June 16

th
, 2016 (PP approval date), and under no 

circumstances shall expenditures incurred more than 18 months prior to the loan 
approval date be included.  

3.11 Auditing. The Program will submit to the Bank the following documents:              
(i) semiannual financial reports of the Program are to be included in the 
semiannual progress report which will be submitted by the MoA to the Bank;         
(ii) annual financial statements of the project, audited by the Auditor General of 
Guyana are to be submitted to the Bank within 120 days at the end of each fiscal 
year, beginning with the fiscal year in which the first expenditures are incurred; and 
(iii) a final financial audit report of the Program is to be submitted by MoA within 
120 days after the date of the last disbursement. 

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results 

3.12 Monitoring. Indicators and targets will be monitored using the Agricultural 
Information System and the Results Matrix. The M&E Unit of the MoA will collect 
the data and prepare the reports. The Program will prepare reports for the Bank 
every six months, which will be submitted no later than 45 days after the end of 
each semester. Also, the MoA will submit to the Bank an Annual Operations Plan 
(AOP) no later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each calendar year. The AOP 
will include the update of the PEP and will detail the activities and procurement 
proposed for the year. The presentation by the Borrower of an initial report, 
including, the Program’s Pluri-annual Execution Plan (PEP), the Procurement 
Plan, the Financial Plan and the Results Matrix according to the terms and 
conditions previously agreed with the Bank, will be a special contractual 
condition prior to first disbursement of the financing. 

3.13 Evaluation. Two independent evaluations will be contracted by the MoA:              
(i) mid–term evaluation, to be implemented when 50% of the resources have been 
committed or thirty months after the date of effectiveness of the loan contract, 
whichever comes first; and (ii) a final impact evaluation, to be implemented when 
90% of the resources have been committed. These reports will be contracted 
based on Terms of Reference agreed with the Bank (see Required Link 3). 

                                                 
4
  This does not constitute a request for approval/no objection to the Direct Contract. Such request will be 

processed in accordance with the applicable rules during execution. FAO is a specialized agency of the 
United Nations and has executed similar censuses around the world. It is the only agency worldwide with 
this kind of experience, except national statistic agencies.  

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40564750/R


- 18 - 

 

3.14 Impact evaluation. The impact evaluation will have two parts. First, investments in 
Component 1 and Component 2 will be evaluated through a quasi–experimental 
design. The planned evaluation intends to assess the impact of data availability 
and research and extension services and seeks to answer the question whether 
these services, provided through the agricultural census, newly constructed 
agriculture centers, improved the production, productivity, and income of 
beneficiary farmer households. In order to answer this question, the evaluation 
relies on a difference-in-difference approach paired with randomized order of 
phase-in (see Optional Link 8). Specifically, the evaluation will take advantage of 
the staggered implementation of the Program over three years by using beneficiary 
farmers in later cohorts as the control group for the early treatment group. In this 
manner, the evaluation can control for potential bias from self-selection among 
beneficiary farmers and ensure a reliable impact estimate. A carefully planned 
selection mechanism (clustered randomized assignment) at the community level 
further allows the inclusion of such farmers who live in close proximity to 
beneficiaries and may enjoy indirect spillover effects that could increase program 
impact. The evaluation will rely on three rounds of surveys: (i) a baseline survey 
administered in year one prior to the provision of extension services to the first 
cohort; (ii) the first follow-up survey administered in year two prior to the provision 
of extension services to the second cohort; and (iii) a final follow-up survey 
administered in year three prior to the provision of extension services to the third 
cohort. A final impact evaluation report will be due at the end of year six of 
Program implementation. 

3.15 The second part of the evaluation will use a before – after approach to evaluate 
the impact of investments in pilot facilities for meat processing proposed under 
Component 3.  As a key impact indicator, livestock production (volume of meat, 
number of animals) will be measured both at the farm level and at the processing 
facility level. Also, prices received by farmers will be recorded to reflect changes in 
sales due to higher quality and compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary 
standards.  

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/40587606/R


 Annex 1 - GY-L1060

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Strategic Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Regional Context Indicators

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Strategy Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2690

     Country Program Results Matrix

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country strategy or country 

program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Evaluable Weight Maximum Score

8.1 10

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution 7.7 33.33% 10

     3.1 Program Diagnosis 3.0

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions 2.4

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality 2.3

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis 7.0 33.33% 10

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic Analysis 4.0

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits 1.5

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs 1.5

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions 0.0

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis 0.0

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 9.6 33.33% 10

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms 2.5

     5.2 Evaluation Plan 7.1

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries and/or public sector 

entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality Yes

Labor

Environment

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector entity prior to 

approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps in the sector 

that were identified in the project document and/or in the evaluation plan
Yes

-Poverty headcount ratio (US $4 per day PPP) (%)

-Global Innovation Index (LAC average)

-Research and development expenditure as a percentage of GDP (%)

-Greenhouse gas emissions (kg of CO2 e per $1 GDP (PPP))

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Aligned

-Productivity and Innovation

-Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability

-Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law

I. Strategic Alignment

-Beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable use of natural capital (#)*

-Micro / small / medium enterprises provided with non-financial support (#)*

-Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological and managerial tools to improve public 

service delivery (#)

-Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives (#)*

Aligned

Support the development of productive use of the country's natural resources, 

while addressing the challenge of sustainable management of the natural 

resources at stake.

The intervention is not included in the 2016 Operational Program.

Medium

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

B

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

Financial Management: Budget, External control.

 The objective of the Program is to increase productivity of the agricultural sector while maintaining a sustainable and climate resilient use of natural resources.  The Program will implement three components: Information for Policy making and 

natural resource management (including an agricultural census that has not been updated since 1952); Strengthening the agricultural innovation and extension system; and Support for compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary standards. 

  

The documentation is well-structured, with a good diagnostic of the problems faced by the sector in terms of major limitations in the Agricultural Information Systems, Research, Innovation & Technology Transfer System, the Animal Health 

and Sanitary and Phytosanitary Framework, and the effects of climate change, all of which contribute to low levels of productivity. 

The proposed solution is clearly related to the magnitude of the problems identified.  The results matrix (RM) reflects the objectives of the program and shows a clear vertical logic for all components. The key outcome indicators have values 

that are the result of the ex-ante economic analysis; and lower-level indicators reflect the design of the three components. The RM includes SMART indicators at the levels of impact, outcomes (except for one) and outputs (except for two) with 

their respective baseline values and targets and the means to gather information. 

The economic analysis (EA) is based on a break-even and Cost-Benefit Analysis that uses data recently collected in the targeted areas.  The benefits are based on a good understanding of the theory of change and are derived from the 

expected gains in yields for two key crops and cattle and the expected rate of adoption by farmers.  The economic costs include all resource costs as well as costs from a social perspective.  In general, the assumptions made are reasonable; 

however, the assumed absolute change in gains for yields is rather high and not supported by empirical evidence. The EA undertakes a sensitivity analysis based on key variables (gains in yields and adoption rates) under three scenarios: 

optimistic; average; and pessimistic.  The Internal Rate of Return is above 12% for the optimistic (31% IRR) and average (14% IRR) scenarios; however, the pessimistic scenario yields an IRR of -1%.  Importantly, the pessimistic scenario 

might not be that pessimistic in the sense that it assumes increases of 1,276% in yields for one of the crops evaluated, which is quite high. Importantly, given the lack of data, the EA was not able to include the potential benefits to the sector 

arising from a new agricultural census. In this sense, one might consider these results as conservative.   

The monitoring and evaluation plan is well designed and the impact evaluation proposes a reasonable strategy based on a quasi-experimental design with random selection at the community level that aims to measure direct and indirect 

impacts of the program by measuring spill-over effects. Given the scant number of rigorous studies done in Guyana, the impact evaluation will make an important contribution to the knowledge base of the sector, the country, and the Bank.    

The risks identified in the risk matrix seem reasonable, except for one that does not comply with DEM guidelines; five are classified as Medium and three are classified as Low. The risks include mitigating actions and compliance indicators.

The Program will promote the participation of women in agricultural technical 

assistance and training, and the agricultural census will have a special focus on 

women for data collection.

An impact evaluation was prepareed during the design. A quasi - experimental 

analysis, based on the implementation strategy was agreed with the MoA. 



Annex II – GY-L1060 
Page 1 of 3 

 

Results Framework 

 

Objective:  To increase productivity of the agricultural sector and sustainable use of natural resources in Guyana. 

 

Expected Impact 

Indicators Units 
Baseline Target EOP* Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

Average gross 
value of farm’s 
agricultural 
production  
(increase expected) 

USD/farm US$582.39/farm  2016 US$848.20/farm  2021 
Baseline study 
Surveys for 
agricultural census 

Target EOP values 
based on expected 
yield increases for 
cassava, bean, and 
cattle

1
. 

Average gross 
value of farm’s 
livestock production  
(increase expected) 

USD/farm US$223.85/farm  2016 US$654.28/farm  2021 
Baseline study 
Surveys for 
agricultural census 

Target EOP values 
based on expected 
yield increases for 
cassava, bean, and 
cattle.

 1
 

Reduction on the 
pressure on fragile 
ecosystems by 
inefficient livestock 
production 
(inefficient use of 
pastures) 

Hectares 
removed 
from 
livestock 
production 

0 ha 2016 570 ha  2021 
Baseline study 
Surveys for 
agricultural census 

Suitable buffer zones 
around pasture areas 
established. 
Technology transfer will 
reduce use of pasture 
areas. Intensity 
(animals / ha) will 
increase.   

* EOP, End of Project 

 

Expected outcomes 

Indicator Unit 
Baseline Intermediate  EOP Target Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year Value Year 

Private investment in 
agriculture (increase 
expected) 

USD per 
year 

5.72 million 2008 
 

2019 7 million 2022 
Go-Invest 
reports 

Related to the 
census. At the 
national level 

Regional development 
plans prepared based on 
the agricultural census 

Plan 0 2016 
 

 3 2022 
Ministry of 
Communitie
s 

Assuming the 
agricultural census 
is available in 2019 

Productivity at the farm 
level of select crops 
(increase expected) 

MT/Ha 

Cassava: 
2,220 kg/ha 

 
Bora bean: 
215 kg/ha 

2016 

 

2019 

Cassava: 
3,883 
kg/ha 

 
Bora 
bean: 
4,143 
kg/ha 

2022 
Baseline 
and final 
evaluation 

Selected crops, 
Baseline value from 
survey, EOP Target 
computed as 35% 
of yields reported by 
NAREI and FAO 

Adoption of sustainable 
agriculture practices by 
farmers (disaggregated by 
gender) 

Number of 
technologie
s 

3 Male 
1 Female 

2016 

 

 
6 Male 

4 Female 
2022 

Baseline 
and final 
evaluation 

Baseline values 
based on 
agricultural 
household survey 

Average price of meat 
processed by pilot facilities 
(increase expected) 

USD / Kg 
USD / Lt 

3 2016 
 

2019 5 2022 
ASDU 
reports 

Return to the 
producers (value of 
the animal) 

Use of practices that 
reduce pressure on 
ecosystems (increase 
expected) 

Number of 
practices 
per 
household 

1.43 2016 

 

2019 3 2022 
Baseline 
and final 
evaluation 

Based on the 
survey 

 

                                                           
1
  Assumptions follow the ex-ante economic analysis: Increases in gross production value at end of project are based on increases in 

cassava, bean, and cattle yields: Cassava and bean yields increase to 35% of benchmark yields provided by NAREI with a 10% 
adoption rate among farmers. Cattle yields increase by 70% with a full adoption rate. Current market prices from survey used to 
compute gross production value. Based on the survey, livestock production contributes around 40% to total gross value of 
household production. 



Annex II – GY-L1060 
Page 2 of 3 

 

Outputs 

Indicator Cost* Unit 
Baselin

e 
Year 

1 
Year 

2 
Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 

EOP 
Target 

Means of verification 

Component 1: Generating Information for evidence – based policy making and natural resource management 

Agricultural census 
completed 

4,00
0 

Census 0   1    1 Results published 

MoA and GSB staff 
trained in data 
management 

70 
Number 
of people 

0 20 50 50 20 20 20 150 
Training for the survey 
and census 

M&E Unit 
strengthened 

100 Unit 0  1      
Consultants and 
equipment for the 
M&E Unit 

Component 2: Strengthening of the agricultural innovation and extension system 

Agriculture centers 
built and refurbished 
in Regions 9 and 10 

3,61
0 

Agricultur
e center 

  1 1   2 
 

ASDU reports 

Design and 
construction of a 
water reservoir in 
Region 9 completed 

500 
Water 

reservoir 
   1     ASDU reports 

Soil laboratories 
constructed and 
implemented 

350 
Laborator

y 
0   1 1   2 ASDU reports 

Research programs 
implemented 

225 Program 0  1 2 3 2 2 10 ASDU reports 

Extension programs 
implemented 

417 Program 0   1 2   3 ASDU reports 

Farmers trained in 
sustainable 
agriculture practices 
that do not receive 
incentives  

928 

Number 
of 

farmers 
(total) 

0 300 1200 1000 500 5,000  3,000 

ASDU reports 

Male 0 216 864 720    2,160 

Female 0 84 336 280    840 

Farmers trained in 
sustainable 
agriculture practices 
the use and benefits 
of technologies 
promoted by AC - 
incentives 

238 

Number 
of 

farmers 
(total) 

0 500 800 700    2,000 

ASDU reports 

Male 0 360 576 504    1440 

Female 0 140 224 196    560 

NAREI and GLDA 
staff trained 

65 

Number 
of people 

(total) 
0 10 10 10 10 10  50 

ASDU reports 
Male 0 8 8 8 8 8   

Female 0 2 2 2 2 2   

Environmental 
supervision visits for 
agriculture research 
and extension 

65 Reports   2 2 2 2 2 10 
EPA with support from 
the MoA 

Component 3: Support for compliance with sanitary and phytosanitary standards 

Pilot facility to 
process meat 
implemented 

1,75
0 

Facility 0   1 1   2 ASDU reports 

Number of producers 
associations 
strengthened 

685 
Producer 
associatio

n 
0  1 1    1 ASDU reports 

Annual review of 
compliance with 
hygienic and 
environmental 
standards 

25 Report 0   1 1 1  3 
Technical audit and 
EPA 

Number of people 
trained in SPS and 

30 
Number 
of people 

0 20 20 30 30   100 ASDU reports 



Annex II – GY-L1060 
Page 3 of 3 

 

Indicator Cost* Unit 
Baselin

e 
Year 

1 
Year 

2 
Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 

EOP 
Target 

Means of verification 

food safety standards Male 0 15 15 22 22   74 

Female 0 5 5 8 8   26 

Development and 
implementation of a 
simplified grading 
system for beef 

120 
Regulatio

n 
0 1      1 

Subscription and entry 
into effect. ASDU 
reports 

Update of abattoir 
standards and 
preparation of legal 
framework completed 

60 
Regulatio

n 
0  1     1 

Subscription and entry 
into effect. ASDU 
reports 

Adaptation of the 
International Codex 
Alimentarius to the 
Guyana context 
completed 

55 
Regulatio

n 
0   1    1 

Subscription and entry 
into effect. ASDU 
reports 

Support to the GLDA 
to enforce standards 
completed 

25 
Annual 
report 

0 1 1 1 1 1 1 6 
Annual reports of 
compliance 

* Thousand dollars 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 1 of 8 

 

Fiduciary Arrangements 

 

COUNTRY: Guyana 

PROJECT Nº: GY-L1060 

NAME: Sustainable Agricultural Development Program 

EXECUTING AGENCY: Ministry of Agriculture 

 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 The general objective of the program is to increase the productivity of the 
agricultural sector while maintaining sustainable and climate resilient use of natural 
resources in Guyana. The total estimated budget is US$15,000,000, all of which 
will be financed by the IDB from the OC/FSO resources. 

 
1.2 The Executing agency is the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA). MoA executed two Bank 

financed Loans – Agricultural Support Services 1558/SF-GY and Agricultural 
Export Diversification Program 1929/BL-GY. The latter loan was executed by the 
Agriculture Sector Development Unit (ASDU) of the MoA which was established in 
2007 to execute all foreign funded programs for the sector.  

 
1.3 An institutional capacity assessment of the ASDU of MoA was conducted in July 

2016 using the Institutional Capacity Assessment System (ICAS) methodology. 
The assessment combining previous experience and the findings from the ICAS 
conclude that the fiduciary risk is considered medium. A re-evaluation of the 
fiduciary risks will be conducted during execution as part of the regular fiduciary 
supervision to ensure efficient support to project execution. 

 
1.4 Fiduciary context of the country. An Integrated Fiduciary Assessment (IFA) was 

conducted in 2012/2013. It provided an update to the 2007 combined Public 
Expenditure and Financial Assessment (PEFA) performance measurement 
framework and OECD-DAC procurement assessment. The results of the 
2012/2013 IFA, like the 2007 PEFA, concluded that Guyana’s overall budget 
planning, accounting and reporting systems worked well; IFMAS (the financial and 
management accounting system used by the Government) operated consistently 
and reliably providing updated information about all elements of budget execution, 
and budget planning and reporting was being done in accordance with the cash 
basis of accounting and its standards. The Public Financial Management (PFM) 
indicator scores from the 2012/2013, indicate encouraging results with slight 
improvements in areas such as Strengthened External Audit Function, Budget 
Preparation Process, Revenue Administration etc. Notwithstanding, the IFA 
highlighted that attention needed to be paid to the internal control environment, 
Internal Audit, Payroll Control and Procurement Control among others. To date, 
confirmations from the Borrower on the results of the 2012/2013 IFA as well as 
2007 PEFA remain outstanding. The Bank’s Guide for the Use of Country Systems 
(GUS) Assessment was also conducted in 2013; this also has not been accepted 
by the Government. The Auditor General’s Office (AOG) is currently eligible to 
audit all Bank-financed TCs and loan operations deemed to be of low or medium 
complexity and risk. This was based on an assessment of the capacity of the AOG 
undertaken by the Bank in 2011 and the continued institutional strengthening 
support given by the Bank to the AOG. For this operation, the Bank is 
recommending: (i) the use of the national accounting system, Integrated Financial 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 2 of 8 

 

Management Accounting System – IFMAS, or any other system acceptable to the 
Bank, for the financial administration of the project; and (ii) for external control, a 
firm of independent public accountants acceptable to the Bank or the Auditor 
General of Guyana. 

 
1.5 With regards to procurement, assessments of the national system (MAPS) have 

been performed in 2007 and 2013. The results are not yet endorsed by the 
Government of Guyana (GoG). Guyana has a dedicated legislation that governs 
public procurement, namely the Procurement Act of 2003 and its associated 
regulations. The National Procurement and Tender Administration Board (NPTAB) 
was established in the same Procurement Act of 2003. It is responsible for 
exercising jurisdiction over the country’s tender processes, reporting to the Ministry 
of Finance with policy making, advisory oversight, and monitoring and information 
functions. In accordance with the existing legal framework, the NPTAB is a 
temporary entity while awaiting the creation of the Public Procurement Commission 
(PPC). The PPC is a Constitutional body with responsibility for overseeing that the 
purchasing of goods and services and the execution of works by public institutions 
is carried out in a fair, equitable, transparent, and competitive manner; its members 
are appointed by the President and approved by the National Assembly. 
The country is in the process of strengthening its centralized website for publication 
of opportunities for requests for proposals, but to date, it is not regularly used 
across procurement entities or by the independent public corporations. 
Additionally, efforts are being deployed to also strengthen capacity to retain 
records of procurement processes and related information, as well as a registry for 
protests, suspension and debarment and contractors’ performance. Statistics on 
public procurement awards is also an area of focus for GoG. Notwithstanding, to 
date, the Country Procurement System has not been approved and hence will not 
be used under the present Loan. Consequently, the Bank requires the use of its 
Procurement Policies GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 for all projects approved starting 
April 19, 2011. In the meantime, the Bank will bring adequate support to the 
procurement function to ensure that procurement activities are carried out in a way 
that support the prompt execution of the operation and in accordance with the 
Bank’s rules and procedures. 

 

II. FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY 

2.1. The ASDU of the MOA will be responsible for the execution of the Loan and for 
carrying out all related fiduciary activities.  In accordance with the existing structure 
at the MoA, the ASDU will discharge its duties coordinating with the Office of the 
Permanent Secretary. As per ICAS findings, the ASDU was established in 2007 as 
the sole “coordinating unit within MoA for the administration of international agency 
funded projects/programs. To strengthen the execution capacity of the ASDU Unit, 
a Financial Officer and a Procurement Officer will be recruited to discharge the 
expected fiduciary duties for the duration of the Loan.  

2.2. MoA, as a budget agency, uses the Integrated Financial Management Accounting 
System (IFMAS) of the country. ASDU uses IFMAS for the financial management 
and an off the shelf accounting system for detailed reporting. IFMAS was 
successfully piloted on previous IDB-financed loans. It is recommended that this 
program use IFMAS along with the off the shelf accounting package for the 
financial management and accounting of the program. 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 3 of 8 

 

2.3. As far as the procurement function is concerned, findings of the ICAS indicate that 
the procurement activities that will be conducted by the ASDU under this Loan will 
be placed under the responsibility of a procurement officer who is presently 
discharging procurement duties under a Loan financed by the World Bank. The 
procurement officer is one constituent of what is referred to as the Procurement 
Department in the current ASDU’s organizational structure. The position for the 
procurement manager is presently vacant. However, in accordance with the 
findings of the ICAS, it appears that, for in as much as the Procurement 
Department is placed under the Project Coordinator (currently, a vacant position as 
per findings of the ICAS), the Procurement Officer reports directly to the 
Permanent Secretary while coordinating activities with the Director of the ASDU. 
Most importantly however, the ASDU is presently operating in accordance with 
approved internal control mechanisms guaranteeing “the presence of internal 
controls throughout the Ministry’s governance, planning, administration, 
procurement and financial management, including support documentation for all 
commitment and payment transactions, authorizing signatories following GoG 
procedures and segregation of authority for most of its internal processes, among 
others”. In addition, an operation’s manual will be tailored and implemented to 
increase the ASDU’s capacity to implement the present Loan. Given the above, it 
is expected that the Procurement Function as structured for the present Loan will 
have the expected capacities to perform its fiduciary duties.  

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

3.1. The Project Team in consultation with the MoA and other stakeholders developed 
a preliminary Risk Mitigation Matrix included in the package of project documents 
to be approved for the present Loan Agreement. The Bank and the MoA will 
undertake joint reviews of the Matrix on a yearly basis, and introduce necessary 
additional mitigating actions as a result of such reviews and as deemed necessary. 

3.2. Taking into consideration the current ASDU organizational structure where a 
vacancy exists in the Accounting section, the capacity of the existing accounting 
staff to undertake the financial management for a new operation, the ICAS 
Assessment and the experience of the Bank with the previous loan, the financial 
management risk has been classified as medium. The recruitment of a financial 
officer to ensure adequate segregation of duties coupled with the provision of 
training on Bank policies and procedures should mitigate the existing risk and 
strengthen the control environment. 

3.3. With regards to the procurement activities, it is estimated that the overall level of 
risk is medium. The existing structure as described in Section 2.3 above is 
identified in the ICAS as presenting a low level of risk. In practice however, the 
current ASDU organizational structure indicates that the Procurement Department 
counts with 2 (two) positions and that only that of the Procurement Officer is filled 
to date. As indicated in the ICAS, the procurement officer is presently responsible 
for the procurement activities under a World Bank Loan. Given that the 
Procurement rules and procedures between the World Bank and the IDB are 
harmonized, it is expected that the experience acquired during the execution of the 
WB Loan will constitute a mitigation factor in itself. However, to avoid potential 
bottlenecks tied to an increased workload as indicated above, recruiting a 
procurement assistant appears to be a necessary additional mitigation measure to 
avoid potential bottlenecks in the execution of the procurement activities under the 
IDB financed Loan. Indeed, once the present Loan enters in execution, the 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 4 of 8 

 

Procurement Officer currently on duty would be responsible for several Loans 
above US$10M.This adapted structure should be reflected and catered for in the 
operation’s manual as approved under the conditions of Section 4.1 below. 

IV. SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF CONTRACT TO BE ADHERED TO 

4.1. Conditions prior to first disbursement: (i) the presentation of evidence that the 
Ministry of Agriculture (MoA) has selected a Program Coordinator, a Financial 
Specialist and a Procurement Specialist according to the terms and conditions 
previously agreed with the Bank(¶3.1 of the POD); (ii) approval and entry into 
effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms and 
conditions previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.4 of the POD), and (iii) presentation 
by the Borrower of an initial report, including, the Program’s Pluri-annual Execution 
Plan (PEP), the Procurement Plan, the Financial Plan and the Results Matrix 
according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank(¶3.12 of the 
POD). 

4.2. Type of exchange rate to be used by EA. The type of funds to be used are 
established in the following manner: (i) Reimbursement of actual expenses: the 
effective rate of exchange on the date of payment of each expenditure, as 
published by the Central Bank of Guyana; (ii) Reporting on accounts (Advance of 
Funds): the effective rate of exchange used in the conversion of the currency of the 
operation to the local currency. In cases of reimbursement of a guarantee of letter 
of credit, the equivalent of the currency of the operation will be fixed in accordance 
with the amount effectively disbursed by the IDB. 

V. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

5.1 Financial Statements and Reports, audited or unaudited. (i) semi-annual 
financial reports of the program are to be included in the semi-annual progress 
report which will be submitted by the MoA to the Bank; (ii) annual financial 
statements of the project, audited by the Auditor General of Guyana are to be 
submitted to the Bank within 120 days at the end of each fiscal year, beginning 
with the fiscal year in which the first project expenditures are incurred; and (iii) a 
final financial audit report of the program is to be submitted by MoPH within 120 
days after the date of the last disbursement. 

5.2 Programming and Budget: The Borrower has committed to allocate, for each 
fiscal year of project execution, adequate fiscal space to guarantee the unfettered 
execution of the project; as determined by normal operative instruments such as 
the Annual Operating Plan and the PP. 

5.3 Accounting and Information Systems. It is expected that IFMAS accounting 
system will facilitate the recording and classification of all financial transactions, 
supported by an off-shelf accounting system. 

5.4 Disbursements and Cash Flow. The Bank will supervise the creation of an 
Advance of Funds, using the Advance of Funds methodology. Whenever resources 
from the financing are requested through an Advance of Funds, it will be deposited 
into a Special Account, denominated in US$, established exclusively for the Project 
at the Central Bank of Guyana. Required resources from this Special Account will 
be transferred to another bank account, denominated in Guyana Dollars to be 
utilized for payment of expenditures in local currency. 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 5 of 8 

 

5.5 The project will provide adequate justification of the existing Advance of Funds 
balance, whenever 80% of said balance has been spent. Advances will normally 
cover a period not exceeding 180 days and no less than 90 days. In order to 
request disbursements from the Bank, the EA will present the following forms and 
supporting documents: 

Type of 
Disbursement 

Mandatory Forms 
Optional forms/ information that 

can be requested by the IDB 

Advance Disbursement Request/ Financial 
Plan 

List of Commitments 
Physical/Financial Progress 
Reports 

Reimbursements of 
Payments Made 

Disbursement Request/ Project 
Execution Status/ Statement of 
Expenses 

List of Commitments 
Physical/Financial Progress 
Reports 

Direct Payment to 
Supplier 

Disbursement Request/ Statement of 
Expenses/Acceptable Supporting 
Documentation 

List of Commitments 
Physical/Financial Progress 
Reports 

 

5.6 Generally, supporting documentation for Justification of Advances and 
Reimbursement of Payments Made will be kept at the office of the EA. 
Disbursements’ supporting documents may be reviewed by the Bank on an ex-post 
basis.  

5.7 Internal Control and Internal Audit: The management of the project will assume 
the responsibility for designing and implementing a sound system of internal 
controls for the project. 

5.8 External Control and Reports. For each fiscal year during project execution, MoA 
will be responsible to produce semi-annual financial reports for the project, annual 
Audited Financial Reports of the Program and one final Audited Financial Report at 
the end of the Program, audited either by the Auditor General of Guyana or by a 
firm of independent public accountants acceptable to the Bank. 

5.9 Financial Supervision Plan. Financial Supervision will be developed based on the 
initial and subsequent risk assessments carried out for the project. Inspection visits 
will be performed based on the risk assessed, covering the following: (i) review of 
the bank reconciliation and supporting documentation for Advances and 
Justifications; (ii) compliance with procedures; (iii) review of compliance with the 
lending criteria; and (iv) ex-post review of disbursements. 

5.10 Execution Mechanism. MoA will be the EA and will be responsible for the 
financial administration of the program. MoA’s responsibility will include:                
(i) preparation of required project reports; (ii) monitoring product, output and 
outcomes achievement using established indicators; (iii) preparation and 
submission of disbursement requests to the Bank and justification of expenses;   
(iv) preparation of financial reports; (v) ensure compliance with all aspects of the 
Operating Manual; and (vi) maintain adequate documentation filing system. 

VI. REQUIREMENTS AND AGREEMENTS FOR EXECUTION OF PROCUREMENT 

6.1 Procurement Execution. Procurement activities for the proposed project will be 
carried out in accordance with the Policies for the Procurement of Works and 
Goods Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2349-9), of March 
2011, and the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed 
by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2350-9), of March 2011. They will 
also be subject to the provisions established in the Loan contract. In addition, for all 
projects, the Borrower is required to prepare and submit to the Bank, a draft 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 6 of 8 

 

General Procurement Notice as well as an initial procurement plan which will be 
updated in accordance with the applicable sections of the Policies and the Loan 
Agreement. 

6.2 Exception to Bank Procurement Policies. The operation does not foresee any 
exception to the Bank’s procurement policies. 

6.3 Procurement of Goods, Works, and Non-Consulting Services. In accordance 
with Section 1.2 of GN-2349-9, “the responsibility for the implementation of the 
project, and therefore for the award and administration of contracts under the 
project, rests with the Borrower”. In accordance with the findings of the ICAS for 
this Loan and given the level of risk as identified above, all procurement activities 
will be carried out under ex-ante supervision.  

6.4 Procurement of Consulting Services. In accordance with Section 1.4 of         
GN-2350-9, “The Borrower is responsible for preparing and implementing the 
project, and therefore for selecting the consultant, and awarding and subsequently 
administering the contract.” As such, the Borrower is responsible for preparing and 
implementing the scheduled activities, and therefore for preparing the TORs, short 
lists, selecting the consultants, awarding the contract and subsequently 
administering it. In accordance with the findings of the ICAS for this Loan and given 
the level of risk as identified above, all procurement activities will be carried out 
under ex-ante supervision as described in the following section of the present 
Annex III.  

6.5 Sole Source Selection and/or Direct Contracting. The Program is currently 
looking into the possibility of a Direct Contract with the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) for a total of US$4 million. This Direct 
Contract would be based on the FAO’s experience in carrying out Agricultural 
Surveys as described in Component 1 of the present Loan and hence, the request 
for same would be grounded on Section 3.10 (d) of GN-2350-9 which foresees that 
“Single-source selection may be appropriate only if it presents a clear advantage 
over competition: […] (d) when only one firm is qualified or has experience of 
exceptional worth for the assignment”. The FAO would be recruited by the Ministry 
of Agriculture and it is expected that the request for no-objection for the said 
contract will be submitted to the Bank for no-objection prior in accordance with the 
applicable rules and procedures governing Direct Contracting of Consulting 
Services. This does not constitute a request for approval/no-objection to the Direct 
Contract in question which, as mentioned above, will be processed in accordance 
with the applicable rules during execution. 

6.6 Selection of Individual Consultants. Individual consultants will be selected and 
recruited in accordance with Section V of GN-2350-9. 

6.7 Recurring Expenses. Include payment of utilities and other office operating 
expenses of the Executing Unit, if any. 

6.8 Advance Contracting/Retroactive Financing. The Bank may finance 
retroactively under the loan, eligible expenses incurred by the Borrower prior to the 
date of loan approval to: (i) design, environmental and impact evaluation, and 
supervision of the infrastructure included in Components 2 and 3; (ii) contract 
specialized personnel of the ASDU dedicated to the Program; and (iii) finance the 
travel, per diem expenses and office supplies, up to the amount US$350,000 
(2.33% of the proposed loan amount), provided that all the requirements 
substantially similar to those set out in the loan agreement requirements are 



Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 7 of 8 

 

adhered to. These expenses must have been incurred on or after June 16
th
, 2016 

(PP approval date), and under no circumstances shall expenditures incurred more 
than 18 months prior to the loan approval date be included.  

6.9 Domestic Preference. Domestic Preference is not requested under this Loan. 

6.10 Country Threshold. Table (US$ thousands) www.iadb.org/procurement  

International Competitive 
Bidding Threshold* 

 

National Competitive Bidding Range 
** (complex works and non-common 

goods)  

Consulting Services 

Works Goods Works Goods International Short List 

>1,000,000 >100,000 <1,000,000 <100,000 > 100,000 

* When procuring simple works and common goods and their amount is under the International 
Competitive Bidding thresholds, Shopping may be used. 
** When procuring non-complex works or common goods with amounts under the NCB range, 
Shopping shall be used. 

 

6.11 Procurement Plan. The Procurement Plan for the operation covering the first 18 
months of project execution can be accessed through the following electronic link. 
The on-line Electronic Procurement Execution System (known by its Spanish 
acronym as SEPA) will be used for the publication and updates of the Procurement 
Plan during project execution. It is expected that the EA will use the SEPA program 
for management of its procurement activities. The Procurement Plan will be 
updated annually or whenever necessary, or as required by the Bank 
(www.iadb.org/procurement; http://www.iniciativasepa.org/bid/sitio/guyana/index-
_ing.htm). The initial procurement plan for the operation lists all procurement 
activities foreseen under this operation. The table below includes the list of the 
main procurement activities for this Loan. 

Main Procurement Activities 

Activity Add’l Info. 
Procurement 

Method 
 

Estimated 
Amount 
 in US$: 

Estimated 
Amount  
BID %: 

Review 
Method 

 

Specific 
Procurement 

notice 

Contract 
Signature 

Buildings, 
Laboratories, 
Water Reservoir, 
and civil works in 
Region 9 

Works ICB 3,100,000 100 Ex-ante Q3 2017 Q4 2017 

Construction of 
abattoir and 
associated waste 
management 
facilities in 
Region 9 

Works ICB 1,200,000 100 Ex-ante Q4 2017 Q1 2018 

Laboratory 
equipment 
(autoclave; soil 
grinder; 
incubator; 
moisture content 
analyzer) 

Goods ICB 120,000 100 Ex-ante Q2 2018 Q2 2018 

Agricultural 
Census 

Consulting 
Services 

SSS 4,000,000 100 Ex-ante N/A Q1 2017 

Design & 
supervision Agri. 
Construction 
Infrastructure 

Consulting 
services 

QCBS 680,000 100 Ex-ante Q1 2017 Q2 2017 

http://www.iadb.org/procurement
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/WSdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=38332109
http://www.iadb.org/procurement
http://www.iniciativasepa.org/bid/sitio/guyana/index_ing.htm
http://www.iniciativasepa.org/bid/sitio/guyana/index_ing.htm


Annex III – GY-L1060 
Page 8 of 8 

 

 

6.12 Supervision. Under the present Loan, procurement activities (i) are not expected 
to be complex in nature, nor will they involve the acquisition of medical of 
therapeutic equipment; (ii) will be subject to ex-ante review given the level of risk 
as identified above; (iii) will be explicitly listed in the approved and updated 
procurement plan in SEPA; (iv) will be launched once all technical specifications 
and/or terms of reference are validated by the Bank’s Sector Specialist; and (v) will 
be documented in accordance with the general filing guidelines that will be 
provided as part of the inception training of the fiduciary staff and in accordance 
with the applicable Bank Policies. 

6.13 All modifications to the present arrangement are subject to a prior written 
agreement between the EA and the Bank. The evaluation of capacity and the level 
of risk may vary during the project’s execution depending on the findings of the 
regular supervision activities that will be conducted during the project’s lifespan. As 
such, supervision modalities may vary as capacity increases. 

6.14 Records and Files. All records and files will be maintained by the EA, according to 
accepted best practices and to the general guidelines that will be provided by the 
Bank at the initial training of the fiduciary staff. All records must be kept for seven 
(7) years beyond the end of the operation’s execution period. It is also 
recommended that the Executing Agencies develop electronic filing to avoid losing 
all paper files. 



