















































PUBLIC  

SIMULTANEOUS  DISCLOSURE 

 

 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

HAITI 

 

 

ARTISANAL FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 

 

 

(HA-L1096) 
 

 

 

 

 

 

GRANT PROPOSAL 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Caroline Bidault (RND/CHA), Team Leader; 

Bruno Jacquet, Marie Bonnard (RND/CHA); Lina Salazar, Carmine Paolo De Salvo, Michele Lemay 

(INE/RND); Romina Emanuela Kirkagacli, Marise Etienne Salnave (FMP/CHA); Louis-François Chrétien 

(LEG/SGO); Régine Lafontant (CDH/CHA); and Lisa Restrepo (INE/RND). 

 

In accordance with the Access to Information Policy, this document is being released to the public and 

distributed to the Bank´s Board of Executive Directors simultaneously. This document has not been 

approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be 

made available to the public, thus superseding and replacing the original version. 



CONTENT 

 

PROJECT SUMMARY………………………………………………………………………..1 

I. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................... 2 

A. Background, Problem Addressed and Justification ........................................... 2 

B. Objective, Components and Cost ...................................................................... 9 

C. Key Results Indicators ..................................................................................... 11 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS .................................................................. 11 

A. Financing Instruments ..................................................................................... 11 

B. Economic Analysis .......................................................................................... 11 

C. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks .................................................... 12 

D. Fiduciary Risk ................................................................................................. 12 

E. Other Key Issues and Risks ............................................................................. 13 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................. 13 

A. Summary Implementation Arrangements........................................................ 13 

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results ........................................ 16 

 



- ii - 

Annexes 
Annex I Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) Summary  

Annex II Results Matrix  

Annex III Fiduciary Arrangements 

 

Electronic Links 

Required 

1. The Pluriannual Execution Plan (PEP) 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542908  

2. Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542996 

3. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542894 

4. Procurement Plan 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542989 

Optional  

1. Economic Analysis of the Program 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542897 

2. Detailed Budget per Output 
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542908 

3. Diagnostic of the fishery sector in Haiti Southern regions 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39305157  

4. A snapshot view of the fishery associated with Fishing Aggregating Devices (FADs) in 
selected communes of the Southeast, South and Grande Anse Departments, Haiti 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39540185  

5. Micro-study of the Fishery Sector in the South and Grand Anse Departments of Haiti 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39541888  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542908
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542996
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542894
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542989
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542897
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39542908
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39305157
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39540185
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39541888


ACRONYMS 

 

AECID 
Spanish Agency of International Cooperation for Development (Agence 

Espagnole de Coopération Internationale pour le Développement ) 

AOP Annual Operation Plan 

BAC Agricultural Communal Office (Bureau Agricole Communal) 

CITES 
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and 

Flora 

DDA 
Departmental Agricultural Directorate (Direction Départementale de 

l’Agriculture) 

EA Executing Agency 

ESMR Environmental and Social Management Report 

FD Fishery Directorate 

FY Fiscal Year  

GCI-9 Ninth General Increase in Resources of the IDB 

GDP Gross Domestic Product 

GoH Government of Haiti 

Ha Hectare 

IDB Inter-American Development Bank 

MDE Ministry of Environment (Ministère de l’Environnement)  

M&E Monitoring and Evaluation  

MARNDR Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development 

MT Metric Ton 

OM Operation Manual 

PDPM 
Marine Fisheries Development Program (Programme de Développement de la 

Pêche Maritime) 

PR Progress Report 

SC Steering Committee 

UE European Union 

UNEP United Nations Environment Programme 

UPMP Procurement Unit of the MARNDR (Unité de Passation des Marchés Publics) 

 

 
 



PROJECT SUMMARY 

HAITI 

ARTISANAL FISHERIES DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM 

(HA-L1096) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Beneficiary: Republic of Haiti 

Executing Agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Natural 

Resources and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

Amortization period: N/A 

Original WAL: N/A 

Disbursement period: 60 months 

Grace period: N/A 

Source Amount (US$) 

Supervision and 

inspection fee: N/A 

IDB (Grant Facility) 15,000,000 Interest rate N/A 

Local 1,500,000 Credit fee: N/A 

Total 16,500,000 

Currency: US Dollars Parallel Financing 

(AECID)         2,700,000* 

Project at a Glance 

Project Objective: The general objective of the project is to improve the income of small fishers in 

three southern regions of Haiti (South, South-East and Grande Anse), through the sustainable 

development of artisanal fisheries. The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen the institutional 

management of the fisheries sector for resource sustainability, and improved sanitary and food safety 

conditions for marketing of seafood products; (ii) improve the quality of fish at landing sites, through 

improved public infrastructure; and (iii) increase artisanal fisheries productivity and reduce economic 

losses through the establishment of a rights-based fishery management scheme. In order to achieve 

these objectives, and consistent with the identified challenges, the project will finance three 

components: (i) institutional strengthening and information system; (ii) public infrastructure; and   

(iii) stakeholders’ capacity building.  

Special contractual conditions prior to first disbursement: (i) the hiring or assignation of a 

planning, monitoring and evaluation specialist within the Fishery Directorate; of an administrator, an 

accountant and an administrative assistant within the MARNDR’s BCP-ProGEBA unit; and of a 

procurement specialist to support the Procurement Unit of the MARNDR (¶3.2); (ii) the creation of 

the Program Steering Committee (¶3.4); and (iii) the approval of the Operation Manual by the 

Steering Committee (¶3.7).   

Special contractual condition prior to the use of resources for execution: the recruitment of 

approximately 26 people by the MARNDR Fishing Directorate to provide basic fishery services in the 

field for the regions of intervention will be a condition prior to execution of Component 3 (¶3.3).  

Special disbursement: To enable the Executing Agency to fulfill all the conditions prior to first 

disbursement, an initial disbursement for up to US$125,000 will be made to the extent the Beneficiary 

fulfills to the Bank’s satisfaction all the standard general conditions prior to disbursement set forth in 

grant agreements, except for: (i) the submission of the initial execution report; and  (ii) evidence of 

reliable financial information systems and internal control mechanisms (¶3.8 and ¶5.6 of Annex III). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None 

Project 

qualifies for: 

SEQ [ X ] PTI [ X ] Sector [ X ] Geographic  Headcount  

  * The program is also supported by approximately US$2.7 million (€2.5million) in parallel financing from 
AECID (Spanish Agency for International Cooperation for Development) which is not included as part of 

the program’s budget total and  is subject to AECID’s annual budget approval for 2016-2020.  



- 2 - 

 

I. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, Problem Addressed and Justification 

1.1 Agriculture including farming activity, livestock, fisheries and forestry, plays a 
dominant role in the Haitian economy, contributing 22.5% of Gross Domestic 

Product (GDP) (Fiscal Year [FY] 2012-13). The economy’s recovery since the 

2010 earthquake has been mainly attributed to accelerated output growth in the 

agricultural sector. This has translated into GDP growth of 4.3% in FY 2013, up 

from the 2.8% observed in 2012. While agriculture represents the principal form 

of livelihood for over one million families, contributing to about 50% of the total 

households’ income,
1
 rural poverty headcount remains the highest in the country 

with 75.2% (58.7% national level).
2
  

1.2 The Fisheries Act of 1978
3
 established the Fishery Directorate (FD) under the 

Ministry of Agriculture Natural Resources and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

as the responsible institution for the administration and enforcement of the 

sector’s legal and regulatory framework, including surveillance and monitoring of 

authorized fishing gear and compliance with fishing seasons for certain species.
4
  

1.3 Occurring along many parts of the country’s approximately 1,700 km coastline,
5
 

the fishery sector in Haiti is of high socio-economic relevance as it generates 

around 77,000 full-time jobs (52,000 direct jobs, and 25,000 indirect jobs),
6
 and 

2.5% of the GDP
7
 (FY 2010-11). Artisanal fishing remains the main type of 

marine fishery in Haiti. It is carried out in a total of 420 locations in 9 out of 10 

departments of the country. Fishing is a diversified and largely unrestricted 

artisanal activity, with the relative importance of main fishing practices varying 

considerably among localities.
8
 Practices can nonetheless be grouped into two 

different types: (i) collection of intertidal species such as shellfish, crabs, clams, 

oysters, mussels; including the use of fish traps; and (ii) coastal fishing performed 

using boats
9
 and fishing gear to catch demersal and pelagic fish. Fishers target a 

wide range of resources that are found mainly on the continental shelf (conch, 

lobster, reef and demersal fishes and small coastal pelagics).
10

  

                                                 
1
  General Agricultural Census 2008-2009 (www.agriculture.gouv.ht); www.brh.net; www.mefhaiti.gouv.ht. 

2
   World Bank (WB). 2014. Poverty and Inclusion in Haiti: Social Gains at a Timid Pace. Washington DC: 

The WB. Retrieved from: http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/01/19871408/poverty-

inclusion-haiti-social-gains-timid-pace  
3 
 The Fisheries Act of 1978 was approved byPresidential decree.

 

4
  e.g. lobster 

5
  Second longest in the Caribbean region countries, after Cuba (Fishery Country Profile, FAO, 2005). 

6
  Ministère de l’Agriculture, des Ressources Naturelles et du Développement Rural (MARNDR), Etude de 

la filière pêche en Haïti et propositions de stratégie d’appui au secteur, IRAM-INESA, 2007. 
7
  FAO statistics and data management, http://faostat.fao.org, 2010. 

8
  Célestin 2004, Damais et al. 2007, Favrelière 2008. 

9
  The estimated fleet is 26,000 units of pirogues, canoes, sailing boats, and/or wooden motorboats. 

10
  Célestin 2004, Damais et al. 2007, Favrelière 2008. 

http://www.agriculture.gouv.ht/
http://www.brh.net/
http://www.mefhaiti.gouv.ht/
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/01/19871408/poverty-inclusion-haiti-social-gains-timid-pace
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/01/19871408/poverty-inclusion-haiti-social-gains-timid-pace
http://faostat.fao.org/


- 3 - 

 

1.4 Marketing of seafood is conducted by a network of intermediaries that ensure the 
supply of fresh products for local consumption and export. The stakeholders who 

market fish products include “merchants,” “merchants-saras” and agencies. The 

marketing process of fishery products is dominated by women.
11

 They sell 69% of 

the fish production fresh and 31% salted or dried. The latter is of lower value than 

the fresh fish and is the result of a lack of accessibility to refrigeration and ice. 

The merchants, who are often the spouses of the fishers buy and then sell 

lowvalue fish to the merchant-saras in local markets or to agencies. Merchants 

saras, estimated at approximately 7,000, come from the urban centers to coastal 

areas to buy (dried or fresh) and return to sell the production back in the cities. 

Finally, an estimated 1,000 agencies are located in the communes in coastal areas 

and exhibit the greatest purchasing and refrigeration capacity. This allows them to 

purchase the highest-valued products (conch, lobster) to resell to wholesalers, 

supermarkets and restaurants in the urban centers.
12

  

1.5 Despite the prevalence of fisheries, Haiti is a net importer of seafood products.
13

 

National production supplies only around 30% of total consumption. In 2011 the 

sector’s annual production in terms of landing equivalent was estimated at 17,000 

MT of fish, 600 MT of lobster, 200 MT of conch meat and 50 MT of shrimp.
14

 

Artisanal fisheries and trade are estimated to generate an annual sales figure 

higher than 240 million gourdes (US$6.3 million). In 2003, total value of export 

amounted to 349 MT (US$4.2 million),
15

 but had dropped significantly by 2011 to 

less than 50 MT and limited to informal and occasional exchanges mainly with 

the Dominican Republic.
16 

This drop in exports was mainly due to the suspension 

of exports to Europe. 

1.6 Sector challenges. Despite the critical importance of fishing as an economic 
activity for coastal communities, several challenges prevent the development and 

sustainability of the sector. The following challenges have been prioritized and 

selected based on prior experience in the sector and Government of Haiti (GoH) 

Marine Fisheries Development Program (PDPM) priorities.
17

 

1.7 Resource sustainability. Artisanal fishery’s contribution to socio-economic 
development depends in large part on the sustainability of the fishery resources, 

which represents the main challenge for the sector. As such, fisheries can be 

distinguished from other agricultural activities by the challenges posed by 

resource management. These include: (i) the diversity of the resource and means 

of production, particularly in the case of artisanal fisheries; (ii) the mobility of the 

                                                 
11

  Gachot, 2015. 100% of merchants and merchants-saras are women. 
12

  Célestin 2004, Damais et al. 2007, Favrelière 2008. 
13

  In 2010, Haiti imported more than US$ 20 million (34 MT) of seafood products and registered close to 

US$6 million of exports (Sources FaoStat, 2012). 
14

  FAOStat, 2012. 
15

  ftp://ftp.fao.org/FI/DOCUMENT/fcp/fr/FI_CP_HT.pdf  
16

  Report on « préparation d’un programme d’investissement public en faveur du secteur de la pêche » (2011) 
17

  Ministère de l’Agriculture, des Ressources Naturelles et du Développement Rural (MARNDR), Etude de 

la filière pêche en Haïti et propositions de stratégie d’appui au secteur, IRAM-INESA, 2007. 

ftp://ftp.fao.org/FI/DOCUMENT/fcp/fr/FI_CP_HT.pdf


- 4 - 

 

resource not confined within set boundaries; (iii) the difficulties of assessing the 

status of stocks and determining sustainable yields; and (iv) the absence of 

property rights. Although reliable fisheries statistics do not exist for Haiti, 

available evidence shows a catch reduction per fishing trip in coastal waters,
18

 

indicating that inshore stocks are either fully exploited or depleted, therefore 

threatening the sustainability of the sector. Ensuring the resource’s sustainability 

requires a strong government commitment to implement sustainable fishery 

management systems.
19

 However, the existing Haitian governance structure has 

not proven conducive to a sustainable exploitation of fisheries, as evidenced 

particularly by a lack of implementation of monitoring, control measures and 

regulations. This has led to unrestricted ‘open access to fishing grounds,’ and 

deterioration of critical breeding and nursery habitat for fish and shellfish.  

1.8 Sector governance. The existing fisheries regulations date from several decades 
and are significantly outdated in several aspects, including the sustainability and 

management of the natural resource. The FD is currently understaffed, comprised 

of only six civils servants. Moreover, the decentralization of the FD services at 

local levels remains weak with only eight agents (most of them supported by 

projects) in Departmental Directorates for Agriculture (DDA) (one agent per 

6,500 fishers). This prevents the provision of public services at local level such as 

extension services for the introduction of new sustainable techniques, and on-site 

data collection and implementation of a catch monitoring system. The FD’s 

technical capacities for applied research, sanitary control and resource 

management, need to be revamped to implement a more science-based approach 

to the sector’s management. In this context, the FD is in a weak position to 

exercise its leadership and coordination role (¶1.2). 

1.9 Availability of information for decision-making. The FD does not collect 
fisheries data nor does it compile fisheries statistics except for imports and 

exports. Basic information especially related to socio economic aspects, catches 

and marketing is essential for the adoption of improved policies for fisheries 

management. Previous efforts to implement a data collection system have not 

proven to be sustainable due to methodological and financial constraints to 

maintain a long term data collection system.
20

 

1.10 Lack of public infrastructure and services for artisanal fisheries, results in 
poor product quality, important post-harvest losses amounting to around 40%

21
 

(US$2.8 million), loss of market opportunities in urban centers and suspension of 

exports of seafood products to Europe. Harvesting, processing and marketing 

occur in marginal highly degraded areas that lack the basic infrastructure to ensure 

basic sanitary conditions and product quality. Out of the 18 communes (¶1.14) 

targeted by the program, only two have regular access to water and electricity, less 

than 10% have adequate landing sites for artisanal fishing boats and the majority 

                                                 
18

  IRAM, 2007. 
19

  Christy, 1997. 
20

  “Fisheries Investment Plan,” financed with the technical cooperation ATN/II-11593-HA. 
21

  Macias, 2014. 



- 5 - 

 

(80%) have public markets in poor conditions without running water or facilities for 

ice production or storage. Finally, 16% do not have public markets.  

1.11 Associations’ capacities. In 2002, the GoH sought to revitalize the fishery sector 
through the National Fishers’ Association. A large number of fishers’ professional 

associations were developed since then with more than 80 associations registered. 

These associations have weak organizational structures and, as a consequence, 

limited capacity to manage productive infrastructure and provide services and 

equipment in a financially sustainable manner. The social context further inhibits 

the development of the sector. Specifically Haitian fishing communities are 

characterized by a relatively young population; high rate of illiteracy.  

1.12 Access to basic technologies and equipment. The development of the fishery 
sector in Haiti requires improvements in post-harvest handling of the product 

through refrigeration and the adoption of technical innovations, some of which 

have an important cost in terms of investment. This combined with the presence 

of financial constraints prevents stakeholders to invest in the sector.
22

  

1.13 Areas of intervention. The program will target the three most productive 
departments (South East; South; and Grande Anse),

23
 that have been prioritized 

by the GoH and which together support a majority of the country’s fisheries 

localities along approximately 540 km of coastline. However, the institutional 

component of the program will benefit all the fishing communes in the country. 

As the South Department is also the intervention area of the tourism project 

financed by the IDB (3383/GR-HA), a fishing program in this department will 

develop the complementarity of the two operations in a context of sustainable 

development of coastal areas through improvement in the fishery/tourism value 

chain. In the South East Department the program will complement the Spanish 

Agency of International Cooperation for Development’s (AECID) funding with 

public infrastructure and thus consolidate this department as a model and catalyst 

for artisanal fisheries development in Haiti contributing to the dissemination of 

their experience in other regions of the south. 

1.14 The area of intervention was further refined based on the following criteria:  (i) at 
least one fishing association; (ii) fishery as a relevant socio-economic activity and 

potential for further increase in productivity; and (iii) the possibility of               

re-enforcing existing interventions financed by the AECID. Within the 

intervention area a total of 55 fisher's associations have been identified, with an 

estimate of 20,800 fishers.
24

 On average, fishing communities comprise 80 

members of which 63% are fishers, and 35% are merchants. These fishing 

communities are widely scattered, small and isolated with little access to basic 

services such as water, sanitation and electricity. In addition, in the area of 

                                                 
22

  IRAM, 2007 and Macias, 2014. 
23

  Supply chain analysis for fresh seafood in Haiti, Felix, 2012. 
24

  Macias, 2014. 

javascript:fOpenWindow('http://edwbip.iadb.org:80/cognos8/cgi-bin/cognos.cgi?b_action=cognosViewer&ui.action=run&ui.object=XSSSTART*2fcontent*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27BI*20Reports*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27OPS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS*20REPORTS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*20-*20Versiones*27*5d*2freport*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*27*5dXSSEND&ui.name=LMS1&run.outputFormat=&run.prompt=false&p_Active=1&p_UDR=UDR&p_OpNumber=3383/GR-HA&p_Date=2015-04-06',%20'_OPSDetail');


- 6 - 

 

intervention the number of fishing vessels is estimated at approximately 10,700.
25

 

The small boat size (under 20 feet long) and lack of engines make offshore deep 

water fishing difficult and so most fishing effort concentrates on shelf resources.  

1.15 Lessons learned. This program takes into account important lessons learned from 
the Bank and other donor-financed operations in Haiti (UE, UNEP, AECID), as 

well as empirical evidence from research undertaken in Haiti and abroad (Belize, 

Ecuador, Chile, Panama, Guadeloupe). Since 2007, the MARNDR is 

implementing, with the technical and financial support from AECID, a project 

focused on strengthening the capacity of fishery institutions and fishers 

organizations to provide adequate services to their members. The total AECID 

funding to present amounts to €3.5million. A recent external evaluation of the 

intervention has indicated positive results, especially with respect to the 

organizational capacity of fishing associations including financial sustainability, 

and provisions of services including maintenance of collective infrastructure.
26

 

Therefore the proposed program aims to follow a similar approach. Moreover, the 

design benefited from the close participation of national and international experts 

involved in AECID-MARNDR’s project. Main lessons are primarily drawn from 

Christy, F. T., 1997 The Development and Management of Marine Fisheries in 

Latin America and the Caribbean, Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011, Coastal fisheries of 

Latin America and the Caribbean and the Sector Framework Document on 

Agriculture and Natural Resources Management (SFD) are included in Table 1. 

1.16 Conception of the intervention. Based on the sector diagnostic, the challenges 
identified and the lessons learned, interventions have been identified to improve 

the sustainability of the resources by simultaneously increasing fishers’ 

productivity and income through the provision of improved public services in the 

sector. The literature
27

 suggests specific reasons that justify the public provision 

of fishery services from a market failure perspective: (i) coordination failures 

might foster depletion of resources reducing economic gains in the long run;     

(ii) liquidity constraints limit the availability of financial resources for fishers to 

access productive capital and adopt sustainable technologies; and (iii) risk 

aversion and information asymmetries limit adoption of more productive and 

sustainable technologies by fishers. To avoid overexploitation of the marine 

resources, the implementation of a long term sustainable fishery management 

system is required as a pilot in the southern regions. The effectiveness of the 

system will be evaluated by an impact evaluation (¶3.12). 

1.17 Regarding productivity and income generation, the program will address market 
failures as follows: (i)  accelerating the decentralization and sustainability of 

fishery services in close proximity to fishers, through the GoH’s commitment to 

improve the staffing in the field; (ii) improving fishers’ access to pelagic stocks 

using technological improvements while simultaneously piloting a rights-based 

                                                 
25

  Dugout woods, flat-bottomed boats, and wooden sailboats. Less than 5% of total fishing vessels is made up 

of fiberglass boats equipped with engines donated by non-governmental organizations and aid agencies. 
26

  Marine Fishery Strengthening Program in the Southeast department, mid-term review, Canaest, 2014. 
27

  Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011. Coastal fisheries of Latin America and the Caribbean. 



- 7 - 

 

fishery scheme; (iii)  promoting enhanced product quality through improved  

post-harvest handling facilities to be co-managed with strengthened fishers’ 

associations; and (iv)  strengthening the fisheries value chain through enhanced 

collaboration between FD and other initiatives of the Bank for private sector. 

Table 1. Lessons Learned 

Lessons learned
28

 Reflected in the program design 

Improved operational legal framework is 

needed for marine fisheries with clear 

competency to regulate and implement 

corrective measures harmonized with 

international standards, framework legislation 

and regulations. 

The modernization of the legal framework will be 

supported through short term technical assistance. 

(Component 1). 

Basic socio-economic information is required 

for the adoption of improved policies for 

fisheries management. 

The program includes the design and implementation of 

marine information system including a national fishers’ 

census, registries and sustainable data collection through 

the associations, including socio economic aspects 

(Component 1). 

Fostering public infrastructure of fish product 

processing and the cold chain will improve the 

quality of the product opening new local and 

international markets. 

The program supports the development of public 

infrastructure to improve fish product post-harvest quality 

and sanitary conditions (Component 2). 

Promotion of collective action schemes among 

fishers is key to their participation, and 

prevents individual actions that might threaten 

the sustainability of the fishing resource. 

The program includes activities aimed at strengthening 

the capacity of fishers associations to promote collective 

actions that ensure sustainability. This includes training 

in sustainable fishing activities as well as maintenance of 

public infrastructure (Component 2). 

Shift attitudes from development to sustainable 

fisheries management: The major opportunities 

of the future lie in improved fisheries 

management. 

The program supports the establishment of fisheries 

management regimes through: rights-based fishery 

management pilot. (Component 3); and implementation 

of the national marine information system and the 

development of a research program (Component 1). 

Given the importance of women contribution in 

the fishery sector, the undertaken activities 

must also be targeted to strengthen their 

participation and empowerment. 

The program includes improvement of public 

infrastructure with the primary goal to increase the value 

of fish sales per merchant (women). Also, part of the 

training and matching grants benefit female merchants 

(Component 3). 

1.18 Regarding resource sustainability, the program will address market failures by 
strengthening fisheries governance and management implementing an integrated 

information system and establishing a strong scientific-based approach. In the 

case of fisheries, empirical evidence shows that integrated fisheries management
29

 

not only contributes to resource sustainability by reducing pressure on stocks but 

also generates increased income, especially with the transition towards a      

rights- based fishery management (Belize,
30

 Ecuador, Chile
31

). The program will 

ensure the implementation of a pilot on sustainable fishery management system to 

avoid overexploitation of the marine resources based on successful interventions 

                                                 
28

  Sector Framework Document on Agriculture and Natural Resources (GN-2709) 
29

  combining research, monitoring and measures to manage the activity 
30

  http://www.tidebelize.org/ 
31

  Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011, Coastal fisheries of Latin America and the Caribbean 



- 8 - 

 

in similar circumstances in Belize and Panama.
32

 This pilot will include:                 

(i) definition of extraction rates compatible with stock replenishment rates; (ii) the 

implementation of a fishery information system including a national fishers’ 

census, as well as a strong monitoring and evaluation system; (iii) the 

implementation of a rights-based fishery management scheme for both offshore 

and coastal waters, combining managed access, quotas and no-take zones; and 

(iv) the promotion of more sustainable alternative fisheries techniques. The 

fisheries management measures will strengthen the benefits for stock recovery of 

the already created marine protected areas in the intervention zone through close 

collaboration with Ministry of Environment (MDE) and UNEP in the 

implementation of fisheries habitat conservation regulations with the cooperation 

of the fishers’ associations. 

1.19 Gender approach. The proposed operation will include a gender approach that 
promotes women’s participation and empowerment. Specifically, the program 

will finance public infrastructure, training
33

 and matching grants
34

 targeted 

towards female merchants. These activities aim to increase women’s income by 

increasing value of sales and reducing economic losses.  

1.20 Consistency with national priorities and donor coordination. The program 
will finance activities included in the National Fisheries Development Program 

(NFDP) and the Fisheries Investment Plan financed with the technical cooperation 

ATN/II-11593-HA, particularly: (i) strengthening the institutional and legal 

framework, through the establishment of a monitoring and control system, a data 

collection and analysis service including a national census of fishers and a fishers 

and vessels registry; (ii) socio-economic development of artisanal fishery through 

institutional and organizational strengthening of fishers associations, and 

introduction of improved fishing techniques and equipment; (iii) improving 

seafood marketing through development of basic public infrastructure destined to 

improve the processing of fish products and access to cold chain; and                 

(iv) increasing effectiveness of fisheries management through introduction of 

awareness campaigns introducing sustainable fisheries management practices. 

Program activities will be closely coordinated with AECID. 

1.21 Consistency with the Country Strategy, Sector Strategy and GCI-9. The 
program is aligned with the Bank’s Country Strategy with Haiti for 2011-2015 

(GN-2646), which sets agriculture (including fisheries) as a priority sector of 

intervention and with its private sector development pillar. The program is also 

included in the 2015 Operational Program Report (GN-2805). It contributes to 

three of the lending program priority targets outlined in the Report on the Ninth 

General Increase in Resources of the IDB (AB-2764) (GCI-9) and its Results 

Framework: (i) support to small and vulnerable countries; (ii) poverty reduction 

and equity enhancement, as beneficiaries will be low income fishers; and 

                                                 
32

  Seijo J.C., FAO, 2011, Coastal fisheries of Latin America and the Caribbean 
33

  Training on the following themes will directly target female merchants: hygiene and sanitary conditions, 

conservation techniques, infrastructure management  
34

  Specific equipment such as coolers and dryers have already been identified 



- 9 - 

 

(iii) support regional cooperation and integration, as the operation is consistent 

with both, the cross-country focus and national subsidiarity criteria.
35

 It will also 

contribute to the regional development goals of “trade openness,” as well as to the 

Bank´s outputs, “regional and subregional integration agreements and cooperation 

initiative supported” as defined in the Results Framework. The operation is 

consistent with the strategic priority to “Protect the environment, respond to 

climate change and enhance food security,” and will contribute to its Regional 

Development Goal “Annual growth rate of agricultural GDP.” The operation is 

consistent with the “Agriculture and Natural Resources Management Sector 

Framework Document” (GN-2709-1), as it will foster fisheries management 

regimes adapted to local conditions. Also, it is consistent with the Sector Strategy 

“Sustainable Infrastructure for Competitiveness and Inclusive Growth”          

(GN-2710-5), as the Program seeks to ensure financial sustainability of the 

investments by developing maintenance plans for each infrastructure to be built. 

The linkages with other projects from an economic perspective will be developed 

during program implementation in particular with 3383/GR-HA, Sustainable 

Coastal Tourism Program, with respect to improving food products for the 

tourism value chain and 3260/GR-HA, Modernization of Agricultural Health 

Public Services, regarding sanitary protection activities. Linkages with other Bank 

initiatives through the FD will be developed to enhance private investments. In 

particular it will support the participation of fishers’ associations in the Program 

to Support Productive Investment (2827/GR-HA). 

B. Objective, Components and Cost 

1.22 The objective of the program is to improve the income of fishers in three southern 
regions of Haiti (South, South-East and Grande Anse), through the sustainable 

development of artisanal fisheries. The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen 

the institutional management of the fisheries sector for resource sustainability, 

and improved sanitary and food safety conditions for marketing of seafood 

products; (ii) improve the quality of fish at landing sites, through improved public 

infrastructure; and (iii) increase artisanal fisheries productivity and reduce 

economic losses through the establishment of a rights-based fishery management 

scheme. To achieve this, the program will support a set of investments and actions 

organized in three components. The direct beneficiaries of the program are the 

20,800 fishers located in the intervention area. An additional 31,200 fishers 

located elsewhere in the country will benefit from institutional strengthening. 

                                                 
35

  According to the guidelines for GCI-9 regional cooperation and integration lending priority                   

(GN-2733/ GN-2650), this operation is consistent with the cross-country focus criteria, as this national 

program will support the institutional strengthening and infrastructure investments to promote 

internationalization of the artisanal fishery industry, as presented in the result matrix by the indicator; 33% 

increase in the number of annual health certificates for exports (OIE). The operation meets the national 

subsidiarity criteria as it will support unilaterally policy reforms that are related to a supra-national plan. 

Particularly, as stated in the result matrix, at least three international conventions on sustainable fishing 

will be adopted. Haiti´s Pelagic fisheries as tuna, are shared among countries in the Caribbean, therefore 

the sustainability improvements will have a positive impact at a regional level.  

javascript:fOpenWindow('http://edwbip.iadb.org:80/cognos8/cgi-bin/cognos.cgi?b_action=cognosViewer&ui.action=run&ui.object=XSSSTART*2fcontent*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27BI*20Reports*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27OPS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS*20REPORTS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*20-*20Versiones*27*5d*2freport*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*27*5dXSSEND&ui.name=LMS1&run.outputFormat=&run.prompt=false&p_Active=1&p_UDR=UDR&p_OpNumber=3383/GR-HA&p_Date=2015-04-07',%20'_OPSDetail');
javascript:fOpenWindow('http://edwbip.iadb.org:80/cognos8/cgi-bin/cognos.cgi?b_action=cognosViewer&ui.action=run&ui.object=XSSSTART*2fcontent*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27BI*20Reports*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27OPS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS*20REPORTS*27*5d*2ffolder*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*20-*20Versiones*27*5d*2freport*5b*40name*3d*27LMS1*27*5dXSSEND&ui.name=LMS1&run.outputFormat=&run.prompt=false&p_Active=1&p_UDR=UDR&p_OpNumber=3260/GR-HA&p_Date=2015-04-07',%20'_OPSDetail');


- 10 - 

 

1.23 Component 1. Institutional strengthening and information system        
(US$7.7million). This component will benefit all fishing communes in the 

country (¶1.13). To accomplish these goals, the program will finance: (i) technical 

assistance to conduct a detailed organizational and institutional analysis of the 

FD, revise and formulate the legal framework of the sector, and formalize the 

status of artisanal fishers;
36

 (ii) development and implementation of a national 

integrated fishery information system including: design of the system, software 

development, a national fishery census, and a registry of fishers, boats, sellers and 

associations; (iii) strengthening of FD’s human resources capacities at 

decentralized levels; (iv) technical training of managers, technicians and FD staff; 

(v) study for seafood products new potential markets; (vi) national sensitization 

campaigns on the use of ice, food safety, consumption of seafood products, and 

information on endangered species; (vii) design and construction of FD office in 

Damien and decentralized buildings;
37

 (viii) design and preliminary 

implementation of a plan for control and surveillance of seafood pathologies as 

well as a plan for sanitary control of seafood products; (ix) study on operational 

fishery control system that supports the transition towards rights–based fishery 

management for both offshore and coastal fisheries through a combination of 

managed access, quotas, no-take zones and similar measures; and (x) stock 

evaluation of under exploited resources via experimental fisheries campaigns and 

implementation of a research program on new fishery techniques.
38

 

1.24 Component 2. Public infrastructure (US$2.6million). This component will 
finance the design, supervision and maintenance plan (¶3.6) of the following 

infrastructure: (i) basic fishery infrastructure (landing, cleaning sites and public 

markets including solid waste management, manual system of seawater pumping 

filtration, ice container); and (ii) other landing facilities to protect fishing vessels 

during storms and hurricanes. To ensure sustainability, the design of investments 

will take into account the vulnerability to natural disasters, climate change 

mitigation and adaptation measures.  

1.25 Component 3. Stakeholders’ capacity building (US$3.5million). This 
component comprises the delivery of technical assistance and productive 

technologies through the provision of matching grants. To strengthen the     

fishers’ and merchants’ associations, the program will finance: (i) training to 

fishers and merchants in organizational administration, infrastructure management 

to ensure their sustainability and skills development for new fishing techniques;
39

 

(ii) provision of improved productive equipment
40

 to fishers’ and             

                                                 
36

  Administrative recognition of what is a fisher, defining fishers’ eligibility to public support. 
37

    The size of the FD offices in Damien cannot host all FD staff. As no other space within the MARNDR is 

available the program proposes to either build or rehabilitate one on the campus.  
38

  As no stock assessment has ever been done in Haiti, a preliminary work was conducted during program 

preparation (Optional Link #6)  
39

  AECID project will directly carry out strengthening capacities of the associations in the South East region 

under the AECID parallel funding, as well as training of project staff in other Departments through 

technical assistance. 
40

  The research program will define new fishing techniques to be promoted by the project to the associations. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=39540185


- 11 - 

 

merchants’ associations through matching grants; and (iii) implementation of a 

pilot on new fishing techniques and rights-based fishery management. 

Approximately 2,829 fishers and 1,661 merchants will benefit from the pilot. 

C. Key Results Indicators 

1.26 The program is expected to improve artisanal fishers’ income through the 
development of sustainable artisanal fisheries in Haiti. Table 2 summarizes the 

program’s key indicators, measurement periods and selection rationale. 

Table 2. Key indicators, measurement periods and selection rationale 

Key Indicators Period Selection rationale  

Impact Indicators 

Increase average total net revenues from fishing and 

fishing-related activities by household 
Y5 

Measures the impact on productivity and 

income of artisanal fishers 

% of fishers fishing exclusively on the shore  
Y5 

 

Measure the improvement on the 

environmental sustainability of artisanal fishing 
Establishment of at least one no-take zone in the 

coastal area associated with the scope of the project 

Selected Outcomes’ Indicators 

Component 1: Membership to international 

conventions on sustainable fishing 
Y5 

Measures the improvement on the management 

of the resource at the institutional level. 

Component 2: Value of weekly sales of fish per 

woman merchant 
Y5 

Measures the improvement on sanitary 

conditions and quality of the products sold. 

Component 3: Fishing basins with rights based 

fishery management  established 
Y5 

Measures the improvement on the management 

of the resource at the local level. 

Core Sector Indicator (CSI): Number of 

beneficiaries of improved management and 

sustainable use of natural and cultural capital 

Y5 
Measures the number of total beneficiairies in 

the associations. 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing Instruments 

2.1 The total program amount is US$16,500,000; financed by the IDB Grant Facility 
up to the amount of US$15,000,000 and by the national counterpart up to the 

amount of US$1,500,000. The program is also supported by approximately 

US$2.7million (€2.5million)
41

 in parallel financing from AECID. A memorandum 

of understanding is expected to be negotiated between MARNDR, AECID and 

IDB to ensure further collaboration and complementarity of both interventions. 

The disbursement period will be 60 months. Table 3 provides the cost summary 

by investment categories and components (detailed budget). The budget includes 

all costs associated with risks mitigation measures mentioned in ¶2.5. 

B. Economic Analysis 

2.2 A cost-benefit analysis was conducted to assess the economic viability of the 
program. The main economic benefits that were quantified in the cost-benefit 

analysis were: (i) the increase in gross operating margins of fishers; (ii) the 

increase in the value added generated by the merchants; and (iii) the benefits 

obtained from the restoration and sustainability of the stock fisheries. The annual 

                                                 
41

  Subject to AECID’s annual budget approval in Euros for 2016-2020. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/38107888/R


- 12 - 

 

overall costs of the program considered in the analysis include both investment 

costs and recurrent costs. The analysis envisions a program horizon of 15 years 

and a 12% discount rate. Goods and services considered in the analysis are 

evaluated using their economic prices. The program is considered economically 

viable as its estimated internal rate of return is 14.5%. The positive net present 

value associated with the program amounts to US$1.6 million. Although the 

economic analysis of the program is based on reasonably conservative 

assumptions, a broad sensitivity analysis confirmed the reliability of the results. 

Table 3. Estimated cost by component in US$ million 

Investment categories IDB Local Total AECID 

I. Components 

1. Institutional capacity strengthening 6.3 1.4 7.7 1.08 

2. Public Infrastructure 2.6 0.0 2.6 0.54 

3. Stakeholders’ capacity building 3.5 0.0 3.5 1.08 

II. Monitoring-Evaluation, Audit, Administration, Contingencies 

Monitoring, Evaluation, Audits 0.8 0.0 0.8 - 

Administration 1.4 0.1 1.5 - 

Contingencies 0.4 0.0 0.4 - 

Total 15.0 1.5 16.5 2.7 

C. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks  

2.3 Following the guidelines in the Bank’s Environment and Safeguards Compliance 
Policy (OP-703 and OP-765), this operation has been classified in Category “B.” 

A positive social impact is expected from increasing fishers income level’s (as a 

result of the program’s activities) and providing suitable fish processing facilities 

(Component 2), which will contribute to improve social conditions and decrease 

public health risks from poorly handled products. In terms of environmental 

impact, the expected strengthening and monitoring of the sector, including the 

fishers census and assessment of fishery resources (Component 1), will build a 

strong foundation to implement a state fishery control system. No resettlement 

and no adverse impacts on critical habitats are foreseen. Direct impacts will be 

related to the construction of infrastructure, for which associated mitigation 

measures will be incorporated in the bidding documents for the works. Potential 

indirect negative impact as overfishing or endangered species fishing will be 

mitigated by both the GoH increased capacity measures and fishers’ awareness 

measures, whose costs have been incorporated into the operation’s budget. An 

environmental and social analysis was conducted and the associated 

Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) will be included in the 

Operation Manual (OM). This information is incorporated in the ESMR. 

D. Fiduciary Risk  

2.4 The financial risk of the proposed program is evaluated as being medium due to 
the increase in volume and complexity of new projects being assigned to the 

fiduciary team of BCP-ProGEBA (HA-L1087, HA-L1050 and HA-L1096). To 

mitigate this risk, the Bank recommends the strengthening of BCP-ProGEBA’s 

accounting team with the hiring of an administrator, an accountant and an 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/39542894/R


- 13 - 

 

administrative assistant dedicated to the implementation of this program. In 

addition the OM of the program will include among other sections: (i) procedures 

for the approval and disbursement of funds; (ii) chart of accounts; and (iii) policy 

and procedures for the administration of inventory. The hiring of a support team 

agreed upon with the Bank and the approval of the program’s OM will be 

condition prior to first disbursement. In addition, during the first year of the 

program, Bank’s Fiduciary staff will conduct inspection visits on a semi-annual 

basis to review the execution of the financial plan, the preparation of financial 

reports and the review of program expenses and documentation. All costs 

associated with mitigation measures are included in the operation budget. 

2.5 The procurement risk is evaluated as medium. The MARNDR’s Procurement 
Unit (UPMP) is operational since early 2014 and has proved to possess a strong 

technical capacity in procurement and a reliable structure. However, the increased 

number of projects that are being handled by this unit may have an impact on the 

timing of procurement activities. As a mitigation measure, an additional 

procurement specialist will be hired to support the UPMP. During the program’s 

life, the Bank will conduct at least one procurement inspection visit per year. All 

associated costs are included in the operation budget. The ex-ante review method 

will apply to major procurement activities. Ex post review will be conducted over 

specific low risk activities as detailed under Annex III. 

E. Other Key Issues and Risks 

2.6 The main risk identified during a workshop conducted with the GoH is the 
increase of the fishing effort and infrastructure sustainability. Mitigation measures 

include among others: implementation of a pilot rights based fishery management 

system, development of a fishery control system, technical assistance and training 

of FD technical staff, creation of a Steering Committee (SC) and implementation 

of infrastructure maintenance plans (¶3.6). The general risk qualification of the 

program is medium. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN  

A. Summary Implementation Arrangements 

3.1 The beneficiary of the program will be the Republic of Haiti and the Executing 
Agency (EA) will be the MARNDR. The EA will be responsible for the overall 

administration of the program, including: planning and reporting for technical and 

fiduciary aspects; execution of procurement activities; the supervision of technical 

assistance firms; financial and accounting management, including the submission 

of disbursement requests; risks management; monitoring and evaluation; and 

complying with contractual conditions of grant agreement. 

3.2 The MARNDR will execute the aforementioned tasks through its FD. The 
program will be headed by a Coordinator of the program. Financial management 

aspects will be handled through the fiduciary team of the MARNDR’s            



- 14 - 

 

BCP-ProGEBA unit while the UPMP will execute all procurement activities. To 

support the Project Coordinator in its tasks, the hiring or assignation of a 

planning, monitoring and evaluation specialist within the FD; of an 

administrator, an accountant and an administrative assistant within the 

MARNDR’s BCP-ProGEBA unit; and of a procurement specialist to support 

the Procurement Unit of the MARNDR will be a special contractual 

condition prior to first disbursement. 

3.3 To date, the MARNDR decentralized human resources in the intervention regions 
are limited (two agents in the South-East, two in the South financed by AECID 

and UNEP) or none (Grande Anse). The program will support the MARNDR-FD 

in strengthening its capacity to provide decentralized services within the 

DDA/BAC by recruiting/absorbing
42

 a total of 26 people (eight managers and 18 

technicians) whose salary will be supported by Public Treasury through 

counterpart funds. Recruitment of these managers and technicians is required to 

provide basic fishery services in the field for the respective regions will be a 

special contractual condition prior to the use of resources for the execution of 

Component 3. These MARNDR’s fishery employees located in the DDA or BAC 

will directly work and collaborate with the fishers associations in strengthening 

their capacity implementing the AECID model with the technical assistance of                

AECID-MARNDR’s project staff. 

3.4 A Steering Committee (SC) will be created
43

 to ensure strategic general guidance 

as well as the approval of the OM, initial Multi-Year Execution Plan, Annual 

Operation Plans and semiannual Progress Reports. This committee will be led by 

the Minister of the MARNDR, or his representative, and composed of: (i) the 

MARNDR’s General Director; (ii) a representative of the National Agency for 

Protected Areas from the Ministry of Environment; (iii) one representative of 

national fishers’ federation,
44

 representing the three implementation departments 

of the country; and (iv) one representative of the fishery and aquaculture 

consultation group
45

 which includes the private sector. Representatives of the 

Bank and other Donors, including AECID and UNEP, will be invited as 

observers. The SC will meet at least two times per year. The creation of the SC 

will be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement. 

3.5 Procurement activities will be conducted as detailed in Annex III. The 
MARNDR’s UPMP will manage all procurement processes for goods and 

services. Specific contractual mechanisms will be identified to purchase 

equipment through matching grants, as foreseen under Component 3. All 

procurement activities will be performed in accordance with Bank rules and 

procedures, with no exceptions to the application of the Policies for the 

                                                 
42

  Including 10 staff already supported by the AECID financing. 
43

  By Ministerial Circular. 
44

  IDBDOCS-#39592336. 
45  The objective of the group for the sector is among other to Ensure effective participation of civil society 

sector strategic orientation; coordinate the mobilization and use of resources (human, material and 

financial); and ensure communication. Membership is open to any stakeholder in the sector. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/39592336/R


- 15 - 

 

Procurement of Goods and Works (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and 

Recruitment of Consulting Services (GN-2350-9). The program will also be 

subject to the special provisions for procurement activities in Haiti (GN-2654). 

3.6 Project financial management will be conducted as detailed in Annex III. 
Advance of funds methodology will be used for the disbursement of program 

funds and for an amount equivalent to three-month funding needs. No financial 

resources of the program will be transferred to participating associations and 

stakeholders, with the exception of a limited budget during the first four years of 

the program for the strengthening of the capacity of local actors including fishers 

and sellers through their association. It will be implemented by DDA via a 

technical assistance to be provided by an experienced operator to be financed 

under Component 3. National counterpart will be used to finance operational costs 

including the strengthening of the FD human resources personnel at decentralized 

levels and which will be processed through the MARNDR single treasury 

account. The program will subsidize the purchase of equipment through matching 

grants to associations based on eligible criteria defined in the OM including: (i) a 

functioning registered association with all fishers and merchants members 

registered; (ii) a business plan; (iii) commitment through an agreement to comply 

with a rights based fishery management plan (¶7.3 of Annex III). The program’s 

grant contribution will be a maximum of US$30,000 per association, and the 

matching amount per association will be a minimum of ten percent of the grant. 

The OM specifies the amounts to be granted to each association per type of 

investment, based on a technical and economic analysis for each investment. 

3.7 Operation Manual (OM). The OM will set out the procedures to be followed by 
the EA with regard to implementation, planning and reporting of activities, 

financial management, audits, procurement and contracting, risks management, 

and monitoring and evaluation. The OM will include: (i) financial and accounting 

procedures; (ii) chart of accounts; (iii) procurement procedures; (iv) matching 

grant eligibility criteria and procedures; (v) environmental and social management 

plan and procedures; and (vi) monitoring and evaluation plan. The SC’s approval 

of the OM will be a special contractual condition prior to first disbursement. 

3.8 Special disbursement. To enable the EA to fulfill all the conditions prior to first 
disbursement an initial disbursement of up to US$125,000 will be made to the 

extent the Beneficiary fulfills, to the Bank’s satisfaction, all the standard general 

conditions prior to disbursement set forth in the grant agreement, except for: 

(i) the submission of the initial execution report; and (ii) evidence of reliable 

financial information systems and internal control mechanisms. 

3.9 Special audit and financial reporting requirements: (i) audit of program: external 
auditors eligible to the Bank will be hired by the FD to perform the audit of the 

program as follows: one annual financial audit of the program including the audit 

of internal control processes and the review of procurement processes to be 

submitted within 120 days following the end of each fiscal year and a final 

financial audit of the program to be submitted within 120 days after the date of 



- 16 - 

 

the last disbursement. For accounting and audit purposes, the Haitian fiscal year 

will be respected; and (ii) during the first year of execution, the program will also 

submit quarterly unaudited financial reports 45 days after the end of each quarter. 

For the following years, the frequency for the submission of unaudited reports 

will be based on risk evaluation updates determined during supervision missions. 

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results  

3.10 Planning and monitoring. During the grant disbursement period, the EA will 
submit annual operation plans

46
 (AOP) no later than 30 days before the end of the 

preceding calendar year; and semiannual progress reports (PR) no later than 30 

days after the end of the calendar semester. AOPs and PRs will be prepared 

following a template consistent with the Bank’s “Project Monitoring Report”. The 

AOPs will include targets indicators, a work plan for the calendar year, updated 

procurement and risk mitigation plans, a disbursement forecast, and a 

maintenance plan for infrastructures and equipment. The PRs will indicate the 

level of fulfillment of the output and outcome indicators planned in the AOPs; 

detail the execution of procurement, risk mitigation and maintenance activities; 

analyze problems encountered; and propose corrective measures. Within 60 days 

after the last disbursement date, the EA will prepare a final report, summarizing 

all the PRs prepared during the program life and will organize a closing workshop 

to present and discuss the Project Completion Report prepared by the Bank. 

3.11 Evaluation. The EA will submit to the Bank: (i) a midterm independent 
evaluation report no later than 36 months after the date of entry into force of the 

grant agreement or when 50% of the grants proceeds have been disbursed, 

whichever occurs first; and (ii) a final independent evaluation report, within 90 

days after the date on which 90% of the grant proceeds have been disbursed or 

after the Bank’s official request. The final evaluation report will mandatorily 

include the results of the program’s impact evaluation (see below). 

3.12 Impact evaluation. An impact evaluation plan was agreed upon with the GoH. 
The impact evaluation and monitoring plan presents the methodology, data 

collection plan, indicators to be measured, sample design and budget allocated to 

each activity. For Components 2 and 3, the evaluation methodology to be applied 

is a quasi-experimental approach of Double Difference combined with a 

Propensity Score Matching. To accomplish this, a data collection strategy will be 

implemented to administer two rounds of surveys to fishers and merchants in 

treatment and control groups. This analysis will allow us to measure the impact 

heterogeneity of the program with an emphasis on beneficiary women 

(merchants). The total number of surveys for both rounds is 3,230. For 

Component 1, a reflexive method will be used to compare indicators before and 

after the intervention. The total cost of the impact evaluation amounts to 

US$450,000. 

                                                 
46

  Sections of the AOPs related to Component 2 and 3 for the SE department will be prepared in coordination 

with AECID. 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/39542996/R


                                                                                    Annex I - HA-L1096

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Strategic Development Objectives

     Lending Program

     Regional Development Goals

     Bank Output Contribution (as defined in Results Framework of IDB-9)

2. Country Strategy Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2646

     Country Program Results Matrix GN-2805

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country 

strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Evaluable Weight Maximum Score

8.6 10

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution 7.2 33.33% 10

     3.1 Program Diagnosis 1.8

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions 2.4

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality 3.0

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis 8.5 33.33% 10

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic 

Analysis
4.0

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits 1.5

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs 1.5

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions 0.0

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis 1.5

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 10.0 33.33% 10

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms 2.5

     5.2 Evaluation Plan 7.5

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries 

and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality Yes

Labor

Environment Yes

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector 

entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps 

in the sector that were identified in the project document and/or in the evaluation plan
Yes

The general objective of the project is to improve income of small fishers in three southern regions of Haiti (South, South-East and Grande Anse), through the sustainable development of artisanal fisheries. The 

project aims to: (i) strengthen the institutional management of the fisheries sector for resource sustainability, and improve sanitary and food safety conditions for marketing of seafood products; (ii) improve the 

quality of fish at landing sites, through improved public infrastructure; and (iii) increase artisanal fisheries productivity and reduce economic losses through the establishment of a rights-based fishery management 

scheme.  A diagnosis of the opportunities and challenges of developing sustainable artisanal fisheries in Haiti is provided, although some key empirical evidence related to resource sustainability is missing. Cognizant 

of this, the project emphasizes the gathering of socio-economic and resource information and in general the interventions and their sequencing respond to the needs identified.

The vertical logic of the project recognizes and embeds both the need to establish sustainable management practices and to enhance income generating opportunities for fishers and merchants. Indicators at all levels 

are SMART and baseline values, yearly targets, and the means for collecting the information is provided. 

The ex-ante economic analysis is in general adequate, although some assumptions are not fully justified. The monitoring and evaluation plan is complete and follows the DEM guidelines. Given the lack of rigorous 

evidence on the effectiveness of the type of interventions promoted by the project, the non-experimental approach proposed for the evaluation is particularly relevant, especially if similar project interventions are 

to be expanded to other parts of the country.

The program will finance public infrastructure, training and matching grants 

targeted towards female merchants (see components II and III). Also, the impact 

evaluation design will allow to measure the specific impact on women 

merchants. 

The project will improve environmental sustaibability of artisanal fishing. See 

paragraph 1.23 of the POD.

The impact evaluation will be conducted by implementing a quasi-experimental 

approach of Difference in Differences combined with Propensity Score 

Matching. This analysis will allow measuring the project effectiveness on 

improving income and environmental sustainability by increasing access to 

productive capital (boats, new fishing techniques, etc.), human capital 

(trainings)  and public infrastructure.  In addition, this evaluation will allow 

comparing the effectiveness of providing matching grants that partially finance 

the cost of productive capital versus providing grants that fully finance access to 

productive capital. Also, the impact evaluation design will allow measuring  the 

specific impact on women merchants. 

Medium

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

-Regional and sub-regional integration agreements and cooperation initiatives supported

-Farmers given access to improved agricultural services and investments

Aligned

Increase agriculture income in targeted areas

The intervention is included in the 2015 Operational Program.

-Trade openness (trade as percent of GDP)

-Annual growth rate of agricultural GDP (%)

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Aligned

-Lending to small and vulnerable countries

-Lending for poverty reduction and equity enhancement

-Lending to support regional cooperation and integration

I. Strategic Alignment



    ANNEX II - HA-L1096  

Page 1 of 5 

 

RESULTS FRAMEWORK 

Objective: The general objective is to increase revenues of artisanal fishermen in the three southern regions of Haiti through the development of sustainable artisanal 

fishing. The specific objectives are to: (i) strengthen the institutional management of the fisheries sector for resource sustainability and improved sanitary and food 

safety conditionsfor marketing of seafood products; (ii) improve the quality of fish at landing sites through improved public infrastructure; and (iii) increase artisanal 

fisheries productivity and reduce economic losses through the establishment of a rights-based fishery management scheme. 

IMPACTS Baseline 2015 End of Project 

Target 

Comments 

IMPACT 1: Increase net revenues of artisanal 

fishers 

  Source and year of baseline: Preparatory surveys Gachot, 2015, will 

be confirmed by baseline surveys administered in Y1 

Means of verification:  Impact evaluation surveys, Associations 

monitoring system, Fisheries information system  
Indicator 1.1: Increase average total net revenues 

from fishing and fishing-related activities by 

household 

US$1,640  US$2,458  

IMPACT 2: Improve the environmental 

sustainability of artisanal fishing 

  Source and year of baseline: Preparatory surveys Gachot, 2015, will 

be confirmed by baseline surveys administered in Y1 

Means of verification:  Impact evaluation surveys. Shore=continental 

plateau. 
Indicator 2.1: % of fishers fishing exclusively on the 

shore out of total number of fishers 

75% 50%  

Indicator 2.2: Establishment of at least one no-take 

zone in the coastal area associated with the scope of 

the project 

0 1 

 

COMPONENT I: INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING AND FISHERIES INFORMATION SYSTEM 

OUTCOMES Baseline Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 End of 

Project 

Comments 

OUTCOMES 

OUTCOME 1: Strengthen 

the institutional management 

of the fisheries sector for 

resource management 

       Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015.International 

conventions  have to be ratified by the parliament. For the FAO 

agreement the verification will be done with documentation 

provided by the Ministry.  

Means of verification: At least 3 from the list below : 

  · The Internation Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic 

Tunas (ICCAT) is responsible for the conservation of tunas and 

other related species in the Atlantic Ocean and adjacent seas 

(1969) 

  · The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species 

of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES; 1973) 

  · UN Agreement relating to the Conservation and Management of    

Straddling Fish Stocks and Highly Migratory Fish Stocks (1995) 

  · Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS; 1974) 

  · The Ramsar Convention (1971) 

  · Convention on Biological Diversity (1993) 

Indicator 1.1: Membership to 

international conventions on 

sustainable fishing (unit: 

number of conventions) 

 

0   1  2 3 



    ANNEX II - HA-L1096  

Page 2 of 5 

 

COMPONENT I: INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING AND FISHERIES INFORMATION SYSTEM 

OUTCOMES Baseline Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 End of 

Project 

Comments 

OUTCOMES 

· Convention on marine pollution (MARPOL; 1983) 

  · International Plan of Action to Prevent, Deter, and Eliminate 

Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (INN)  

OUTCOME 2: Improve 

health conditions of fishing 

products 

        
Source and year of baseline: OIE fisheries report, 2008-2009  

Means of verification: OIE reports 

Indicator 2.1: Number of 

health certificates for exports 

given to firms (OIE) 

666   800   1000 

OUTPUTS 

Output 1: Revision and 

formulation of judicial 

instruments for the drafting of 

a framework law on fisheries 

0   1   1 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR , DPAQ 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

Output 2: FD offices built and 

equipped (unit: infrastructure) 

0   3   3 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Visual observation during IDB inspection 

visits. 

One office for Fisheries Directorate in Damiens and 2 buildings in 

Pestel and in Les Cayes 

Output 3: Study on 

operational implementation of 

a control and monitoring 

system of marine fisheries 

(unit : study) 

0  1    2 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Rapport semestriel du projet 

Control and monitoring system of marine fisheries, pilot towards a 

rights-based fisheries control system 

Output 4: Implementation 

plans for a system of 

monitoring, control and 

surveillance of diseases as well 

as for a health control system 

for fishing products drafted 

(OSAPISA) (unit: plan) 

0  2    2 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: (i) Biannual project reports;  

(ii) Implementation plan for a system of monitoring, control and 

surveillance of diseases; and (iii) Implementation plan for a health 

control system for fishing products  

Output 5: Additional FD staff 

at decentralized DDA (South, 

South East and Grande Anse) 

in place (unit: staff) 

0 26     26 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Proof of recruitment (contractual term 

prior to first disbursement) 

Additional DDA managers (8) and technicians (18) in departments 

of intervention (Sud, Grande Anse and Sud Est) 



    ANNEX II - HA-L1096  

Page 3 of 5 

 

COMPONENT I: INSTITUTIONAL STRENGTHENING AND FISHERIES INFORMATION SYSTEM 

OUTCOMES Baseline Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 End of 

Project 

Comments 

OUTCOMES 

Output 6: Managers and 

technicians trained (unit: 

people trained) 

0 2 45   2 49 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

Staff trained in : masters ; short term training for DDA managers, 

DPAQ managers and technicians; training of aquatic pathology 

service. 

Output 7: Study on new 

potential markets prepared 

(unit: study) 

0 1   0  1 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports, Study 

Output 8: Outreach campaigns 

conducted (unit: campaign)  

0  2 1   3 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: (i) Biannual project reports; (ii) National 

outreach campaign on the use of ice and health norms;               

(iii) National outreach campaign promoting the consumption of 

fishing products; and (iv) National outreach campaign on 

endangered species. 

Output 9: Fisheries 

information system in place 

(unit: system in place) 

0  1    1 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

This system includes: software development ; data collection 

system 

Output 10: Census of 

fishermen conducted (unit: 

census) 

0 1     1 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports, census report, 

dataset 

The census of fishermen will take place nationally and will include 

data on equipment and boats. 

Output 11: Studies  on fishery 

resources and new fishing 

techniques completed (unit: 

study) 

0 3 1 1 1  6 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

3 fisheries resources evaluation campaigns (experimental fishing) 

Research on new fishing techniques including artifical reefs, FAD 

(including study of impacts) 
 

COMPONENT II: PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURES 

OUTCOMES Baseline Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 End of 

Project 

Comments 

OUTCOME 3: Increase 

quality of fish sold  

       Source and year of baseline: Preparatory surveys Gachot, 2015, 

will be confirmed by baseline surveys administered in Y1 

Means of verification: Impact evaluation surveys in the 

intervention area 
Indicator3.1: Value of weekly 

sales of fish per woman 

merchant 

US$54       US$74 



    ANNEX II - HA-L1096  

Page 4 of 5 

 

COMPONENT II: PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURES 

OUTCOMES Baseline Y1 Y2 Y3 Y4 Y5 End of 

Project 

Comments 

OUTPUTS 

Output 12: Fish 

reception/unloading areas with 

water supply and wastewater 

disposal systems built (unit: 
infrastructure and equipment) 

0  1 1   2 Baseline year: 2015 

Means of verification: Visual observation during IDB inspection 

visits. Marigot and Anse d’Hainault 

Includes: 300m2 warehouse, 1 floating pontoon, 1 3000L tank, 2 

manual water pump systems, 1 insulated container. 

Output 13: Fish cleaning areas 

with water supply and 

wastewater disposal systems 

built (unit: infrastructures and 

equipment) 

0  10 7   17 Baseline year: 2015 

Means of verification: Visual observation during IDB inspection 

visits. One by commune of intervention except Jacmel 

Includes: 30m2 warehouse, 1 2000L tank and its setting up, 1 

manual water pump system, 1 20m3 insulated chamber. 

Output 14: Communal public 

markets built and equipped 

with water supply and 

wastewater disposal systems 

(unit: infrastructure and 

equipment) 

0 2  2   4 Baseline year: 2015 

Means of verification: Work acceptance report + visual 

observation during IDB inspection visits. 

Belle Anse (improvement of existing market), Bainet, Aquin, St 

Jean du Sud (local/regional distribution centers) 

Includes: 90m2 warehouse, 1 3000L tank and its setting up, 1 

manual water pump system. 

Output 15: Landing areas 

improved (unit: infrastructure 

and equipment) 

0  21 20 28  69 Baseline year: 2015 

Means of verification Visual observation during IDB inspection 

visits. Beaching trolleys; improvement of accesses on board and 

boat shelters. 

Output 16: Technical 

assistance to the MARNDR for 

the monitoring of the public 

infrastructure works (unit: 

technical assistance) 

0 1     1 Baseline year: 2015 

Means of verification Proof of recruitment (contractual term prior 

to first disbursement),  progress reports, supervision visit reports. 

 

 

COMPONENT III: STAKEHOLDERS’ CAPACITY BUILDING 

OUTCOMES 

OUTCOME 4: 

Establishment of rights based 

management systems  

       Source and year of baseline: Macias, 2014  

Means of verification: Fisheries information system and surveys  

Note: The targeted area is composed by five fishing basins defined 

as fishing geographic area with a homogeneity in terms of fisheries 

perspective (eg narrow continental shelf, sandy bottoms, 

techniques and material) that the fishers usually operate together. 

Indicator 4.1: Fishing basins 

with rights based fishery 

management  established (unit: 

number) 

0     2 2 



    ANNEX II - HA-L1096  

Page 5 of 5 

 

COMPONENT III: STAKEHOLDERS’ CAPACITY BUILDING 

OUTCOMES 

OUTCOME 5: Increase 

artisanal fishing productivity 

       Source and year of baseline: Preparatory surveys Gachot, 2015, 

will be confirmed by baseline surveys administered in Y1 

Means of verification: Fisheries information system and surveys 

(Total catches of pelagic fishes per boat / total number of fishing 

trips per month) / number of fishers per boat 

Indicator 5.1: Catches of 

pelagic fishes by trip and by 

fisher (unit: KG) 

0.373      1 

OUTCOME 6: Reduce 

economic losses 

       Source and year of baseline: Preparatory surveys Gachot, 2015, 

will be confirmed by baseline surveys administered in Y1 

Means of verification: Impact evaluation surveys in the 

intervention area 
Indicator 6.1: Percentage of 

total catches sold fresh (%) 

69%      78.3% 

OUTPUTS 

Output 17: Fishers 

associations trained (unit: 

association) 

0  40 15   55 Source and year of baseline: MARNDR, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

100% of fishers are men 

Output 18: Merchants 

associations trained (unit: 

association) 

0  10  15  25  Source and year of baseline: Rapport Javier Macias, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

100% of the beneficiaries of the merchant training will be women 

Output 19: Fishers and 

Merchants associations having 

access to technologies through 

matching grant system (unit: 

association) 

0   20 20 15 55 Source and year of baseline: Rapport Javier Macias, 2015 

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

Associations will be able to choose from a list of predefined 

technologies. 

Output 20: Pilot on new 

fishing techniques 

implemented in the targeted 

area and rights based 

management fishery system 

(unit=pilot) 

0     1 1 Source and year of baseline: the implementation of this pilot will 

be based on the studies conducted in component I.  

Means of verification: Biannual project reports 

Output 20.1: Number of 

beneficiaries of improved 

management and sustainable 

use of natural and cultural 

capital 

0     4490 4490 Core Sector Indicator (CSI) 

Number of total beneficiairies in the associations. To be 

desagregated as follows: 

2829 fishers (men) and 1661 merchants (women) 

 



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 1 of 8 

 

 

FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTS 

 

COUNTRY:    Republic of Haiti 

PROJECT Nº :  HA-L1096 

NAME:  Artisanal Fisheries Development Program 

EXECUTING AGENCY:  The Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural 

Development (MARNDR) 

FIDUCIARY TEAM:  Marise E. Salnave and Romina Kirkagacli (FMP/CHA) 

 

I. Executive Summary 
 

1.1 The objective of the project is to improve income of small fishers in three southern 
regions of Haiti (South, South-East and Grand Anse) through the sustainable 

development of artisanal fisheries. The Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and 

Rural Development (MARNDR) will execute the project through its Fishery Directorate 

(FD). Financial management aspects will be handled through the fiduciary team of the 

MARNDR’s BCP-ProGEBA unit while the Central Procurement Unit of the Ministry 

(“Unité de Passation des Marchés Publics” - UPMP for its French acronym) will execute 

all procurement activities.  

 

1.2 The project amount is US$16,500,000 financed by the IDB Grant Facility up to the 
amount of US$15,000,000 and the national counterpart up to the amount of 

US$1,500,000. 

 

II. General Context of National Financial Management and Procurement Systems 
 

2.1 The most recent evaluation of the public financial management systems of the Republic   
of Haiti is contained in the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) 

assessment report conducted in 2011 and published in February 2012. Country financial 

management systems and external control mechanism, as evidenced by this latest 

diagnostic, would require further improvements to conform to levels consistent with 

fiduciary management of Bank’s funded projects. As a result, no country systems will be 

used for the financial management of the project.  

 

2.2 An evaluation of the National Procurement System was performed in 2013, applying the 
methodology established by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and 

Development (OECD/DAC). A certain number of recommendations were identified 

through an action plan for the modernization of the national procurement system; 

however, the implementation of this plan still needs to be initiated. Based on the current 

situation and the need to align the national system to international standards and best 

practices, the Bank’s procurement policies will govern procurement activities foreseen 

under this program. 

2.3 To mitigate these risks the Bank will continue in the foreseeable future to: (i) rely on 
special project execution units for the execution of all projects; and (ii) to implement 

special fiduciary arrangements for the implementation of its projects and to conduct close 



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 2 of 8 

 

 

operation supervision of project execution units. External control will be performed for 

all Bank operations by independent audit firms acceptable to the Bank in accordance with 

the Bank’s financial reporting and audit guide. 

 

III. Executing Agency´s Fiduciary Context  
 

3.1 The MARNDR will execute the project through its FD and will be responsible for the 
overall management of the project including the preparation of the PEP and POA, 

technical supervision of activities as well as the monitoring and evaluation of project 

results. Financial management aspects will be handled through the fiduciary team of 

MARNDR’s BCP-ProGEBA unit which has extensive experience in the financial 

management of Bank financed operations
1
 and will report to the Director of the FD. 

BCP-ProGEBA will be responsible for the overall administrative and financial 

management of project resources including budgeting, accounting and reporting on use of 

funds, payments and disbursement requests and the recruitment project auditors.  The 

implementation of this new project will result in an increase in workload which may have 

an impact on project execution.  

 

3.2 The UPMP, created through the Ministerial Decree “M-AIDG/(C-17)09-13:1659 (bis)” 
on September 17, 2013, has been in place and operational since early 2014. Based on 

findings of the technical assistance conducted by the Bank’s procurement team, this Unit 

has proved to possess a solid technical knowledge in the application of Bank’s 

procurement policies. The Coordinator of the Unit, a Senior Procurement Specialist who 

has worked in specific Bank projects in the past, has been handling all procurement 

activities of the Ministry with a high focus on the quality of the processes and an 

increased collaboration with the technical teams. The Unit is composed of several 

procurement specialists and has an organized system to treat purchase requests and 

conduct procurement processes and is now working on the establishment of an improved 

filing system. With an increased number of projects handled by this Unit, the 

management of the workload may have an impact on execution. 

 

IV. Fiduciary Risk Evaluation and Mitigation Actions  
 

4.1 The latest assessment of BCP-ProGEBA was updated in July 2014 and confirms 
improvement in its financial management risk rating from medium to low.                 

BCP-ProGEBA has updated its accounting system and its accounting manual to include 

mechanisms followed for the monitoring of budget, the safeguarding of financial 

information, and the management of fixed assets. Nonetheless, due to the increase in 

volume and complexity of new projects being assigned to the fiduciary team of         

BCP-ProGEBA (HA-L1050 and HA-L1096), the Bank considers financial management 

risk rating to be medium and to mitigate this risk recommends the strengthening of its 

accounting team with the hiring of an administrator, an accountant and an administrative 

assistant dedicated to the implementation of this new project. In addition the operation 

                                                 
1
  The unit has successfully executed operations HA0016, HA-L1021 in the Artibonite Valley and is currently 

implementing HA-L1087. 



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 3 of 8 

 

 

manual of the project will include among other sections: (i) procedures for the approval 

and disbursement of funds; (ii) chart of accounts; and (iii) policy and procedures for 

inventory administration. The hiring of the administrator, the accountant and the 

administrative assistant and the approval of the project’s operation manual will be 

condition prior to first disbursements. In addition, during the first year of the project, 

Bank’s Fiduciary staff will conduct inspection visits on a semi-annual basis to review the 

execution of financial plan, the preparation of financial reports and the review of project 

expenses and documentation. 

 

4.2 The fiduciary risk level for procurement under this project is defined as medium mainly 
due to the workload that is being handled by the UPMP through the procurement 

execution of several projects. The following specific risks and related mitigation 

measures have been identified: (i) clearance of all procurement processes is currently 

centralized with the coordinator of the Unit which can result in delays in procurement 

execution. Mitigation: A procurement specialist with the required qualifications will be 

hired in order to support the additional workload of the Unit; (ii) with a centralized 

structure, the high number of transactions may also negatively impact the execution 

timeframe. Mitigation: The Unit will work on consolidated procurement plans in order to 

improve its planning capacity and identify recurrent purchases so as to reduce 

transactional costs and achieve best value for money; (iii) the increased number of 

contracts handled by the Unit may impede the effectiveness of contract management. 

Mitigation: Identify a mechanism to ensure proper follow up on contract management 

matters; (iv) the technical staff has not executed Bank’s projects previously and is new to 

Bank’s procurement policies and procedures. Mitigation: As for all other projects, it is 

recommended that the technical staff is trained on procurement matters such as: 

preparation of Terms of Reference, establishment of selection criteria, evaluation of 

technical and financial offers and contract monitoring during execution; and (v) while a 

filing system has been put in place, the Unit does not have a dedicated space to stock 

archives and does not have a person dedicated to the management of files. Mitigation: 

Recruitment of a dedicated person for the management of archives. 

 

V. Aspects to be Considered in the Special Conditions of Contract 
 

1. Special conditions precedent to first disbursement: 
 

5.1 Special Accounts: FD will open two separate bank accounts (in US dollars and in local 
currency) for the management of grant resources. Local counterpart funds will be 

processed through the Compte Unique du Trésor (CUT- according to its French acronym) 

the MARNDR single treasury account which became operational in October 2014 for 

funds disbursed by the Government of Haiti. 

 

5.2 The preparation of an operation manual to include: (i) procedures for the approval and 
disbursement of funds; (ii) chart of accounts; and (iii) inventory, equipment and 

consumable stocks management and fuel consumption control procedures.  

 



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 4 of 8 

 

 

5.3 The Central Bank exchange rate at the day of transaction will be used at the reference 
rate. 

 

5.4 Procurement: A procurement specialist with the required qualifications will be hired in 
order to support the workload of the UPMP. 

 

5.5 Special audit and financial reporting requirements: (i) Audit of project: external 
auditors eligible to the Bank will be hired by the FD to perform the audit of the program 

as follows: one annual financial audit of the program including the audit the internal 

control processes and the review of procurement processes to be submitted within 120 

days following the end of each fiscal year and a final financial audit of the program to be 

submitted within 120 days after the date of the last disbursement.  For accounting and 

audit purposes, the Haitian fiscal year will be respected; and (ii) during the first year of 

execution, the project will also submit quarterly unaudited financial reports 45 days after 

the end of each quarter. For the following years, the frequency for the submission of 

unaudited reports will be based on risk evaluation updates determined during supervision 

missions. 

 

5.6 Special disbursement: An initial disbursement of up to US$125,000 will be made to the 
extent the beneficiary fulfills, to the Bank’s satisfaction, all the standard general 

conditions prior to disbursement set forth in grant agreements, except for (i) the 

submission of the initial execution report; and (ii) evidence of reliable financial 

information systems and internal control mechanism. US$125,000 will enable the 

executing agency to fulfill all the conditions prior to first disbursement and shall include: 

(i) the hiring of the administrator, the accountant and the administrative assistant to 

strengthen the fiduciary team of the BCP-ProGEBA; (ii) the hiring of a procurement 

specialist to support the Coordinator of the UPMP; (iii) the selection of a consultant 

responsible for elaborating the operation manual of the program; (iv) the hiring of a 

planning, monitoring and evaluation specialist to support the FD Coordinator; (v) the 

hiring of a consultant for the formatting of the BCP-ProGEBA accounting system to 

include the chart of accounts of this new operation and the financial reports to be 

submitted to the Bank including the training of new accounting personnel; and (vi) the 

purchase of office and Information Technology (IT) equipment. 

 

VI. Fiduciary Arrangements for Procurement Execution  
 

6.1 The procurement fiduciary arrangements establish the conditions applicable to all 
procurement execution activities in the project. 

 

1. Procurement Execution  
 

6.2 All project related procurement activities will be performed by the MARNDR 
Procurement Unit following the Bank’s Procurement Policies: Policies for the 

Procurement of Goods and Works financed by the Inter-American Development Bank 

(GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants financed by 



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 5 of 8 

 

 

the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2350-9) and the Special Procurement 

Provisions for Haiti (GN-2654). 

 

a. Procurement of works, goods and non-consulting services: The contracts for works, 
goods, and non-consulting services

2
 generated under the project and subject to 

International Competitive Bidding will be executed through the use of the Standard 

Bidding Documents (SBDs) issued by the Bank. The processes subject to National 

Competitive Bidding (NCB) will be executed through the use of National Bidding 

Documents agreed to by the Bank. The technical specifications review during the 

preparation of the selection process, is the responsibility of the project sector specialist. 

Some contracts for the purchase of equipment will be executed using matching grant 

mechanisms (the cost of the equipment will be borne by the project and partially through 

beneficiaries’ contributions). As such, specific contractual modalities will be identified in 

order to reflect this specific execution mechanism. A contract with a financial institution 

is foreseen to allow the purchase of this equipment by fishermen associations through a 

voucher system.  

b. Selection and contracting of consultants: The consulting services contracts generated 
under this project will be executed through the use of the Standard Request for Proposals 

(SRFPs) issued or agreed to by the Bank. The terms of reference review for the selection 

of consulting services is the responsibility of the project sector specialist. 

c. Selection of individual consultants: The selection will be made in accordance with 
Bank’s Procurement rules and procedures and will consist in evaluating the capacity of at 

least three candidates against set and agreed Terms of References.  

d. Direct contracting: No Direct Contracting is foreseen under this project for the time 
being. Should any direct contracting be required during the execution of the operation, a 

revised Procurement Plan will reflect this change and will be submitted to the Bank for 

non-objection. 

2. Thresholds (thousands US$) 
 

6.3 The thresholds established in the Special Procurement Provisions for Haiti (GN-2654), 
until these will be in place, will be applied to the procurement activities foreseen under 

this operation, as detailed in the following table: 

 
Table 1. Thresholds in force since January 1, 2012 (In thousands of US$) 

HAITI   

Works Goods Consulting Services 

International 

Competitive 

Bidding 

National Competitive 

bidding / Price 

Comparison 

International 

Competitive 

Bidding 

National Competitive 

bidding / Price 

Comparison 

Short list of national 

firms only 

>1.000 <1.000 >100 <100 <100 

 
 

                                                 
2
  Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2349-9) paragraph 1.1: The services 

different to consulting services have a similar process as procurement of goods. 



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 6 of 8 

 

 

3. Main Procurement Activities 

Table 2. Main Procurement Activities 

Activity Procureme

nt Method 

Estimated 

Date 

Estimated Amount 

thousands US$ 

Goods    

Purchase of  70 boats ICB Feb-2016 385,000 

Purchase of  80 engines ICB Feb-2016 320,000  

Purchase of 930  coolers for fish merchants ICB Feb-2016 210,000  

Works    

Construction of 23 fisheries infrastructures  
ICB Jan-2016 1,700,000  

Construction of  2 docks  (Marigot et Anse d'Hainault) ICB Jan-2016 510,000  

Services    

Contract with financial institution for the provision of vouchers to 

fishers’ associations 

NCB Jan-2016 60,000 

Preparation of a national census of fishermen ICB Jan-2016 400,000 

Firms    

Supervision of fisheries infrastructure works QCS Jan-2016 1,756,000  

Operators to strengthen fishermen’s associations QCS Mar-2016 1,200,000  

Communication campaign QCS Mar-2016 525,000  

Design and implementation of an  information system for 

fisheries 

QCS April-2016 450,000  

*To access the 18 month procurement plan, click here  

 

4. Procurement Supervision 
 

6.4 Based on the risks identified under Section II above, the major procurement activities 
foreseen under this operation will be subject to ex ante review by the Bank. Procurement 

activities using the shopping method for goods and for works falling below the threshold 

of US$200,000 and the recruitment of individual consultants selected under a competitive 

method will be subject to ex post review. The external audit firm recruited under this 

operation as per paragraph 4.2 will conduct the ex-post review on these contracts, on 

behalf of the Bank. 

 

5. Records and Files 
 

6.5 The executing agency will be required to keep files and track records of all procurement 
related activities financed by the Bank in their office in accordance with the Bank’s 

procurement rules and procedures and to the project’s operational rules in such a way that 

pcdocs://IDBDOCS/39542989/R


ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 7 of 8 

 

 

it be available for supervision visit by the fiduciary team. It is also recommended that the 

executing agency develops electronic filing so as to ensure the efficiency of the system. It 

is important however to note that the national legislation in Haiti does not recognize 

electronic documents, hence this filing method should not replace paper files. 

 

VII. Financial Management 
 

A. Programming and Budget 
 

7.1 Programming and budget execution and monitoring at the project level will rely on the 
Bank’s project financial management formats and procedures. The FD will prepare 

annually, an operation plan (AOP) which includes a procurement plan and a            

twelve-month detailed financial plan. The financial plans will respect the budget lines 

defined in the grant agreement (investment categories). During the first year of execution, 

the program’s financial plans will be reviewed on a quarterly basis.  

 

B. Accounting and Information Systems 
 

7.2 BCP-ProGEBA’s financial management systems will be used for the financial 
management of the project. The system will be programmed to generate income and 

expense reports by investment categories and source of funds and to generate financial 

statements required by bank. 

 

C. Disbursements and Funds Flow  
 

7.3 Advance of funds methodology will be used for the disbursement of project funds for an 
amount equivalent to three-month funding needs.  The FD will open separate bank 

accounts for the management of grant resources. Disbursement Supervision will be 

expost. As specified in section 5.6 above, an initial disbursement of up to US$125,000 

will be made by the Bank grant to fulfill conditions prior to first disbursements. No 

financial resources of the program will be transferred to participating associations and 

stakeholders, with the exception of a limited budget during the first four years of the 

program for the strengthening of the capacity of local actors including fishermen and 

sellers through their association to be implemented by Departmental Agricultural 

Directorate (DDA) via a technical assistance to be provided by an experienced operator 

(one operator per department in the South and Grand’Anse) to be financed under 

Component III of the program. The local national counterpart will be used to finance 

operation costs including the strengthening of the FD human resources personnel at the 

decentralized level; managerial (eight) and technical (18) staff. GoH funding will be 

processed through the MARNDR single treasury account. The project will also subsidize 

the purchase of equipment through matching grants based on eligible criteria is to be 

defined in the operation manual. Funds will be used for the purchase of improve 

productive equipment. Each association will contribute to a certain percentage of the cost 

based on their financial capacity and further defined in the operation manual. Exchange 

rate valid at the day of transaction will be used to record all expenses made in local 

currency. The Central Bank exchange rate will be used at the reference rate.  



ANNEX III – HA-L1096 

Page 8 of 8 

 

 

 

D. Internal Control and Audit 
 

7.4 The internal auditor of MARNDR will fulfill the internal audit function. The internal 
control environment of the project will be strengthened with the preparation and 

implementation of the project operation manual referred to in section 4.2. 

 

E. External Control and Reporting 
 

7.5 Audits will be performed in accordance with Bank’s Guidelines for Financial Reports and 
External Audits as described in point 4.5. Financial audit cost will be financed by IDB 

grant and estimated at US$200,000. The program financial statements will correspond to 

the fiscal year. The audit firm will carry out audit on the basis of specific terms of 

reference to be agreed between the FD and the Bank. During the first year of execution, 

the project will also submit quarterly unaudited financial reports 45 days after the end of 

each quarter. The frequency for the submission of unaudited report, for subsequent years, 

will be based on risk evaluation updates determined during supervision missions. 

 

F. Financial Supervision Plan 
 

7.6 During the first year of execution, Fiduciary staff will review the execution of financial 
plan on a quarterly basis and on a semi-annual basis for the following years. Semi-annual 

inspection visit will be performed by financial management specialist, during the first 

year of execution however frequency of visit are subject to change based on findings 

raised during supervision missions. 

 

G. Execution Mechanism 
 

7.7 The FD will maintain proper financial management systems and will prepare AOPs (see 
7.1.) indicating cash flow needs for the execution of program’s activities. The        

twelve-month financial plan will serve as the basis for advance of funds disbursements. 

Disbursement of advances of funds will be for the equivalent of funding needs required 

for three months of program execution. Fund flows will be executed as stated in point 

7.3. 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

 

 

 

 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/15 

 

 

 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing ____/GR-HA to the Republic of Haiti 

Artisanal Fisheries Development Program 

 

 

 

The Board of Executive Directors 

 

RESOLVES: 

 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is authorized, 

in the name and on behalf of the Bank, as Administrator of the IDB Grant Facility (hereinafter 

referred to as the “Account”), to enter into such contract or contracts as may be necessary with 

the Republic of Haiti, as Beneficiary, for the purpose of granting it a nonreimbursable financing 

to cooperate in the execution of the Artisanal Fisheries Development Program. Such 

nonreimbursable financing will be for an amount of up to US$15,000,000, which form part 

of the Account, and will be subject to the Terms and Financial Conditions and the Special 

Contractual Conditions in the Project Summary of the Grant Proposal. 

 

 

 

(Adopted on ___ ____________ 2015) 

 

 

 
LEG/SGO/HA/IDBDOCS#39566710 
HA-L1096 





