















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

BOLIVIA 

 

 

 

AGRICULTURAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY PROGRAM II 

(BO-L1179) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Álvaro García Negro (RND/CPR) 
and Juan Manuel Murguía (RND/CBO), Project Team Co-leaders; César Falconi (CSD/RND); 
Viviana Alva-Hart (RND/CAR); Fernando Balcázar (RND/CCO); Carolina Escudero and 
Abel Cuba (FMP/CBO); Javier Jiménez (LEG/SGO); Gina Peñaranda (CAN/CBO); Alberto 
Villalba (VPS/ESG); and Yolanda Valle (CSD/RND). 

 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors 
simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the 
document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus superseding 
and replacing the original version. 

 



 

CONTENTS 

PROJECT SUMMARY 
 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................................ 1 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale ............................................ 1 
B. Objectives, components and cost ................................................................. 8 
C. Key results indicators ................................................................................. 10 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................... 11 

A. Financing instruments ................................................................................ 11 
B. Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 11 
C. Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 12 
D. Other project risks ...................................................................................... 12 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 13 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements ................................................ 13 
B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ....................................... 15 

 
 
 
 

  



 - ii - 
 
 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) – Summary  

Annex II Results Matrix  

Annex III Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements  

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED 

1. Multiyear execution plan 

2. Annual work plan 

3. Monitoring and evaluation plan 

4. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) 

5. Procurement plan 

OPTIONAL 

1. Economic analysis of the program 

2. Institutional capacity assessment  

3. Draft Operating Regulations for the program 

 
  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670736
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670729
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670734
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670747
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670738
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670749
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670745
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670743


 - iii - 
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS 

BSE Bovine spongiform encephalopathy 
CAO Cámara Agropecuaria del Oriente 
DALY Disability-adjusted life year 
EGDI E-Government Development Index 
FMD  Foot and mouth disease 
GDP Gross domestic product 
IBCE Instituto Boliviano de Comercio Exterior [Bolivian Foreign Trade 

Institute] 
ICAS Institutional Capacity Assessment System 
ICB International competitive bidding 
IICA Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture 
INE Instituto Nacional de Estadística [National Statistics Institute] 
IPPC International Plant Protection Convention 
IRR Internal rate of return 
NB-SABS Normas Básicas del Sistema de Administración de Bienes y Servicios 

[Basic Regulations of the Goods and Services Management System] 
NPV Net present value 
OIE World Organisation for Animal Health 
OVE Office of Evaluation and Oversight 
PVS OIE Tool for the Evaluation of Performance of Veterinary Services 
RASFF Rapid Alert System for Food and Feed 
SCF Single Currency Facility 
SENASAG Servicio Nacional de Sanidad Agropecuaria e Inocuidad Alimentaria 

[National Service for Agricultural Health and Food Safety] 
SIAP-BID Sistema de Administración de Proyectos del Banco [Administration 

System for Bank Projects] 
SICOES Sistema de Contrataciones Estatales [Public Procurement System] 
SIGEP Sistema Integrado de Gestión Pública [Integrated Public Management 

System] 
UDAPE Unidad de Análisis de Políticas Sociales y Económicas [Economic and 

Social Policy Analysis Unit] 
 
 



 

 
PROJECT SUMMARY 

BOLIVIA 

AGRICULTURAL HEALTH AND FOOD SAFETY PROGRAM II 
(BO-L1179) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Plurinational State of Bolivia 
 OC FSO 

Amortization period: 30 years 40 years 

Executing agency: Servicio Nacional de Sanidad 

Agropecuaria e Inocuidad Alimentaria [National Service 
for Agricultural Health and Food Safety] (SENASAG) 

Disbursement period: 5 years 5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace period: 6 years 40 years 

IDB (OC): 21,250,000 85 
Inspection and 
supervision fee: 

(a) N/A 

IDB (FSO): 3,750,000 15 
Interest rate: SCF – fixed(b) 0.25% 

Credit fee: (a) N/A 

Total: 25,000,000 100 
Currency of approval: US$ US$ 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description: The general objective of the program is to help increase productivity in the agriculture 

sector. The specific objectives are: (i) to reduce production losses from pests and diseases; (ii) to facilitate access to 
international markets; and (iii) to enhance service to users. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the loan: (i) the borrower will sign a subsidiary 

agreement with the executing agency establishing the following and other elements: (a) the mechanism for transferring the 
loan proceeds; and (b) the commitment of the executing agency to conduct program activities in accordance with the terms 
of the loan contract (paragraph 3.2); (ii) the executing agency: (a) will create the program execution unit in accordance with 
terms and conditions previously agreed upon with the Bank; and (b) will contract specialists, through a competitive process, 
in at least the following areas: general coordination, planning, financial management, procurement, and environmental and 
social management (paragraph 3.2); (iii) the program technical board will be created and its members appointed 
(paragraph 3.2); and (iv) the program Operating Regulations will be approved by the executing agency and will be in force, 
under terms previously agreed upon with the Bank (paragraph 3.4). 

Special contractual conditions of execution: Prior to startup of the activities for the fruit fly control program in 

Component 3, agreements will be signed between SENASAG, the Municipio of El Torno, the Municipio of Luribay, and 
local producers’ associations (paragraph 3.3). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(c) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting topics:(d) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a) The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its 
review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(b)  The borrower will pay interest on outstanding balances on this portion of the Ordinary Capital loan at a LIBOR-based rate. The rate on 
the outstanding balance will be set whenever such balance reaches 25% of the approved net amount or US$3 million, whichever is 
greater. 

(c) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(d) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule 

of Law). 

 



 
 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale 

1.1 Overview of the agriculture sector. The agriculture sector is of crucial 
importance to the Bolivian economy. It accounts for more than 13% of the country’s 
GDP, contributes more than US$1.3 billion in exports (18% of the total), and 
employs 35% of the economically active population (INE, 2015). The sector’s GDP 
has been growing at an average annual rate of 4.16% (2002-2014), and its 
composition has undergone no substantive change over the last decade. Crop 
products represent 70% of agricultural GDP, livestock products account for 21%, 
and forestry, hunting, and fisheries products make up the remaining 9% (UDAPE, 
2015). The sector is fairly diversified, with the largest areas under cultivation 
corresponding to industrial crops (45%)—soybeans, sunflowers, sugarcane, and 
sesame—followed by nonindustrial crops such as grains (30%), fruits and 
vegetables (8%), and tubers (7%). The livestock sector is dominated by beef and 
milk production and by poultry farming. Agricultural exports have grown at an 
average annual rate of 13% over the past decade, with soybeans, Brazil nuts, 
quinoa, beans, and fruits as the main agricultural exports. The main destination 
markets are Latin America (47%), Europe (30%), and the United States (23%). 

1.2 Despite the recent growth and relative importance of the agriculture sector, an 
in-depth examination reveals low levels of productivity. According to a recent 
study, total factor productivity in Bolivia’s agriculture sector showed an annual 
growth rate of 1.4% over the period 2000-2012, below the average for the region 
(1.7%) and far short of Brazil (3.0%), Peru (2.6%), Chile (2.3%), and Paraguay 
(3.2%) (Nin-Pratt et al., 2015). Among the factors contributing to the poor 
performance of productivity in the sector (which include lack of market information, 
inadequate infrastructure, scarce access to financing, and low levels of innovation 
and technology transfer1), losses due to pests and diseases are especially 
significant. Estimates suggest that fruit growers in Bolivia lose approximately 
US$113 million per year2 due to the impact of the fruit fly, and it is estimated that 
the beef sector would lose around US$57 million3 in the event of another outbreak 
of foot and mouth disease (FMD). These estimates reflect a situation in which the 
intensity of spending on agricultural health4 in Bolivia (6.7% in 2009) is much lower 
than in Brazil (26.1%), Uruguay (22.9%), Chile (19.8%), and Argentina (37%) 
(Agrimonitor, 2015). 

1.3 Recent empirical evidence shows that progress in controlling pests and diseases 
is key to improving the country’s productivity. In this respect, a comparative 
evaluation of six agricultural health and food safety projects conducted by the 
Office of Evaluation and Supervision (OVE, 2015) indicates that campaigns for 
controlling and eradicating pests and diseases carried out by agricultural health 
agencies have been effective in boosting productivity. Noteworthy here is the case 
of farmers participating in the fruit fly control program in Peru (loans 1025/OC-PE, 

                                                
1 Kay, C. (2011); and Hameleers, Antezana, and Paz (2011). 
2  SENASAG – TESA PROMOSCA (2013). 
3  Due to source control costs and the closing of export markets, Mascitelli (2016). 
4  In this case, the intensity of spending on agricultural health refers to the proportion of supports for general 

services (or sector public goods) that go to agricultural health services. 

http://agrimonitor.iadb.org/es
https://publications.iadb.org/bitstream/handle/11319/7146/Evaluacion_comparativa_de_proyectos_de_sanidad_agropecuaria_e_inocuidad_alimentaria_Anexo_3.pdf?sequence=7


 - 2 - 
 
 
 

1647/OC-PE, and 2015/OC-PE), which increased fruit yields by 65%, and 
enhanced the value of production by 15% (Salazar et al., 2016). At the same time, 
Peru’s exports of fruits and vegetables rose at an average annual rate of 22.5% 
(1998-2014), outpacing other exports in the sector, for which the annual growth 
rate was 7.4% (SUNAT, Peru). The case of Uruguay also demonstrates the 
international trade benefits of animal disease control. Specifically, once the country 
was declared FMD-free without vaccination in 1996, the value of beef exports rose 
by more than 50%, generating additional annual earnings on the order of 
US$110 million from exports to the United States, while trade with Pacific Rim 
countries increased, and savings in vaccination costs came to US$8 million per 
year (Knight-Jones and Rushton, 2013; Otte et al., 2004). An important point to 
consider in connection with the foregoing empirical evidence is that the impacts 
have been felt by small and medium-sized farmers. 

1.4 To address the country’s phyto-zoosanitary and food safety risks, the National 
Service for Agricultural Health and Food Safety (SENASAG) was created by 
Law 2061 in 2000, with the mandate to protect health and the safety of food.5 In 
2016, Law 830/2016 ratified SENASAG as the competent national authority in this 
area. For technical and operational purposes, SENASAG has organized its 
functions into two broad areas: (i) agricultural health; and (ii) food safety, the 
challenges of which are described below. 

1.5 Agricultural health. In Bolivia, the fruit fly is one of the most destructive 
agricultural pests, damaging more than 260 crops and causing losses in the range 
of 20% to 60% of yields (SENASAG, Fruit Fly Control Program 2012). The area 
under cultivation in fruits and vegetables in the country exceeds 250,000 hectares, 
with citrus accounting for the greatest portion of that area (INE-CAN, 2013). The 
fruit fly reduces product yield, quality, and value; it increases production costs; and 
it diminishes opportunities for market access in light of phytosanitary restrictions in 
importing countries. To manage this pest, which has the potential to spread far and 
wide, a coordinated public-private effort is needed in which SENASAG plays a key 
role, defining intervention and inspection protocols, among other activities (IICA, 
2009). In order for importing countries to accept Bolivian fruits, fruit-fly-free zones 
must be established and maintained.6 Experience with control in one area can 
contribute to the design of a strategy for eradicating the pest in other areas, or in 
the entire country. Another threat to fruit production, especially citrus fruit, is 
Huanglongbing disease, which can devastate citrus orchards.7 This disease has 
not yet been detected in Bolivia, but the vector insect is known to be present. The 

                                                
5  The responsibilities of SENASAG include: (i) preservation of the health of agricultural and forestry 

resources; (ii) product certification for domestic consumption, imports and exports; (iii) accreditation of 
individuals and companies as service providers; (iv) control, prevention, and eradication of pests and 
diseases in animals and plants; (v) control and guarantee of food safety in the production and processing 
chains; and (vi) control of inputs used for agricultural, agroindustrial, and forestry production. 

6  An area free from fruit fly is one in which the fruit fly is not present, as demonstrated by scientific evidence, 
and in which, as appropriate, that status is being officially maintained (CIPF-NIMF 26 and NIMF 5). 

7  Huanglongbing is a bacterial disease that affects all commercial citrus species, as well as others. It is 
currently considered the most devastating citrus disease worldwide, given the damage it causes, the 
difficulty of diagnosing it, and the speed at which it spreads (Food and Agriculture Organization). The 
arrival of Huanglongbing in Brazil is estimated to have caused annual losses of 6% in the area under 
cultivation, cost increases of 10% to 20%, and an annual exit of 18% of small producers (1-4 hectares, 
2015-2016) (IICA, 2015, Evaluation of the Potential Impact of Huanglongbing in Argentina). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691814
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652374
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652374


 - 3 - 
 
 
 

presence of the vector combined with reports of the disease in neighboring 
countries makes it all the more urgent to take steps for its prevention and control. 

1.6 In zoosanitary aspects, Bolivia has been officially recognized by the World 
Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) as an FMD-free country since 2014. This has 
been the first step in opening dialogue between the country and potential meat 
export markets. Since that declaration, several countries have shown interest in 
Bolivian beef. The next challenge in terms of gaining access to potential markets 
is to identify the risk of diseases of the nervous system, primarily bovine 
spongiform encephalopathy (BSE), for which Bolivia needs to run analyses that 
show a negligible risk of the disease in the country.8 Neighboring countries have 
already been recognized by the OIE as countries with a negligible BSE risk. Once 
these zoosanitary requirements have been met, potential buyers will give priority 
to those countries with the highest levels of food safety, particularly those with little 
or no presence of biological, physical, or chemical contaminants (including 
residues of pesticides and veterinary drugs) (Garzón, 2009). 

1.7 Another fast-growing sector that has been affected by health concerns is poultry 
farming, with production having increased over the last 10 years by 135% 
(www.udape.gob.bo). This sector is an important source of employment, 
generating some 60,000 direct jobs and 135,000 indirect jobs, owing primarily to 
its multiplier effect on the production of corn, sorghum, and soybeans. Among the 
diseases that cause losses in poultry production, the most important is Newcastle 
disease (the mortality rate from respiratory infections, of which this disease is a 
leading cause, is 9%). Declaring areas free from this disease would help open 
markets for poultry products.9 At this time, there is no evidence in Bolivia of avian 
flu, which could cause major losses in production and risks to human health (OIE, 
2007). Drawing on data from animal health services in 12 countries, Swayne 
(2011) found that the increase in the capacities of veterinary services, such as 
laboratory analysis, trained personnel, development of biological products, and the 
responsiveness of the surveillance system, are correlated with improvements in 
the control of avian flu. In this respect, Bolivia needs to conduct surveillance for 
the disease and demonstrate its absence with scientific evidence, so that it cannot 
be used as a sanitary barrier preventing access for the country’s poultry products 
to international markets. 

1.8 Food safety. The benefits of stronger and more effective food safety systems are 
increasingly important for meeting the growing demand for healthier, cleaner food. 
However, the country has little information on the level of contaminants in its food 
products. The government’s network of food safety laboratories—still without 
ISO 17025 accreditation—are limited in their diagnostic capacities to testing for 
biological contaminants (e.g. salmonella) and are unable to test for chemical 
contaminants (metals, pesticide residues, etc.). Data on the growth of pesticide 
imports, rejections of exports of agricultural products, and cases or outbreaks of 

                                                
8  BSE (known as mad cow disease) is a disease for which the OIE has established official recognition of the 

health status of countries and zones, based on a general risk analysis. The categories for BSE are: 
negligible risk, controlled risk, and undetermined risk. Bolivia is included in this last category.  

9  The Newcastle disease status of a country, zone or division can be determined on the basis of specific 
criteria established by the OIE. 

http://www.oie.int/en/animal-health-in-the-world/official-disease-status/fmd/list-of-fmd-free-members/
http://www.udape.gob.bo/
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652369
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652369


 - 4 - 
 
 
 

foodborne diseases10 highlight the problem. Between 2005 and 2013, pesticide 
imports grew 75% by volume (IBCE).11 With respect to the rejection of food 
products in foreign markets, the European market notified four rejections (RASFF, 
2016) during the period 2009-2013,12 while over that same period Peru reported 
no cases of rejection. The cases of foodborne disease recorded between 2010 
and 2015 totaled 35,850 (Ministry of Health of Bolivia, 2016). Meanwhile, the World 
Health Organization estimates a value of 315 disability-adjusted life years (DALY)13 
per 100,000 inhabitants caused by foodborne illnesses in Bolivia, higher than the 
estimate for most Latin American countries, which is 140 DALY, and for the United 
States and Canada, at 35 DALY. Thus, contaminant surveillance programs and 
awareness-raising for all links in the country’s supply chains are increasingly 
important for providing safer food to the Bolivian population and facilitating access 
to international markets. 

1.9 Beyond the technical and operational areas described above, SENASAG has a 
user services office covering all units. A survey conducted of users (producers, 
companies, exporters, and importers) of SENASAG services in 2016 revealed a 
satisfaction index of 6.13, measured on a scale of 0 to 10. The areas in which 
users reported dissatisfaction included transactions times, the number of 
requirements imposed, and the costs. In order to improve the delivery of services 
to users, SENASAG has embarked on a process to systematize its transactions, 
and at present four of the services in greatest demand can be done by users online. 
These efforts by SENASAG are part of a larger process to implement 
e-government that the country is pursuing in accordance with the General 
Telecommunications, Information Technologies, and Communications Act 
(164/2011). Meanwhile, indicators such as the United Nations e-Government 
Development Index (EGDI) show that the country has much room for improving 
the management of its public services. According to EGDI 2016, Bolivia ranks 
101st of 193 countries (behind most of the countries in the region), and the Doing 
Business report places it 137th of 198 countries worldwide, and 30th of 
32 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean (World Bank, 2015). 

1.10 For purposes of international comparison of agricultural health and food safety 
services, countries’ national services are subject to evaluations by the World 
Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) and the Inter-American Institute for 
Cooperation on Agriculture (IICA). In the case of Bolivia, those evaluations identified 
improvements in the delivery of services between 2008 and 2014 but recognized the 
need to strengthen them further. The evaluation of animal health and animal-source 

                                                
10  Date on foodborne diseases are merely indicative of the problem, as contamination may originate at 

different points in the chain, not only in production. These data represent a low estimate of the real situation 
in the country, as only about 10% of persons who suffer a bout of gastrointestinal illness will seek medical 
attention (Food and Agriculture Organization, 2002). 

11  The Action Network on Pesticides and their Alternatives in Latin America (www.RAP-AL.com) estimates 
annual use of agrochemicals in Bolivia at 9.03 kg per capita, higher than in Brazil (5.2 kg) and three times 
higher than in Costa Rica and Panama. 

12 Of total rejections in RASFF, 63% are due to the presence of aflatoxins in Brazil nuts, 21% to 
microbiological problems, and 16% to unsuitable organoleptic characteristics. The ratio of rejections per 
tons of exports for Bolivia is 1 rejection for every 4,907 tons, where for Peru the figure is 0 rejections for 
every 4,172 tons.  

13  A disability-adjusted life year (DALY) is equivalent to one year of healthy life lost. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652366
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652539
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652539
http://www.rap-al.com/


 - 5 - 
 
 
 

food safety services by the OIE14 showed improvements in 22 of the 
39 competencies assessed (the others were unchanged). The average value of the 
competency performance indicators for SENASAG in 2014 was 62%, below the 
averages achieved by Chile (2010, 82%), Uruguay (2014, 83%), and Colombia 
(2015, 70%).15 The plant health services evaluation conducted by IICA in 2014, using 
a similar methodology, found performance levels averaging 47%16 in the various 
competencies and identified the need for improvement in all areas of plant health 
services. Both evaluations recommend, among other steps, improving: (i) the 
surveillance, inspection, and control system; (ii) the control of agricultural inputs and 
medications; (iii) the capacity and management of laboratories for diagnostics and 
analysis of residues, with proper biosafety conditions; and (iv) improvement in the 
services offered to users. 

1.11 Bank’s strategy in the agriculture sector of Bolivia. The Bolivian government, 
with Bank support, is implementing efforts to boost productivity. This year, it has 
approved: (i) the National Irrigation Program with a Watershed Approach III 
(3699/BL-BO) for US$158.4 million, which will help to increase or improve areas 
under irrigation and will benefit more than 20,000 farmers directly; (ii) Direct 
Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives II (3536/BL-BO) for 
US$62 million, to help small-scale farmers adopt technologies that will boost 
agricultural yields, the value of output, and productive efficiency; and (iii) the Rural 
Land Regularization and Titling Program (3722/BL-BO) for US$60 million, which 
will support the regularization and titling of 24.5 million hectares and the 
registration of more than one million rural landholdings of small and medium-sized 
farmers. The proposed agricultural health and food safety program will supplement 
these operations with support targeted at general agricultural services designed to 
improve productivity levels in the sector. 

1.12 The proposed operation will help to consolidate Bank support in the area of health 
and safety, recognizing that SENASAG has been supported from its inception with 
funds from the Agricultural Services Program (1057/SF-BO), which called for 
investments to establish the institutional structure and set up the planning and 
administration systems, as well as services in the technical areas of food safety, 
animal health, and plant health. Achievements under that operation include: 
(i) central headquarters and nine district offices (one for each department) set up 
and open for service; (ii) coverage of 37% of the operating budget with own 
resources; (iii) Institutional Strategic Plan approved; (iv) website with information 
from the institution published; (v) national food safety unit created and providing 
services through a reliable management system (ISO-9000 certification); 
(vi) network of food safety laboratories established and running tests to identify 

                                                
14 The OIE Tool for the Evaluation of Performance of Veterinary Services (PVS) measures the effectiveness 

of veterinary services, identifies gaps and weaknesses, and provides recommendations for 
40 competencies in four groups: (i) human, technical, and financial resources; (ii) technical authority and 
capability; (iii) interaction with stakeholders; and (iv) access to markets. Each competency is rated on a 
scale from 1 to 5, with 5 being the highest score. The resulting values can be expressed as percentages. 
The tool used by IICA to evaluate plant health services, known as “Performance, Vision and Strategy,” is 
similar to the PVS tool developed by the OIE.  

15  http://www.oie.int/support-to-oie-members/pvs-evaluations/. 
16  This is lower than some other countries of the region, which have values above 50%, and far short of the 

ideal 100%. PVS country results are not publicly available. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652545
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652552
http://www.oie.int/support-to-oie-members/pvs-evaluations/


 - 6 - 
 
 
 

biological contaminants in foods; and (vii) two areas of the country (Chiquitanía in 
the department of Santa Cruz and the entire department of Oruro) have been 
declared FMD-free by the OIE. 

1.13 As well, in 2008 the Bank approved the Agricultural Health and Food Safety 
Program (2061/BL-BO) designed to strengthen systems for: (i) the administration 
of human, physical, and financial resources; (ii) cost recovery; (iii) integrated 
management of planning and monitoring; and (iv) information and management of 
services provided to users. In technical areas, the most pressing consideration 
was identified as the need to eradicate foot and mouth disease so the country 
could be declared FMD-free by the OIE. 

1.14 At the close of the operation, in 2014, SENASAG had achieved the following: (i) the 
system for the administration of human, physical, and financial resources had been 
implemented; (ii) own revenue from fees for services covered 90% of the total 
budget; (iii) the planning and monitoring system (Planea), part of the Institutional 
Strategic Plan, had been installed in the central and district offices; (iv) a user 
services management information system (Gran Paitití)17 was in operation with 
78 services systematized and 4 services available online through the institutional 
portal; and (v) the central office and district offices had been refurbished and 
improved. Lastly, the operation helped the country obtain an “FMD-free with 
vaccination” declaration by the OIE in 2014. 

1.15 Lessons learned. Between 2002 and 2014, the Bank approved 17 investment 
loans to strengthen agricultural health and food safety systems in the region, for a 
total amount of US$359 million, or approximately 10% of the total sector portfolio 
(OVE, 2015). As noted earlier, SENASAG has been supported since its creation, 
first with funds from the Agricultural Services Program (1057/SF-BO) and 
subsequently, in 2008, through the Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program 
(2061/BL-BO). The latter operation was selected as part of a sample of six projects 
(Argentina (1950/OC-AR, 2008-2015); Nicaragua (1500/SF-NI, 2003-2011); 
Peru (1647/OC-PE, 2005-2009, and 2045/OC-PE, 2008-2014); and Uruguay 
(2182/OC-UR)) that were analyzed by OVE for purposes of evaluating the 
interventions and identifying recommendations for the design of new operations. 
On the basis of the previous operations, as well as the conclusions and 
recommendations from the Comparative Project Evaluation of Agriculture Health 
and Food Safety, 2002-2014 (OVE), Table 1 below describes the main lessons 
learned and how these have been incorporated into the design of the proposed 
operation. 

 

                                                
17  Gran Paitití is an information technology system developed to manage each of the services that SENASAG 

provides nationwide. It administers information on animal health, plant health, food safety, as well as 
information from the administrative, planning and legal areas. The system is of national scope and is used 
in the departmental, local and frontier offices of SENASAG. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40652556


 - 7 - 
 
 
 

Table 1. Recommendations incorporated into program design 

Recommendations Incorporation into program design 

Involve the private sector 
through joint work and the 
incorporation of new 
information and 
communication technologies. 

The program gives priority to incorporating a greater number of 
online services for users, in order to make their delivery more 
prompt and efficient.18 The phytosanitary and zoosanitary 
programs will be implemented in coordination with farmers. 

Make the laboratories 
sustainable. 

The laboratories operated by SENASAG are self-funded but do 
not have the necessary capacity to run public programs for pest 
and disease control. The program will provide financing to 
enhance the capacity of the laboratories, which will remain 
self-funded. 

Strengthen the food safety 
area. 

The program will strengthen the capacity of the laboratories for 
analyzing contaminants, surveillance plans, and training for 
farmers in good agricultural practices, thereby helping to 
improve food safety levels in Bolivia 

Evaluation and results in 
relation to direct beneficiaries 

The program includes a monitoring and evaluation component 
and an impact evaluation plan that will analyze the impacts of 
program activities on the direct beneficiaries. 

 

1.16 Program design. The design of the program addresses the need to protect Bolivia’s 
agricultural resources from health risks and provide the safety assurances sought 
by domestic consumers and foreign markets, especially high-value markets, as part 
of the government’s bid to position Bolivia as a reliable and safe supplier of quality 
food products. To this end, the program will continue the work of strengthening the 
country’s health services, which the Bank has supported (loans 1057/SF-BO and 
2061/BL-BO) since the creation of SENASAG. The design of the operation takes 
into account achievements to date, lessons learned, and the results of evaluations 
by the Bank and leading international agencies working in this area. Thus, the 
operation focuses on: (i) strengthening the technical capacity of SENASAG to act 
independently and objectively, basing its decisions on scientific principles; 
(ii) enhancing the analytical capacity in fully equipped, internationally accredited 
laboratories for the diagnosis of diseases and pests, control of agricultural inputs, 
and detection of contaminants in agricultural and food products; (iii) implementing 
disease and pest prevention and control programs that will help lay the groundwork 
for expanding those programs to other regions or for implementing innovative work 
solutions (coordination mechanisms with the private sector, accreditation of 
professionals, etc.) that will facilitate surveillance and control of other health 
threats; and (iv) improving the management and increasing the efficiency of 
service delivery to users throughout the country. 

1.17 Country strategy for the sector. The program is part of the Patriotic Agenda 2025 
and the Productive Economic Development Plan 2016-2020. The program will 
contribute primarily to Pillar 6, Productive Sovereignty with Diversification, which 
sets the objective for the agriculture sector of boosting productivity and enhancing 
market access for Bolivian products. The program will also contribute to Pillar 8, 
Food Sovereignty, with respect to the promotion of good agricultural practices and 

                                                
18  The program is helping to enforce the supreme decree on e-government in Bolivia (Supreme Decree 1874 

of 23 January 2014), as well as the 2016-2020 e-Government Plan. 



 - 8 - 
 
 
 

ecologically sound production. Lastly, the program is aligned with the Institutional 
Strategic Plan of SENASAG 2014-2018. 

1.18 Bank’s country strategy with Bolivia. The operation is consistent with the Bank’s 
country strategy with Bolivia 2016-2020 (document GN-2843), inasmuch as it will 
contribute to the objective of increasing productivity in the economy through the 
delivery of quality public goods and services. 

1.19 Strategic alignment with the Update to the Institutional Strategy 2010-2020 
and the Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019. The program is consistent 
with the Update to the Institutional Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and 
is aligned with the development challenges of productivity and innovation 
inasmuch as it will increase the agricultural productivity of small farmers and 
thereby contribute to the indicators in the Corporate Results Framework 
corresponding to the number of beneficiaries of improved management and 
sustainable use of natural capital and to the number of government agencies 
benefitted to improve public service delivery. The program is also aligned with the 
challenge of economic integration, inasmuch as it will support food safety 
mechanisms facilitating the participation of Bolivian producers in value chains 
integrated into international trade and will promote the alignment of trade 
integration instruments (Integration Annex). The program is aligned, as well, with 
the crosscutting area of institutional capacity, as it will strengthen the technological 
and management instruments for improving the delivery of SENASAG services, as 
reflected in the results indicators mentioned above. 

1.20 In addition, with respect to the Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019 (document 
GN-2727-6), the program is aligned with the regional context indicators of 
(7) intraregional trade in goods and (12) government effectiveness, as reflected in 
the program impact indicator in the results matrix (i) increased exports of agricultural 
products and the program outcome indicators (i) fewer sanitary barriers that restrict 
access to export markets for agricultural and agrifood products and (ii) improved 
service to users with incorporation of the virtual office and electronic signature. The 
program will further contribute to the Corporate Results Framework by aligning itself 
with the country development results indicator (5) corresponding to public agencies’ 
processing times of international trade of goods and services, as reflected in the 
outcome indicators mentioned above. 

1.21 The program is also consistent with the Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document (document GN-2709-5), which 
emphasizes the need to strengthen the provision of agricultural public goods, as well 
as with the Food Security Sector Framework Document (document GN-2825-3) in 
the dimension of access to safe and nutritious food, and also with the Integration 
and Trade Sector Framework Document (document GN-2715-6), which addresses 
the problem of logistics costs and the facilitation of international trade. 

B. Objectives, components and cost 

1.22 Objective. The general objective of the program is to help increase productivity in 
the agriculture sector. The specific objectives are: (i) to reduce production losses 
from pests and diseases; (ii) to facilitate access to international markets; and (iii) to 
enhance service to users. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691878


 - 9 - 
 
 
 

1.23 Components and cost. To achieve the program’s objective, investments will be 
made in four components, as described below. The total cost of the program will 
be US$25 million. 

1.24 Component 1. User services system (US$2.70 million). This component will 
improve the delivery of agricultural health and food safety services to users. To 
this end, it will provide financing for: (i) computer equipment and the development 
of applications to expand the capacity of the Gran Paitití information technology 
system, incorporating a greater number of online services and enabling digital 
signature; (ii) renovation of the building housing the Santa Cruz district 
headquarters19 (which serves roughly 50% of the country’s users), in order to 
incorporate new offices and refurbish public reception areas; and (iii) training for 
staff of SENASAG in public management and customer service. 

1.25 Component 2. Animal health system (US$7.80 million). This component will 
improve the zoosanitary status of the country by implementing national programs 
for disease prevention and control and strengthening laboratory capacity for the 
diagnosis of diseases and the control of veterinary inputs. It will provide financing 
for: (i) the program to maintain the country’s FMD-free status; (ii) the BSE 
prevention program; (iii) the program to control Newcastle disease in poultry, with 
a view to declaring two zones free of the disease, in the department of 
Cochabamba and the department of Santa Cruz, the country’s main poultry 
production areas; (iv) the national avian flu prevention program; and (v) the 
construction and equipping of a national laboratory for animal health diagnostics 
and control of veterinary inputs in the department of Santa Cruz.20 For the four 
zoosanitary programs, the component will finance epidemiological surveillance, 
emergency simulations, and training for technical staff.  

1.26 Component 3. Plant health system (US$8.10 million). This component will 
improve the country’s phytosanitary status through pest control programs and the 
creation of capacity for diagnosing agricultural diseases and pests and controlling 
agricultural inputs. It will provide financing for: (i) the pilot program for fruit fly 
control, so as to have two areas declared “low prevalence” zones, the municipio of 
El Torno (department of Santa Cruz) and the municipio of Luribay (department of 
La Paz). These two municipios have a total land area of 9,000 hectares, with 
2,500 farmers producing a large share of the country’s fruit supply; (ii) the 
prevention and control program for Huanglongbing disease that affects citrus 
crops; and (iii) construction and equipping of the national laboratory for diagnostics 
and control of agricultural inputs in the department of Santa Cruz. 

1.27 Component 4. Food safety system (US$5 million). This component will focus 
on training and awareness-raising for farmers and the general public with respect 
to greater food safety, and it will also determine the baselines for the presence of 
contaminants, as a way of facilitating surveillance decisions in line with scientific 
criteria. It will provide financing for: (i) training and certification in good agricultural 

                                                
19  The department of Santa Cruz accounts for the largest share (29%) of national GDP (INE, 2006) and 

produces 70% of the country’s food (CAO, 2014). SENASAG district headquarters in Santa Cruz serves 
approximately 50% of the country’s users. 

20  Before awarding contracts for the works in question, the executing agency will present to the Bank 
evidence that it has legal possession of the properties. This is a required condition for all works contracts, 
such as those mentioned in the following paragraphs. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691924


 - 10 - 
 
 
 

practices and ecological production for producers of priority farm products for local 
and export markets;21 (ii) renovation and equipping of the Cochabamba laboratory 
and construction and equipping of the main national laboratory, in the department 
of Santa Cruz, to expand its analytical capacity for identifying residues in 
agricultural and food products; and (iii) installation and operation of the 
surveillance system for chemical residues and contaminants in food, in accordance 
with Codex standards. 

C. Key results indicators 

1.28 The program has a results matrix (Annex II) agreed upon with SENASAG that 
presents impact, outcome, and output indicators with their respective baselines, 
targets and means of verification. The main expected outcomes are: (i) reduced 
losses in agricultural production caused by pests and diseases; (ii) fewer sanitary 
barriers that restrict access to export markets; (iii) improved zoosanitary and 
phytosanitary conditions in the country; and (iv) shorter processing times. The 
operation will generally benefit rural producers in the country (880,000 farms), the 
members of the main agrifood chains, and consumers of food products in the country 
(11.4 million) by lowering transaction costs and helping to preserve health and safety 
conditions while facilitating access to markets. The fruit fly pilot program is expected 
to benefit 2,300 producers, and 2,500 producers will receive training in best 
agricultural practices. 

1.29 Economic evaluation. The cost-benefit methodology was used to estimate the 
economic benefits to be generated among the target population of beneficiaries 
(see link). These benefits will be seen in the reduction of production losses caused 
by pests and diseases, better access to external markets (due to improved sanitary 
conditions), and improvements in terms of internal savings and time savings for 
users of services owing to modernization of the processing system (e.g. electronic 
signature).22 Based on the incremental economic effect and considering an impact 
horizon of 20 years, the planned investments yield a net present value (NPV) of 
US$21.1 million (at a discount rate of 12%) and an internal rate of return (IRR) of 
23.5%. Under these assumptions, the benefit/cost ratio is US$1.58 per unit 
invested. The indicators were subjected to a sensitivity analysis, which showed 
that even under pessimistic hypotheses concerning certain execution risks 
(a 20% increase in investment and recurrent costs combined with a 25% decrease 
in the rate of application of techniques, a 25% decrease in market access, and a 
25% decrease in users of the virtual office system), the program would still reach 
the breakeven point (NPV of 0 and IRR of 12%). 

                                                
21  This activity will provide training and certification for producers of priority products for the local and export 

markets, in accordance with the Economic and Social Development Plan 2016-2020. This includes the 
production of bananas, pineapples, quinoa, tomatoes, coffee, cocoa, chia, soybeans, sesame, wheat, 
potatoes, and corn. Beneficiary producers will be selected at random from each association. 

22  Benefits in the form of fewer export rejections and less foodborne disease in the population due to 
improvements in safety were also identified but were not included in the calculations because there was 
no attribution mechanism or precise baseline information available. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40691924
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670749


 - 11 - 
 
 
 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 The total cost of the program is estimated at US$25 million, which the Bank will 
finance with a blend of US$21.25 million from the Ordinary Capital (OC) and 
US$3.75 million from the Fund for Special Operations (FSO). The distribution by 
source of financing is shown in Table 2. 

 

Table 2. Program cost and financing (US$ millions) 

Investment category IDB Total % 

I. Direct costs 23.60 23.60 94.4 

Component 1. User services system  2.70 2.70 10.8 

Component 2. Animal health system 7.80 7.80 31.2 

Component 3. Plant health system 8.10 8.10 32.4 

Component 4. Food safety system 5.00 5.00 20.0 

II.  Administration 0.80 0.80 3.20 

III.  Monitoring and evaluation 0.30 0.30 1.20 

IV.  External audits 0.30 0.30 1.20 

Total 25.00 25.00 100.00 

 

2.2 The program is structured as a specific investment operation, to be executed over 
five years, with the following disbursement schedule, in accordance with 
preliminary financial plan: 

 
Table 3. Program costs and financing (US$ millions) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

Total IDB 1.46 8.94 6.03 6.24 2.33 25.00 

% 5.9% 35.8% 24.1% 24.9% 9.3% 100% 

 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.3 In accordance with the Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (OP-703), 
the program has been classified as a category “B” operation. During program 
preparation, an Environmental and Social Analysis found that the program will 
primarily have positive social and environmental impacts. The program will 
contribute to the following and other positive impacts: (i) more rational use of 
pesticides through implementation of integrated pest management and plant 
protection activities and training in good agricultural practices and ecological 
production; (ii) control of animal diseases that can affect human health; and (iii) a 
safer food supply. Potential adverse environmental impacts will be isolated and of 
limited scope. They will be linked to the construction and remodeling of 
infrastructure (4,000 square meters of new construction and refurbished space at 
two locations), the operation of laboratories (with a marginal increase in the use of 
toxic and biological substances as test reagents, samples of pesticides and 
veterinary products, and biological samples), and pest and disease control 
activities. To mitigate these adverse risks and impacts, an Environmental and 
Social Management Plan (ESMP) has been prepared that includes procedures for 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670747
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670747


 - 12 - 
 
 
 

handling toxic substances in the laboratories, steps for disposing of waste in 
accordance with national and international standards for the management, control, 
and disposal of biological and hazardous solid and liquid wastes, measures to 
ensure hygiene and safety in the workplace, and a monitoring plan that includes 
environmental indicators. The program also calls for activities to communicate with 
the general public and disclose information on the objectives and scope of the 
investments, through the publication and dissemination of information. The ESMP 
has been incorporated into the program Operating Regulations. 

C. Fiduciary risks 

2.4 Based on the results of the institutional assessment, SENASAG has the 
institutional capacity needed to properly carry out the responsibilities of the 
executing agency for the program. The results of the Institutional Capacity 
Assessment System (ICAS) exercise show strengths in organization, execution, 
and control capacities, and thus a weighted satisfactory development level and a 
low level of risk. Nevertheless, the risk analysis indicated the possibility of delays 
in procurement and contracting processes and hence the need to mitigate that risk 
by strengthening the institution’s team with fiduciary consultants in financial 
management and procurement, working exclusively on program implementation. 
This is due to the large number of financial and procurement transactions involved 
in the program, compared with the current levels of administrative and accounting 
activity at SENASAG. 

D. Other project risks 

2.5 The principal challenges facing SENASAG, as revealed by the risk analysis, lie in 
building and modernizing the laboratory infrastructure for animal health, plant 
health, and food safety, as well as in running and managing it. To mitigate those 
risks, the program includes specialized consulting assignments for infrastructure 
design, equipment and outfitting, and specialized technical training for laboratory 
personnel and for the technical areas responsible for running the laboratories. The 
investments financed by the program, both for infrastructure construction and for 
equipping SENASAG laboratories, entail a series of medium- and long-term 
institutional challenges involving the maintenance and sustainability of those 
assets. In this context, the project team analyzed a series of factors that will 
contribute directly to mitigating this risk. First, with enactment of the new 
Agricultural Health and Food Safety Act, there will be an estimated 22% annual 
increase in the current fee-based revenues of SENASAG, and this will contribute 
directly to the institution’s budgetary capacity, including the coverage of 
incremental operating costs associated with the operation and maintenance of 
those assets. Second, with respect to laboratory services, SENASAG will introduce 
fees directly associated with the costs of providing technical services, including the 
cost of maintenance and asset depreciation or replacement. Third, the program 
includes specific training activities for personnel, including aspects directly related 
to operation of the new infrastructure, equipment, and other assets. Lastly, 
SENASAG will be able to reinforce its human resources with respect to 
management of goods, services, and assets, thanks to the new legal and 
budgetary framework contained in the new law, as well as enhancing cost recovery 
management, among other aspects. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670745
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670745


 - 13 - 
 
 
 

2.6 Another risk is that SENASAG services will not meet the expectations generated 
by the program. To mitigate this risk, the program will implement a monitoring and 
evaluation plan covering the activities of the program execution unit as well as 
external evaluations, training, and instruction in institutional management by 
results. Risks have also been identified with respect to the contractual status of 
SENASAG staff, who now carry out their functions as temporary employees under 
short-term contracts. On this point, SENASAG has initiated a structural process 
with the Ministry of Rural Development and Lands and the Ministry of Economy 
and Public Finance for the gradual institutionalization of positions and their 
corresponding conversion to permanent positions financed from the General 
Treasury of the Nation. As well, with enactment of the new Agricultural Health and 
Food Safety Act and the anticipated growth in SENASAG’s own revenues, the 
institution will have greater financial capacity that will allow sound management of 
the conversion of staff contracts and thereby mitigate the risks associated with 
labor conditions. Lastly, risks have been identified in relation to the interest of 
potential beneficiaries and their participation in the program’s planned activities 
and services. To mitigate these risks, the program includes specific institutional 
strengthening measures designed to improve the quality of services provided by 
SENASAG and its capacity to respond to its clients, as well as training in good 
agricultural practices and other activities that will yield private benefits for 
producers. 

2.7 Finally, with respect to sustainability and scalability of the fruit fly project, this pilot 
project constitutes a learning phase in the framework of a national strategy for 
attacking the pest. Priority has been given to two zones (in the departments of 
Santa Cruz and La Paz), which have the largest concentration of farmers, a major 
share in the total production of the sector, the presence of producers’ organizations 
and associations, large markets in close proximity, and high incidences of the pest. 
The two zones together cover a total of 9,000 hectares (12% of the total area—
currently 75,000 hectares—planted in orchards that are susceptible to the fruit fly), 
and they have different geographic, ecological, and productive characteristics, 
which will provide detailed information, now lacking, in order to design a national 
program that will ultimately serve all areas of production in the country. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements 

3.1 The borrower will be the Plurinational State of Bolivia, and the executing agency 
will be the National Service for Agricultural Health and Food Safety (SENASAG). 
SENASAG was created by Law 2061 of 16 March 2000 as a deconcentrated 
agency of what is now the Ministry of Rural Development and Lands, with its own 
structure and legal, technical, and administrative capacity. It has nationwide 
responsibility for administering the agricultural health and food safety regime. It will 
handle coordination, planning and monitoring, technical and administrative 
management, procurements and contracting, and financial administration of the 
program. It will also implement the environmental and social safeguards for the 
program, contained in the ESMP. 

3.2 To implement the program, a program execution unit will be created; it will report 
directly to the national director of SENASAG, as the senior executive authority. 



 - 14 - 
 
 
 

Staffing of the program execution unit will consist of a general coordinator and 
personnel responsible for legal, planning, accounting and financial, procurement, 
and environmental matters. These personnel will work in direct coordination with 
the support and control areas of SENASAG with respect to fiduciary management 
and with the national head offices for plant health, animal health, and food safety, 
which will be responsible for technical management of activities in each of these 
areas. SENASAG will also establish a technical board for program coordination, 
comprising the national technical directors of SENASAG, and it will serve as a 
mechanism for ongoing monitoring and evaluation of program implementation. As 
special contractual conditions precedent to the first disbursement of the 
loan: (i) the borrower will sign a subsidiary agreement with the executing 
agency establishing the following and other elements: (a) the mechanism for 
transferring the loan proceeds; and (b) the commitment of the executing 
agency to conduct program activities in accordance with the terms of the 
loan contract; (ii) the executing agency: (a) will create the program execution 
unit in accordance with terms and conditions previously agreed upon with 
the Bank; and (b) will contract specialists, through a competitive process, in 
at least the following areas: general coordination, planning, financial 
management, procurement, and environmental and social management; and 
(iii) the program technical board will be created and its members appointed. 

3.3 During program preparation, plans were made for SENASAG to be able to sign 
agreements with autonomous territorial entities23 and producers’ associations. 
Those agreements will lay the basis for mutual cooperation among those involved 
and will spell out the activities covered by the agreements, the commitments of the 
parties, including mechanisms for cooperation between them, and other terms and 
conditions necessary for execution. Among other matters, the agreements will 
define: (i) the number of producers and land area to be covered or 
incorporated/used in the program technical activities; (ii) the times to be spent on 
specific areas and producers; (iii) the geographic location of farms and of 
agricultural activities; (iv) the inputs and the scope of technical assistance and 
training to be provided by the program; and (v) the dissemination of practices and 
results. As a special condition of execution, prior to startup of the activities for the 
fruit fly control program in Component 3, agreements will be signed between 
SENASAG, the Municipio of El Torno, the Municipio of Luribay, and local 
producers’ associations. 

3.4 Program Operating Regulations. Program execution will be governed by 
program Operating Regulations, which will establish guidelines and operating 
procedures relating to: (i) the execution structure of the program and the 
responsibilities of the program executing agency; (ii) the responsibilities of other 
entities involved in program implementation; (iii) the procedures for planning and 
programming the activities to be financed; (iv) the procedures and processes for 
technical management and financial and procurement administration; (v) the 
procedures for environmental and social management of the program; and 
(vi) operating instructions for monitoring and evaluation of the program’s impact. 
As a special contractual condition precedent to the first disbursement of the 
loan, the program Operating Regulations will be approved by the executing 

                                                
23  This encompasses departmental, municipal, regional, and rural indigenous autonomous governments. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670743


 - 15 - 
 
 
 

agency and will be in force, under terms previously agreed upon with the 
Bank.  

3.5 Procurement. Works, goods, and consulting services financed with program 
resources will be procured in accordance with the Bank policies established in 
documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 and with the provisions of the loan contract 
and the program’s fiduciary agreements and requirements (see Annex III), 
including the procurement plan for the first 18 months. The procurement plan 
includes the purchase of vehicles, operating and information processing 
equipment, furniture, individual consultants, consulting firms, and other items. It 
will be updated annually or when there are substantial changes, subject to the 
Bank’s approval. Procurement processes may be reviewed ex post, in accordance 
with the provisions of Annex III. 

3.6 Audits. During the loan disbursement period, within 120 days following the close 
of SENASAG’s fiscal year, audited annual financial statements for the program will 
be presented to the Bank. Audits will be conducted by a firm of independent 
auditors acceptable to the Bank. The scope and other aspects of the audit will be 
governed by the Financial Management Policy for IDB-financed Projects 
(document OP-273-6) and the Guide for the Preparation of Financial Statements 
and External Audits. 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.7 Monitoring. The program has a monitoring and evaluation plan. SENASAG will 
prepare and send the following reports to the Bank on a regular basis: (i) no later 
than 60 days after the end of each six-month period during program execution, a 
monitoring report, focused on achievement of the output indicators and progress 
towards outcomes, identification of problems encountered, and the corrective 
measures taken; and (ii) no later than the last quarter of each year during program 
execution, the multiyear execution plan, the program risk matrix, and the annual 
work plan for the following year. In addition, SENASAG will conduct two 
independent evaluations financed from the loan: (i) the midterm evaluation will be 
presented to the Bank no later than 90 days after 50% of the loan has been 
disbursed (or at the end of the third year of execution, whichever occurs first); and 
(ii) the final evaluation, no later than 90 days after 90% of the program resources 
have been disbursed. These reports will include an evaluation of the quality of data 
from the monitoring system, the degree of achievement of the outputs, outcomes 
and impacts established in the results matrix, as well as the level of compliance 
with the ESMP. 

3.8 Evaluation. The impact evaluation is designed primarily to measure the effects of 
the pilot program for fruit fly control, given its potential expansion at the national 
level. The estimates will be based on the method of differences in a panel of 
producers encouraged to participate randomly in a treatment group and a control 
group. For this purpose, two surveys are planned: a baseline survey (in two 
phases) and a final evaluation. The proposed sample covers two municipios 
located in the department of Santa Cruz: El Torno, one of the pilot areas of the 
intervention, and La Guardia, serving as a counterfactual (control) benchmark 
within the same geographical zone, where the agroecological characteristics, 
productive orientation, degree of organization among producers, and prevalence 
of the pest are very similar (70% correlation). The sample for the baseline study 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670734


 - 16 - 
 
 
 

comprises 386 farmers (with 248 in the treatment group and 138 in the control 
group), and a similar sample will be used for the final evaluation. The budget for 
data collection has been included in the program. The operation provides an 
opportunity to generate empirical evidence on the impact of pest management and 
control efforts on production, productivity, and incomes for individual farms and for 
the total area, as well as changes in land use, application of insecticides and/or 
fertilizers, incorporation of new technologies, and/or reorientation of crops. 



Annex I -BO-L1179 

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Strategic Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Regional Context Indicators

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Strategy Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2843

     Country Program Results Matrix

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country strategy or 

country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Evaluable Weight Maximum Score

8.7 10

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution 7.7 33.33% 10

     3.1 Program Diagnosis 1.8

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions 4.0

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality 1.9

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis 8.5 33.33% 10

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic 

Analysis
4.0

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits 1.5

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs 1.5

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions 0.0

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis 1.5

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 10.0 33.33% 10

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms 2.5

     5.2 Evaluation Plan 7.5

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries and/or 

public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality

Labor

Environment

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector entity 

prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps in 

the sector that were identified in the project document and/or in the evaluation plan
Yes

-Intraregional trade in goods (%)

-Government effectiveness (average LAC percentile) 

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Aligned

-Productivity and Innovation

-Economic Integration

-Institutional Capacity and the Rule of Law

I. Strategic Alignment

-Public agencies' processing times of international trade of goods and services 

-Beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable use of natural capital (#)

-Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological and managerial tools to improve 

public service delivery (#)

Aligned

Improve the provision of quality public goods and services.

The intervention is not included in the 2016 Operational Program.

Low

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting and Reporting.

Procurement: Information System.

The objective of the program is to increase productivity of the agricultural sector by reducing production losses due to livestock and crop diseases, facilitating access to international markets, and improving the service to users 

of the national animal health system. The Program will implement four components: (i) Strengthening of user services; (ii) Strengthening of the animal health system; (iii) Strengthening of the plant health system; and (iv) 

Strengthening the food safety system. 

The documentation is well-structured, with a good diagnostic of the major challenges faced by the sector that contribute to low levels of productivity, including the significant losses of agricultural production due to animal and 

plant diseases, the difficulty of accessing key markets due to phytosanitary restrictions, scarce information about food safety due to limited diagnostic capabilities of national laboratories, as well as the inefficiency and low 

quality of service provision by the animal health system. The proposed solution is clearly related to the magnitude of the problems identified. While the results matrix (RM) reflects the objectives of the program, a clear vertical 

logic cannot be established due to an incomplete discussion of the current political restrictions on the exports of animal products which may inhibit market access even if domestic sanitary conditions are improved. The key 

outcome indicators have values that are the result of the ex-ante economic analysis; and lower-level indicators reflect the design of the four components. The RM includes SMART indicators at the levels of impact (except for 

one), outcomes (except for one) and outputs with their respective baseline values and targets and the means to gather information.  

The economic analysis (EA) is based on a Cost-Benefit Analysis that compares the expected benefits generated by the distinct program components (reduced production losses, improved market access, improved efficiency of 

the animal health system) with program costs (main investments and costs of operation, personnel, and maintenance). In general, the assumptions made are reasonable; however, the analysis fails to address the concerns of 

export restrictions that may considerably limit expected benefits of market access. The CBA estimates an IRR of 23.5%. A sensitivity analysis presents four alternate scenarios: (i) if costs increase to 20% above budget, the IRR 

is reduced to 17%; (ii) if adoption rates among farmers affected by the Fruit Fly and Newcastle disease drop to 70%, the IRR is 17.3%; (iii) if only 40% of all service procedures in the animal health system are improved, the 

IRR drops to 20.5%; and (iv) if only 40% of all market access improving measures are achieved, the IRR drops to 18.3%.

The monitoring and evaluation plan is well designed and the impact evaluation proposes a reasonable strategy for the evaluation of the pilot program for Fruit Fly eradication. The robust identification strategy proposes both a 

difference-in-difference approach (with propensity score matching) using an untreated municipality as a reasonable counterfactual, as well as randomized offering within the treated municipality to increase participation and 

adoption rates and identify the optimal design of the program. The evaluation also allows for the quantification of potentially important spillover effects. Given the scant literature on the effectiveness of plant health 

interventions, the impact evaluation will make an important contribution to the knowledge base of the sector, the country, and the Bank.

The risks identified in the risk matrix seem reasonable; eight are classified as Medium and five are classified as Low. It includes mitigating actions and compliance indicators.

The program will generate valuable information on the causal link between the 

control of the fruit fly and the increase of income of UPAS and agricultural yields.



Annex II 
Page 1 of 3 

 
 

RESULTS MATRIX 
(see detailed/complete results matrix) 

Objective: The general objective of the program is to help increase productivity in the agriculture sector. The specific objectives are: (i) to reduce 
production losses from pests and diseases; (ii) to facilitate access to international markets; and (iii) to enhance service to users. 

 

Impacts 
Baseline 

(2016) 
Target 
(2021) 

Means of verification Observations 

Impact: Increased exports of agricultural 
products  

  
  

Indicator: Annual export value of agricultural 
products (US$ millions) 

1,488  
(2015) 

1,963 
(2021) 

IBCA and INE data. 
Target: Projection of the average 
growth rate for 2010-2015 over the 
period 2016-2021. 

Impact: Increased economic value of livestock 
sector production 

Indicator: Gross value of annual production of 
the livestock sector (cattle, poultry, and swine) 
(US$ millions) 

    

Impact: Higher agricultural yields      

Indicator: Difference between average 
agricultural yields per hectare among 
beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries of the fruit 
fly pilot program (in kilograms per hectare). 

1,293  
(2015) 

1,815 
(2021) 

IBCA and INE data. 
Target: gross estimate based on 
2010-2015 trend and projection of 
sector benchmarks. 

Baseline by type of product     

Mandarins 8,174 9,809 Impact evaluation to be 
performed under the program. 

- The baseline value comes from 
departmental government and 
SENASAG studies. They will be 
revised in light of the baseline 
surveys. 

-  There is no information 
disaggregated between baseline 
data for the treatment and 
control groups. 

-  The target value comes from the 
technical estimates. 

Oranges 7,630 9,156 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40692440


Annex II  
Page 2 of 3 
 
 

 

Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program 
Outcomes 

Baseline 
(2016) 

Target 
(2021) 

Means of verification Comments 

Outcome 1: Reduced losses in agricultural 
production caused by pests and diseases. 

Indicator:  

Difference between losses in production caused by 
the fruit fly (measured as percentages of harvest) 
among beneficiaries (B) and non-beneficiaries (NB) 
in the pilot project. 




















NB

2017

NB

2022

B

2017

B

2022 %QP%QP%QP%QP  

30% 15% 

Baseline survey of 
producers. 

Annual reports of 
SENASAG based on the 
technical report monitoring 
program execution. 

Producer survey for 
evaluation of impact at the 
end of program. 

Production losses  
Baseline: 
30% (Santa Cruz) 
36% (La Paz) 

Target: 
15% (Santa Cruz) 
18% (La Paz) 

LB: SENASAG technical 
evaluation based on 
departmental data  

QP: production losses by volume. 

Outcome 2: Fewer sanitary barriers that restrict 
access to export markets for agricultural and 
agrifood products. 

Indicator:  

 New international agreements validating health 
status and safety of Bolivian agricultural products 
(quantity). 

0 20 

SENASAG based on IBCA 
and INE sector information 
and statistics. 
Evidence: international 
agreements signed by 
SENASAG. 

International agreements are 
instruments such as bilateral or 
multilateral agreements, 
protocols between countries, or 
similar instruments. They involve 
the opening of a new country for 
exportation of an agricultural 
product (e.g. chicken to Ecuador, 
citrus fruits to Brazil) 

Outcome 3: Improved zoosanitary conditions in the 
country  

  

SENASAG based on 
evaluations, resolutions, 
and OIE methodology. 

BSE: application presented to 
OIE. 

Indicator:  

 maintenance of Bolivia’s FMD-free status  
1 1 

 self-declaration of zones free of Newcastle 
disease 

0 2 

Outcome 4: Improved phytosanitary conditions in 
the country  

  
SENASAG based on 
technical studies of 
progress under the fruit fly 
pilot project. 

Based on IPPC international 
standards for phytosanitary 
measures. 

Indicator:  

 Declaration of zones of low prevalence of fruit fly 
pests 

0 2 



Annex II 
Page 3 of 3 

 
 

Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program 
Outcomes 

Baseline 
(2016) 

Target 
(2021) 

Means of verification Comments 

Outcome 5: Improved service to users with 
incorporation of the Virtual Office and Electronic 
Signature.  

  

Program execution unit 
report with details from 
administrative records, 
based on the Gran Paitití 
processing system and 
help desks. 

Average time includes user 
waiting time. 

It does not include the time 
needed to complete the forms. 

Indicator:  

 Average wait time for in-person service 
(submission of requirements and delivery of 
permit/certificate) in two selected services (food 
safety permit for importation, phytosanitary 
certificate for exportation) (minutes). 

36 0 

 Average processing time for approval of business 
registration (days)  

32 20 

 



Annex III 
Page 1 of 6 

 
 

FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS  

Country: Plurinational State of Bolivia 

Project: BO-L1179 Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program II 

Executing agency: National Service for Agricultural Health and Food Safety (SENASAG) 

Prepared by: Carolina Escudero and Abel Cuba (FMP/CBO) 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 This annex was prepared taking into account the results of the Institutional 
Capacity Assessment System (ICAS) review of SENASAG. 

1.2 Accounting activities, budgetary management, and cash management will be 
carried out using the Integrated Public Management System (SIGEP) and 
SENASAG’s institutional accounting system (VISUAL). For the financial reports 
required by the Bank, the SIAP-BID1 will be used. For tendering processes, the 
standard bidding documents of the Bank or those agreed upon with the Office of 
the Deputy Minister of Public Investment and External Finance (VIPFE) will be 
used and made available through the Public Procurement System (SICOES),2 
where calls for proposals and the results of national bidding processes will be 
published. 

1.3 At present, the Bolivian government and the Bank are preparing an agreement to 
adopt partial use of the Basic Regulations of the Goods and Services Management 
System (NB-SABS) in operations financed by the Bank in Bolivia. This program 
could apply that agreement once it is signed and in effect. 

II. FIDUCIARY CONTEXT OF THE EXECUTING AGENCY  

2.1 SENASAG was created on 16 March 2000 by Law 2061 as an operational 
structure of what is now the Ministry of Rural Development and Lands. It is 
responsible for administering the Agricultural Health and Food Safety System, in 
the framework of Article 9 of the Law on Organization of the Executive Branch. 
Supreme Decree 25729 of 7 April 2000 regulates the organization and powers of 
the SENASAG and also establishes its technical, administrative, and managerial 
independence, and its competencies, jurisdiction, and presence throughout Bolivia, 
in accordance with Law 1178 on Governmental Administration and Control, 3 
approved on 20 July 1990. 

                                                
1 Administration System for Bank Projects, developed by the Bank’s Country Office in Bolivia (CAN/CBO). 
2 Public Procurement System. A set of bidding documents agreed upon between the Bank and the VIPFE 

for use in processes below the threshold for international competitive bidding (ICB). 
3 This law governs the systems for administration and control of funds of the Plurinational State of Bolivia 

and their linkages with the national planning and public investment systems. 

http://www.sicoes.gob.bo/


Annex III  
Page 2 of 6 
 
 

2.2 For procurements, SENASAG applies the NB-SABS or the rules indicated in 
external financing agreements. 

2.3 Financial transactions are handled in the SIGEP and in SENASAG’s institutional 
system, which provides secure and reliable information on budget execution. This 
system produces financial information in the official currency, classified for 
accounting purposes by expenditure item. In addition, the entity has implemented 
the PLANEA system, which is the primary register for budgetary control and use of 
resources. The accounting records will be kept in accordance with the government 
accounting system. The financial reports required by the Bank will be prepared in 
SIAP-BID until the SIGEP accounting module for external resources enters into 
effect. 

2.4 Project contracting and payments will be conducted by SENASAG, through the 
execution unit, which will work exclusively on program execution and will be 
formally created within the organizational structure of that entity. 

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION MEASURES  

3.1 The ICAS review of SENASAG indicates an adequate degree of development and 
institutional capacity from the viewpoint of administrative definitions, regulations, 
etc. However, the analysis of risks associated with the program’s fiduciary 
management yields a medium risk classification. 

3.2 To mitigate the risk factors, three specific measures have been planned for 
program execution in order to strengthen fiduciary management: (i) the SENASAG 
team will be reinforced with professional personnel specialized in financial 
management and procurement management for program execution; 
(ii) administrative and internal control processes adapted to program needs for 
adequate financial and administrative management of procurements and 
contracting, including control mechanisms and targets for processing times, will be 
incorporated into the program Operating Regulations; (iii) SENASAG will adopt in 
full the national systems for integrated financial management currently used for 
planning, budgeting, accounting, and cash management functions, including the 
SIGEP, PLANEA, and VISUAL platforms, to ensure access to financial information 
in real time; and (iv) with respect to technical matters, staff capabilities will be 
strengthened in the areas of animal health, plant health, and food safety so as to 
ensure technical soundness in the preparation of technical specifications, terms of 
reference, and other basic inputs for procurement activities. 

IV. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL CONDITIONS OF THE CONTRACT  

4.1 Operating Regulations. These will cover the execution mechanism, procedures, 
and information flows, as previously agreed between the executing agency and the 
Bank. 

4.2 Exchange rate agreed upon with the executing agency for financial 
reporting. The exchange rate used will be the rate in effect in the country on the 
effective date of the conversion of funds into local currency in the executing 
agency’s accounts. 

4.3 Financial statements and other audited reports. For the duration of the program 
disbursement period, audited financial statements for the program will be 



Annex III  
Page 3 of 6 

 

submitted to the Bank within 120 days after the end of each fiscal year of the 
executing agency. The statements will be duly audited by a firm of independent 
auditors acceptable to the Bank. The final report will be submitted to the Bank 
within 120 days following the date stipulated for the final disbursement. 

4.4 The terms of reference for the contracting of the firm of independent auditors will 
be subject to the Bank’s prior approval, and may include outputs stemming from 
the International Standards on Auditing relating to the financial audit of the 
program and other tasks. The scope will be governed by the Financial 
Management Policy for IDB-financed Projects (document OP-273-6) and the 
Guide for the Preparation of Financial Statements and External Audits. 

4.5 Procurement. Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the policies set 
forth in documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9, with partial use of the NB-SABS 
(paragraph 1.3). 

V. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION  

5.1 Procurement execution. Procurement processes for the program will be detailed 
in the procurement plan approved by the Bank and will be conducted within the 
framework of the policies set forth in documents GN-2349-9 and GN-2350-9 (with 
no exceptions anticipated), or through partial use of the NB-SABS. 

5.2 Procurement of works, goods and nonconsulting services. In the case of 
international competitive bidding (ICB), the current standard bidding documents 
issued by the Bank will be used. For other processes, the documents available in 
the SICOES will be used. Any changes to those documents will require the Bank’s 
no objection. 

5.3 Selection and contracting of consultants. Contracts for consulting services will 
be executed considering the following: 

(i) Selection of consulting firms. The Bank’s standard request for 
proposals will be used. For contracts in amounts of less than 
US$200,000, the documents available in SICOES will be used. Any 
changes to these documents will require the Bank’s no objection. 

(ii) Short list of consulting firms. This may be composed entirely of 
local firms for contracts where the value is less than the US$200,000 
threshold established for Bolivia. 

(iii) Selection of individual consultants. This will be based on 
qualifications for the assignment, comparing the CVs of at least three 
candidates, and as a rule no interviews will be held. When the 
assignments are linked to other specific advisory services, consulting 
firms will be used, except in circumstances (to be analyzed case-by-
case) where it is deemed appropriate to provide backup support to the 
individual consultant.  

5.4 Procurement planning. Program execution will adhere to the procurement plan 
administered by SENASAG and agreed upon in advance with the Bank. 
SENASAG will publish the procurement plan in the Procurement Plan Execution 
System (SEPA) and will update it annually or as needed.  



Annex III  
Page 4 of 6 
 
 

5.5 Advance procurement/retroactive financing. No advance procurement that 
would require retroactive recognition of financing is anticipated. 

5.6 National preference. The application of national preference will not be considered 
in procurement processes. 

5.7 Terms of reference and technical specifications. The Project Team Leader is 
responsible for reviewing the criteria for the selection of shortlists, terms of 
reference, and technical specifications, which will be agreed upon with the 
executing agency prior to execution of the processes. 

5.8 Table of threshold amounts. 

 
Table 1. Threshold amounts (US$000) 

Works Goods Consulting firms 

ICB NCB Shopping ICB NCB Shopping 
International 

publicity* 
National 

publicity** 

More than 
US$3,000 

Less than 
or equal to 
US$3,000 

Less than 
or equal to 
US$1,500 

More 
than 

US$200 

Less 
than or 
equal to 
US$200 

Less than 
or equal 

to US$50 

More than 
US$200 

Less than or 
equal to 
US$200 

* Shortlist with maximum of two firms of the same nationality. 
** Shortlist may be 100% national. 

5.9 Main procurement processes. These are detailed in Table 2. 

 

Table 2. Planning of main procurement item 

Description 
Selection 
method 

Estimate
d date 

Estimated 
amount 

(US$000) 

Consulting firms    

3 contracts with international firms to prepare designs for the works and conduct 
the program impact evaluation  

CQS/ 

QCBS 
TBD 359 

3 contracts with local firms to develop the data warehouse, supervise the works, 
and perform the external financial audit of the program  

CQS/ 
QCBS 

TBD 377 

Works    

Construction of the food quality control module, and upgrade of infrastructure 
according to ISO 17025 for LIDIVET facilities (2 contracts) 

Shopping TBD 904 

Refurbishment of installations and upgrade of infrastructure according to 
ISO 17025 for LIDIVECO facilities (2 contracts) 

Shopping TBD 215 

Construction and improvements of infrastructure for the district office; diagnostic 
rooms; and plant health and pest control diagnostic laboratory in Santa Cruz 
(3 contracts) 

Shopping TBD 3,228 

Installation of plant and animal health demonstration plots  Shopping TBD 104 

Installation of border control posts for entry and exit of fruit  Shopping TBD 42 

Goods    

Computer equipment (various purchases during execution) TBD TBD 2,101 

4x4 vehicles (various purchases during execution) TBD TBD 2,870 

Motorcycles (various purchases during execution) TBD TBD 1,231 

Other equipment (various purchases during execution) TBD TBD 1,128 

Laboratory equipment, materials, and inputs (various purchases during execution), TBD TBD 7,044 

Furnishings (various purchases during execution)  TBD TBD 154 



Annex III  
Page 5 of 6 

 

*Click here for the procurement plan for the first 18 months. 

 

5.10 Procurement supervision. Annual supervision visits will be conducted. If 
necessary, annual ex post review visits will be held. 

5.11 The thresholds for ex post review are shown in Tables 3 and 4 (direct contracting 
and unlisted procurements will be subject to ex ante review). The external audit 
firm will perform the ex post review. 

 
Table 3. Thresholds for ex post review of procurement (US$000) 

Works 
Goods and 

nonconsulting 
services 

Consulting firms 
Individual 

consultants 

Contracts for amounts 
less than or equal to 

US$1,500 

Contracts for amounts 
less than or equal to 

US$200 

Contracts for amounts 
less than or equal to 

US$50 

Those that are not 
considered key and 
are not part of the 

execution unit 

 

5.12 Operating or recurring expenses.4 These will be agreed upon with the Project 
Team Leader, recorded in the project budget, and included in the procurement 
plan. They will be contracted using the NB-SABS. The Bank may decline to 
finance these expenses if it finds that they have violated the basic principles of 
competition, efficiency, and economy. The external audit firm will be responsible 
for reviewing the supporting documentation for these expenses. 

5.13 Records and files. SENASAG will be responsible for establishing the supporting 
documentation, procedures and controls necessary to safeguard the 
documentation generated by the program. The Bank may, at any time, verify the 
standards for organization, control, and security of files. 

                                                
4 Operating or recurring expenses encompass leasing of premises, notifications, announcements, or 

communications made on radio, in the written press, or on television, translations, bank fees, office 
supplies, photocopies, postage, fuel, maintenance, short courses, and travel for line personnel. 

Description 
Selection 
method 

Estimate
d date 

Estimated 
amount 

(US$000) 

Individual consultants    

Program execution unit staff including coordination, planning, finance, 
procurement (2), legal, environmental and social management, and coordination 
with the Ministry of Rural Development and Lands, and administrative assistance 
in support of program execution  

NICQ TBD 766 

Technical team to develop the online web applications in the framework of “Gran 
Paitití” 

NICQ TBD 754 

13 international professionals to provide technical consulting services needed for 
the program  

IICQ TBD 305 

10 national professionals to carry out technical consulting services needed for 
the program  

NICQ TBD 133 

Nonconsulting services    

About 48 contracts for training services and awareness-raising workshops; 
equipment maintenance and calibration; validation of methods; site visits; etc. 

Shopping/ 
NCB 

TBD 2,947 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=40670738


Annex III  
Page 6 of 6 
 
 

VI. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

6.1 Programming and budget. SENASAG will handle both the formulation of the 
budget and any future changes, on the basis of the approved annual work plan, 
and will arrange to have the program recorded as an investment budget to be 
reported in the SIGEP. As an institutional tool, it has the PLANEA system for 
monitoring the institutional budget and the program.  

6.2 Accounting and information systems. Program transactions will be recorded in 
the SIGEP. The system integrates the different accounting stages in a single file 
and complies with the requirements for budgeting (budget execution), accounts 
(allocation of assets, liabilities, equity, and results), and cash management (cash 
transfer), on an accrual accounting basis. In addition, for purposes of program 
accounts, a chart of accounts will be prepared that will identify expenditures made 
at each step on a cash basis, harmonizing the program’s investment categories 
with the budgetary items and their respective accounts. In addition, the executing 
agency will use the SIAP-BID system on a temporary basis as a supplement for 
issuing the program financial reports, until the SIGEP accounting management 
module enters into effect. 

6.3 Disbursements and cash flow. Loan proceeds will be disbursed as advances of 
funds and direct payments, on the basis of the financial program, which will be 
periodically updated by SENASAG. The Bank will process a new advance of funds 
once at least 80% of previous fund advances has been accounted for. Loan 
proceeds will be deposited in a separate account in U.S. dollars and subsequently 
transferred to a different account in local currency, both within the CUT.5  

6.4 Internal control and internal audit. The financial management of the executing 
agency is subject to an annual reliability review by the Internal Audit Unit, and the 
program is expected to be included in this type of review. As a strategic activity 
within its mandate, the Bank will hold regular coordination meetings with the 
Internal Audit Unit to identify program monitoring needs. 

6.5 External control and reports. The SENASAG will contract a firm of independent 
auditors acceptable to the Bank on an annual basis, following Bank policies. This 
will be a multiyear contract (covering at least three fiscal years), in order to avoid 
transaction costs and ensure continuity in the work of the auditors, as well as to 
guarantee timely interventions that will allow for preliminary reviews at semiannual 
intervals. 

6.6 The terms of reference for contracting the firm of independent auditors will have 
the Bank’s no objection. 

6.7 Financial supervision plan. Activities may be adjusted on the basis of the 
program’s risk assessment conducted by the fiduciary team with the executing 
agency, and the external audit reports. Expenditures will be supervised on an 
ex post basis. However, at a minimum, the annual supervision plan will provide for 
a comprehensive visit (procurement and finances) by the Bank.  

                                                
5 Cuenta Única del Tesoro (CUT) [Single Treasury Account]. 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/__ 
 
 
 

Bolivia. Loan ____/BL-BO  to the Plurinational State of Bolivia 
Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program II 

 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Plurinational State of Bolivia, as Borrower, for the purpose of 
granting it a financing to cooperate in the execution of an agricultural health and food safety 
program II. Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$21,250,000 from the resources of 
the Single Currency Facility of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, corresponds to a parallel loan within 
the framework of the multilateral debt relief and concessional finance reform of the Bank, and 
will be subject to the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of 
the Project Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ _________ 201_) 
 
 
 
LEG/SGO/ CAN/IDBDOCS#40715591-16 
Pipeline No. BO-L1179 

 
 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/__ 
 
 
 

Bolivia. Loan ____/BL-BO  to the Plurinational State of Bolivia 
Agricultural Health and Food Safety Program II 

 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Plurinational State of Bolivia, as Borrower, for the purpose of 
granting it a financing to cooperate in the execution of an agricultural health and food safety 
program II. Such financing will be for the amount of up to US$3,750,000 from the resources of 
the Bank's Fund for Special Operations, corresponds to a parallel loan within the framework of 
the multilateral debt relief and concessional finance reform of the Bank, and will be subject to 
the Financial Terms and Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of the Project 
Summary of the Loan Proposal. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ ________ 201_ 
 
 
 
LEG/SGO/CAN/IDBDOCS#40714969-16 
BO-L1179 


	RES-final-version-con-cambios-vps_lp---resoluciones-legales-ingls---bo-l1179.pdf
	IDBDOCS-#40715591-v1-Proposed_Resolution_BL-OC
	IDBDOCS-#40714969-v1-Proposed_Resolution_BL-FOE





