















































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

URUGUAY 

RURAL PRODUCTIVE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM II 

(UR-L1147) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Ana Ríos (CSD/RND), Project 
Team Leader; Luis Hernando Hintze (RND/CUR), Project Team Co-leader; Gonzalo Muñoz 
and Maja Schling (CSD/RND), Alvaro García Negro (RND/CPR); Elizabeth Chávez and 
Rosario Frugone (CSD/RND); Jennifer Doherty-Bigara (CSD/CCS); Alberto Villalba 
(VPS/ESG); Rodolfo Graham (LEG/SGO); Federico Bachino and Adriana Torres (CSC/CUR); 
Abel Cuba and Emilie Chapuis (FMP/CUR); and Catherine Meola (SCL/GDI). 

This document is being released to the public and distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors 
simultaneously. This document has not been approved by the Board. Should the Board approve the 
document with amendments, a revised version will be made available to the public, thus superseding 
and replacing the original version. 



 

CONTENTS 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................. 1 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale ............................................ 1 
B. Objectives, components, and cost ................................................................ 7 
C. Key results indicators ................................................................................... 9 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ............................................................... 10 

A. Financing instruments ................................................................................ 10 
B. Environmental and social risks ................................................................... 11 
C. Fiduciary risks ............................................................................................ 12 
D. Other project risks ...................................................................................... 12 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 13 

A. Summary of execution arrangements ......................................................... 13 
B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results ....................................... 15 
C. Impact evaluation ....................................................................................... 15 

 
 
 

  



 - ii - 
 
 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Summary Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) 

Annex II Results Matrix 

Annex III Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED 

1. Multiyear execution plan (PEP) and annual work plan (AWP) 

2. Monitoring and evaluation plan 

3. Environmental and social management report (ESMR) 

4. Procurement plan 

OPTIONAL 

1. Bibliography 

2. Diagnostic assessment for capacity building in technology generation and transfer, technical 
assistance, and rural extension 

3. Impact evaluation of the Rural Productive Development Program (RPDP) 

4. Beneficiaries of RPDP requests for proposals and the registry of family producers 

5. Survey of nonbeneficiary family producers in RPDP requests for proposals 

6. RPDP evaluation 

7. Climate change 

8. Technology evaluation 

9. Gender 

10. Program economic evaluation 

11. Rural Development Bureau - Organizational chart 

12. Draft program Operating Regulations 

 
  

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-44
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-40
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-41
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-43
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-27
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-48
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-48
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-32
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-33
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-34
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-35
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-36
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-37
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-52
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-38
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-64
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-39


 - iii - 
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS 

ATDR Agente Territorial de Desarrollo Rural [Regional Rural Development 
Agent] 

DGDR Dirección General de Desarrollo Rural [Rural Development Bureau] 
ESMP Environmental and social management plan 
ESMR Environmental and social management report 
GHG Greenhouse gas 
ICAS Institutional Capacity Assessment System 
ICTs Information and communication technologies 
INIA Instituto National de Investigación Agropecuaria [National Agricultural 

Research Institute] 
IPNEs Institutos Públicos no Estatales [Nonstate Public Institutes] 
MGAP Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP) 
PMU Project Management Unit 
RPDP Rural Productive Development Program 
RTAE Rural Technical Assistance and Extension 
 
 



 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY 

URUGUAY 
RURAL PRODUCTIVE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM II 

(UR-L1147) 
 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Borrower: Eastern Republic of Uruguay 
Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Amortization period: 24 years 

Executing agency: The borrower, through the Ministry of Livestock, 
Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP) 

Disbursement period: 6 years 

Grace period: 6.5 years(b) 

Interest rate: LIBOR-based 

Source Amount (US$) % Credit fee: (c) 

IDB (Ordinary Capital) 24,232,000 89 Inspection and supervision fee: (c) 

Local 2,889,000 11 Weighted average life: 15.25 years(d) 

Total 27,121,000 100 Approval currency: United States dollars 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description: To help improve the sustainability of small and medium-sized family-owned agricultural production units. 
The specific objectives are to increase the adoption of climate-smart technologies and to build capacities for technology generation and 
transfer, technical assistance, and rural extension. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first loan disbursement: Submission, to the Bank’s satisfaction, of evidence of the 
entry into force of the program Operating Regulations, including the environmental and social management plan (ESMP), in accordance 
with the terms previously agreed with the Bank (paragraph 3.1). 

For contractual conditions of a socioenvironmental nature, see Annex B of the environmental and social management report (ESMR). 

Special contractual conditions for execution: For the use of resources allocated to subcomponents (i), (iii), and (iv) of Component II, 
the signing and entry into force of Standard Framework Agreements between the MGAP (through the Rural Development Bureau 
(DGDR)), and the National Agricultural Research Institute (INIA) and Nonstate Public Institutes (IPNEs) (paragraph 3.2). 

Exceptions to Bank policies: None 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(e) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(f) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

 
(a) Under the terms of the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the amortization schedule, 

as well as currency and interest rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk management considerations into account when reviewing such 
requests. 

(b) Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted provided that they do not entail any 
extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date as documented in the loan contract. 

(c) The credit fee and the inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors as part of its review of the Bank’s 
lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(d) The original weighted average life of the loan may be shorter, depending on the signature date of the loan contract. 

(e) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(f) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity and Rule of Law). 

 
 

 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-39
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-41


 
 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, problem addressed, and rationale1 

1.1 The agriculture sector: importance, features, and challenges. The agricultural 
sector2 is of critical importance for Uruguay’s economy. In 2016, it accounted for 7% 
of GDP, or 12% of GDP when associated food industries are included (Ackermann 
et al., 2018). It represented 15% of employment and more than 75% of total exports, 
the main categories being beef, agricultural produce, dairy products, and forestry 
products (Uruguay XXI, 2016). Compared with other productive activities, the sector 
has the greatest multiplier effect on the economy (6.22, versus 5.47 for the 
manufacturing industry and 6.08 for services) and the greatest impact on 
employment (0.42, versus 0.33 for the services sector) (Terra et al., 2009). The 
sector received annual support equivalent to 0.58% of GDP over the 2014-2016 
period, of which 63% was for general services and 37% consisted of producer 
support (direct or price support) (Ackermann et al., 2018).3 

1.2 Between 1981 and 2012, total agricultural productivity in Uruguay grew at a higher 
average rate than in the region as a whole (1.5%, compared to 1.2%) (Nin-Pratt, 
Falconi, Ludena, & Martel, 2015). This growth has been uneven, however, with small 
and medium-sized family producers left behind (Instituto National de Investigación 
Agropecuaria [National Agricultural Research Institute] (INIA), 2016). Family 
systems account for more than 70% of farm enterprises and contribute around 25% 
of gross agricultural product. They are characterized by low levels of technology 
adoption and production efficiency, with high levels of variation from one year to the 
next (Albin, 2017); they are also focused primarily (60%) on livestock (Dirección 
General de Desarrollo Rural [Rural Development Bureau] (DGDR) and the Ministry 
of Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP), 2018c). Climate variability and 
change have a particular impact on small and medium-sized producers (MGAP, 
2017a), as it is reported that family-owned livestock farms tend to be located in areas 
of greater climate vulnerability (de Torres Álvarez et al., 2014). 

1.3 Against this backdrop, the sustainability of smaller-scale production units faces 
challenges across two main dimensions: 

1.4 Dimension 1 – Productive. The productivity of smaller-scale units could be 
enhanced by technical assistance and technology adoption. The results of the 2014 
dairy survey show that the level of productivity is, in general, directly related to farm 
size (Instituto Nacional de la Leche [National Dairy Institute] (INALE), 2017). Based 
on the same survey, Pérez-Quesada and García-Suárez (2016) report that 
productivity can be increased among smaller producers because their level of 
technical efficiency stands at 74%. This indicates that they can use available inputs 
and technologies more efficiently in order to increase production (by 26% on 
average). These authors also indicate that agronomic, veterinary, or accounting 
technical assistance is associated with higher production efficiency. Nonetheless, 
knowledge management difficulties and limited access to extension services are 
barriers that have a particularly marked impact on smaller-scale producers (INIA, 
2016). In 2011, only 46% of farms received technical assistance (Hegedus, 2013), 

                                                
1  See bibliographical references. 
2  Includes forestry and agroindustrial activities. 
3  Estimate based on the methodology of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-8
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-8
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-27


 - 2 - 
 
 
 

while it has been observed that technical assistance coverage increases in tandem 
with farm size (Arboleya, 2018). 

1.5 This production gap may also be narrowed through technology adoption, including 
improved management practices. In the case of cattle ranching, for example, 
producers that have not received technical assistance report average annual beef 
yields of 50-70 kg per hectare, versus 250 kg per hectare in specialized 
establishments (World Bank and the International Center for Tropical Agriculture, 
2015). A recent project demonstrated the potential for increasing beef productivity 
levels from 70 kg per hectare to 100 kg by using existing technologies and 
implementing practices based on the improved the use of available resources 
(Gómez Miller, 2017). In the case of family-owned dairy producers, a project aimed 
at improving production practices—coordinated by INALE in partnership with dairy 
cooperatives—indicates that 70% of beneficiaries either maintained or increased 
production over the 2013-2017 period, even under extreme climatic conditions 
(Arboleya, 2018). 

1.6 Despite the potential for increased productivity, there are significant barriers to the 
adoption of agricultural technologies. In Uruguay, this is influenced by farm size, 
access to information, technical and managerial capacities, costs, risk, and the 
availability of appropriate technologies (Gómez Miller, 2017; Saravia and Gómez, 
2013). Technology adoption is also directly linked to technical assistance and rural 
extension services (Saravia and Gómez, 2013), and technological change requires 
the identification, validation, and dissemination of technologies that are appropriate 
for family agriculture (Comisión Nacional de Fomento Rural [National Rural 
Development Commission], 2009). 

1.7 Social factors. Knowledge and adoption of technologies is influenced by social 
networks, which are an important source of information and learning that strengthen 
producers’ capabilities (Aramburu et al., 2014; Doss, 2006). Rural associations 
provide positive externalities and produce public and semi-public goods, in addition 
to serving as a tool for economic and social inclusion (Bijman et al., 2012). The 
experience in Latin America indicates that membership of such associations among 
rural extension users helps to overcome scale constraints, as it allows them to 
access the services offered by rural organizations (Escobar, 2012). Collective 
processes are therefore important for family agriculture, and support is needed to 
strengthen these organizations (de Torres Álvarez et al., 2014). 

1.8 In Uruguay, rural associations (cooperatives, rural development enterprises, and 
agricultural trade associations) have sought to meet the diverse needs of producers, 
with the existence of around 200 such organizations with the potential for 
implementing rural technical assistance and extension (RTAE) services (Arboleya, 
2018). In family agriculture, collective approaches have proven effective in 
supporting technological changes, reduced price variability, integration into value 
chains, lower transaction costs, and access to goods and services (Programa Fida 
Mercosur Claeh and Centro Cooperativista Uruguayo, 2014), as well as participation 
in programs to support technology adoption (DGDR/MGAP, 2018a). There is 
evidence of the effectiveness of collective strategies for supporting production: 
increased implementation of such strategies is correlated with economic and 
production improvements (66% increase in per capita farm earnings and 39% in 
liters per hectare) (García Ferreira et al., 2011). Collective approaches also help to 



 - 3 - 
 
 
 

ensure that producers continue to implement activities once an intervention has 
been completed (Universidad de la República, 2006). Nonetheless, collective 
activities aimed at facilitating access to technology face difficulties in terms of access 
to capital; minimum scales for achieving economic and organizational viability; 
visualization of the benefits from an activity (particularly where the impact is long 
term); and a scarcity of the skills necessary for collective work (INIA & DGDR, 2016). 
With respect to RTAE, the critical factors for improving these services include the 
training of technical staff, interagency coordination, and the availability of suitable 
technologies (Hegedus, 2013). 

1.9 At the same time, there are gender and age gaps in access to government rural 
development policies, technical assistance, access to land, assets, own revenues, 
independent work, and farm titles (DGDR, 2018). For example, women account 
for just one in four beneficiaries of policies to improve the productivity and income 
of family producers (compared to 44% of potential beneficiaries), while data from 
the 2011 Agricultural Census indicate that women producers receive less technical 
assistance (38% versus 43% for producers) (Mascheroni, 2016). Likewise, the 
advancing age of producers in the sector (MGAP, 2017b) is a barrier to increased 
productivity, as producer age is inversely correlated with the use of new 
technologies (INIA, 2016). 

1.10 Dimension 2 – Environmental. Climate change magnifies the aforementioned 
problems, as the country is vulnerable to extreme events. For example, preliminary 
estimates by the MGAP indicate that the immediate impact of the 2017-2018 drought 
caused agricultural sector losses equivalent to US$560 million. This amount rises 
by more than US$600 million if delayed impacts are taken into account, relating to a 
decline in the number of calves born and the consequent impact on future exports. 
The sector is also the main source of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (74% of the 
total in 2012). Within this, beef production accounts for more than 66% of emissions 
(Eastern Republic of Uruguay, 2017). This underscores the importance of 
implementing adaptation and mitigation measures. In fact, Uruguay’s production 
strategy is to rely on technological innovation and inclusion in value chains to double 
output by 2050 in a sustainable and inclusive manner, with greater climate resilience 
and lower rates of emissions (MGAP, 2017b). In addition, the objectives of the First 
Nationally Determined Contribution include reducing the rate of emissions from food 
production, while also indicating the priority given to adaptation in the agricultural 
sector (Eastern Republic of Uruguay, 2017). 

1.11 To achieve these proposals, climate-smart agricultural technologies warrant 
particular consideration, as these either maintain or enhance productivity while 
reducing emissions and/or contributing to climate resilience (World Bank and the 
International Center for Tropical Agriculture, 2015). Accordingly, the 2010 
“Agrointelligent Uruguay” policy has promoted the incorporation of climate-smart 
measures to enhance productivity in an environmentally sustainable manner 
(Ministry of Housing, Land Management, and the Environment, 2016). For example, 
implementation of the policy has facilitated a reduction in emissions rates for beef 
production through the use of feed management technologies and animal husbandry 
methods that help to boost productivity (Eastern Republic of Uruguay, 2017). In 
family-based livestock farming, specifically, estimates indicate that climate-smart 
practices (focused on adjustments in the number of animals per hectare, the use of 
rotational grazing systems, and herd optimization) can increase productivity by 25% 



 - 4 - 
 
 
 

and reduce emission rates by 30%, while simultaneously improving drought 
resilience (Ministry of Housing, Land Management, and the Environment, 2017). 
This reduction in GHG emissions through the implementation of climate-smart 
technologies tends to increase over time, reaching up to 40% in the third year in 
some cases (INIA, 2018). 

1.12 Previous experience. The Food and Agriculture Organization (2009) identifies the 
central elements of agricultural policy that agricultural institutions should focus their 
efforts on. These include government policies to protect and support weaker 
economic sectors; strengthening of the institutional framework for agriculture; and 
the provision of technology transfer and rural extension services. 

1.13 In this sphere, with respect to the implementation of differentiated policies for family 
agriculture in Uruguay, the following issues have been identified as important: 
(i) ensuring strong interagency coordination; (ii) creating synergies with other policy 
instruments (e.g., the promotion of collective endeavors and support for investments 
to enhance resilience); (iii) establishing a technical assistance network consisting of 
professionals committed to the programs and involved in them; (iv) working with 
producers that are nonbeneficiaries of public programs, as well as with those already 
served to incorporate more complex technologies or processes; and (v) leveraging 
the potential of rural organizations to facilitate the promotion and implementation of 
activities (Arboleya, 2018). The importance of addressing these factors is consistent 
with the findings of the Rural Productive Development Program (RPDP) (loan 
2595/OC-UR), whose impact evaluation showed a significant effect on beneficiaries’ 
productivity, with an increase of at least 10% in milk and beef yields per hectare 
(Aguirre et al., 2018). This study also reports that the impact is generally greater 
among those benefiting from MGAP support for the first time, and it indicates that 
the program has helped to strengthen beneficiary organizations, with an 
improvement in their collective processes. Nonetheless, data on program 
participation (DGDR/MGAP, 2018a) show that there is potential for improving the 
inclusion of women and young people as beneficiaries (44% of potential 
beneficiaries are women, yet only 25% benefited, while in the case of young people4 
4% of the total benefited, compared to a potential of 12%) (Beneficiaries of RPDP 
requests for proposals). 

1.14 An analysis carried out for Latin America (Food and Agriculture Organization and 
the IDB, 2016) indicates the need for government funding to ensure that the most 
vulnerable producers are able to access RTAE. It also reports that for these services 
to be effective, they should have a territorial approach, involve the participation of 
public and private stakeholders, provide continuous training for their human 
resources, and be linked to the research. Cumulative experience points to the 
following good practices: emphasizing the inclusion of smaller-scale producers that 
face greater hurdles to increased productivity; the participation of producers in 
determining their needs and prioritizing their problems; the provision of information 
and alternatives based on local agroecological and socioeconomic conditions; the 
simultaneous provision of public and private services at the regional level; and the 
incorporation of information and communication technologies (ICTs) to help reach 
producers and provide information and services to them (Escobar, 2012). ICTs can 
help foster the adoption of technologies to optimize production and increase farmer 

                                                
4  Individuals 15 to 29 years of age, according to the National Youth Institute. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-48
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-32
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-33
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-33


 - 5 - 
 
 
 

incomes (Jack & Tobias, 2017). Evidence from small-scale farmers in India indicates 
that cellphone-based technical assistance helped to increase yields (28% for cumin 
and 9% for cotton), with an estimated private return of US$10 for each dollar 
invested in the service (Cole & Fernando, 2016). 

1.15 Recent Bank experience. The RPDP, which was approved in 2011 with a final 
disbursement date of 31 December 2018, is executed by the MGAP through its Rural 
Development Bureau (DGDR). Its objective is to help improve the incomes of small- 
and medium-scale farmers, by increasing their productivity through the adoption of 
new technologies. To this end, the program focused on providing financing for: 
(i) production support for technology transfer; (ii) the promotion of research into 
adaptive technologies; and (iii) institutional strengthening of the DGDR. The 
operation’s intervention mechanism was based on requests for proposals for group 
management plans, and this serves as the foundation for this program. Its 
outcomes—some of which were measured in the aforementioned impact evaluation 
(paragraph 1.13)—include the following: (i) increases in average agricultural and 
livestock yields; (ii) the incorporation of new technologies validated under family 
agriculture condition; (iii) increases in the number of family producers belonging to 
rural organizations; and (iv) strategic territorial plans approved. 

1.16 Lessons learned. Lessons learned during execution of the RPDP, in particular, 
have been taken into account in the proposed program, together with experiences 
from similar operations (lons 1463/OC-UR, 2443/OC-DR, 1800/OC-PR, 2055/BL-NI, 
and 2223/BL-BO) and the Office of Evaluation and Oversight’s (OVE) Review of the 
Bank’s Support to Agriculture, 2002-2014. These lessons and way in which they 
have been incorporated into the program are presented in Table 1. 

 
Table 1. Lessons learned and their incorporation into program design 

Lessons learned Incorporation into program design 

In the RPDP5 

Coverage  

- Include incentives aimed at incorporating 
RPDP non-beneficiary producers. 

- The lack of information is an obstacle to 
producers’ participation in DGDR programs. 

- Lower proportion of women and young people 
among beneficiaries.  

- Creation and/or strengthening of synergies 
with rural organizations or public 
institutions. 

- Strengthening of program dissemination. 

- Requests for proposals targeting 
exclusively women and young people.  

Technical assistance  

- Assistance provided by individual technicians 
has posed limitations for: (i) the 
comprehensive, multidisciplinary 
consideration of technological options; 
(ii) reaching producers in remote or isolated 
areas; and (iii) high turnover.  

- Introduction of comprehensive technical 
assistance arrangements provided by 
multidisciplinary teams linked to rural 
organizations and/or public institutions. 

                                                
5  See Aguirre et al. (2018), DGDR/MGAP (2018) (Encuesta a Productores/as Familiares No Beneficiarios 

de Convocatorias de la DGDR), DGDR/MGAP (2018a) and Mendoza (2018) (Evaluación del PDPR). 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-34
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-34
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-35


 - 6 - 
 
 
 

Lessons learned Incorporation into program design 

Monitoring and evaluation  

- Monitoring and evaluation require the 
availability and implementation of instruments 
for gathering and analyzing information. 

- The detailed prior design of the impact 
evaluation is essential for the robust analysis 
of program effectiveness. 

- A good practice yet to be implemented 
involves the categorization of technologies 
financed by the program, with a view to 
facilitating the monitoring and evaluation of 
expected outcomes and impacts.  

- Incorporation of instruments that facilitate 
dynamic monitoring and allow evaluation of 
the effectiveness of execution processes.  

- Design of the impact evaluation, and the 
identification and planning of the 
instruments to be used for information 
gathering.  

- Inclusion of typologies of technologies and 
technology packages.  

In similar operations 

Provision of technical assistance and 
technology linkage 

 

- The limited scale, high number, and scattered 
nature of smaller-scale producers lead to high 
costs in providing technical assistance and 
technology adoption on an individual basis. In 
addition, the development and/or adaptation 
of technologies for these producers is limited 
by a disconnect with researchers.  

- Promotion of the creation of groups of 
producers and linkages with rural 
organizations and public institutions to 
provide technical assistance more 
efficiently. 

- Activities that foster interaction between 
producers and technology 
researchers/developers. 

Sustainability of technology adoption  

- Projects frequently provide one-off 
improvements without altering the structural 
barriers experienced by beneficiaries; this 
reduces the sustainability of benefits over 
time. 

- Long-term sustainability is sought through 
the work with rural organizations, 
complementary multidisciplinary technical 
assistance offered by the private and public 
sectors, and technologies designed and 
adapted for the target population.  

 

1.17 Intervention strategy. The proposed program is based on the evidence presented 
above, and it seeks to continue improving the productive and environmental 
sustainability of small-scale agricultural units. To this end, it focuses on technology 
adoption, with particular attention devoted to market failures casued by: information 
asymmetries (paragraphs 1.4 and 1.6), human capital (paragraphs 1.7 and 1.9), and 
coordination (paragraphs 1.10 and 1.11). Using the RPDP as a foundation, the 
lessons learned and good practices identified through the experiences of the MGAP, 
the Bank, and the region were incorporated into the program’s design in order to 
amplify its reach and impact (paragraphs 1.10 to 1.14). These elements are 
summarized in Table 2. 

 



 - 7 - 
 
 
 

Table 2. Summary of key elements of program design 

Targeting 

- Emphasis on new beneficiaries. 

- Previous producers may benefit, but with more complex technologies. 

- Producers determine their needs and priorities, but solutions focus on climate-smart technologies 
(inputs and processes, including ICTs). 

- Special consideration for women and young people. 

Structure 

- Strengthening of interagency coordination and synergies. 

- A territorial approach with the participation of rural organizations and key institutions that 
contribute to promotion and implementation of the program. 

- Comprehensive technical assistance provided by multidisciplinary teams that are committed to 
the program and involved in it. 

- Public and private sector participation. 

 

1.18 Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and is expected to contribute to the 
Corporate Results Framework 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6) through the 
development challenge of productivity and innovation, as it fosters increased 
productivity through the adoption of new technologies. It also contributes to the 
indicator of government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological 
and managerial tools to improve public service delivery. It is also aligned with the 
crosscutting themes of: (i) gender equity, with a special focus on women’s 
participation, thus contributing to the indicator of women beneficiaries of economic 
empowerment initiatives; and (ii) climate change and environmental sustainability, 
as it includes climate-smart technologies that contribute to resilient, low-carbon, 
sustainable development and thus supports farmers through access to improved 
agricultural services and investments (see Table 3 for specific indicators). It also 
contributes to the Sector Framework Documents on Agriculture and Natural 
Resources Management (document GN-2709-5), Food Security (document 
GN-2825-8); Climate Change (document GN-2835-5); and Innovation, Science, and 
Technology (document GN-2791-8). This is a result of its focus on the following 
dimensions of success, respectively: high levels of agricultural productivity and the 
management of climate impacts in the sector; reducing the vulnerability of food 
systems to climate change and natural disasters; progress in the countries on 
including climate considerations in the sectors; and investment in innovation, 
science, and technology. In addition, it supports the results matrix for the IDB 
Country Strategy with Uruguay 2016-2020 (document GN-2836), as it is linked to 
the strategic pillar of productivity and competitiveness through its support for 
innovation. It is also included in the Update of Annex III of the 2018 Operational 
Program Report for Uruguay (document GN-2915-2). 

1.19 It is estimated that 100% of the operation’s funds will be invested in climate change 
adaptation and mitigation activities, based on the multilateral development banks’ 
joint methodology for estimating climate finance (Climate Change). These funds 
contribute to the IDB Group’s target of increasing financing for climate-change 
related projects to 30% of all approved operations by the end of 2020. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost 

1.20 Objective. To help improve the sustainability of small and medium-sized family-
owned agricultural production units. The specific objectives are to increase the 

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/8505
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/8505
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-36


 - 8 - 
 
 
 

adoption of climate-smart technologies and to build capacities for technology 
generation and transfer, technical assistance, and rural extension. 

1.21 Climate-smart technologies help to strengthen climate resilience and/or reduce 
GHG emissions while also improving performance in terms of yield or return. Based 
on this criterion, priority will be given to those aligned with the actions identified in 
the First Nationally Determined Contribution. 

1.22 Component I. Improved productivity through technology adoption and 
alliance-building (IDB: US$17.94 million; local: US$380,000). This component 
focuses on financing the implementation of plans to improve productivity while 
taking climate considerations into account. It will provide direct support to 
producers who, as a group and in response to open and competitive requests for 
proposals organized by the MGAP, submit management plans that propose the 
use of climate-smart technologies to address their challenges. Groups of at least 
three producers (family, small, and medium-sized) will be eligible, the majority 
being family producers and not necessarily members of rural organizations. 
Support for the implementation of these plans will comprise financing for: 
(i) investments in technology, providing up to 50% of the total cost of materials, 
inputs, and specialized technical assistance for technology adoption (with a 
maximum value of US$8,000 per producer); and (ii) comprehensive technical 
assistance. The comprehensive technical assistance will consist of support and 
training in the areas of production, marketing/value added, and administration, 
provided by teams set up in either rural organizations or public institutions. 

1.23 Support will be differentiated, emphasizing the participation of beneficiaries who 
have not previously received support from the DGDR. In the case of beneficiaries 
who have already received DGDR assistance, the management plans will need to 
include more advanced technologies (as defined in the Technology evaluation). In 
no case will support be provided for practices that have already received 
cofinancing. New beneficiaries will also have the option of receiving greater 
comprehensive technical assistance as determined by the management plan and 
the technology selected (this support will be determined, in due time, in the 
documentation for the request for proposals). To encourage greater participation by 
women and young people, requests for proposals will be issued exclsuively for these 
groups, offering them up to 80% financing for technology adoption and alliance-
building processes. 

1.24 Component II. Capacity-building in technology generation and transfer, 
technical assistance, and rural extension (IDB: US$5.2 million; local: 
US$1.97 million). This componenent involves financing for activities aimed at 
generating and transferring technologies, as well as strengthening the delivery of 
rural technical assistance and extension (RTAE). To this end, strategic partnerships 
will be established with key rural organizations and/or nonstate public institutes 
(IPNEs) that have a local presence and work directly with producers. The component 
encompasses the following subcomponents: 

a. Generation and adaptation of climate-smart technology for family 
agriculture. This seeks to spark the development of new technologies or 
adjustments to existing ones through farm-based research and 
experimentation, based on strategic partnerships between producers’ 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-8
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-37


 - 9 - 
 
 
 

associations and public and/or private research entities. This will allow newly 
developed or adapted technologies to meet to the needs of producers. 

b. Strengthening of private sector RTAE capacities. This focuses on 
strengthening the ability of rural organizations to provide services to producers. 
It includes the creation of multidisciplinary teams to provide comprehensive 
technical assistance, training, as well as programs to disseminate and build 
awareness of the requests for proposals. 

c. Strengthening of public sector RTAE capacities. This is focused on 
improving capacities and coordination between the MGAP and IPNEs to 
support the delivery of RTAE to producers. 

d. Promotion and adoption of ICTs in family agriculture. This encompasses 
support for the use, dissemination, and development of ICTs for family 
agriculture through strategic partnerships with key entities. 

1.25 Monitoring and administrative costs (IDB: US$1.09 million; local: 
US$540,000). This includes the costs of administration, monitoring, audit, 
determination of baselines and final targets, and the midterm and final evaluations. 

C. Key results indicators 

1.26 A total of 3,100 producers are expected to benefit directly from the program, of 
which 50% have not previously benefited from DGDR support. Of this total number 
of beneficiaries, 32% are expected to be women (see Gender annex), with young 
people accounting for 11%. The expected impacts are increased productivity and 
reduced GHG emissions. The following intermediate outcomes are expected: 
(i) increased adoption and availability of climate-smart technologies; (ii) increased 
participation of new beneficiaries, women, and young people; and (iii) greater use 
of agricultural services, including technical assistance. Key indicators are 
presented in Table 3. 

 

Table 3. Main indicators in the results matrix 

Impact indicators 
Timing of 

measurement 
Rationale for selection 

Increase in partial land productivity (kg of 
meat/hectare, liters of milk/hectare) 

Impact 
evaluation 

Measures the contribution to the 
production dimension of sustainability 

Reduction in emissions per unit of output 
(kgs CO2 equivalent/kg of meat) 

Years 1 and 6 Measures the contribution to the 
environmental dimension of 
sustainability 

Increase in the rate of adoption of 
climate-smart technologies by 
beneficiaries  

Years 1 and 6 These measure the use of climate-
smart technologies, a proxy that 
indicates that producers have improved 
their climate resilience and reduced 
emissions  

Increase in the percentage of 
beneficiary producers that manage their 
lands with a safe carrying capacity 

Years 1 and 6 

Increase in the percentage of beneficiary 
family producers that continue to receive 
comprehensive technical assistance once 
the plan has been completed  

Years 1 and 6 Indicator of the intervention’s 
sustainability 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-52


 - 10 - 
 
 
 

Impact indicators 
Timing of 

measurement 
Rationale for selection 

Increase in the percentage of users of 
services provided by rural organizations.  

Years 1 and 6 The supply of services provided by rural 
organizations is a proxy that indicates 
whether producers are better able to 
buy inputs, sell their products, and/or 
purchase services on a group basis, 
thus favoring productivity levels 

Increase in new technologies validated 
for family production 

Years 1 and 6 Measures the availability of new 
technologies for family agriculture 

Increase in the rate of adoption of ICTs 
by family production units  

Years 1 and 6 Measures the effectiveness of training 
and other efforts to promote the use of 
ICTs by family producers 

Increase in the percentage of new 
beneficiaries 

Years 1 and 6 Indicates whether targeting and 
promotion efforts were effective in 
encouraging the participation of new 

beneficiaries 

Increase in the percentage of women 
beneficiaries  

Years 1 and 6 Indicates whether targeting and 
promotion efforts were effective in 
encouraging women’s participation 

Increase in the percentage of young 
beneficiaries  

Years 1 and 6 Indicates whether targeting and 
promotion efforts were effective in 
encouraging youth participation  

 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 Program cost and financing. Total program cost is US$27.12 million, of which 
US$24.23 million (89%) will be financed through a specific investment loan from the 
Bank’s Ordinary Capital. Table 4 presents the costs broken down by component. 

 

Table 4. Program cost and financing (US$ million) 

Investment component IDB 
Local 

counterpart 
Total % 

I.  Improved productivity through technology 
adoption and alliance-building 

17.94 0.38 18.32 68 

i. Individual plans 17.09 0.38 17.47 64 

ii. Plans, women and young people  0.85 0.00 0.85 3 

II. Capacity-building in technology generation 
and transfer, technical assistance, and 
rural extension 

5.20 1.97 7.17 26 

i. Generation and adaptation pf climate-
smart technologies 

0.42 0.13 0.55 2 

ii. Strengthening of private RTAE 4.26 0.96 5.22 19 

iii. Strengthening of public RTAE 0.19 0.79 0.98 4 

iv. Promotion and use of ICTs 0.33 0.09 0.42 2 

Administration and monitoring 1.09 0.54 1.63 6 

Total (US$) 24.23 2.89 27.12 100 

% 89.00 11.00 100.00  

 



 - 11 - 
 
 
 

2.2 The disbursement period will be six years, based on the expected annual budgetary 
space in the national budget, and also to allow the impacts in the producers’ 
management plans to materialize. See Table 5 for disbursement details. 

 
Table 5. Disbursement schedule (US$ million) 

Year 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Total 

Amount 4.0 5.9 4.9 4.4 3.5 1.5 24.2 

% 16.5 24.4 20.2 18.2 14.5 6.2 100 

 

2.3 Economic viability. Based on the experience and evaluation of the RPDP, the level 
of support for technology implementation is maintained at up to 50% of total costs, 
with a maximum of US$8,000 per producer. Analyses of the ex ante economic 
evaluation show that subsidies of 50% are sufficient to ensure that investments yield 
a return over that time period (Mendoza, 2018). In camparative terms, a similar 
World Bank program currently under way in Uruguay provides maximum support of 
80% of an investment of up to US$16,000 per producer. However, financing is 
limited to activities with substantial positive environmental externalities (reductions 
in pollution in tributaries and improvements in the efficiency of water usage). 

2.4 The program’s economic viability is based on the cost-benefit analyses carried out 
using a model of the support for climate-smart technology adoption by producers. 
Economic benefits were estimated by calculating the value of increased productivity 
in the targeted farms. Support to producers will be concentrated mainly in the 
segments of livestock farming for beef and wool (65%) and dairy (16%), which will 
be offered incentives for a wide variety of climate-smart technologies. For the 
program as a whole (including both administration, supervision, and monitoring 
costs and investments to strengthen the rural organizations supporting adoption by 
the producers), an internal rate of return of 15.4% was obtained, with a net present 
value of US$5.0 million (based on a 10-year time horizon and a discount rate of 
12%). In light of these results, the benefit/cost ratio is 1.11 for each unit invested. 
The results were subject to a sensitivity analysis indicating that even under more 
conservative assumptions (relating to the technology adoption process, higher 
costs, limitations in access to technical assistance once the intervention has been 
completed), program returns remain above 12%. The program also offers parallel 
benefits in terms of the reduction in GHG emissions, which are accounted for 
separately (Program economic evaluation). 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.5 This program has been classified as Category B operation in accordance with the 
Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (Operational Policy OP-703), as its 
potential direct and indirect impacts are reversible and temporary, of low magnitude, 
and localized in nature. Well-known measures are readily available to mitigate and 
compensate for them, and the implementation thereof is viable. It has also been 
determined that the level of natural disaster risk is low to moderate, taking into 
account the focus on climate-smart technologies. At the same time, highly positive 
effects are expected from the delivery of agricultural extension services, training, 
and climate-smart technology packages that will impact producers and the different 
beneficiaries throughout the entire production chain, as well as consumers across 
the country. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-38


 - 12 - 
 
 
 

2.6 An environmentaland social analysis was prepared for the program, and its 
corresponding environmental and social management plan (ESMP) sets out 
procedures, responsibilities, guidelines, and criteria for identifying, evaluating, 
avoiding, mitigating, and monitoring the environmental and social impacts of the 
specific actions financed. A significant consultation process was implemented during 
preparation of the operation, and there is no evidence of any environmental or social 
liabilities or compliance failures that could affect the future performance of this new 
initiative. 

2.7 The ESMP will be included as an annex to the program Operating Regulations, and 
both documents will establish environmental and social requirements to ensure that 
the project is executed in compliance with the Bank’s safeguards and the conditions 
included in Annex B of the environmental and social management report (ESMR). 

2.8 Environmental and social sustainability risks. Adverse climate conditions 
represent a medium risk to the program. In order to mitigate this, the program will 
focus on climate-smart technologies; requests for proposals that support the 
development and adaptation of climate-smart technologies; the development of 
ICTs that contribute to adaptation to climate change and variability; and the inclusion 
of climate risk management in training for associations, technical staff, and 
producers. 

C. Fiduciary risks 

2.9 Based on the MGAP’s prior experience in executing similar operations, no specific 
weaknesses have been identified in its institutional capacity. Neither the fiduciary 
activities included in the Procurement Plan nor the financial management activities 
are regarded as complex, thus confirming—together with the executing agency’s 
track record of performance and compliance—the low level of risk for this project 
(see Annex III). 

D. Other project risks 

2.10 Development risks. There is a medium level of risk associated with farm 
management plans lacking a comprehensive approach and difficulties in attracting 
new beneficiaries. To mitigate the former, the following activities are planned: 
training for each request for proposals, with specific training regarding the 
comprehensive approach; periodic monitoring and territorial coordination meetings; 
and preparation of a dissemination plan. In the case of the second risk, in addition 
to a dissemination plan, adjustments are planned to the requirements in the requests 
for proposals, as well as the signing of agreements with other public institutions. 

2.11 Macroeconomic risk. The new regional context poses a medium level of 
macroeconomic risk over the next few years for growth in Uruguay, trends in the 
dollar, and the resulting impact on inflation. Nonetheless, country risk remains low 
and stable (172 basis points in September 2018). At the same time, the increase in 
the dollar exchange rate may favor the competitiveness of the export-oriented 
agricultural sector. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-621703441-9
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-41


 - 13 - 
 
 
 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of execution arrangements 

3.1 The borrower will be responsible for program execution, through the Ministry of 
Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP). The MGAP, in turn, will act through 
the Rural Development Bureau (DGDR) with support from the Project Management 
Unit (PMU). The DGDR will be responsible for technical execution and the direction 
of the program, while the PMU will be responsible for fiduciary and administrative 
matters (see Organizational chart). The guidelines and procedures for program 
execution are set out in the program Operating Regulations. As a special 
contractual condition precedent to the first loan disbursement, evidence will 
be provided to the Bank’s satisfaction that that the program Operating 
Regulations (including the ESMP) have entered into force, in accordance with 
the terms previously agreed with the Bank. The aim of this is to establish the 
guidelines and procedures to be followed for successful program execution. 

3.2 Special contractual conditions for execution. Standard Framework Agreements 
are expected to be signed with the National Agricultural Research Institute (INIA) 
and other Nonstate Public Institutes (IPNEs) that are considered key to the execution 
of certain program activities. For the use of resources allocated to subcomponents 
(i), (iii), and (iv) of Component II, the signing and entry into force of Standard 
Framework Agreements between the MGAP (through the DGDR) and the INIA and 
IPNEs will be a special contractual condition for execution. The signing of these 
agreements is essential for implementation of the activities financed under each of 
the subcomponents. 

3.3 Execution arrangements are based on those used during implementation of the 
RPDP, with adjustments aimed at incorporating lessons learned. Details of the 
arrangements are provided in the draft program Operating Regulations, and Table 6 
provides a summary of their key features. 

 

Table 6. Key implementation features 

Technologies financed. These will be determined based on the producers’ needs, taking into 
account local conditions, technical viability, and contribution to climate change mitigation and/or 
adaptation. Multidisciplinary technical teams—the formation of which is supported under 
Component II—will prepare the management plans. 

Management plans. A management plan is considered implemented once at least 60% of the 
activities included in the approved plan have been fulfilled and an evaluation of technology adoption 
has been completed. 

Rural organizations. As part of execution, rural organizations interested in becoming Regional 
Rural Development Agents (ATDRs) will be convened and selected. The ATDRs are rural 
organizations authorized by the DGDR to provide support for the following activities: (i) raising 
awareness among producers; (ii) training for technical staff and producers; (iii) dissemination of the 
requests for proposals; (iv) provision of comprehensive technical assistance; (v) preparation of 
management plans; and (vi) monitoring of the implementation of approved plans. The program will 
finance institutional strengthening of the ATDRs, training of their human resources, and the services 
of promotion, extension, and technical assistance that they provide. 

Program dissemination. The requests for proposals will be widely publicized, using communication 
and awareness-building strategies by the DGDR and the ATDRs. 

 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-64
http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-39


 - 14 - 
 
 
 

3.4 Procurement of goods, works, and consulting and nonconsulting services. 
Procurement financed in whole or in part with Bank resources will be conducted in 
accordance with the Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by 
the IDB (document GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and Contracting of 
Consultants Financed by the IDB (document GN-2350-9). The Procurement Plan 
contains details of the procurement processes that will be implemented during 
execution, as well as the procedures used by the Bank for their review. 

3.5 Direct contracting. Direct contracts totaling US$6,048,153 are envisaged, of which 
US$4,025,963 will be financed with Bank resources and the rest with local 
counterpart funds. The Bank-financed amount will be used to renew the contracts of 
consultants belonging to the RPDP team (US$3,885,736) and for fuel purchases 
(US$140,227). 

3.6 Single-source selection of consultants is permitted under sections 3.10(a) and 3.11 
of the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB 
(document GN-2350-9), which establish the principle of continuity of service where 
such continuity is more efficient than a new competition. In this case: (i) initial 
selection of the consultants was done on a competitive basis in 2012 and received 
the Bank’s prior no objection; (ii) the consultants whose contracts are to be renewed 
are subject to an annual performance evaluation; and (iii) in the event of 
unsatisfactory results, a consultant’s contract will not be renewed and alternative 
human resources will be sought through a competitive process. With regard to the 
direct purchase of fuel from the state-run Administración Nacional de Combustibles, 
Alcohol y Pórtland [National Fuel, Alcohol, and Cement Administration] (ANCAP), 
this is based, first, on the requirements of section 3.6(c) of the Policies for the 
Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the IDB (document GN-2349-9), 
which allow direct contracting in cases where a product may only be obtained from 
one source, and, second, on section 33.C.1 of the Texto Ordenado de Contabilidad 
y Administración Financiera [Consolidated Text on Accounting and Financial 
Administration] (TOCAF), which indicates that government bodies or departments 
may engage in direct contracting with each other. 

3.7 The fiduciary agreements and requirements (Annex III) establish the framework for 
financial management and planning, as well as the supervision and execution of 
procurement applicable to program execution. 

3.8 Disbursements. The primary disbursement modality will be advances of funds 
based on actual liquidity needs. These advances will preferably be made every six 
months, once reporting has been filed for at least 70% of the amount advanced. As 
documentary support, the accounting forms will need to be presented along with the 
financial planning spreadsheet. Documentation will be subject to ex post review. 

3.9 Audit. For the duration of program execution, the PMU will submit the program’s 
audited financial statements on an annual basis in accordance with Bank 
requirements. As agreed with the executing agency, audits will be performed by the 
Tribunal de Cuentas de la República [National Audit Office] (TCR). The audited 
annual financial statements will be submitted within 120 days after the end of each 
fiscal year or, in the case of the final statements, within 120 days following the date 
of final disbursement. 



 - 15 - 
 
 
 

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results 

3.10 Throughout program execution, the DGDR, in coordination with the PMU, will 
prepare semiannual progress reports and submit them to the Bank within 60 days 
after the end of each six-month period. These reports will indicate the level of 
physical and financial progress toward the indicators and activities included in the 
results matrix, the annual work plan, and the procurement plan, analyzing any 
problems encountered and describing the corrective measures adopted to resolve 
them. The monitoring reports for the second half of each year will include the annual 
work plan for the following year, the updated procurement plan, the status and 
maintenance plan for the executed works, as well as the status of compliance with 
the environmental and social requirements established for the program in the ESMP. 

3.11 The DGDR, in coordination with the PMU, will also submit two evaluation reports: 
(i) midterm, within 90 days after the date on which 50% of resources have been 
committed, or after 50% of the execution period has elapsed, whichever occurs first; 
and (ii) final, within 90 days after the date on which 95% of resources have been 
disbursed. These reports, which will be prepared independently using loan 
resources, will include (i) financial execution by subcomponent and source of 
financing; (ii) progress toward attainment of the outputs, outcomes, and impacts 
contained in the results matrix; (iii) fulfillment of the ESMP; and (iv) a summary of 
the financial accounts, procurement, disbursements, and internal control. 

3.12 The monitoring and evaluation plan agreed with the MGAP and considered in the 
budget includes detailed information on indicators and means of verification; the 
critical path for activities and outputs; monitoring instruments; responsible parties; 
and the methodology and budget for implementation of the plan. 

C. Impact evaluation 

3.13 A quasi-experimental impact evaluation will be conducted that makes use of 
producers’ voluntary registration for the requests for proposals, implementing a 
random promotion to increase the participation rate in a randomly selected treatment 
group. This promotion will be used as an instrumental variable for evaluating the 
program’s impact on beneficiary productivity. A pilot test will be carried out at the 
end of 2018 with a view to selecting an effective promotion tool. Once this tool has 
been fine-tuned, the evaluation will be conducted for the meat and dairy segments 
at a minimum, given that these are representative of the majority of program 
beneficiaries. The source of information for this analysis will consist of surveys 
administered before and after the intervention (in 2019 and 2024), with a total 
sample of approximately 1,000 producers. 



Annex I - UR-L1147 

Page 1 of 1

Summary

1. IDB Development Objectives

Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Development Objectives

Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2836

Country Program Results Matrix GN-2915-2

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to 

country strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability Evaluable

3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution

3.1 Program Diagnosis

3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions

3.3 Results Matrix Quality

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis

4.1 Program has an ERR/NPV, or key outcomes identified for CEA

4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits and Costs

4.3 Reasonable Assumptions

4.4 Sensitivity Analysis

4.5 Consistency with results matrix

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 

5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms

5.2 Evaluation Plan

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria) Yes

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries 

and/or public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public 

sector entity prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

1.0

9.1

3.0

3.6

2.5

9.0

3.0

3.0

Financial Management: Budget, Treasury, Accounting and 

Reporting, External Control.

Procurement: Information System.

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

2.0

9.3

2.5

6.8

0.0

Yes

Boosting productivity and competitiveness by promoting 

innovation

The intervention is included in the 2018 Operational 

Program.

The objective of the Program is to contribute to improving the sustainability of family, small and medium-sized agricultural production units. The specific objectives are the 
increase in the adoption of climate-smart technologies (CS), and the strengthening of capacities in the generation and transfer of technologies, technical assistance and rural 
extension. CS technologies are those that contribute to increasing climate resilience and/or reducing greenhouse gas emissions while improving performance in terms of 
production or profitability. The diagnosis provided is solid and substantiated in evidence, evaluation and lessons learned from the first Rural Productive Development Program.

The results matrix exhibits a clear vertical logic and is anchored in the two main dimensions that the program addresses to achieve the sustainability of production units of 
smaller scale: productive and environmental. The indicators of impact, result and product in general are SMART, with baselines and defined targets and with the means to verify 
compliance.

The economic analysis is based on the estimation of the benefits of increased productivity in the farms that benefit from the Program. The assumptions are reasonable and are 
based on the findings of previous evaluations, including of the first program. The results of the sensitivity analysis indicate that even under more conservative assumptions 
(linked to the rate of adoption of technologies, higher costs, limitations in access to technical assistance after the end of the intervention), the return of the program remains at 
levels above 12%

The Monitoring Plan complies with the requirements of the DEM. The evaluation proposal is to carry out a quasi-experimental impact assessment that takes advantage of the 
voluntary registration of producers to the calls made by the Program, implementing a random promotion to increase the participation rate in a group of randomly selected 
producers. This promotion will be used as an instrumental variable to evaluate the impact of the program on the productivity of the beneficiaries.

Medium

Yes

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Yes

-Productivity and Innovation

-Gender Equality and Diversity

-Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability

I. Corporate and Country Priorities

-Beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable use of natural capital (#)*

-Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives (#)*

-Government agencies benefited by projects that strengthen technological and

managerial tools to improve public service delivery (#)*

-Farmers with improved access to agricultural services and investments  (#)*

-Beneficiaries of IDBG projects that contribute to at least one key dimension of food

security  (#)*



Annex II 
Page 1 of 8 

RESULTS MATRIX 

Project Objective: To help improve the sustainability of small and medium-sized family-owned agricultural production units. 

EXPECTED IMPACT 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline 

Baseline 
year 

Final target 
Means of 

verification 
Comments 

IMPACT 1 Improved sustainability of agricultural production by small and medium-sized family producers in Uruguay 

Partial productivity 
increased 

meat, kg/ha; 
milk, l/ha 

Meat: 
88 kg/ha 

Milk: 
3.632 l/ha 

2018 

Meat: 
96 kg/ha 

Milk: 
3.995 l/ha 

Impact 
evaluation 

Production plans that have lasted at least 36 months are 
considered to be beneficiaries. 

Current values are based on the RPDP I evaluation (conducted 
in 2018) and will be updated once the baseline from the impact 
evaluation is available (expected in 2019). 

A 10% increase in productivity is expected based on the results 
of the RPDP I evaluation. 

Beef, mutton, lamb and wool and milk segmented. 

Meat equivalent = beef + mutton and lamb + wool. 

Emissions per unit of 
output reduced 

Kg CO2-
eq/kg 

18.6 2018 11.1 

Initial survey: 
2019 

Final survey: 
2024 

INIA methodology (See annex to the Monitoring and 
Evaluation Plan). Values will be updated once the baseline 
from the impact evaluation is available. 



Annex II 
Page 2 of 8 
 
 

EXPECTED OUTCOMES 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline  

Baseline 
year 

Final 
target 

Means of 
verification 

Comments 

OUTCOME 1: Climate-smart improvements in agricultural production units  

Increased rate of climate-
smart technology adoption 
by beneficiaries* 

%  8.4 2017 64 Impact evaluation 

Those participating for at least 36 months are considered to be 
beneficiaries. 

Provisional baseline: Livestock Survey 2016/2017; the adoption 
rate is based on the question on innovation, item 8: 

“Management of the production process:“ ”Have you adopted 
(for the first time) livestock management practices aimed at 

introducing changes or improvements in the establishment?” 
This was restricted to producers of less than 150 Livestock Units 
(the average for the two lowest strata). Value will be updated 
once the baseline from the impact evaluation is available 
(expected in 2019). 

The target is based on the implementation of RPDP II plans. 

Increased percentage of 
producers who manage 
their lands with a safe 
carrying capacity 

% 28.5 2018 37.05 Impact evaluation 

Definition of safe carrying capacity (INIA/IPA) - see annex to the 
Monitoring and Evaluation Plan. Natural land systems are 
considered to exist where improved pastures are no more than 
5% of the total area. 

The current baseline value represents the probability of 
exceeding carrying capacity based on data from the Livestock 
Survey for producers using natural lands. 

Increase of 30% over the baseline. 

The baseline value will be updated once the baseline from the 
impact evaluation is available. 

 

  



Annex II 
Page 3 of 8 

 
 

Indicators 
Unit of 

Measure 
Baseline 

Baseline 
year 

Final 
target 

Means of 

verification 
Comments 

OUTCOME 2: Inclusion of new beneficiaries in MGAP (DGDR) interventions  

Increased percentage of new 
beneficiaries 

%  30 2017 50 Monitoring system 

New beneficiaries, in this context, are producers that have 
never participated in a DGDR program (including the first 
phase of the RPDP). 

The indicator shows the outcome of targeting actions on 
groups that do not typically have access to the incentives due 
to communication limitations. 

OUTCOME 3: Increase in the ongoing use of technical assistance from the RTAE system by family producers 

Increased number of 
beneficiary producers that 
continue to receive 
comprehensive technical 
assistance once the plan has 
been completed* 

Number of 
producers 

(% in 
parentheses) 

Meat:  
81 

(4%) 

Milk:  
323 

(16%) 

2016/2017 
livestock 

2014 dairy 

Meat:  
243 

(12%) 

Milk:  
972 

(48%) 

Rate for beneficiaries 

drawn from the 

monitoring system. 

Impact evaluation 

The baseline and final target are based on the 2,025 
producers whose management plans will be approved and 
implemented.  

The benchmark for the baseline is the current percentage for 
each group. The target is expected to be three times the 
number of producers to continue with technical assistance. 

This refers to technical assistance that is not provided by the 
DGDR, and which entails regular visits from technical staff 
(not one-off assistance). For livestock, agronomic technical 
assistance; for dairy, agronomic and veterinary technical 
assistance. 

OUTCOME 4: Strengthening the collective activities of rural organizations 

Increase in the percentage of 
users of services provided by 
rural organizations* 

% 29 2018 38 

Monitoring system: 

application form and 

closing form (at the 

end of the project) 

Includes: 

Technical assistance; 

Sale of inputs; 

Machinery or equipment services; 

Use of production services; 

Marketing of products. 

Increase of 30% over the baseline. 

The baseline is the percentage of nonbeneficiaries 
participating in one or more rural organizations. This indicative 
value will be adjusted based on information from the rural 
organizations' registration forms, which will include an 
information request regarding the number of users. 



Annex II 
Page 4 of 8 
 
 

Indicators 
Unit of 

measure 
Baseline Year 

Final 
target 

Means of 

verification 
Baseline 

OUTCOME 5: Improved availability of technologies for small and medium-sized family producers 

Increase in new technologies 
validated for family production 

Number 0 2018 5 

Monitoring system 

Final report on each 

technology validated 

by the INIA 

Validation of a technology includes four categories of 
indicators: sociocultural, productive/economic, environmental, 
and reapplication. See annex to the Monitoring and 
Evaluation Plan. 

OUTCOME 6: Increased participation in DGDR interventions by rural women and young people  

Number of female 
beneficiaries increased 

Number of 
producers 

(% in 
parentheses) 

775 

(25%) 
2018 

992 

(32%) 
Monitoring system 

2018 study of 

beneficiaries 

Baseline source: Percentages are drawn from the RPDP I 
study of beneficiaries.  

Target source: Monitoring system. 

Target values are representative of the Uruguayan Registry of 
Family Producers. 

Estimates of absolute values are calculated from the 
respective percentages, based on 3,100 beneficiaries. 

Young beneficiaries are those aged between 15 and 
29 years, according to INJU. 

Number of young beneficiaries 
increased 

Number of 
producers 

(% in 
parentheses) 

124 

(4%) 
2018 

341 

(11%) 

OUTCOME 7: Increase in the use of information and communication technologies (ICTs) 

Increased rate of ICT adoption 
in family production* 

% 7 2018 11 

Monitoring system 

Specific baseline 

survey 2019 

(Registry of Family 

Producers) 

Final survey 2024 

(Registry of Family 

Producers) 

The target is for a 70% increase with respect to the baseline. 

The baseline value will be updated once the baseline from the 
impact evaluation is available. 

 
  



Annex II 
Page 5 of 8 

 
 

OUTPUTS 

Outputs 
Estimated 
cost (US$) 

Unit of 
measure 

Base-
line 

Base-
line 
year 

Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 
Final 
target 

Means of 
verification 

Comments 

Component I: Improved productivity through technology adoption and alliance-building 

Management plans 
implemented 

10,107,237 

Number of 
plans 

0 2019 0 0 600 750 450 225 2,025 
Monitoring 
system 

“Implemented” 
indicates that 60% of 
the activities included 
in the approved plans 
have been fulfilled and 
that the technology 
adoption evaluation 
has been conducted. 

Milestone 1: 
Management 
plans approved 

Number of 
plans 

0 2019 400 600 600 700 400 0 2,700 
Monitoring 
system 

Approved plans are 
those presented by 
eligible producers that 
have passed technical 
evaluation and for 
which the contract has 
been signed. 

Days of technical 
assistance provided 
to beneficiaries 

6,353,121 
Days of 
technical 

assistance 
0 2019 2,000 5,000 6,000 6,500 7,000 0 26,500 

Monitoring 
system 

8-hour day. 

Tools designed for 
promoting alliance-
building initiatives, 
with emphasis on 
integration into the 
chain  

106,955 Report 0 2019 0 1 0 0 0 0 1 

Promotion 
tools 
approved by 
DGDR 
management 

Supporting 
technical 
document 

 

Producers 
participating in new 
alliance-building 
initiatives  

898,421 
Number of 

beneficiaries 
0 2019 0 200 0 200 0 0 400 

Monitoring 
system 

Alliance-building 
initiatives to resolve 
limitations of scale: 
sales contracts for 
output, product 
differentiation. 



Annex II 
Page 6 of 8 
 
 

Outputs 
Estimated 
cost (US$) 

Unit of 
measure 

Base-
line 

Base-
line 
year 

Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 
Final 
target 

Means of 
verification 

Comments 

Number of women 
beneficiaries of 
specific plans 

424,000 
Number of 

women 
0 2019 0 100 0 100 0 0 200 

Monitoring 
system 

 

Number of youth 
beneficiaries of 
specific plans 

424,000 
Number of 

young people 
0 2019 100 0 100 0 0 0 200 

Monitoring 
system 

Youth beneficiaries 
are those between 15 
and 29 years old, 
according to INJU. 

Component II: Capacity-building in technology generation and transfer, technical assistance, and rural extension 

Projects supervised 
for validating 
technologies aimed 
at family producers 

560,603 Projects 0 2019 0 0 3 10 2 0 15 
Reports by 
project 

 

Number of rural 
organizations with a 

“comprehensive 
technical 

assistance” team 

4,270,304 
Rural 

organizations 
0 2019 20 10 10 0 0 0 40 

DGDR 
reports 

ATDR 

“Comprehensive” 
means that their 
function is to provide 
technical assistance 
to improve the 
productivity of 
medium-sized family 
producers. 

Specific 
agreements 
implemented with 
IPNEs to provide 
RTAE to 
beneficiaries 

819,508 
Number of 

agreements 
0 2019 2 1 1 0 0 0 4 

Agreements 
signed 

 

Proposal for 
evaluation system 
formulated 

25,000 Consultancy 0 2019 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 
Consultant 
report 

 



Annex II 
Page 7 of 8 

 
 

Outputs 
Estimated 
cost (US$) 

Unit of 
measure 

Base-
line 

Base-
line 
year 

Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 
Final 
target 

Means of 
verification 

Comments 

Monitoring tool for 
the RTAE system 
developed 

59,769 System 0 2019 0 0 1 0 0 0 1 
Confirmation 
that system 
is operating 

Conceptual definition, 
methodology defined, 
procedures 
established, and 
computer program 
developed. 

Private technical 
staff trained in 
providing 
comprehensive 
support to 
producers 

270,000 
Number of 

technical staff 
0 2019 100 50 25 25 0 0 200 

Training 
records 

Content: 

- Projects; 

- Technology; 

- Management; 

- Extension; 

- Communication; 

- Socioenvironmental 
area. 

* In coordination with 
the Acreditación de 
Saberes [Knowledge 
Accreditation] 
process. 

Public sector 
technical staff 
trained in strategy 
and methods for 
providing 
assistance and 
consolidation of 
rural extension 
processes 

72,600 
Number of 

technical staff 
0 2019 50 30 10 10 0 0 100 

Training 
records 

Content: 

- Projects; 

- Technology; 

- Management; 

- Extension; 

- Communication; 

- Socioenvironmental 
area. 

* In coordination with 
the Acreditación de 
Saberes [Knowledge 
Accreditation] 
process. 



Annex II 
Page 8 of 8 
 
 

Outputs 
Estimated 
cost (US$) 

Unit of 
measure 

Base-
line 

Base-
line 
year 

Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Year 6 
Final 
target 

Means of 
verification 

Comments 

Annual 
dissemination and 
awareness-building 
plans implemented 
and evaluated 

684,859 
Number of 

plans 
0 2019 1 1 1 1 1 1 6 

DGDR 
reports 

 

ICT projects 
developed for family 
production  

305,000 Projects 0 2019 0 0 5 5 5 0 15 
DGDR 
reports 

 

Tools implemented 
for supporting the 
use of ICTs in 
family agricultural 
production systems 
and RTAE services  

117,000 
Number of 

tools 
0 2019 2 1 1 2 1 2 9 

DGDR 
reports 

Guiding strategy, 
surveys (3), 
workshops, training, 
events to exchange 
experiences. 

 



Annex III 
Page 1 of 8 

FIDUCIARY AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Country: Uruguay 

Project: UR-L1147 - Rural Productive Development Program II 

Executing agencies: The Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP) 
through the Rural Development Bureau (DGDR) and its 
Project Management Unit (PMU) 

Fiduciary team: Abel Cuba and Emilie Chapuis (FMP/CUR) 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This operation is for US$27,121,000, of which US$24,232,000 will be financed by 
the Bank. The borrower is the Eastern Republic of Uruguay and the executing 
agency is the Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture, and Fisheries (MGAP) with the 
support of the Rural Development Bureau (DGDR) and its Project Management 
Unit. The MGAP’s execution of loans 1131/OC-UR (the Agricultural Services 
Program), 1643/OC-UR (Program to Support the Productivity and Development of 
New Livestock Products), and 2182/OC-UR (Program to Support Agricultural 
Public Management I) has been satisfactory. It is currently executing loan 
2595/OC-UR (Program to Support Agricultural Public Management II), for which 
fiduciary risk has been measured as low based on the Institutional Capacity 
Assessment System (ICAS) methodology.1 The Project Monitoring Report 
indicates a satisfactory level of execution. 

The objective of the new loan (UR-L1147) is to help improve the sustainability of 
small and medium-sized family-owned agricultural production units. The specific 
objectives are to increase the adoption of climate-smart technologies and 
strengthen alliance-building among participating producers. The expected impacts 
are an increase in income and productivity. The fiduciary activities—both financial 
execution arrangements and the procurement contracts included in the 
Procurement Plan attached to the Proposal for Operation Development for this 
operation—were identified based on the aforementioned objectives. The following 
sections describe the fiduciary mechanisms identified during the analysis mission. 
It should be noted that no exceptions to Bank policies are envisaged with respect 
to either financial management or procurement. Likewise, no retroactive financing 
or advance procurement is expected, consistent with the definitions in Section 1.9 
of document GN-2349-9 (Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works 
Financed by the IDB) and section 1.12 of document GN-2350-9 (Policies for the 
Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the IDB). 

1 Program to Support Agricultural Public Management II, loan 3800/OC-UR, ICAS Analysis Report, May 2016. 



Annex III 
Page 2 of 8 
 
 

II. THE EXECUTING AGENCY’S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT 

 As mentioned above, the MGAP will be the executing agency for this operation 
through the DGDR and its Project Management Unit (PMU). Accounting, financial 
management, and procurement activities, together with support for the planning 
and monitoring of all operations involving external borrowing, are centralized in the 
PMU. Based on the information gathered during the analysis mission, the 
executing agency will have the same staff as for execution of the Program to 
Support Agricultural Public Management II. It was established that the executing 
agency has satisfactory experience in executing Bank-financed operations. 

 As reflected in the 2016 ICAS assessment mentioned in the previous section, “the 
MGAP’s key functions have been clearly defined in the areas of administration and 
financial accounting, and in management of the procurement cycle, on the basis 
of prior experience [...].” As further detailed in this Annex, the MGAP has executed 
several Bank-financed projects with a satisfactory level of performance, leading to 
the conclusion that its institutional capacity, as evaluated, is high. 

 In addition, the Ministry will be supported by its DGDR and PMU, as indicated in 
the matrix that describes the execution arrangements (comparing, in particular, the 
arrangements for loan 3800/OC-UR and the structure envisaged for the execution 
of UR-L1147). The aforementioned tool provides information including the 
following: 

a. With respect to the fulfillment of conditions in the area of procurement, 
technical aspects will be the responsibility of the DGDR while the UGP will be 
responsible for fiduciary requirements. 

b. The PMU will be responsible for: managing financial and audit reports; 
reporting on expenditure and requesting advance disbursements from the IDB; 
making payments to providers; preparing the procurement plan and the 
financial plan; and the accounting system. 

c. The DGDR will be responsible for: coordinating, implementing, and monitoring 
activities; planning, preparing, and organizing work plans; human resources; 
and filing documentation relating to program activities with the aim of providing 
information to the IDB and ensuring that supporting documentation is kept. 

 As indicated, execution arrangements are well established. Bearing in mind also 
the MGAP’s prior experience in executing similar operations, no specific 
weaknesses have been identified in the executing agency’s institutional capacity. 

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

3.1 Fiduciary risk is considered to be low. This finding is based on the institutional 
capacity assessment carried out under UR-L1135. It was agreed during the 
orientation mission for this new loan that since: (i) the exercise had been 
completed within a reasonable period; (ii) the fundamental structure of the 
executing agency remained identical; (iii) the indicators for measuring execution 
and the fulfillment of Bank requirements were satisfactory; and (iv) the new 
operation would use the same team of qualified staff with experience in executing 



Annex III 
Page 3 of 8 

 
 

Bank-financed operations, the May 2016 ICAS assessment identifying a low level 
of risk remained valid. 

3.2 In addition, neither the fiduciary activities included in the Procurement Plan nor the 
financial management activities are regarded as complex, thus confirming the low 
level of risk for this new operation due to the executing agency’s track record of 
performance and compliance. 

IV. CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SPECIAL PROVISIONS OF THE CONTRACT 

 The following considerations will be included in the special provisions: 

a. The program Operating Regulations will be updated to identify the 
administrative and financial management arrangements for the component 
involving the distribution of support. The total value of support will be 
US$20,231,000, of which $19,631,000 will be financed with Bank loan 
proceeds and US$600,000 with local counterpart funds. 

b. Exchange rate: for financial reporting in U.S. dollars, the exchange rate used 
will be the one prevailing on the date of payment. 

c. Audited financial statements: During the project disbursement period, audited 
project financial statements will be submitted to the Bank within 120 days after 
the end of each of the MGAP’s fiscal years. The statements will be audited by 
the Tribunal de Cuentas de la República [National Audit Office] (TCR), or by 
an independent audit firm acceptable to the Bank based on terms of reference 
agreed with the Bank. The final audit report will be submitted to the Bank within 
120 days after the date stipulated for the final disbursement under the loan. 

V. AGREEMENTS AND REQUIREMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION 

 The Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements for Procurement establish the rules 
governing the execution of all procurement planned under the project. 

 Procurement execution 

 The Bank’s procurement policies—documents GN-2349-9 (Policies for the 
Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development 
Bank) and GN-2350-9 (Policies for the Selection and Contracting of Consultants 
financed by the Inter-American Development Bank)—will apply to all planned 
procurement activities under this operation. These will be included in the 
Procurement Plan, which will cover an initial minimum period of 18 months with 
annual updates thereafter. Before initiating procurement, this procurement plan will 
be registered, approved, and published in the Procurement Plan Execution System 
(SEPA, www.iniciativasepa.org). Once registered, the plan will be updated 
annually, or whenever required by substantial changes to the original plan. 

 The relevance of each expenditure (i.e. terms of reference, technical 
specifications, and budget) is the responsibility of the project’s sector specialist 
and always requires a no objection before the procurement process may begin, 
based on the operational criteria of the Project Team Leader. 

http://www.iniciativasepa.org/


Annex III 
Page 4 of 8 
 
 

a. Procurement of works, goods, and nonconsulting services: Project-
related contracts for works, goods, and nonconsulting services2 subject to 
international competitive bidding will be carried out using the standard bidding 
documents issued by the Bank. Contracts subject to national competitive 
bidding will be carried out using national bidding documents satisfactory to the 
Bank. The review of technical specifications for procurement during 
preparation of the selection processes is the responsibility of the project sector 
specialist. 

b. Selection and contracting of consultants: Contracts for consulting services 
under the project will be executed using either the Bank’s Standard Request 
for Proposals (in the case of all contracts above the applicable threshold for 
international shortlists) or one satisfactory to the Bank (in the case of bidding 
processes for amounts below the threshold applicable to international 
competitive bidding). The project sector specialist is responsible for reviewing 
the terms of reference for consulting service contracts. 

c. Direct contracting: As set out in the table below, direct contracting for a total 
amount of US$6,048,153 is envisaged, of which US$2,022,190 will be financed 
with local counterpart funds and US$4,025,963 with Bank resources. Direct 
contracts financed with local funds will not be subject to Bank review.  

Table 1. Direct contracts (US$) 

 IDB Local counterpart Total 

Consulting services, RPDP 
team 3,885,736  1,211,681  5,097,417  

Fuel 140,227   -  140,227  

Training  -  444,100  444,100  

Travel expenses  -  101,350  101,350  

Vehicle maintenance  -  109,686  109,686  

Postage  -  54,843  54,843  

Bank fees  -  10,530  10,530  

Audit, TCR  -  90,000  90,000  

Total 4,025,963  2,022,190  6,048,153  

 

(i) The contracts of the consultants belonging to the RPDP team are 
expected to be renewed under the operation. The team is made up of 
advisors, assistants, and the rural development field teams that are 
currently working under loan 2595/OC-UR. Consequently, and in 
accordance with sections 3.10(a) and 3.11 of the Policies for the 
Selection and Contracting of Consultants (document GN-2350-9) 
(which establish the principle of continuity of service where such 
continuity is more efficient than a new competition), the executing 
agency’s request has been deemed consistent with Bank policies 
based on the following factors: (i) initial selection of the consultants was 
done on a competitive basis in 2012 and received the Bank’s prior no 
objection; (ii) the consultants whose contracts are to be renewed are 

                                                
2  Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank 

(document GN-2349-9), paragraph 1.1: The treatment of nonconsulting services is similar to that of goods. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=774396


Annex III 
Page 5 of 8 

 
 

subject to an annual performance evaluation; and (iii) in the event of 
unsatisfactory results, a consultant’s contract will not be renewed and 
alternative human resources will be sought through a competitive 
process. The value of this activity is expected to total US$5,097,417 
over the six-year loan execution cycle, with US$3,885,736 financed 
from Bank loan proceeds and US$1,211,681 from local counterpart 
funds. This amount is considered reasonable given that: (i) the team 
comprises a total of 28 people; and (ii) their monthly salaries average 
US$2,462, which is within the reference scale for the Office of the 
President of the Republic. 

(ii) A budget of US$140,227 is also envisaged over the loan execution 
period for the direct purchase of fuel from the Administración Nacional 
de Combustibles, Alcohol y Pórtland [National Fuel, Alcohol, and 
Cement Administration] (ANCAP). The fuel will be used for transporting 
field teams in the project’s area of influence. This line is consistent with 
the requirements of section 3.6(c) of the Policies for the Procurement 
of Goods and Works Financed by the IDB (document GN-2349-9), 
which allow direct contracting in cases where a product may only be 
obtained from one source. ANCAP is an energy company that manages 
all of the country’s fuel supply plants and has a monopoly over fuel 
imports and exports in Uruguay. It also proposes fuel prices, which are 
then approved by the Executive Branch. Lastly, section 33.C.1 of the 
Texto Ordenado de Contabilidad y Administración Financiera 
[Consolidated Text on Accounting and Financial Administration] 
(TOCAF) indicates that government bodies or departments may 
engage in direct contracting with each other. As ANCAP is a state-run 
company, direct contracts with it are aligned with national requirements 
and the Bank’s policies. 

(iii) Training: The program includes training activities for a total of 
US$444,100. These will be financed using local counterpart funds, 
meaning that no interventions are expected in relation to procurement 
contracts using either the ex ante or ex post modalities. 

d. Selection of individual consultants: Selection of individual consultants is 
anticipated for a total amount of US$162,770, in accordance with the 
provisions of Section V of the Policies for the Selection and Contracting of 
Consultants Financed by the IDB, observing in particular the procedures 
envisaged for the competitive selection of these consultants. 

 

Table 2. Thresholds for international competitive bidding and shortlists with international 
participants (US$ thousands) 

Works Goods and services Consulting services 

International 
competitive 

bidding 

National 
bidding 

Shopping 
International 
competitive 

bidding 

National 
bidding 

Shopping 

International 
advertising 

for 
consultants  

Shortlist 

100% 

national 

≥3,000,000 
≤3,000,000 

≤100,000 ≥250,000 
≤250,000 

≤50,000 ≥200,000 ≤200,000 
≥250,000 ≥50,000 

 



Annex III 
Page 6 of 8 
 
 

 Main procurement processes 

 The procurement activities identified for this operation will be divided as set out in 
the following table: 

 
Table 3. Procurement activities 

Category Total, IDB 
Total, local 
counterpart 

Total US$ 

Goods 58,324 7,076 65,400 

Training -  444,100 444,100 

Consulting firms 204,918 135,082 340,000 

Individual consultants 3,992,282 1,267,905 5,260,187 

Nonconsulting services 205,115 24,885 230,000 

Total procurement 4,460,639 1,879,048 6,339,687 

*See Procurement Plan. 

 

 Procurement supervision 

 Given the experience and performance of the executing agency, procurement 
activities will be subject to ex post review, with the exception of those cases in 
which ex ante supervision is justified and explicitly specified in the Procurement 
Plan. The following table sets out the thresholds applicable to the foregoing:3 

 
Table 4. Thresholds for ex post review (US$) 

Works Goods Consulting services 

≥3,000,000 ≥250,000 ≥200,000 

 

 Ex post reviews will be conducted every 12 months in accordance with the project 
supervision plan. 

 Records and files 

 The agreed formats or procedures set out in the program Operating Regulations 
will be used for the preparation and filing of project reports. 

VI. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

 Programming and budget. For preparation of the Executive Branch’s (five-year) 
national budget, the agencies of the central government submit their proposals to 
the MEF before 31 July of the first year of the administration’s term in office. The 
MEF coordinates the budget preparation process with assistance from the 
Planning and Budget Office and the National Civil Service Office. It submits the 
national budget proposal to the Executive Branch, which approves it and forwards 
it to the Legislative Branch by 31 August of the same year. The Legislative Branch 
has 120 days to analyze, approve, and express its opinion on the amounts, and it 
may not make amendments that increase expenditure. Reallocations and any 
increases in the annual budget are prepared by the Executive Branch when it 
presents its annual accountability and budget execution statements. Within six 

                                                
3  Note: Ex post review thresholds are applied on the basis of the executing agency’s fiduciary execution 

capacity. They may be modified by the Bank as a result of changes in that capacity. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getDocument.aspx?DOCNUM=EZSHARE-1345538185-43


Annex III 
Page 7 of 8 

 
 

months after the end of the fiscal year, the Executive Branch presents these 
reports to the Legislative Branch and may propose amendments for duly justified 
reasons. 

 The local counterpart contribution for this program is US$2.89 million. The 
executing agency will provide evidence to the Bank that local counterpart funds 
have been allocated for the first year of execution, both at the time of fulfillment of 
the conditions precedent and annually thereafter (by the end of February). 

 Accounting and information systems. Project accounts will be maintained in the 
project’s own system and in the country’s Integrated Financial Information System 
(SIIF). Budget credits approved for the program under the five-year budget law are 
allocated and executed using the SIIF; as a result, the procedures established by 
the General Accounting Office (CGN) will be followed when processing project-
related commitments and payments. 

 Project financial statements will be issued periodically on a modified cash basis. 
Project financial statements will be audited annually, and comprise the following: 
(i) statement of cash received and disbursements made; and (ii) statement of 
cumulative investment. 

 Disbursements and cash flow (in coordination with the use or nonuse of the 
national treasury system). Project funds will be managed through a National Single 
Account (CUN), to which end the National Treasury, at the request of the PMU, 
will open a special account at the Central Bank of Uruguay. This account will 
receive the funds disbursed by the Bank, but as it is a registered account (which 
cannot be used to make payments), a specific bank account will be opened for the 
program at the state-owned commercial bank (Banco de la República Oriental del 
Uruguay) for purposes of making the corresponding payments. 

 Disbursements will be made in the form of advances, based on actual liquidity 
needs and supported by adequate financial and disbursement projections. These 
advances will preferably be made every six months, once reporting has been filed 
for at least 70% of the amount advanced. As documentary support, the accounting 
forms will need to be presented along with the financial planning spreadsheet. 
Expenditures involving transfers to Rural Development Field Agents (ATDRs) will 
be documented in two stages: first, once the advances are made, and second, 
once the expense reports are received, supported by an accounting report that 
includes the exact amount used by each ATDR. 

 The eDisbursements system will be used to process disbursement requests. The 
exchange rate for the conversion of local currency payments into the currency 
used for the loan shall be the one prevailing on the date of payment. 

 Internal control and audit. The internal control system is based on the national 
system defined in the laws and regulations currently in force. As established in the 
Consolidated Text on Accounting and Financial Administration, the TCR will 
exercise preventive intervention in all expenditures related to program execution. 
The level of reliability for execution of this operation is high. 

 The MGAP will maintain the conditions established for the execution of loan 
2595/OC-UR, thus ensuring the continuity and participation of fiduciary staff 
assigned full-time to the program, although for this program they will constitute a 
unit within the PMU. This will strengthen the fiduciary function, as the PMU’s 



Annex III 
Page 8 of 8 
 
 

structure includes an Executive Management Department and an Administrative 
and Financial Department. In light of the formal structure specified by the Ministry, 
it is anticipated that the human resources and defined processes necessary to 
meet the Bank’s requirements will be available.  

 External control and reporting. The national external control system is executed 
by the TCR. The previous MGAP operation (2595/OC-UR) was audited by the 
TCR, and the corresponding annual reports were delivered in a timely manner and 
with unqualified audit opinions. For this program, the executing agency’s intention 
is for the TCR to continue providing these services. The TCR’s eligibility level is 
consistent with the type of entity and risk associated with the operation. 

 Annual financial audit reports and the respective evaluation of internal controls will 
be submitted for each fiscal year during the disbursement period by 30 April of the 
following year. The auditing standards issued by the International Organization of 
Supreme Audit Institutions will be considered. The cost of the audits will be agreed 
upon in the TCR Service Agreement Letter and will be financed with local 
counterpart funds. 

VII. FINANCIAL SUPERVISION PLAN 

 The initial financial supervision plan is based on the following: 

a. Participation in the launch workshop organized by the project team, with a brief 
presentation on project financial management considerations. 

b. Review of the financial conditions precedent (chart of accounts, agreement 
with the TCR, evidence of budgetary allocation of resources).  

c. Review of the annual work plan and initial financial plan prepared by the PMU 
as support for the first advance of funds (to be requested once the program’s 
eligibility has been established). 

d. If necessary, one financial visit will be carried out each year during program 
execution. The following issues will be covered: reconciliation of the account for 
advances and investments; implementation of external audit recommendations; 
quality and timeliness of accounting records; and maintenance of archives. 

 Execution mechanism. The MGAP will be accountable to the Bank for project 
execution, and it will maintain a direct relationship with the Bank. A description of 
the processes involving the use of the funds will be included in the program 
Operating Regulations; approval and entry into force of the Operating Regulations 
will be a condition precedent to the project’s first disbursement. 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-___/18 

Uruguay. Loan ____/OC-UR to the Eastern Republic of Uruguay 
Rural Productive Development Program II 

The Board of Executive Directors 

RESOLVES: 

That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such contract or contracts as 
may be necessary with the Eastern Republic of Uruguay, as Borrower, for the purpose of 
granting it a financing aimed at cooperating in the execution of the Rural Productive 
Development Program II. Such financing will be in the amount of up to US$24,232,000 from the 
resources of the Bank’s Ordinary Capital, and will be subject to the Financial Terms and 
Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions of the Project Summary of the Loan 
Proposal. 

(Adopted on ___ ____________ 2018) 

LEG/SGO/CSC/EZSHARE-1028536987-9657 
Pipeline No. UR-L1147 


	ur-l1147_summary_validation_dem_opc_spd.pdf
	Summary (I, II, III) 





