















































 

PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

 
 
 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

HAITI 
 
 
 
 
 
 

AGRICULTURAL AND AGROFORESTRY TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION 
PROGRAM - PITAG 

 
 

(HA-L1107, HA-G1038) 
 
 
 

GRANT PROPOSAL 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

This document was prepared by the project team consisting of: Carmine Paolo De Salvo 
(RND/CHA) and Bruno Jacquet (RND/CHA), Co-Team Leaders; Lina Salazar and Gonzalo Muñoz 
(CSD/RND); Sebastien Gachot and Geraud Albaret (RND/CHA); Regine Lafontant (CDH/CHA); 
Renaud Tahon (VPS/ESG); Nicola Magri (CTI/CHA); Romina Kirkagacli (VPC/FMP); Marise 
Salnave (VPC/FMP); Monica Centeno Lappas (LEG/SGO); Jennifer Doherty-Bigara (CSD/CCS); 
and Lisa Sofia Restrepo (CSD/RND). 

 
In accordance with the Access to Information Policy, this document is being released to the public and 
distributed to the Bank’s Board of Executive Directors simultaneously. This document has not been approved 
by the Board. Should the Board approve the document with amendments, a revised version will be made 

available to the public, thus superseding and replacing the original version

 
 



 

CONTENTS 
 
 

PROJECT SUMMARY ......................................................................................................... 1 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING ................................................................. 2 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, and Justification ...................................... 2 
B. Objective, Components and Cost ............................................................... 12 
C. Key Results Indicators ................................................................................ 13 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS ................................................................ 15 

A. Financing Instruments................................................................................. 15 
B. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks ................................................ 16 
C. Fiduciary Risk ............................................................................................. 17 
D. Other Key Issues and Risks ........................................................................ 17 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN ............................................................ 19 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements ................................................ 19 
B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results ...................................... 20 
C. Significant Design Activities Post Approval ................................................. 20 

 
 
 
 
  



- ii - 

 

 

ANNEXES 

Annex I Development Effectiveness Matrix (DEM) - Summary 

Annex II Results Framework 

Annex III Fiduciary Arrangements  

 

ELECTRONIC LINKS 

REQUIRED (REL) 

1. Pluriannual Execution Plan (PEP) and Annual Operational Plan (POA) 

2. Monitoring and Evaluation Arrangements 

3. Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR)  

4. Procurement Plan  

OPTIONAL (OEL) 

1. Technical Documents for Component I 

2. Technical Documents for Component II 

3. Economic Analysis 

4. Draft Operational Manual 

5. Technical References  

6. Safeguard Policy Filter (SPF) and Safeguard Screening Form (SSF) 

  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-5
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-13
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-15
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-7
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-8
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-22


- iii - 

 

 

ABBREVIATIONS 

APAGRO Agroalimentary Productive Support Program 

CIRAD Centre de Coopération Internationale en Recherche Agronomique pour 
le Développement 

CRF Corporate Results Framework 

CRI Climate Risk Index 

CRIAR Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives 

IDB Inter-American Development Bank 

IFAD 

IICA 

International Fund for Agricultural Development 

Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture 

INDC Intended National Determined Contribution 

IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 

IRR Internal Rate of Return 

EA Executing Agency  

ESMP Environmental and Social Management Plan 

ESMR Environmental and Social Management Report 

ESS Environmental and Social Strategy 

FAMV Faculty of Agronomy and Veterinary Medicine 

FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 

FIES Food Insecurity Experience Scale 

FONRED Fonds national de recherche pour un développement durable 

GAFSP Global Agriculture and Food Security Program 

GDP Gross Domestic Product 

GHI Global Hunger Index 

GSSE General Services Support Estimate 

KBA Key Biodiversity Areas 

LAC Latin America and the Caribbean 

MARENA Natural Resources and Water Basins Management Program 

MARNDR Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development  

MOU Memorandum of Understanding 

NAIP National Agriculture Investment Plan 

PAES Environmental Program of El Salvador 

PATCA Technological Innovation Program 

PEU Project Execution Unit 

PITAG Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program 

PMDN Natural Disaster Mitigation Program 

POD Proposal for Operation Development 

POM Program Operating Manual 

PSE Producer Support Estimate  

PSG 

PTTA 

Project Specific Grant 

Technology Transfer to Small Farmers Program 

RESEPAG Agricultural Services Strengthening Program 

RGA General Agricultural Census 



- iv - 

 

 

ABBREVIATIONS 

SECAL Food Security Support Program 

SIGI Système Intégré de Gestion des Informations 

SME Small and Medium Enterprises 

SPF Safeguard Policy Filter 

SSF Safeguard Screening Form 

TSE Total Support Estimate 

UEP Studies and Planning Unit 

UNDP United Nations Development Program  

UPMP Unité de Passation des Marchés Publics 

USAID United States Agency for International Development  

WFP World Food Program 

 
 
 
 
  



 

PROJECT SUMMARY  

HAITI  

AGRICULTURAL AND AGROFORESTRY TECHNOLOGICAL INNOVATION PROGRAM - PITAG 

(HA-L1107, HA-G1038) 

Financial Terms and Conditions 

Beneficiary: Republic of Haiti Amortization Period: N/A 

Executing Agency (EA): Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources 
and Rural Development (MARNDR) 

Disbursement Period: 60 months 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace Period: N/A 

IDB (Grant Facility – HA-L1107):     55,000,000 
 

71.6 
Supervision and 
Inspection Fee: 

N/A 

Other/Co-financing (GAFSP – HA-G1038): 10,000,000 13 
Interest rate: N/A 

Credit Fee: N/A 
Other/Co-financing (IFAD)(a): 10,859,305 14.1 

Local: 1,000,000 1.3 

Currency of Approval: US Dollars  
Total: 76,859,305 100 

Project at a Glance 

Project Objective/Description: The general objectives of the program are to increase agricultural income and 
food security for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti. The specific objectives are to increase agricultural 
productivity and improve the use of natural capital through the adoption of sustainable technologies. 

Special Contractual Clauses prior to the first disbursement of the financing: (i) the approval by the Executing 
Agency and entry into effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms and conditions 
previously agreed with the Bank (¶3.1); (ii) see Annex III that includes a special disbursement; and (iii) see 
Environmental and Social Management Report (ESMR) (REL-3). 

Special Contractual Clauses of execution: see (i) ESMR (REL-3); and (ii) special execution requirements 
contained in Annex III. 

Exceptions to Bank Policies:  None. 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges(b): SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Cross-Cutting Themes(c): GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a) International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) contribution is, as of today, parallel (co-financing) but might be 
received by the Bank as a Project Specific Grant (PSG), subject to IFAD’s Board approval.  

(b) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(c) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional Capacity 

and Rule of Law). 

 
 
 
 
 
 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6


- 2 - 

 

I. DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING 

A. Background, Problem Addressed, and Justification 

1.1 The agricultural sector and food security in Haiti. With a per capita annual 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of US$818 (2015) and 59% of the population living 
in poverty (World Bank, 2012),1 Haiti stands among the poorest countries in the 
world. The United Nations Development Program (UNDP) Human Development 
Index’s socio-economic indicators for 2014 placed Haiti 163rd out of 188 countries.2 
According to the World Bank Group,3 in rural areas, the poverty rate is even higher 
(75%), and more than 80% of Haitians who live in extreme poverty live in rural 
areas, where access to basic services remains very limited. In fact, it is estimated 
that only 10% of the rural population has access to electricity and less than 8% to 
drinkable water. 

1.2 Food insecurity is widespread in Haiti. The country is ranked 115th out of 
118 countries in the 2016 Global Hunger Index (GHI). Results of a recent World 
Food Program (WFP) analysis (2015) indicate that approximately 47% of the 
households are moderately or severely food insecure. In addition, households with 
children of less than five years of age are much more exposed to frequent food 
shortages.4 Therefore, one fifth of children less than five years old are chronically 
malnourished (DHS, 2012).5 

1.3 In this setting, the performance of the agricultural sector is strategic to help raise 
rural households’ incomes and improve their food security.  The sector contributes 
25% of GDP and 85% of employment in rural areas (UNDP, 2015). Haitian 
agriculture, though, presents very low levels of productivity, even when compared 
to other countries in the region (Table I-1 shows yields for the main crops grown in 
Haiti as a proxy for productivity), and per capita income in the Haitian agricultural 
sector has stagnated in recent years. Annual agricultural GDP per capita is 
currently estimated at US$400 per year. 

Table I-1. Yields for main Haitian crops compared to regional yields* 

Product Haiti's yields as % average yields in Central America and the Caribbean 

Cocoa 99% 

Mango 91% 

Sorghum 39% 

Avocado 47% 

Banana 25% 

* Countries considered for this comparison are Central American and Caribbean countries included 
in the FAOSTAT database, years 2010-2014.  

1.4 Agricultural productivity can be influenced by a wide range of factors such as land 
tenure status, human capital level, availability of agricultural inputs, access to 
finance, agricultural services provision (such as information, agricultural research 

                                                 
1  Please see OEL-5 for complete Technical References.  
2  UNDP Human Development Index. 
3  Haiti: Des opportunités pour tous-Diagnostic-Pays Systématique, May 2015. 
4  World Bank and ONPES, 2014. 
5  Haiti Demographic and Health Surveys. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 3 - 

 

and technology transfer, irrigation, agricultural health and food safety) and 
macroeconomic and trade policies. Some of the main factors that exacerbate low 
productivity include: 

a. Low level of investment and access to technologies. Most producers in 
Haiti are still using basic techniques predominantly for subsistence agriculture 
and lack of access to certified high-quality seeds, appropriate soil conservation 
techniques, inputs for production (i.e. pesticides and fertilizers)6 as well as 
basic tools and equipment. The General Agricultural Census (RGA) shows that 
only 7% of the farmers used mechanical equipment. Also, the baseline data 
collected for Technology Transfer to Small Farmers Program (PTTA) show that 
only 9% of the farmers had used improved seeds and only 22% have 
knowledge of certified seeds. The number of providers is limited in the country 
and their geographical locations do not allow to serve the vaste majority of 
smallholder farmers.7 In addition, a constrained access to factors of production 
(capital, land, labor, water availability)8 greatly limits the capability of farmers 
to increase productivity. This is explained in part by the significant financial 
constraints faced by farmers, due notably to the lack of agricultural credit, 
particularly in rural areas, where financial markets are thin or non-existent. 
Data collected for the evaluation of the agroforestry technology provided by 
PTTA in the North Department show that 28% of the farmers have a bank 
account and 19% have received a credit for agricultural purposes. Lack of 
information about existing technologies, farming techniques, access to 
markets, natural risks and climate change is also a contributing factor.  

b. Lack of financial and human resources to develop agricultural 
innovation. Agricultural research and extension has been virtually 
non-existent in Haiti for nearly three decades, (Cirad, 2015). Aggregate 
numbers show that over the last three decades technical efficiency in the 
Haitian agricultural sector has fallen drastically, at a -1.8% average yearly rate 
(Nin-Pratt, A. et al. 2015). Factors that contribute to explain these findings are 
the outdated institutional research framework, and the lack of technology 
transfer and extension systems. The lack of local expertise in applied and 
adaptive agricultural research as well as technology transfer is in turn partially 
explained by the very limited training and educational opportunities in these 
areas (some universities, such as FAMV, offer academic courses, but the 
quality of their curriculum remains low).9 The institution in charge of agricultural 
research is the Innovation Directorate of the MARNDR, which has 
71 employees distributed across the country, with only 6% of them having an 
education sufficient to conduct research activities. The 2009 RGA reports that 
43% of the farmers identified weak agricultural research and extension 
services as a constraint for the development of the sector. Moreover, only 
2.6% of farmers mentioned receiving some type of technical assistance. 

                                                 
6  In a study conducted by USAID in the North of Haiti in 2017, it is estimated that 28% of farmers use pesticide. 

Fertilizers is used by 4% of cacao producers, 13% of banana producers and 95% of rice producers. 
7     See Technical Document for Component II (Bellande, 2016). 
8  Only 13% of agricultural land has access to water, according to the 2009 General Agricultural Census. 
9   Cirad, 2015. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 4 - 

 

c. Climate risks. Haiti is one of the countries with the highest Climate Risk Index 
(CRI Germanwatch, 2016) and natural disaster risk index in the world 
(WB, 2005; UNDP, 2004), including climate hazards (Kreft et al., 2015). The 
climatic risks faced by farmers and their ability to cope with them also limit the 
long-term growth of the productivity of the agricultural sector in Haiti, especially 
in a context where watersheds are characterized by severe soil erosion risk 
and, on average, 50% of the upper watersheds is deforested.10 For instance, 
hurricane Matthew caused severe economic damages and estimated losses 
that amounted to US$1.9 billion. The damages and losses in perennial crops 
(coffee, cocoa, breadfruit, coconut, avocado, citrus and other fruit), which are 
extremely important for food security and rural income, were particularly high 
and represented US$433 million, further decreasing capital assets and 
sources of income for Haitian farmers. For the future, climate models predict 
temperatures to increase up to 0.8°C for the 2020s; and precipitation scenarios 
a drying trend in the mid-2020s with 3 to 4% less rainfall in the annual mean 
(IDB, 2016), translating into losses of 25% in average key crops such as 
banana, manioc and beans (UNDP, 2015). The limited access of farmers to 
agricultural technologies (¶1.4a) reduces their ability to cope with these natural 
and climate risks. 

1.5 The agricultural sector policy context. According to the Inter-American 
Development Bank (IDB) Agrimonitor database, total public support to the 
agricultural sector represented, on average, 5.3% of GDP in the period 2006-2012, 
but only 3.2% of the resources are allocated to finance public goods (the lowest 
level in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC), with funding to research basically 
inexistent), although, in LAC, such public spending has proven higher economic 
return rates than expenditures directed to the financing of private goods 
(Anriquez et al., 2016). 

1.6 Recent reforms. In recent years, the Government of Haiti, with the support of the 
IDB through Policy Grants 2731/GR-HA and 2945/GR-HA, has progressed in key 
areas of agricultural policy that would improve agricultural productivity and 
competitiveness in Haiti, as summarized below. 

a. Agricultural Research.  In 2013 the Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources 
and Rural Development (MARNDR) and other agricultural research 
stakeholders, with the support of the IDB: (i) reviewed and analyzed the 
agricultural research programs and activities implemented in the last three 
decades; (ii) worked on the strategic issues on which research financing should 
focus; and (iii) reviewed different research financing instruments. This work 
resulted in the drafting of a new research institutional framework and a 
financing mechanism (Fonds National de Recherche pour un Développement 
Durable, FONRED), which is expected to be implemented in 2017. 

                                                 
10  Agricultural exploitation stressed the environment and have led to soil erosion and deforestation to be endemic 

problems in Haiti (McClintock, 2003). The great deforestation of the country began during the colonial period 
and was intensified in 1730 with coffee introduction, then other agricultural practices as monoculture and 
clean-cultivation caused rapid erosion and exhausted soil nutrients (Paskett and Philoctete, 1990). Most 
hillsides are eroded and a third of the land is severely degraded (White and Jickling, 1995). Also, gully erosion 
is chronic, which compromises soil fertility, infrastructure quality, and productivity (Wahab et al., 1986). 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 5 - 

 

b. Farmers’ access to technologies. A two-fold strategic approach was 
proposed to address the limited access of farmers to improved technologies: 
(i) create a legal and policy framework for a modern agricultural research 
system in the country (see above); and (ii) expand progressively the incipient 
market-friendly system of “smart subsidies” for promoting the adoption of 
agricultural technologies, reducing the supply-driven distribution of subsidized 
inputs and avoiding the crowding out of private suppliers. 

c. Institutional reform of the Ministry of Agriculture. In 2013, the MARDNR 
created a procurement unit (UPMP, Unité de Passation des Marchés Publics) 
to improve its capacity to absorb and administer financial resources. The 
Studies and Planning Unit (UEP) was staffed with high-level professionals, and 
launched the preparation of programmatic plans, with the objective of 
rationalizing budget preparation. 

1.7 In Haiti, the Bank is already financing investments for the provision of several 
agricultural public goods (agricultural health and food safety, land administration, 
fisheries management, rural infrastructure) through the following operations: 
Natural Disaster Mitigation Program II (3622/GR-HA), Artisanal Fisheries 
Development Program (3492/GR-HA), Modernization of Public Agricultural Health 
Services (3260/GR-HA) and Land Tenure Security Program in Rural Areas 
(2720/GR-HA). Investments in agricultural research and technology transfer 
complement the existing portfolio. 

1.8 Synergies with other initiatives. Several national and international institutions 
are partnering with the MARNDR on the provision of incentives to smallholder 
farmers and on applied agricultural research and training in Haiti: (i) the World 
Bank, USAID and the French Development Agency for the agricultural incentives 
program; and (ii) FAO, the Embassy of France in Haiti, USAID, IICA, the University 
of Quisqueya, the Faculty of Agronomy and Veterinary Medicine (FAMV), and 
NGOs for applied agricultural research and training. 

1.9 On the Bank side, the second phase of the Natural Disaster Mitigation Program 
(PMDN II - HA-L1097/HA-G1031), implemented by the MARNDR since 2016, 
offers possible synergies, notably related to watershed protection (combination of 
infrastructure provided by PMDN and sustainable farming practices promoted by 
PITAG), and to the strengthening of the FAMV curriculum. Other synergies (both 
on content and geographical areas) are envisaged with the Land Tenure Security 
Program in Rural Areas (2720/GR-HA), Water Management Program in the 
Artibonite Basin (3089/GR-HA), the Program to Establish a Partial Credit 
Guarantee Fund for Enterprise Development (2416/GR-HA), and MIF 
interventions in all suitable intervention areas. Collaboration with the last two 
programs will be particularly useful to facilitate the integration of farmers into the 
value chain and their access to broader markets. 

1.10 In order to maximize synergies, avoid duplication and adequately define the 
activities of PITAG, a coordination process was conducted with the various 
initiatives of the institutions listed above and will be continued during program 
execution through regular meetings and especially through the Agricultural 
Sectorial Group (a donor coordination mechanisms) that the Bank’s chairs in Haiti. 



- 6 - 

 

1.11 Lessons Learned. During the period 2011-2016, the MARNDR implemented the 
PTTA (2562/GR-HA), through funding provided by the Bank and the Global 
Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP), and the Natural Disaster 
Mitigation Program (PMDN – 2187/GR-HA). These programs covered a total area 
of 20,240 hectares across the South, North and Northeast departments. They 
benefitted a total of 43,956 small agricultural producers: 9,043 for PMDN and 
34,913 for PTTA 1. While PMDN focused on the promotion of agroforestry 
technological packages, PTTA promoted technological packages for irrigation, 
sisal, annual crops (rice, sweet potato, peanuts and vegetables), and agroforestry 
(coffee, cocoa, diversified crop systems). Qualitative and quantitative evaluations 
assessed that with an average adoption rate of 80%, and with average incentive 
values of US$595/farmer for PMDN and US$700/farmer for PTTA, agroforestry 
technological packages have generated positive results, since they contributed to 
the reforestation of about 13,082 hectares in the country, and led to significant 
increases in gross value added per plot ranging from 10% to 109%. The 
evaluations also found that results have been more limited for the annual crops 
(rice and vegetables), with no significant improvement of gross value added, since 
farmers did not modify their agricultural production practices. However, the 
subsidies contributed to reduce farmer decapitalization, as farmers used the 
vouchers to avoid selling cattle (an average effect of US$227) or contract informal 
and expensive credit to buy agricultural inputs (a 10% points difference between 
treatment and control groups).  

1.12 From a conceptual and operational standpoint, the proposed operation has been 
therefore designed on the basis of the lessons learned through PTTA and several 
other programs that implemented similar incentive mechanisms in Haiti: (i) the 
Agricultural Services Strengthening Program I and II (RESEPAG), financed by the 
World Bank and GAFSP; (ii) the Natural Disaster Mitigation Program II (PMDN 
II- 3622/GR-HA), financed by Bank; and (iii) the Food Security Support Program 
(SECAL), financed by the European Union and the French Development Agency. 
Other similar programs have been financed by the IDB in other countries, such as: 
(i) the Direct Supports for the Creation of Rural Agrifood Initiatives II (CRIAR) in 
Bolivia (3536/BL-BO); (ii) the Agroalimentary Productive Support Program 
(APAGRO) in Nicaragua (2055/BL-NI); and (iii) the Technological Innovation 
Program II (PATCA) in the Dominican Republic (2443/OC-DR). In addition to the 
lessons learned through the aforementioned operations, the design of the 
proposed operation takes into account: (i) the Review of the Bank's Support to 
Agriculture, 2002-2014, published (OVE, 2015); and (ii) the analysis of the 
performance of the incentive mechanism of the programs implemented in Haiti 
(IRAM, 2015). The main lessons learned and their inclusion in the design of the 
program are summarized in Table I-2.



- 7 - 

 

Table I-2. Incorporation of Lessons Learned in the Design of the Proposed Program  

Lesson Learned Source of the 
Lesson 

How the lesson shaped the 
design of the program 

(i) PTTA provided vouchers to rice and vegetable 
producers in order to purchase inputs such as labor, 
fertilizer, and pesticides. The results of the evaluation show 
that while the vouchers led to some adjustments in crop 
choices and input use, these changes did not translate into 
increased agricultural productivity or income. 

A randomized 
control trial impact 
evaluation of PTTA 
(rice and vegetable 
vouchers) (Gignoux 
et al., 2016). 

Agricultural and Agroforestry 
Technological Innovation 
Program (PITAG) shifts its focus 
from subsidies to inputs that are 
widely known and used by 
farmers (i.e. most rice-growers 
reported to have applied urea 
(88%), other chemical fertilizer 
(71%), and pesticide (79%) in the 
baseline survey), towards the 
promotion of more suitable 
technologies and agroforestry 
systems, which enhance soil 
conservation and generate 
positive environmental 
externalities.  

 

(ii) Agroforestry vouchers could be used for services such 
as pruning and grafting, or inputs such as seedlings and 
pesticides. The evaluation shows that, compared to the 
control group, beneficiary farmers increased the total 
number of plots planted and specifically the number of plots 
with annual crops. The project also had a positive impact 
on the use of labor and increased the expenditure in 
permanent seedlings. In addition, the program determined 
a 23% increase in farmers’ expected production, 38% in 
expected income and 78% in expected profits. 

An impact evaluation 
using a propensity 
score matching on 
agroforestry 
vouchers provided 
by PTTA 
(Fahsbender et al., 
2017) 

(iii) Include robust monitoring and evaluation arrangements 
in project design that will establish with certainty which 
elements of the program are effective. 

OVE, 2015 PITAG is built on the lessons 
learned through rigorous impact 
evaluations, and will measure its 
impacts through a rigorous 
monitoring and evaluation 
strategy. 

(iv) In designing projects, place as much emphasis on 
technical assistance as on the productive capital goods to 
be offered to beneficiaries. 

OVE, 2015 Technical assistance to farmers 
and technology providers has 
been strengthened in PITAG, 
through specific activities 
included in Component II. 

(v) The design of new technological packages must be 
directly related to the results of applied agricultural 
research, while considering the diversity of climates and 
social contexts in which they will be implemented. 

IRAM, 2015; PMDN I 
Mid-Term and Final 
Evaluations 

PITAG includes applied research 
component (Component I). 

(vi) The menu of technologies should be designed as to 
enhance agricultural productivity and contribute to climate 
change adaptation, without damaging the environment. 
Also, the promotion of technologies and practices should 
be avoided if certain conditions related to access to factors 
of production (especially water) are not fulfilled. 

IRAM, 2015; PMDN I 
Mid-Term and Final 
Evaluations 

PITAG makes a particular effort 
at identifying specific 
technologies that will facilitate 
climate change adaptation. 

(vii) It is necessary to develop synergies and 
complementarities among projects at local level (i.e., 
watershed protection through the combination of 
infrastructure, adoption of sustainable cropping practices 
and land tenure security; value chain development through 
support to agribusiness and Small and Medium Enterprises 
(SME) and adoption of sustainable cropping practices) to 
maximize impacts. 

PMDN I Mid-Term 
and Final 
Evaluations 

PITAG is designed in 
coordination with other 
complementary initiatives (see 
par. 2.7-2.9). 



- 8 - 

 

1.13 Justification for public intervention. From an economic perspective, several 
reasons justify public investment in agricultural research and training, as well as 
technology transfer services to farmers. Public investment in agricultural research 
and technology transfer schemes show high rates of social and economic returns 
(Alston et al., 2000). In addition, the proposed program will focus its support in 
promoting technologies (mainly agroforestry) that will generate positive 
environmental externalities. Moreover, with regards to technology transfer 
interventions, the literature also recognizes the existence of several market failures 
that hinder the process of agricultural technology adoption in developing countries, 
including: (i) lack of access to information and/or asymmetric information; (ii) input 
and output market inefficiencies (Feder, Just and Zilberman, 1985; Jack, 2013); 
(iii) liquidity constraints and insufficient access to credit; and (iv) risk aversion. 

1.14 The lack of information limits technology adoption not only because agricultural 
producers lack knowledge on the effective use of these technologies, but also 
because they lack information regarding location of private providers or costs of 
production. For instance, in the case of Nepal, Joshi and Pandey (2005) show that 
farmers’ perceptions regarding different rice varieties influence adoption decisions. 
Therefore, the authors conclude that it is important to disseminate information 
broadly using different methods to form accurate perceptions of the technologies 
to be promoted among farmers. Similarly, Conley and Udry (2004) demonstrate 
the importance of learning and information effects on the technological adoption in 
Ghana. Specifically, the authors show that pineapple producers changed their 
input use patterns only when they gained access to information regarding 
production yields from neighboring farmers. Finally, Bentley et. al (2011) measured 
the effect of farmers´ field schools where free information regarding plant health 
and agricultural practices is provided to farmers in Bolivia. The authors found that 
adoption rates are higher (about 82%) for producers who received the information, 
in comparison with the control group. 

1.15 As for the presence of thin markets for technology providers in rural regions, this 
is mainly caused by the small population density spread in remote and large areas 
without accessible roads and high transaction costs (IFAD, 2003). Therefore, it is 
not profitable for technology providers to be located in areas under these 
conditions without certainty of a demand for their technologies. On the other hand, 
it is difficult for farmers to reach technology providers as these are primarily located 
in urban or suburban areas. The presence of liquidity constraints and credit 
restrictions is one of the principal factors that limit smallholder farmers’ technology 
adoption, as mentioned in ¶1.4.  

1.16 Finally, the fourth obstacle that limits technology adoption is risk aversion. This 
factor limits technology adoption because producers prefer certainty regarding the 
future yields that will be obtained with new technologies before incurring the initial 
cost. Thus, producers tend to postpone technology investments until they can 
confirm the benefits associated with the adoption of such technologies through 
experience from other farmers (Feder, 1980). Several studies provide evidence on 
the negative impact of risk aversion on technology adoption such as Abadi 
Ghadim, Pannell y Burton (2005) and Besley and Case (1994), which in the case 
of Haiti could be further accentuated by climate uncertainty.  

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 9 - 

 

1.17 The Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program (PITAG) aims 
to improve technology adoption by reducing the aforementioned market failures. 
Specifically, the provision of a matching grant that partially covers the cost of an 
agricultural technology aims to ease liquidity and credit constraints faced by 
smallholder farmers. Secondly, the provision of technical assistance to farmers 
aims to reduce the barriers related to risk aversion and information asymmetry. 
Lastly, the implementation of technology fairs aims to reduce the lack of 
information and eliminate problems related to shortage of supply and thin markets 
by bringing together demand (small farmers) and supply (technology private 
providers). Given the ability of the program to mitigate these three market failures, 
together with high social returns of agricultural research and technology transfer 
and the positive environmental externalities the program would produce, public 
intervention is justified. 

1.18 Evidence of the relevance of the selected thematic areas of intervention. 
Agricultural productivity can be influenced by a wide range of factors such as land 
tenure status, human capital level, availability of agricultural inputs, climate 
change, access to finance, the provision of agricultural services (such as 
information, agricultural innovation, irrigation, agricultural health and food safety) 
and macroeconomic and trade policies. A strategy to improve the agricultural 
sector’s performance requires a set of well-defined policies geared towards 
promoting efficient factor and product markets.  

1.19 The economic literature presents ample evidence of the linkage between 
agricultural services and agricultural productivity, which is a main driver of 
competitiveness. Research and technology transfer have been shown to be among 
the key determining factors of improvements in agricultural productivity over the 
past 50 years (Pardey et al., 2012). Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations (FAO, 2012) reports that research and technology transfers are 
priorities in order to meet the growing demand for food because of their high 
returns. Specific studies obtain rates of return ranging from 43% to 67% for 
investments in research and technology transfer (Alston et al, 2014; Jin and 
Huffman, 2015).  

1.20 In addition to the PTTA impact evaluations (mentioned above), other studies have 
analyzed the impact of similar programs in Latin America and the Caribbean. 
Gonzalez et. al. (2009) evaluate the impact of an agricultural technology transfer 
program, Technological Support in the Agricultural Sector, that aims to reduce the 
barriers that limit technology adoption among farmers in the Dominican Republic. 
The study presents evidence that the adoption of the promoted technologies 
increases productivity levels for beneficiary producers of rice and livestock. As for 
technologies that aim to increase agricultural productivity through the promotion of 
environmentally friendly technologies, there is evidence of their impact on income 
and productivity. Specifically, different studies of the Environmental Program of El 
Salvador (PAES), which promoted the adoption of conservation technologies and 
product diversification show that the project had positive effect on household 
income (Cocchi and Bravo-Ureta, 2007; Bravo-Ureta, 2006). Also, (Bravo-Ureta et 
al. (2010) analyze the impact of the Natural Resources and Water Basins 
Management Program (MARENA) in Honduras, which promoted agroforestry and 
soil conservation technologies with the goal to increase diversified farming and 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 10 - 

 

enhance soil, water and forest management. They find positive results of the 
project on the total value of agricultural production. 

1.21 The adoption of sustainable practices can increase the resilience of crop yields, 
which are expected to drop between 5-10% by 2060 because of temperature 
increase and shift in precipitation patterns,11 and improve watershed management 
and soil conservation. The promotion of resilient crops, through the adoption and 
multiplication of agroforestry, and the dissemination of climate change awareness 
has proven to increase system resilience and, therefore, enhance livelihoods. For 
example, use of cover crops in Brazil over maize increased its production by 
198-246% (Altieri, 2001), and intercropping can enhance soil fertility, reduce 
reliance on chemical fertilizers, and therefore reduce the carbon footprint of the 
agricultural sector (Conant, 2010). 

1.22 Finally, with regards to food security, (Salazar et. aAl., 2016) assesses the impact 
of the CRIAR program in Bolivia that aims to improve access to agricultural 
technologies through a voucher-based subsidy scheme. The results show that 
beneficiary households are 20–30% more likely to be food secure than the control 
group and 22% less likely to be concerned about lack of food. This increase was 
driven both by food availability and food access. The annual value of production 
per hectare increased by 92% and the value of production sold by 360%, and the 
results also show that participation in CRIAR increased net annual agricultural 
household income by 36% and per capita household income by 19%.  Also, an 
ongoing study of the PATCA II, that provides voucher-based subsidies to farmers 
to improve agricultural technology adoption, shows that beneficiary farmers 
increased food security by 27% (Salazar et. al., 2016). 

1.23 Consistency with national priorities. The proposed program is consistent with 
the 2010-2025 Agriculture Policy Document, the 2010-2016 and 
2016-2021 National Agriculture Investment Plan (NAIP), the 2011-2016 
Agricultural Extension Plan, and Haiti’s Intended National Determined Contribution 
(INDC, 2015). These documents envision to build-up and strengthen a modern 
agricultural sector based on the efficiency and effectiveness of family agriculture 
and agribusiness. 

1.24 Strategic alignment. The program is consistent with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy (UIS) 2010-2020 (AB-3008) and is strategically aligned with the 
development challenges of: (i) productivity and innovation, through the generation 
of sustainable agricultural technologies and improving access to those 
technologies, as reflected by the impact indicator “Annual household value of 
agricultural production.” The program is also aligned to the cross-cutting themes 
of: (i) climate change and environmental sustainability, through the generation and 
promotion of climate change adaptation and sustainable technologies, as reflected 
in the result indicators “Beneficiaries who adopted soil protection and restoration 

                                                 
11  According to a vulnerability study for the agricultural sector in Haiti’s National Adaptation Plan of Action (PANA), 

the temperature increase is estimated to vary between 1°C by 2030 and up to 1.7°C by 2060 and precipitation 
patterns are expected to decrease between 20% by 2030 and up to 35.8% by 2060, with a specific impact on 
irrigated crops. Corn projection scenarios foresee a decrease of 4% by 2030 and 7.7% by 2060; b) for rice 
decreases will attain 9% by 2030 and 15% by 2060 and potato will reach a 5% decrease by 2030 and 10% by 
2060. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-40


- 11 - 

 

technologies,” “Additional hectares of land applying agroforestry technologies,” 
and (ii) gender equality and diversity, through the reduction of gender inequalities 
and the promotion of women’s participation, as reflected in the result indicator 
“Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives.” The program 
contributes to the Corporate Results Framework (CRF) 2016-2019 (GN-2727-6) 
through the indicators of: “beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable 
use of natural capital,” “women beneficiaries of economic empowerment 
initiatives,” “farmers with improved access to agricultural services and 
investments” and “beneficiaries of IDBG projects that contribute to at least one key 
dimension of food security. The program is aligned with the Bank’s Country 
Strategy with Haiti 2011-201512 (GN-2646), which sets agriculture as a priority 
sector of intervention. The program is also included in the 2017 Operational 
Program Report (GN-2884) and is aligned with the Country Strategic Objective 
“Protect the environment, respond to climate change and enhance food security”. 
The program is also consistent with the “Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document” (GN-2709-5) as it focuses on the 
provision of public agricultural goods and promotes access to technology, with the 
“Food Security Sector Framework” (GN-2825-3), as it will increase agricultural 
productivity and therefore contribute to food security, and the “Climate Change 
Sector Framework” (GN-2835-3) as the program enhances resiliency of vulnerable 
farmer communities through adaptation measures. According to the joint MDB 
approach on climate finance tracking, an estimated 64.56% of total IDB funding for 
this project result in climate change mitigation and adaptation activities. This 
contributes to the IDBG’s climate finance goal of 30% of combined IDB and IIC 
operational approvals by year’s end 2020.  

1.25 Gender mainstreaming. In the context of PTTA, a gender gap analysis was 
conducted. This study combined qualitative data from focus groups and 
quantitative data from the baseline survey. The main conclusions are the following: 
(i) women heads of household have less time to allocate to agricultural activities 
and therefore, have higher labor expenditures than men (310 Gdes vs. 280 Gdes); 
(ii) women heads of household have smaller plots and less access to land; 
(iii) women sell a lower proportion of their production and allocate more to home 
consumption compared to men (52% vs. 64% in the case of rice); (iv) more 
female-headed households face severe food insecurity (86% vs 71%); 
(v) female-head of households are less educated than men (55% never attended 
school vs. 30%); and (vi) female-headed households have lower annual income 
(US$176 vs. US$347) (Coelho, 2015). 

1.26 As a result of the gender gap assessment the following activities will be included 
as part of PITAG, with the objective of reducing gender inequalities and promoting 
women’s participation. First, PITAG will include an information campaign that 
targets women directly. Second, Component I will allocate financial resources to 
five applied research projects with the objective of developing new agricultural 
technologies that are directly targeted towards women’s needs or crops usually 
grown by women. Third, Component II will promote post-harvest technologies that 
are targeted towards agricultural activities usually conducted by women (i.e. mills 
and moisture meters). Fourth, the agroforestry packages will include crop varieties 
that aim to reduce food insecurity such as moringa and mirlinton, which are usually 

                                                 
12  Currently in effect until December 2017 (GN-2646-2). 

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807


- 12 - 

 

grown by female farmers. Fifth, the program will be monitored and evaluated using 
sex-disaggregated indicators. 

1.27 Climate change. The National Determined Contribution of Haiti defines a 
conditional target of 31% GHG emissions reduction, and includes key agricultural 
adaptation and mitigation actions such as development of crops resilient to climate 
change, sustainable practices and conservation of agricultural genetic resources, 
soils and water resources to attain its commitment. The program contributes to the 
NDC target through the development and promotion of sustainable and climate 
resilient technologies (mainly focusing on agroforestry packages), which will also 
contribute to the reforestation of the country and the reduction of net emissions.13 

B. Objective, Components and Cost 

1.28 The general objectives of the program are to increase agricultural income and food 
security for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti. The specific objectives 
are to increase agricultural productivity and improve the use of natural capital 
through the adoption of sustainable technologies. The channels through which 
increases in agricultural productivity are expected to increase food security are 
twofold. First, higher agricultural productivity will translate into higher agricultural 
yields, increasing food production for home-consumption. Second, higher 
agricultural productivity will increase agricultural income from increased production 
sales which, in turn, will improve household’s purchasing power for, amongst other 
goods, foodstuffs. To achieve its objectives, the program will be structured in two 
components. 

1.29 Component I. Applied research and training (US$14,600,000). The objective of 
this component is to generate and disseminate applied agricultural research and it 
will finance the following activities: (i) applied and adaptive agricultural research 
projects developed and implemented by national and/or international institutions. 
These research projects will create, improve and/or adapt sustainable agricultural 
technologies that will enhance the supply of technological options available to 
farmers. Eight main projects (total budget: US$9,318,000) were identified through 
a prioritization exercise based on an index that summarized economic, social, and 
environmental indicators as well as the yield gap vis-à-vis other countries in the 
region. All research projects will include climate considerations and foster 
adaptation and mitigation measures. Seven additional smaller projects will be 
demand-driven (total budget: US$3,080,000) and will be selected through a similar 
prioritization exercise; (ii) the strengthening of the higher education curriculum 
through activities conducted within the research projects (scholarships, among 
others), in order to improve applied and adaptive research and technology transfer 
capabilities in Haiti; and (iii) the institutional strengthening of the MARNDR 
Innovation Directorate (ID), through: (a) technical and scientific support; 
(b) materials and equipment; (c) strengthening of the technical and scientific profile 
of its professionals; and (d) an innovation information system. The component will 
be executed by the ID of the MARNDR. The selection of the various proposals will 
be conducted by a panel composed by Ministry staff and external experts (faculty 

                                                 
13  According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), agroforestry is a climate smart practice, 

as it has a mitigation potential of 1.1–2.2 Pg carbon over the next 50 years and also provides proven resiliency 
assets. 



- 13 - 

 

members from Haiti and abroad). The results of Component I will progressively 
provide inputs for the technology menu promoted by Component II, including 
climate considerations. A behavioral study will be also conducted to determine 
farmers’ willingness to pay for the new technologies (resulting from the adaptive 
research) to be introduced in the menu. The activities of the component are 
consistent with the recent reforms supported by the IDB as represents a first 
opportunity of application of the FONRED guidelines, whose development was 
supported by the IDB. 

1.30 Component II: Promotion of sustainable agricultural technologies 
(US$55,909,305). This component will finance the adoption of profitable, climate 
smart, and sustainable agricultural technologies that will improve farm profitability, 
generate positive environmental externalities, and facilitate the mitigation of and 
adaptation to climate change. The component will be implemented through the 
agricultural incentives mechanism implemented by the MARNDR. A preliminary 
technology menu has been selected through a prioritization exercise based on the 
relative importance of the different crops, their socio-economic relevance and their 
environmental sustainability. This menu will include: pre-harvest, harvest and 
post-harvest technologies, as well as sustainable soil recovery and conservation 
practices (i.e. agro-forestry systems, sustainable soil management techniques).14 
This menu will be updated each year, taking into consideration the results of 
Component I. To become beneficiaries of this component, interested farmers will 
participate in a series of fairs that will be organized to match demand and supply 
for the various technologies. The component will cover 90%15 of the costs of the 
technologies through a matching grant, and farmers will cover, in cash, the 
remaining 10%. The maximum amount of subsidy will depend on the specific 
technology chosen by farmers and will go up to US$2,000, with a weighted 
average of US$950. Given the damages experienced by farmers in the areas 
affected by hurricane Matthew (South and Grand’Anse Departments), the 
component will finance the total cost of the technologies in these regions. The 
demonstrated results of the selected technologies ensure the sustainability of the 
intervention (see Table I-2). The component will also finance: an information 
system for program implementation, technical assistance for farmers (specific 
assistance on how to choose and apply the technologies and general, strategic 
assistance on farm management and commercialization), and technical assistance 
for technology providers (mainly focused on quality control and environmental 
management). Technical operators will facilitate the implementation of the 
Program in the different intervention areas. 

1.31 Other project costs (US$6,350,000). Other activities to be financed include: 
(i) administration (e.g., consultants, travel, equipment, operational costs, audits); 
(ii) mid-term, final, and impact evaluations; and (iii) contingencies. 

C. Key Results Indicators 

1.32 The Results Framework (Annex II) has been agreed with the Government of Haiti 
and includes the program’s objectives, impacts, results and products, as well as 

                                                 
14  The initial list of technologies includes: motor-pompes, animal traction, cane mills, threshers, stocking 

equipment, different types of agroforestry packages, different types of forestry packages, forages. 
15  This percentage is meant to represent an average across technologies, and was determined on the basis of 

previous experiences, income data, and indicators collected during the evaluation of related programs. 



- 14 - 

 

their respective indicators. Table I-3 summarizes the program’s key impact 
indicators, measurement period and selection rationale. 

Table I-3. Key Indicators 

Impact/ Results indicator Measurement 
period 

Selection rationale 

(i) Percentage of male-headed 
households who are severely 
food insecure using the Food 
Insecurity Experience Scale 
(FIES) 

Y1 and Y5 This indicator measures the degree of food 
insecurity faced by the household, and it will 
be measured separately for male and 
female headed households, and compared 
with a control group. 

(ii) Annual value of agricultural 
production (US$/household) 

Y1 and Y5 This indicator is a proxy for agricultural 
productivity. 

(iii) Additional hectares of land 
applying agroforestry 
technologies 

Y1 and Y5 This indicator will measure the adoption of 
agroforestry technologies and monitor forest 
coverage, and will be measured separately 
for male and female farmers. 

1.33 Economic analysis. The program’s ex-ante economic analysis is based on a cost 
benefit methodology that examines the economic viability for each of the 
technologies selected as well as for the program as a whole. The costs considered 
include the investment (i.e., asset cost, technical assistance and private 
investment), operation, maintenance and reposition of the technologies as well as 
additional production costs and opportunity costs. The net benefits attributed to the 
adoption of the technologies were estimated using technical coefficients for labor 
and inputs obtained from the impact evaluation of agroforestry technologies 
provided with PTTA as well as from the technical report for Component II. The 
results of the analysis, using efficiency prices, an adoption rate of 75%, a 12-year 
horizon, and a discount rate of 12%, confirm that the program is economically 
viable with a net present value of US$28,000,000 and Internal Rate of Return (IRR) 
of 27%. Table I-4 shows the expected effects from each of the options offered in 

the technological menu with their respective IRR. 

Table I-4. Expected Effects and Internal Rates of Returns for the Technologies 

Technology Direct Effects IRR 

Agroforestry Increase productivity and improve soil quality 41.7% 

Irrigation Increase productivity and crop diversification 67.9% 

Animal traction Increase production 22.7% 

Post-Harvest equipment Increase income due to food processing 49.3% 

1.34 Beneficiaries. The program will have the following beneficiaries: (i) 3,000 direct 
beneficiaries of the agricultural applied research and training projects 
(Component I); and (ii) 65,048 farmers that will directly benefit from the matching 
grant mechanism promoting the adoption of technologies (Component II). It is 
expected that women would represent at least 40% of these beneficiaries. The 
departments targeted by the program are: North, North-East, Artibonite, South, 
and Grand’Anse. The first three departments have been selected because of the 
foreseen synergies with other complementary programs and the South and 
Grand’Anse were included to re-capitalize these departments after the damages 
caused by hurricane Matthew. Based on information obtained through PTTA, the 
expected beneficiaries will be farmers who, on average, have access to 



- 15 - 

 

1.4 hectares of land and plant 0.7 hectares; have low levels of income 
(US$248 annual household agricultural income and US$208 income from 
livestock); and low levels of schooling (53% are illiterate, 26% have incomplete 
primary school, 9% finished primary school and 2% have a high school degree). 
Given the program’s limited resources, the proposed targeting will help to: 
(i) ensure the coordination with other rural development programs financed by the 
Bank and other partners (see ¶2.6); and (ii) focus attention on farmers who are in 
most need of the proposed technological changes.

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing Instruments 

2.1 The total program amount is US$76,859,305. The Grant Facility will finance 
US$55,000,000, the GAFSP16 will finance US$10,000,000, and International Fund 
for Agricultural Development (IFAD)17 will finance the remaining US$10,859,305. 
The local counterpart will finance US$1,000,000 to cover recurrent costs. IFAD 
might elect, by the end of 2017, to contribute to the project through a Project 
Specific Grant (PSG) administered by the Bank, in place of a parallel cofinancing, 
for the budgeted amount. Such additional non-reimbursable funding will contribute 
to the project according to Table II-1. In this case, the Bank would establish a 
commitment from IFAD through an administrative agreement without the 
requirement of preparing or approving a separate project proposal. Under such 
administrative agreement, the resources provided by the donor will be 
administered by the Bank. The Bank will not charge an administrative fee for donor 
contributions to projects in Haiti.  The Board is therefore requested to authorize the 
President, or such representative as he shall designate, to enter into such 
agreements as may be necessary with IFAD and with the Republic of Haiti to 
receive, administer, and allocate to this operation the PSG resources aimed at 
supporting and executing the components of this operation. Table II-1 provides the 
cost summary by investment categories and components. The budget includes all 
costs associated with risks mitigation measures identified in the ESMP and the risk 
analysis.

                                                 
16  This co-financing is subject to the entry into effect of a specific agreement for the financing of this program to 

be signed between the IDB and GAFSP. 
17  This parallel financing is subject to IFAD´s approval. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-6


- 16 - 

 

Table II-1. Costs and Sources of Financing (US$) 

Investment categories IDB GAFSP IFAD Local Total 

Components 

Component I. Applied 
research and training 14,600,000  

 

 14,600,000 

Component II. Promotion 
of sustainable 
agricultural technologies 35,050,000 10,000,000 

 
 

10,859,305  55,909,305 

Other project costs 

Administration 4,000,000  
 

1,000,000 5,000,000 

Audits 150,000  
 

 150,000 

Monitoring & Evaluation 700,000  
 

 700,000 

Contingencies 500,000  
 

 500,000 

TOTAL 55,000,000 10,000,000 
 

10,859,305 1,000,000 76,859,305 

• IFAD contribution is, as of today, parallel (co-financing) but might be received by the Bank as 
a PSG, subject to IFAD’s Board approval. 

 

2.2 The program is an investment grant operation and it is designed to be disbursed 
in 60 months. The disbursement calendar is presented in Table II-2 and is based 
on the Pluriannual Execution Plan (PEP) (see REL-1).  

 

Table II-2. Disbursement Projections (US$) 

Source Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

IDB 3,123,865 4,150,926 14,565,837 16,471,691 16,687,681 55,000,000 

GAFSP 1,000,000 2,000,000 3,000,000 3,000,000 1,000,000 10,000,000 

IFAD 1,000,000 2,859,305 3,000,000 2,000,000 2,000,000 10,859,305 

Local 200,000 200,000 200,000 200,000 200,000 1,000,000 

TOTAL 5,323,865 9,210,231 20,765,837 21,671,691 19,887,681 76,859,305 

% 6.9 12.0 27.0 28.2 25.9 100 

A. Environmental and Social Safeguard Risks 

2.3 According to OP-703, the program was classified as Category “B.” The expected 
negative impacts are considered to be low, and avoidable through adequate 
mitigation measures. During project preparation, an Environmental Assessment 
and an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) were prepared and 
consulted.18 Key project impacts and risks include: (i) water resource exploitation 
by the introduction of water pumps for irrigation purposes. This risk will present a 
negligible negative impact, based on an ex-ante hydrological assessment of the 
accumulated pumping capacity of the small number of water pumps (450 over all 

                                                 
18  The preliminary draft of the Environmental Assessment (and ESMP) was posted on the Ministry of Agriculture’s 

website (http://agriculture.gouv.ht/view/01/) on January 13, 2017 for public view, as well as on the IDB website 
on January 17, 2017. An updated version, integrating the results of the first consultations, was posted on 
February 16, 2017, prior to QRR. No further update was needed after last consultation events in 
September 2017. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3
http://agriculture.gouv.ht/view/01/
http://www.iadb.org/en/projects/project-description-title,1303.html?id=HA-L1107
http://www.iadb.org/en/projects/project-description-title,1303.html?id=HA-L1107


- 17 - 

 

intervention zones) to be financed throughout the life of the program. Moreover, a 
Water Resource Assessment will be completed prior to project execution to allow 
for a better understanding of the present state of water resources in the proposed 
intervention zones. The use of these water pumps will also be monitored; 
(ii) possible conflicts generated by program activities regarding agricultural use of 
land in protected areas/Key Biodiversity Areas (KBA).19 To mitigate this risk, the 
program will only take place in areas where management plans exist and are in 
effect, and will be implemented in accordance with the respective protected area 
management plan, including abiding by existing sustainable development zoning 
regulations; (iii) possible promotion of the use of invasive species. To address this 
concern, during the first year of the program’s implementation, a study on invasive 
and non-invasive species will be completed to identify alternatives. If no alternative 
is found, a management plan relating to the use of the invasive species will be 
prepared and implemented. The beneficiary shall comply with the environmental, 
social, health and safety and labor requirements set forth in the Environmental and 
Social Management Report (ESMR); and (iv) emissions associated with energy 
forests. To address this risk, for the first years of the PITAG project, energy forest 
packages will not be offered. Rather, during this time more research will be 
completed to determine the emissions (particularly of carbon dioxide and black 
carbon) that may be released due to energy forests. This research will examine 
the relationship between carbon emissions and sequestration, and the possible 
contribution to climate change, as well as potential human health impacts from 
burning biomass (in the form of charcoal or fuelwood). 

B. Fiduciary Risk 

2.4 An update of PTTA/RESEPAG institutional assessment related to its financial 
management and internal control processes was completed in January 2017. 
Based on its results, the Bank considers PTTA/RESEPAG overall risk rating to be 
medium due to following weaknesses: (i) financial reports are prepared manually, 
which increases the possibility of errors in financial reporting as SYSCOMPTE 
does not automatically generate financial reports; (ii) limitations identified in the 
Système Intégré de Gestion des Informations (SIGI), system used for the 
management of subsidies to farmers; and (iii) absence of a code of ethics. To 
mitigate those risks the EA: (i) has launched an evaluation of the functionality and 
the design of the SIGI information system which will advise on the best option to 
choose for the implementation of PITAG; (ii) will need to set up SYSCOMPTE 
parameters to allow the automatic generation of financial reports and the 
monitoring and execution of budget; and (iii) includes a code of ethics and 
professional conduct in the POM. The fiduciary risk related to procurement delays 
is classified as medium and its mitigation measures include: (i) anticipation and 
good planning for complex procurement processes; (ii) strengthening of the UPMP; 
and (iii) support to the MARNDR to simplify the procedures for contract approval 
and signature. 

C. Other Key Issues and Risks 

2.5 The design of the program used the methodology “Program Risk Analysis for 
Sovereign Guaranteed Loans.” A risk identification and management workshop 

                                                 
19  Sites contributing significantly to the global persistence of biodiversity.  



- 18 - 

 

was conducted during program preparation, to identify program risks and 
mitigation measures. All main counterparts (IDB, MARNDR, private sector, 
development partners) have been consulted as part of the definition of the risk 
matrix and its mitigation measures. The high risk identified is the insufficient quality 
and quantity of technology providers. Several mitigation measures were identified 
for this risk, namely: (i) strengthened selection process of potential providers, 
including quality and quantity control; (ii) trainings; (iii) updated quality standards 
for technologies; (iv) possibility to exclude providers who do not follow the rules; 
and (v) technology transfer to providers through Component I. The development 
risk related to the cash constraints of suppliers is medium, and its mitigation 
measures include: (i) strengthened selection process of potential providers, 
including quality and quantity control; (ii) promotion of link with microfinance 
institutions, including programs financed by IDB and Ministry of Commerce; and 
(iii) good planning of the campaigns in terms of areas and quantities of subsidies. 
The development risk linked to the lack of local financial counterpart is medium 
and its mitigation measure is the preliminary planning and communication with the 
Ministry of Finance. Extreme climatic events have been identified as a medium 
development risk and the related mitigation measures are: (i) promotion of 
technologies that are resilient to climate change; (ii) research on climate resilience; 
and (iii) good planning of the campaigns in terms of areas and seasons. The 
complexity of the subsidy management process is a medium development risk and 
its mitigations measures include: (i) updated operational procedure, based on 
PTTA experience; and (ii) improvement of information system (SIGI). The limited 
number of actors that can execute quality research in the country is a medium 
development risk, whose mitigation measures are: (i) promotion of consortia with 
national and international research centers; and (ii) efforts to give maximum 
visibility to calls for proposals. The limited transfer of research outputs to producers 
is a medium development risk and its mitigation measures include: 
(i) strengthening of coordination between the two Components, the Innovation 
Directory of the MARNDR; (ii) inclusion of dissemination activities in Component I; 
and (iii) monitoring of research activities in the country. The difficulty to access 
intervention areas has been identified as a medium governance risk, whose 
mitigation measure is the timely preparation of providers and the selection of 
providers that will have access to difficult areas. Finally, a medium sustainability 
risk was identified: value added by the technological packages absorbed by 
household consumption expenses. Its mitigation measures include: (i) promotion 
of synergies with microfinance initiatives; and (ii) introduction of the matching grant 
mechanism. 

2.6 The Government of Haiti and the MARNDR expressed high interest in this program 
and are committed to the sustainability of the activities supported by the Program 
beyond its execution period, since the program is aligned with the Road Map of 
the current administration, the 2010-2025 Agriculture Policy Document, the 
2010-2016 and 2016-2021 National Agriculture Investment Plan (NAIP), the 
2011-2016 Agricultural Extension Plan, and Haiti’s Intended National Determined 
Contribution (INDC, 2015). 



- 19 - 

 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of Implementation Arrangements 

3.1 The beneficiary of the program will be the Republic of Haiti, and the EA will be the 
MARNDR, which has been in charge of the execution of most Bank-financed 
operations in the sector, and currently manages an active portfolio totaling 
approximately US$140 million. The EA will manage the program through: (i) the 
technical and administrative team of PTTA/RESEPAG executing unit (PEU); and 
(ii) the UPMP, which have demonstrated their capacity to execute similar programs 
in the past. The EA will be responsible for the overall administration of the program, 
including: planning and reporting technical and fiduciary aspects; execution of 
procurement activities; supervision of firms and service providers; financial and 
accounting management; risk management; monitoring and evaluation; 
supervision and execution of the environmental and social management plan. The 
Innovation Directorate will be responsible for the planning and technical 
supervision of Component I. The approval by the Executing Agency and entry 
into effect of the Program Operating Manual (POM) according to the terms 
and conditions previously agreed with the Bank constitutes a Special 
Contractual Clause prior to the first disbursement of the financing, justified 
by the need to have designated personnel for the execution of the program and 
clear procedures that will guide its implementation. 

3.2 Program Operating Manual (POM). The POM, which establishes standards and 
procedures for the MARNDR with regard to programming activities, procurement 
audits, and monitoring and evaluation, among others, will govern program 
execution. The POM will include, among others, the following: (i) a detailed 
description of the implementation agreement of each component; (ii) roles and 
responsibilities of the agencies involved in the implementation of the program; 
(iii) criteria and procedures to select and contract goods and services; (iv) criteria 
and procedures for management and financial control of the program; 
(v) monitoring and evaluation arrangements; (vi) specific environmental and social 
measures of the program, as described in the ESMR (annexed to the POM); 
(vii) presentation of evidence that the MARNDR has selected a program 
coordinator and a financial officer according to the terms and conditions previously 
agreed with the Bank; and (viii) a provision according to which a technical 
verification of the use of agricultural subsidy funds by the beneficiary will be 
performed on a quarterly basis by an individual consultant who will be hired 
according to the terms and conditions previously agreed with the Bank. A 
preliminary manual of procedures was prepared during program preparation.  

3.3 The following are some salient elements that will be included in the POM regarding 
the execution of Component II. The main selection criteria for beneficiaries are the 
following: (i) to be registered in the MARNDR farmers’ registry; (ii) to be domiciled 
in the area of intervention; (iii) to work on an area equal to or greater than 0.25 Ha; 
(iv) not having received a previous MARNDR technology subsidy; and (v) to meet 
the specific criteria for the desired technical package. The selected farmers will 
pay their contribution to a financial institution and technology providers will provide 
the technology to the farmers. The program will pay the remaining part of the cost 
of the technology to technology providers once it has been verified that they have 



- 20 - 

 

delivered the technology to the farmers. All the transactions and validation will be 
tracked by an updated version of the SIGI. 

3.4 Procurement. All program-related procurement activities will be performed 
following Bank’s Procurement Policies: Policies for the Procurement of Goods and 
Works financed by the Bank (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and 
Contracting of Consultants financed by the Bank (GN-2350-9) as applicable.  

3.5 Financial and Auditing reports. The program will submit to the Bank the following 
documents: (i) semi-annual financial reports of the program included in the 
semi-annual progress report; (ii) annual financial statements of the program, 
audited by an independent auditor are to be submitted to the Bank within 120 days 
at the end of each fiscal year, beginning with the fiscal year in which the first 
expenditures are incurred; and (iii) a final financial audit report of the program is to 
be submitted by the MARNDR within 120 days after the date of the last 
disbursement.  

B. Summary of Arrangements for Monitoring Results 

3.6 It will be the PEU´s responsibility to put in place a monitoring system to collect data 
related to all the indicators in the Results Framework. This system will be 
instrumental for the PEU to be able to submit to the Bank semi-annual progress 
reports that will describe, among others: (i) the physical progress of the program 
(i.e., in terms of output indicators); (ii) the progress made in terms of outcomes and 
impacts, as stipulated in the Results Framework; and (iii) the status of applicable 
environmental and social mitigation measures. 

3.7 An impact evaluation will be conducted to measure the program’s impact and 
results. Specifically, the impact evaluation will be a combination of experimental 
and quasi-experimental techniques. Component I will be evaluated using a before 
and after calculation. On the other hand, Component II will use a randomization 
methodology to analyze the impact of the adoption of those technologies that will 
experience a demand higher than project’s capacity to supply it (i.e., irrigation), 
and combine it with a quasi-experimental approach of difference-in-difference for 
technologies such as agroforestry and post-harvest. For this purpose, a sample of 
2,000 farmers (1,000 beneficiaries and 1,000 control, representative by gender) 
will be surveyed for baseline and a follow-up surveys. The data collection will be 
representative of female-headed households and separate analysis will be 
performed in order to measure impact by gender. The total budget for the impact 
evaluation amounts to US$550,000 that will be covered with resources from this 
grant. Details on the monitoring and evaluation activities are provided in the 
Monitoring and Evaluation Plan prepared for the program. 

C.  Significant Design Activities Post Approval  

3.8 There will be no significant design activities post approval.  

 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-5


Annex I - HA-L1107/HA-G1038

Page 1 of 1

1. IDB Development Objectives

     Development Challenges & Cross-cutting Themes

     Country Development Results Indicators

2. Country Development Objectives

     Country Strategy Results Matrix GN-2646

     Country Program Results Matrix GN-2884

Relevance of this project to country development challenges (If not aligned to country 

strategy or country program)

II. Development Outcomes - Evaluability
3. Evidence-based Assessment & Solution

     3.1 Program Diagnosis

     3.2 Proposed Interventions or Solutions

     3.3 Results Matrix Quality

4. Ex ante Economic Analysis

     4.1 The program has an ERR/NPV, a Cost-Effectiveness Analysis or a General Economic 

Analysis

     4.2 Identified and Quantified Benefits

     4.3 Identified and Quantified Costs

     4.4 Reasonable Assumptions

     4.5 Sensitivity Analysis

5. Monitoring and Evaluation 

     5.1 Monitoring Mechanisms

     5.2 Evaluation Plan

Overall risks rate = magnitude of risks*likelihood

Identified risks have been rated for magnitude and likelihood

Mitigation measures have been identified for major risks

Mitigation measures have indicators for tracking their implementation

Environmental & social risk classification

The project relies on the use of country systems

Fiduciary (VPC/FMP Criteria)

Non-Fiduciary

The IDB’s involvement promotes additional improvements of the intended beneficiaries and/or 

public sector entity in the following dimensions:

Gender Equality

Labor

Environment

Additional (to project preparation) technical assistance was provided to the public sector entity 

prior to approval to increase the likelihood of success of the project

The ex-post impact evaluation of the project will produce evidence to close knowledge gaps in 

the sector that were identified in the project document and/or in the evaluation plan
Yes

1.5

9.6

2.5

7.1

8.5

4.0

0.0

1.5

1.5

Evaluable
10.0

3.0

4.0

3.0

Note: (*) Indicates contribution to the corresponding CRF’s Country Development Results Indicator.

The objective of the program is to lower the levels of poverty and food insecurity in rural areas of Haiti by improving access to adequate and climate resilient agricultural 

technologies and increasing agricultural productivity among smallholder farmers. To increase adoption of such technologies, the program proposes the provision of agricultural 

incentives and technical assistance, as well as the development of applied and adaptive agricultural research projects, along with a strengthening of the high education 

curriculum and institutional capacities to conduct and apply research. 

The documentation is well-structured. The diagnostic is based on empirical evidence of the major challenges faced by the country with regards to the vulnerability of Haiti’s 

agricultural sector and outlines various market, environmental, and institutional factors contributing to the current levels of low productivity. The proposed solution is then 

linked to the problems identified. The results matrix (RM) reflects the objectives of the program and establishes a clear vertical logic, including impact indicators that can capture 

the program’s overall effect on income and food security. The RM includes SMART indicators at the impact (except one), outcome and output level, with their respective baseline 

values and targets and the means to gather information.  

The economic analysis includes a Cost-Benefit Analysis that considers the intervention’s benefit on the income of targeted smallholder farmers as measured in terms of gross 

value added. In general, the benefits are based on a good understanding of the theory of change, and the economic costs include all resource costs as well as costs from a social 

perspective. However, the quantification of benefits under Component I and II does not clearly separate between the distinct beneficiaries, which may lead to issues of double 

counting. Overall assumptions appear reasonable and appropriate; a sensitivity analysis contemplates key parameters and various break-even points.

The monitoring and evaluation plan presents all outputs and associated costs. The evaluation plan proposes a before-after comparison for Component I (no attribution), as well 

as a randomized control trial with an instrumental variable approach and a difference-and-difference method with matching for Component II. The plan provides sufficient detail 

on methodological and logistical considerations, though the power calculations should have been conducted separately for male and female beneficiaries given the focus on 

heterogeneous impact by gender.

The risk matrix identifies eleven risks; three are classified as Low, seven as Medium, and one as High. All of them seem reasonable and include appropriate mitigating actions 

and compliance indicators.

There is an impact evaluation plan that aims to measure the effect of 

the program on the adoption of agricultural technologies.

Medium

Yes

III. Risks & Mitigation Monitoring Matrix

IV. IDB´s Role - Additionality

Yes

Yes

B

-Beneficiaries of improved management and sustainable use of natural capital (#)*

-Women beneficiaries of economic empowerment initiatives (#)*

-Farmers with improved access to agricultural services and investments  (#)*

-Beneficiaries of IDBG projects that contribute to at least one key dimension of food security  (#)*

Yes

Protect the environment, respond to climate change, and enhance food 

security.

The intervention is included in the 2017 Operational Program.

Development Effectiveness Matrix

Summary

Yes

-Productivity and Innovation

-Gender Equality and Diversity

-Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability

I. Corporate and Country Priorities



Annex II – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 1 of 6 

RESULTS MATRIX 

Project Objective: To increase food security and agricultural income for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti.  

Specific Objective: Increase agricultural productivity and improve the use of natural capital through the adoption of sustainable technologies. 

 

EXPECTED IMPACTS 

Indicators Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

IMPACT 1: Improve Food Security 

Indicator 1.1: Percentage of male-
headed households who are 
severely food insecure using the 
Food Security Scale (ELCSA)  

% 71 2013 35 2022 

 

Agricultural Household 
Surveys for baseline 
and follow-up. 

The baseline number will be 
updated through surveys to be 
conducted prior to program 
implementation. The baseline 
values correspond to baseline 
values of PTTA. Target numbers are 
based on the CRIAR impact 
evaluation conducted in Bolivia and 
apply to program beneficiaries. 

Indicator 1.2: Percentage of 
female-headed households who are 
severely food insecure using the 
Food Security Scale (ELCSA) 

% 86 2013 50 2022 

 

Agricultural Household 
Surveys for baseline 
and follow-up. 

The baseline number will be 
updated through surveys to be 
conducted prior to program 
implementation. The baseline 
values correspond to baseline 
values of PTTA. Target numbers are 
based on the CRIAR impact 
evaluation conducted in Bolivia and 
apply to program beneficiaries. 

 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

Indicator 1.3: Beneficiaries of 
IDBG projects that contribute to at 
least one key dimension of food 
security 

# 0 2017 65,048 2022  

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

This number corresponds to the 
total number of program 
beneficiaries. IDB finances 39,679 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 13,010, and 
IFAD 12,359. 

IMPACT 2: Increase Agricultural Income 

Indicator 2.1:  Annual agricultural 
income  

USD/ 
household 

170 2015 268 2022 

 The baseline number will be 

updated through surveys to be 

conducted prior to program 



Annex II – HA-L1107 
Page 2 of 6 

 

Indicators Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

• Annual agricultural income for 
female-headed agricultural 
households 

USD/ 
household 

68 2015 107 2022 

Agricultural Household 

Surveys for baseline 

and follow-up.  

implementation. The baseline and 

target values are obtained from the 

impact evaluation of the PTTA. The 

income increase corresponds to 

58%. Targets apply to program 

beneficiaries. 

This includes only income from crop 

related agricultural activities 

(livestock is not included) 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

•  Annual agricultural income for 
male-headed agricultural 
households 

USD/ 
household 

197 2015 311 2022 

Indicator 2.2: Annual agricultural 
profits 
 

USD/ 
household 

98 2015 160 2022 

 

Agricultural Household 

Surveys for baseline 

and follow-up. 

The baseline number will be 

updated through surveys to be 

conducted prior to program 

implementation. The baseline and 

target values are obtained from the 

impact evaluation of the PTTA. The 

profit increase corresponds to 

63%.Targets apply to program 

beneficiaries. 

Profits correspond to the agricultural 

revenues minus the cost of variable 

inputs and transportation for crop 

activities. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

• Annual agricultural profits of 
female-headed agricultural 
households 
 

USD/ 
household 

30 2015 49 2022 

• Annual agricultural profits of 
male-headed agricultural 
households 

USD/ 
household 

116 2015 189 2022 

IMPACT 3: Increase Agricultural Productivity 

Indicator 3.1: Annual value of 
agricultural production 

USD/ 

Household
/year 

347 2015 478 2022 

Agricultural Household 
Surveys for baseline 
and follow-up. 

This corresponds to an increase of 
38% in the value of production. This 
target corresponds to the results 
obtained in the impact evaluation of 
PTTA. Targets apply to program 
beneficiaries. 

 



Annex II – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 3 of 6 

 

EXPECTED RESULTS 

Results Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

 RESULT 1: Improve use of Natural Capital  

Indicator 1.1: Beneficiaries of 
improved management and 
sustainable use of natural 
capital. 

# 0 2017 61,224 2022  

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

This number corresponds to 
beneficiaries from agroforestry 
technologies. IDB finances 37,347 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 12,245, and 
IFAD 11,632. 

Indicator 1.2: Beneficiaries 
who adopted soil protection and 
restoration technologies 

# 0 2017 
45,918 

2022 

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

This number corresponds to 
beneficiaries from agroforestry 
technologies multiplied by an 
adoption rate of 75% (adoption rate 
observed in similar projects in the 
region). IDB finances 28,011 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 9,183, and 
IFAD 8,724. 

Indicator 1.3:  Additional 
hectares of land applying 
agroforestry technologies 

Has 0 2017 27,900 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target corresponds to 
estimates made for the economic 
analysis. IDB finances 17,019 
hectares, GAFSP 5,580, and IFAD 
5,301. 

RESULT 2: Improve Agricultural Innovation Services 

Indicator 2.1: Research and 
development expenditure as 
percentage of Agricultural GDP 

% 0.12 2017 0.3 2022 

Ministry’s executed 
budget. 

Baseline is taken from IDB 
Agrimonitor estimations for the 
average of the period 2008-2012.  

This indicator will be measured 
before and after the implementation 
(reflexive methodology). The target 
is based on calculations that 
include the value of the investment 
in research made by this and other 
related programs of the Ministry. 

Indicator 2.2: New 
technologies developed or 

# 0 2017 8 2022 
Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

These new technologies 
correspond solely to those 



Annex II – HA-L1107 
Page 4 of 6 

 

Results Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

adapted by new applied 
research projects 

developed by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 

Indicator 2.3: Male farmers 

who adopt the technologies 

developed by new applied 

research projects. 

# 0 2017 1,800 2022 

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

These new technologies 
correspond solely to those 
developed by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 

Indicator 2.4: Female farmers 

who adopt the technologies 

developed by new applied 

research projects. 

# 0 2017 1,200 2022 

Records of 
beneficiaries from the 
Ministry. 

These new technologies 
correspond solely to those 
developed by the Ministry of 
Agriculture. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

RESULT 3: Increase Adoption of Agricultural Technologies 

Indicator 3.1: Percentage of 
beneficiary producers who 
adopt agricultural technologies. 

% 0 2017 75% 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target represents the 
percentage of adopters observed in 
similar projects in the region 
including the PATCA in Dominican 
Republic and CRIAR in Bolivia. 

 

Indicator 3.2: Percentage of 

beneficiary women who adopt 

agricultural technologies 
% 0 2017 75% 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target represents the 
percentage of adopters observed in 
similar projects in the region. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

Indicator 3.3. Farmers who 

adopt agricultural technologies # 0 2017 48,786 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up. 

The target represents the 
percentage of adopters observed in 
similar projects in the region. IDB 
finances 29,760 farmers, GAFSP 
9,757, and IFAD 9,269. 



Annex II – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 5 of 6 

Results Unit  
Baseline Goals Means of 

verification 
Observations 

Value Year Value Year 

Indicator 3.4. Women 

beneficiaries of economic 

empowerment initiatives 
# 0 2017 26,019 2022 

Agricultural 
Household Surveys 
for baseline and 
follow-up.  

Project Report. 

This includes the total number of 
women to benefit from the program 
(40% of total beneficiaries from 
component I and II). IDB finances 
15,872 beneficiaries, GAFSP 
5,204, and IFAD 4,943. “Pro 
Gender Flag” 

 

PRODUCTS 

Products  Unit  
Base 
line 

Year 
1 

Year 
2 

Year 
3 

Year 
4 

Year 
5 

Final 
Goal 

Means of 
verification 

Observations 

Component I: Applied research and training 

1.1. Applied agricultural research 
projects implemented for the 
development/adaptation or 
improvement of new agricultural 
technologies  

# 
0 0 2 2 6 5 15 

Project 
progress 
report. 

The initial research projects 
will include: rice, banana, 
tubers, horticulture products, 
legumes, and agroforestry. 

MS. 1.1.1. Applied agricultural 
research projects implemented for 
the development/adaptation or 
improvement of agricultural 
technologies that specifically target 
female farmers 

# 
0 0 0 0 0 3 3 

Project 
progress 
report. 

Research projects on 
horticulture, tubers, and 
legumes  

“Pro Gender Flag” 

MS. 1.1.2. Applied agricultural 
research projects implemented for 
the development/adaptation or 
improvement of agricultural 
technologies that specifically target 
climate change adaptation or 
mitigation 

# 
0 0 0 0 0 3 3 

Project 
progress 
report. 

Three research projects on 
agroforestry. 

1.2. Scholarships to support the 
implementation of new innovation 
projects delivered to research 
fellows  

# 
0 0 2 3 3 2 10 

Project 
progress 
report. 

Research fellows include 
students, scientists and 
academics from Haiti that 
work in the new lines of 
agricultural research 
developed by the project.  



Annex II – HA-L1107 
Page 6 of 6 

 

Products  Unit  
Base 
line 

Year 
1 

Year 
2 

Year 
3 

Year 
4 

Year 
5 

Final 
Goal 

Means of 
verification 

Observations 

1.3. Directorate of Innovation 
strengthened  

# 
0 0 0 0 1 1 1 

Project 
progress report  

Strengthening of the 
Innovation Directorate 
includes provision of 
equipment and contracting a 
supervisor for the research 
program. Also, the 
implementation of the 
innovation information 
system. 

MS. 1.3.1. Innovation information 
system implemented 

# 
0 0 0 1 1 1 1 

Project 
Progress 
Report  

This corresponds to a system 
to monitor the research 
initiatives in the country. This 
system will be implemented 
by the MARDR. 

Component II: Promotion of sustainable agricultural technologies 

2.1. Beneficiary farmers who 

received technological packages # 

 

0 

       

3,252  

       

6,505  

     

19,514  

     

19,514  

     

16,262  

     

65,047  

Project 
progress 
report. 

IDB finances 39,679 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 13,010, 
and IFAD 12,359. 

MS. 2.1.1. Female farmers who 

received technological packages  # 
0 1,301 2,602 7,806 7,806 6,504 26,019 

Project 
progress 
report. 

This corresponds to 40% of 
total beneficiaries. IDB 
finances 15,872 beneficiaries, 
GAFSP 5,204, and IFAD 
4,943. 

“Pro Gender Flag” 

MS. 2.1.2. Beneficiary farmers who 

received technological packages 

for climate change adaptation and 

mitigation. 

# 
0 

  

3,061  

  

6,122  

  

18,367  

  

18,367  

  

15,306  

  

61,223  

Project 
progress 
report. 

This number corresponds to 
beneficiaries receiving 
agroforestry technologies. 
IDB finances 37,347 
beneficiaries, GAFSP 12,245, 
and IFAD 11,632. 

2.2. Beneficiary farmers who 

received technical assistance # 

 

0 1,650 3,300 9,900 9,900 8,250 33,000 

Project 
progress 
report. 

IDB finances 24,750 
beneficiaries, and IFAD 
8,250. 

 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 1 of 6 

 

FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTS 
 

COUNTRY:    Republic of Haiti 

PROGRAM Nº:    HA-L1107/HA-G1038  

NAME:  Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program - 
PITAG 

EXECUTING AGENCY (EA): The Ministry of Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural 
Development (MARNDR)  

FIDUCIARY TEAM:   Marise E. Salnave and Romina Kirkagacli (FMP/CHA) 

 

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

1.1 The general objectives of the program are to increase agricultural income and food 
security for smallholder farmers in selected areas of Haiti. The specific objectives are to 
increase agricultural productivity and improve the use of natural capital through the 
adoption of sustainable technologies. The EA will be the MARNDR, which will implement 
all program components through: (i) its Executing Unit named “PTTA/RESEPAG,” which 
will ensure program technical and financial management; and (ii) the procurement unit of 
the MARNDR named “UPMP,” which will perform procurement activities. The program is 
composed of two components: Component I - Applied research and training and 
Component II – Promotion of sustainable agricultural technologies. The total program 
amount is estimated at US$76,859,305; financed by the IDB Grant Facility for up to the 
amount of US$55,000,000; the GAFSP will co-finance up to the amount of 
US$10,000,000; the IFAD will finance the remaining US$10,859,305. The national 
counterpart will finance US$1,000,000 to cover recurrent costs linked to Component I and 
administrative expenses. 
 

1.2 The latest evaluation of the public financial management systems of the Republic of Haiti 
is contained in the Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessment 
report conducted in 2011 and published in February 2012. The Government of Haiti has 
shown continued commitment in improving the country system and has adopted in May 
2014 Public Financial Management reform strategy including an action plan 2014-2016 to 
consolidate basic public financial management functions focus on: (a) continuing the 
implementation of a Single Treasury Account (STA) with the support of IMF; (b) reaffirming 
the role of public accountants in the monitoring of expenses in all line ministries, and 
(c) improving the monitoring of public debt. Despite these measures, the    
country financial management systems and external control mechanism would require 
further improvements prior to conform to levels consistent with their utilization for the 
fiduciary management of Bank’s funded programs. As a result, no country systems will be 
used for the financial management of program. An evaluation of the National Procurement 
System was performed in 2013, applying the methodology established by the Organization 
for Economic Co-operation and Development. A certain number of recommendations were 
identified through an action plan for the modernization of the national procurement system. 
Based on the current situation and the need to align the national system to international 
standards and best practices, the Bank’s procurement policies will govern procurement 
activities foreseen under this program. Therefore, to mitigate these risks the Bank will 
continue in the foreseeable future to: (i) rely on special program executing units for the 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 2 of 6 

 

execution of all programs while at the same strengthening institutional capacities; and 
(ii) to implement special fiduciary arrangements for program implementation and to 
conduct close supervision of program executing units. External control will be performed 
for all Bank operations by independent audit firms acceptable to the Bank in accordance 
with the Bank’s financial reporting and audit guide. 

II. EXECUTING AGENCY´S FIDUCIARY CONTEXT AND COLLABORATION WITH OTHER ENTITIES 

2.1 The EA will be responsible for the overall program execution and administration, including: 
planning and reporting technical and fiduciary aspects; execution of procurement activities; 
supervision of firms and service providers; financial and accounting management; risk 
management; monitoring and evaluation; supervision and execution of the environmental 
and social management plan. The MARNDR will execute the aforementioned tasks 
through: (i) its Executing Unit named “PTTA/RESEPAG,” which will ensure the financial 
management of the program; and (ii) the procurement unit of the MARNDR named 
“UPMP”, which will perform the procurement activities of the program. The PEU has 
gained experience in the execution of Bank financed operations over the past five years, 
during the execution of the Technology Transfer Program for Small Farmers Program 
(HA-L1059, 2562-GR-HA, PTTA I). The program coordinator will report to MARNDR’s 
General Director. The EA will be responsible for the fiduciary aspects of the program and 
overall administration including financial reporting.  
 

2.2 The UPMP, which is the procurement unit of MARNDR, was created through a Ministerial 
Decree “M-AIDG/(C-17)09-13:1659 (bis)” of September 17, 2013, has been in place and 
operational since early 2014. Based on findings of the technical assistance conducted by 
the Bank’s Procurement team, this unit has proved to possess a solid technical knowledge 
in the application of the Bank’s procurement policies. As of now, 12 procurement 
specialists are working in the unit. The UPMP can count on an organized system to treat 
purchase requests and conduct procurement processes, and is developing an improved 
filing system.  

 
2.3 A Steering Committee (SC) will be created after program start-up workshop to ensure 

strategic overall guidance and coordination among the different institutions involved in 
program implementation. The SC will meet at least once a year in order to discuss 
strategic issues, as well as to approve the multi-year execution plan, annual operation 
plans and progress reports. This committee will be chaired by MARNDR’s General 
Director.  

III. FIDUCIARY RISK EVALUATION AND MITIGATION ACTIONS 

3.1 An update of PTTA/RESEPAG institutional assessment related to its financial 
management and internal control processes was completed in January 2017. Based on 
the results, the Bank considers PTTA/RESEPAG overall risk rating to be medium due to 
following weaknesses: (i) financial reports are prepared manually which increases the 
possibility of errors in financial reporting as SYSCOMPTE does not automatically generate 
financial reports; (ii) Limitations identified in SIGI information system used for the 
management of subsidies to farmers; and (iii) absence of a code of ethics. To mitigate 
those risks the EA: (i) has launched an evaluation of the functionality and the design of the 
SIGI information system which will advise on the best option to choose for the 
implementation of new program; (ii) will need to set up parameters SYSCOMPTE to allow 
the automatic generation of financial reports and the monitoring and execution of budget; 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 3 of 6 

 

and (iii) include a code of ethics and professional conduct in the POM. The fiduciary risk 
related to procurement delays is classified as medium and its mitigation measures 
include: (i) anticipation and good planning for complex procurement processes; 
(ii) strengthening of the UPMP; and (iii) support to the MARNDR to simplify the 
procedures for contract approval and signature. 
 

3.2 Based on the most recent capacity evaluation of the UPMP conducted by the Bank, the 
risk level in terms of procurement is considered as medium. However, the following risks 
and mitigation measures have been identified: (i) a heavy workload is being handled by 
UPMP with the execution of several parallel programs financed by the IDB and other 
donors. Mitigation: hiring a new procurement specialist or designating a specific 
procurement specialist already working with the Unit to support the additional workload; 
(ii) a lengthy contract approval process at the level of the Ministry, which impacts the 
program timeframe. Mitigation: the EA will submit an annex to the POM describing the 
procedure and timeframe applicable to the MARNDR’s internal and external approval 
process for procurement contracts; (iii) with a centralized structure, the important 
number of transactions may also negatively impact on the execution timeframe. 
Mitigation: the Unit will work on consolidated procurement plans for the Ministry in order 
to improve its planning capacity and identify recurring purchases so as to reduce 
transactional costs and achieve best value for money; and (iv) contract archives are well 
organized but not yet available in electronic version. Mitigation: the program will support 
some of UPMP’s operational costs which will also be used to support the development of 
an electronic filing system. 

IV. ASPECTS TO BE CONSIDERED IN THE SPECIAL CONTRACTUAL CONDITIONS OF THE GRANT 

4.1 Prior to first disbursement of the financing. Special Accounts and authorized 
signatures: PTTA/RESEPAG will open four separate bank accounts at the Haitian 
Central Bank (two accounts for each financing source (IDB and GAFSP), one in US 
Dollars and one in Gourdes)..      

4.2 Adoption of program operation manual1. PTTA/RESEPAG shall update to the 
satisfaction of the Bank, their operations manual (OM) which shall set out the procedures 
to be followed by the EA with regard to planning and reporting of activities, financial 
management, audits, procurement and contracting, risk management, and monitoring and 
evaluation. The OM shall include, among others: (i) the role of each participant and 
collaborating institution for the implementation of the program; (ii) a code of ethics section; 
(iii) an annex describing the procedure and timeframe applicable to the MARNDR’s 
internal and external approval process for procurement contracts; (iv) the framework of 
Environmental and Social Management Plans; (v) the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan, 
procedures for the safeguard of financial information; and (vi) a chart of accounts. 

4.3 Audit special requirements: PTTA/RESEPAG will be responsible for the recruitment of 
external auditors eligible to the Bank to perform the financial audit of the program as 
follows: (i) annual financial audit of the program to be submitted within 120 days after the 
closure of each fiscal year for each executing unit; and (ii) a final financial audit of the 
program to be submitted within 120 days after the date of the last disbursement.  Audit 
may include audit of procurement processes under ex-post modality (this specific activity 
will be confirmed in the Terms of reference of the audit firm). For the audit of financial 

                                                 
1  The adoption of a program operating manual is considered critical and essential for insuring the efficient and effective 

execution of the program. 



Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 4 of 6 

 

statements, the Haitian fiscal year will be used. For Component II, a technical verification 
of the use of funds by the beneficiaries will be performed on a quarterly basis by an 
individual consultant based on terms of reference approved by the Bank.  

4.4 Special disbursement. To enable the EA to fulfill all the conditions prior to first 
disbursement, an initial disbursement of up to US$150,000 will be made to the extent the 
beneficiary fulfills, to the Bank’s satisfaction, all the standard general conditions prior to 
disbursement set forth in the grant agreement.  Funds will be used to finance the 
contracting of technical and fiduciary personnel, update the POM, prepare program’s 
chart of accounts and update program accounting and information systems (see ¶3.1). 

V. FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTS FOR PROCUREMENT EXECUTION 

5.1 The procurement fiduciary arrangements establish the conditions applicable to all 
procurement execution activities in the program. 

A. Procurement Execution  

5.2 All program related procurement activities will be performed by the MARNDR 
Procurement Unit (UPMP) and will be governed by the Bank’s Procurement Policies: 
Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works financed by the Inter-American 
Development Bank (GN-2349-9) and Policies for the Selection and Contracting of 
Consultants financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2350-9).  

a. Procurement of Works, Goods and Non-Consulting Services: The contracts for 
Works, Goods, and Non-Consulting Services2 generated under the program and 
subject to International Competitive Bidding will be executed through the use of the 
Standard Bidding Documents (SBDs) issued by the Bank. The processes subject to 
National Competitive Bidding (NCB) will be executed through the use of National 
Bidding Documents agreed to by the Bank.  

b. Selection and Contracting of Consultants: The consulting services contracts 
generated under this program will be executed through the use of the Standard 
Request for Proposals (SRFPs) issued or agreed to by the Bank. Research entities, 
Firms or Universities will be selected to develop research programs using Selection 
Based on Quality as procurement method. Approximately eight contracts will be 
signed for a total amount of US$13,000,000.  

B. Recurring Expenses 

5.3 Certain recurring expenses will be procured using program funds. These procurement 
activities will be carried out in accordance with the administrative procedures of the EA 
with the prior approval of the Bank who will assess and approve the use of these 
procedures.  

 

 

 

 

 

                                                 
2  Policies for the Procurement of Goods and Works Financed by the Inter-American Development Bank (GN-2349-9) 

paragraph 1.1: The services different to consulting services have a similar process as procurement of Goods. 

http://idbdocs.iadb.org/wsdocs/getdocument.aspx?DOCNUM=774392


Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 5 of 6 

 

 

 

C. Main Procurement Activities 

Table V-1. Procurement Activities 

 
Activity 

Procurement 
Method 

Estimated 
Date 

Estimated 
Amount 
000’US$ 

FIRMS    

Development and implementation of research programs  

SBQ First two 
contracts to 
be signed in 
2018  

1,500,000 per 
contract  

Development of an information system to monitor and manage 
the research programs and the provision of agricultural subsidies  

SBQC December 
2017 

500,000 

Technical assistance and management of the agricultural 
subsidies scheme  

SBQC December 
2017 

5,000,000 

Technical assistance and training of service providers 
SBQC February 

2018 
600,000 

 INDIVIDUALS    

Supervisor of research program 
 
QIC 

 
March 2018 

500,000 for the 
entire duration of 

the program 

*To access the 18-month procurement plan, click here 

D. Procurement Supervision 

5.4 Based on the risks identified under Section II above, the major procurement activities 
foreseen under this operation will be subject to ex ante review by the Bank. Procurement 
activities using the shopping method for goods, works, non-consulting services and the 
recruitment of individual consultants selected under a competitive method might be 
subject to ex post review, as confirmed in the Procurement plan.  

E. Records and Files 

5.5 The EA will be required to keep files and track records of all procurement activities 
financed by the Bank in such a way that it be available for supervision visit by the 
fiduciary team. As confirmed by recent inspection visits, the UPMP is provided with an 
organized archiving system, despite space limitations which will be addressed with the 
creation of an electronic filing system with support from the Bank. Until the national 
legislation in Haiti will not recognize electronic documents, electronic archiving should 
not replace paper files. 

VI. FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT 

A. Programming and Budget 

6.1 PTTA/RESEPAG will provide an annual operation plan (AOP), procurement plan and a 
12-month detailed financial plan. The financial plans and will respect the budget lines 
defined in the grant agreement (investment categories).   

B. Accounting and Information Systems 

6.2 SYSCOP will be used for program financial management. Detailed annual budget 
including activities to be financed will be included in system to facilitate the comparison 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-HA-LON/HA-L1107/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-2047280280-3


Annex III – HA-L1107/HA-G1038 
Page 6 of 6 

 

of Actual vs Budget forecast at the end of each month and the production of financial 
reports by source of funds.  

C. Disbursements and Funds Flows  

6.3 Program financial management will be guided by OP-273-6. PTTA/RESEPAG will 
prepare annual planning of program cash flows to be revised every four months.  
Financial plans will be based on activities derived from the Annual Operation Plan and 
Procurement Plan and payment terms agreed with suppliers. Advance of funds 
methodology will be used for the disbursement of program funds. For each new 
advance, PTTA/RESEPAG will need to justify 80% of cumulated advance received. 
Disbursement Supervision will be ex-post. Local national counterpart will be used to 
finance recurring costs related to activities financed under Component I. Exchange rate 
on the date of conversion of the currency in which the disbursement is made will be used 
to record all expenses made in local currency; the Central Bank of Haiti exchange rate 
published for that date will be used at the reference rate. Payment of subsidies will be 
made via a financial institution which will be hired through a competitive bidding process. 
Payments by the financial institution will be subject to the farmer meeting set technical 
requirements to be validated by the Departmental Directorate of Agriculture (DDA) and 
the payment of a small contribution. The DDA will inform the EA that all technical 
requirements have been met following which the EA will send payment authorization to 
the financial institution. Amount to be disbursed will be subject to terms defined in 
matching grant agreement. 

D. Internal Control and Audit 

6.4 The internal control environment of the program will be strengthened with: (i) the 
updating and implementation of an operation plan; (ii) the updating of the current 
accounting system to include a module for budget preparation and monitoring and the 
automatic preparation of financial report; and (iii) the use of an information system for the 
management of subsidies to the farmers. 

E. External Control and Reporting 

6.5 Audits of financial statements will be performed in accordance with Bank’s Guidelines for 
Financial Reports and External Audits (OP-273-6) as described in Section IV of the 
Guidelines. Financial audit cost will be financed by IDB grant and estimated at 
US$150,000, including the audit of procurement aspects.    

F. Financial Supervision Plan  

6.6 During the first year of execution, fiduciary personnel of the Bank will perform inspection 
visits to review the execution of financial plan every four months and on a semi-annual 
basis for the following years, however the frequency of visits is subject to change based 
on findings from supervision missions.  

G. Execution Mechanism 

6.7 PTTA/RESEPAG will maintain proper financial management systems and will prepare 
an AOP and Procurement Plan and a twelve-month financial plan indicating cash flow 
needs. Disbursement of advances of funds will be for the equivalent of funding needs 
required for four months of program execution. Fund flows will be executed as stated in 
point 6.3 (Disbursement and Fund Flows) above.  

 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/17 
 
 
 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing ____/GR-HA to the Republic of Haiti 
Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological 

Innovation Program - PITAG 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

 That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, as Administrator of the IDB Grant Facility 
(hereinafter referred to as the “Account”), to enter into such contract or contracts as may be 
necessary with the Republic of Haiti, as Beneficiary, for the purpose of granting it a 
nonreimbursable financing to cooperate in the execution of the Agricultural and Agroforestry 
Technological Innovation Program - PITAG. Such nonreimbursable financing will be for an 
amount of up to US$55,000,000, which form part of the Account, and will be subject to the 
Terms and Financial Conditions and the Special Contractual Conditions in the Project Summary 
of the Grant Proposal. 

 

 
 

(Adopted on __ ______________ 2017) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/HA/EZSHARE-1537888330-1429 
HA-L1107 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/17 
 
 
 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing GRT/__-_____-HA to the Republic of Haiti 
Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological 

Innovation Program - PITAG 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

 1. That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, as Administrator of the Global Agriculture 
and Food Security Program (GAFSP) Trust Fund (hereinafter referred to as the “Trust Fund”), to 
enter into such agreement or agreements as may be necessary with the Republic of Haiti, as 
Beneficiary, for the purpose of granting it a nonreimbursable financing to cooperate in the 
execution of the Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological Innovation Program - PITAG. Such 
nonreimbursable financing will be for an amount of up to US$10,000,000, which form part of the 
Trust Fund, and will be subject to the Terms and Financial Conditions and the Special 
Contractual Conditions in the Project Summary of the Grant Proposal. 

 

 2. That the authorization granted in paragraph 1 above shall be effective only once 
the Bank has entered into the specific contribution agreements. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ ______________ 2017) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/HA/EZSHARE-1537888330-1430 
HA-L1107 



DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK 
 
 
 
 

PROPOSED RESOLUTION DE-__/17 
 
 
 

Haiti. Nonreimbursable Financing GRT/__-_____-HA to the Republic of Haiti 
Agricultural and Agroforestry Technological 

Innovation Program - PITAG 
 
 
 

The Board of Executive Directors 
 
RESOLVES: 
 

1. That the President of the Bank, or such representative as he shall designate, is 
authorized, in the name and on behalf of the Bank, to enter into such agreements as may be 
necessary, and to take such additional measures as may be pertinent, to receive, administer 
and approve the use of nonreimbursable financing resources chargeable to the resources 
provided by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) described in Document 
PR-____, up to the amount of US$10,859,305 for the co-financing of any component to this 
nonreimbursable financing. 
 

2. That the authorization granted in paragraph 1 above shall be effective only once 
the Bank has entered into the specific contribution agreements. 
 
 
 

(Adopted on __ ______________ 2017) 
 
 
 

LEG/SGO/HA/EZSHARE-1537888330-1427 
HA-L1107 





