
























































PUBLIC 
SIMULTANEOUS DISCLOSURE 

DOCUMENT OF THE INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK  
 

 

 

 

PARAGUAY 

 

 

 

PROJECT TO IMPROVE AND EXPAND ANIMAL HEALTH SERVICES IN 
PARAGUAY  

(PR-L1148) 

LOAN PROPOSAL 
 
 
 
 
PROJECT SUMMARY  
PARAGUAY 

PROJECT TO IMPROVE AND EXPAND ANIMAL HEALTH SERVICES IN PARAGUAY  
(PR-L1148) 

Financial terms and conditions 

Borrower: National Service for Animal Health and 
Quality (SENACSA) 

Flexible Financing Facility(a) 

Guarantor: Republic of Paraguay Amortization period: 24 years  

Executing agency: The borrower, through the Project 
Management Unit and with the support of the Bureau of 
Administration and Finance  

Disbursement period: 5 years 

Source Amount (US$) % Grace period:  5.5 years(b) 

IDB Ordinary Capital: 15,000,000 100 

Interest rate: LIBOR-based 

Credit fee: (c) 

Inspection and supervision fee: (c) 

Total: 15,000,000 100 

Weighted average life: 14.75 years 

Approval currency: United States dollars 
from the Ordinary 
Capital 

Project at a Glance 

Project objective/description: The program’s general objective is to help improve the productivity of the livestock sector. 
The specific objectives are to: (i) improve the effectiveness of animal health services with a risk management approach; 
and (ii) expand the coverage of veterinary services, including for smaller species. 

Special contractual conditions precedent to the first loan disbursement: (i) the Program Execution Unit will have been 
formed according to the terms agreed upon with the Bank; and (ii) the borrower will have presented, to the Bank’s 
satisfaction, evidence that the program Operating Regulations have entered into force (paragraph 3.4). 

Special contractual conditions for execution: The project will be executed in accordance with the contractual provisions 
on environmental, social, health, and safety issues set forth in the legal requirements section of the Environmental and 
Social Management Report, including Annex B.  

Exceptions to Bank policies: SENACSA will be the borrower and the executing agency. The guarantee by the Republic 
of Paraguay will be limited to SENACSA’s financial obligations in the context of the loan (including repayment of principal, 
payment of interest, and other lending charges) and will not cover performance obligations or local counterpart 
contributions. Accordingly, the Board of Executive Directors is being asked to approve a partial waiver of the Bank’s 
policy on Guarantees required from the borrower (document GP-104-2) (paragraph 3.1). 

Strategic Alignment 

Challenges:(d) SI 
 

PI 
 

EI 
 

Crosscutting themes:(e) GD 
 

CC 
 

IC 
 

(a) Under the Flexible Financing Facility (document FN-655-1), the borrower has the option of requesting changes to the 
amortization schedule, as well as currency and interest-rate conversions. The Bank will take operational and risk 
management considerations into account when reviewing these requests. 

(b) Under the flexible repayment options of the Flexible Financing Facility, changes to the grace period are permitted 
provided that they do not entail any extension of the original weighted average life of the loan or the last payment date 
as documented in the loan contract.  

(c) The credit fee and inspection and supervision fee will be established periodically by the Board of Executive Directors 
as part of its review of the Bank’s lending charges, in accordance with applicable policies. 

(d) SI (Social Inclusion and Equality); PI (Productivity and Innovation); and EI (Economic Integration). 
(e) GD (Gender Equality and Diversity); CC (Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability); and IC (Institutional 

Capacity and Rule of Law). 
 

 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-25
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-25


 

I. PROJECT DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS MONITORING1 

A. Background, problem, and rationale  

1.1 Paraguay closed 2017 with real GDP growth of 4.3%, up from 4.1% in 2016. 
Inflation, meanwhile, reached 4.5%, higher than the target of 4% set by the Central 
Bank of Paraguay (BCP) for 2017, while the central government’s budget deficit was 
1.5% of GDP, similar to the previous year. In the short and medium terms, the 
country’s GDP is expected to grow by around 3.5% to 4.0%, and its fiscal position 
should get stronger in line with the provisions of the Fiscal Responsibility Law. 

1.2 In this context, the agricultural sector is key to the Paraguayan economy, due to its 
contribution to GDP (an annual average of 25% in the 2004-2016 period) as well as 
to its share of the country’s jobs (annual average of 30% during the same period). 
Furthermore, from 2004 to 2016, the sector grew at an average annual rate of 5.7%. 
On par with this growth, the sector’s exports have significantly increased over the 
past decade; in 2016, they accounted for 60% of the total value of exports (BCP, 
2017). The livestock subsector accounts for approximately 5.5% of national GDP, 
with around 13 million head of cattle, 1.3 million pigs, and 500,000 sheep, among 
other species (National Service for Animal Health and Quality, SENACSA, 2016). 
Exports of animal products and byproducts totaled an annual average of 
US$1.424 billion in the three-year period 2014-2016 and account for 16% of all 
exports (SENACSA, 2017).2  

1.3 The importance of sheep, pig, and poultry products in the domestic market should 
also be highlighted. The majority of these products come from small family farms 
(IICA, Paraguay Observatory, 2016). According to the 2008 National Agricultural 
Census, there are 289,000 productive farms managing 31 million hectares of land, 
of which 66% are dedicated to livestock activity. Of these, 92% have less than 
50 hectares and are considered family farms.  

1.4 In the past few years, Paraguayan beef production has increased significantly due 
to growth in the cattle herd and slaughter.3 However, there are still significant 
productivity gaps compared to other countries in the region. For example, in 
Paraguay, the bovine calving rate4 is approximately 46%, lower than in the other 
MERCOSUR countries, which have an average rate of 61% (SIGOR SENACSA, 
2017). The national annual average cattle offtake rate5 is 15%, while in the other 
countries in the region it averages 24%. Likewise, while Paraguay produces 28 kg 
of meat per hectare per year, Brazil produces 49 kg, Argentina 34 kg, and Uruguay 
40 kg.6 With regard to productivity rates for small livestock, in Paraguay the lambing 

                                                
1  The references presented in the document are available at optional electronic link 1. 
2  Paraguay ranks sixth in the world among meat exporters.  
3  SIGOR: in the last decade the cattle herd grew 40% (from 10 million to 14 million heads) and the slaughter 

doubled (from 1.1 million to 2 million head of cattle).  
4  The calving rate refers to the percentage of weaned calves.  
5  The offtake rate is the percentage of cattle slaughtered divided by the population monitored by the official 

veterinary services; it is from 2016. 
6 EA Digital 2014 http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-

sinoineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-24
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/
http://ea.com.py/v2/blogs/el-aumento-del-hato-ganadero-no-genera-productividad-sino-ineficiencia-a-escala-mayor/


  - 2 - 

rate is 40%; in Uruguay, it is 90%.7 Increasing productivity through technical change 
is complex, above all when taking into account the limited return on certain new 
technologies compared to the extensive production in areas with a relative 
abundance of land. However, expanding the agricultural frontier also has negative 
effects, namely, increasing deforestation.8 The main challenges for improving 
productivity include the availability of improved adapted pastureland; improving the 
genetic quality of the herd to increase efficiency in converting pasture to meat or 
milk; the appropriate management of pastures and livestock; improving reproductive 
efficiency and animal health. Furthermore, productivity is affected by the sector’s 
vulnerability to climate change, and the livestock sector is the country’s principal 
source of greenhouse gas emissions.9  

1.5 The importance of livestock health. International empirical evidence shows that 
animal health has significant positive effects on livestock productivity, access to 
international markets, and consumer health, due to fewer cases of zoonotic 
diseases.10 Globally, there is ever more concern over the sustained increase in 
detections of new and re-emerging infectious agents. This is accompanied by 
significant social and economic impacts on public and animal health in the affected 
regions. The growing risks of transmission of animal diseases and exchange of 
pests associated with trade liberalization, the movement of persons, and climate 
change, has led to greater epidemiological risks (Globalization and Infectious 
Diseases, 2004).  

1.6 The countries in the region, immersed in this risky scenario, are increasingly 
vulnerable, since they have the world’s largest population of animals intended for 
commercial use (Naranjo, 2017). This new global risk scenario led the member 
states of the World Trade Organization to sign an Agreement on the Application of 
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (WTO, 1995), whereby they commit to 
assessing and managing the risk to ensure sanitary and phytosanitary protection.11 
Accordingly, government veterinary services must design their sanitary strategies 
using a risk management approach that includes the pillars of identifying and 
reducing risks, as well as responding to sanitary emergencies.  

1.7 Pursuant to the Plan of Action 2011-2020 of the Hemispheric Program for the 
Eradication of Foot-and-Mouth Disease,12 the region of South America will move 
toward eradicating foot-and-mouth disease (FMD), which would mean an end to 
vaccination in the near future. This would lead to significant economic benefits by 
making it possible for Paraguay to access markets with more stringent health 
requirements and higher prices, but it would also increase the vulnerability of the 

                                                
7  Efecto de características maternas y del cordero sobre peso vivo al nacimiento, señalada, destete  

supervivencia neonatal [Effect of maternal and lamb characteristics on live weight at birth, marking weight, 
weaning weight, and neonatal survival] (Grasso, 2013).  

8  From 2001 to 2013 pastureland in Latin America was increased by 96.9 million hectares, mostly through 
deforestation in regions like Colombia, central Brazil, western Paraguay, northern Guatemala, and eastern 
Nicaragua (Graesser et al., 2015). 

9  Taking into account emissions from converting forest to cropland (Third National Communication from 
Paraguay to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (SEAM/UNDP/GEF, 2017)).  

10  IDB. Agriculture and Natural Resources Management Sector Framework Document (document 
GN-2709-5).  

11  World Trade Organization. https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/spsagr_e.htm. 
12  Pan American Health Organization/Pan American Foot-and-Mouth Disease Center (PAHO/PANAFTOSA, 

2010). 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/15%20LifeCycle%20Milestones/Draft%20Area/POD%20-%20Enlace%20opcional%20-%20Diagn%C3%B3stico%20Sanidad%20Animal%20SENACSA%20-%20PR-L1148.docx?d=w26f4b22bde8240db8f607175c8775d30
https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/spsagr_e.htm


  - 3 - 

country’s livestock population, which would be left without vaccine protection and 
exposed to potential reintroductions of the disease. This represents a strategic shift 
towards a risk management perspective in the design of health services, entailing 
major structural and organizational-operational adaptations.  

1.8 The animal products market, principally in the pork and poultry production sector, is 
also rapidly evolving towards new requirements related to the comprehensive safety 
of the production chain, including specifications on biosecurity management, 
real-time monitoring of hygienic-sanitary conditions, and farm-to-fork traceability, 
etc. Keeping more than one livestock species is another risk-reduction strategy for 
farmers, as it provides them with a broader range of options for adapting to the 
unpredictability of the weather than if they keep only one species (Reijntjes et al., 
1992). 

1.9 Ties between animal health and climate change. Evidence exists that 
interventions in animal health represent an important strategy for adapting to13 and 
mitigating14 climate change, which impacts animal health through its direct and 
indirect effects on the host-pathogen system environment. In fact, climate variability 
and extreme climate events are important factors in predicting the occurrence of 
diseases in animals.15 The direct effects are more pronounced in vector-transmitted 
diseases and/or diseases affected by weather conditions such as temperature and 
humidity.16 In turn, the indirect effects are derived from changes in biodiversity and 
land use, as well as from animals’ efforts to adapt to the new environment.17 
Managing health risks (which involves preventive veterinary medicine, monitoring, 
detection, and early response) is thus key to addressing the impacts of climate 
change on animal health.18 Therefore, in many countries, measures aimed at and 
support for effective animal health services may be the most important and 
necessary adaptation strategies,19 since efficient veterinary services are vital to 
addressing the impacts of climate change on animal health.20 It is also necessary to 
support animal health services in all countries so as to control and appropriately 
manage transboundary diseases and the food safety problems that may be 
exacerbated by climate change and the intensification thereof associated with 
climate variability.21 

1.10 Health risk management approach. The challenges involved in implementing new 
trade agreements that have stricter health requirements, as well as in addressing 
climate change scenarios, call for a new approach in health services based on 
identifying risks, assessing their potential effects, preventive action programs, and 
timely, effective communication. This entails creating risk management platforms 

                                                
13  Climate Change Impacts and Risks for Animal Health in Asia (S. Forman et al., 2008).  
14  Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions through Better Animal Health (A. Stoot et al., 2010).  
15  Climate-smart livestock production. FAO 2017. https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/spsagr_e.htm.  
16  Impact of Climate Change on Livestock Health: A Review (N. Abdela and K. Jilo, 2016).  
17  Climate-smart livestock production. FAO 2017.  
18  Climate Change and Animal Health (J. Lubroth, 2012). 
19  Managing Animal Diseases Risk in Australia: The Impact of Climate Change (P. Van den Bossche and 

J.A.W. Coetzer, 2008). 
20  Climate Change Impacts and Risks for Animal Health in Asia (S. Forman et al., 2008). 
21  Managing Animal Diseases Risk in Australia: The Impact of Climate Change (P.F. Black et al., 2008). 

https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/sps_e/spsagr_e.htm


  - 4 - 

that use modern information technologies (OIE, 2004 and 2011).22 Therefore, new 
approaches to health certification and management are needed, with public-private 
participation and integration; collaborative monitoring, detection, and intervention 
systems; application of best practices protocols for production, health, and 
biosecurity; and use integrated production systems. A notable example is Mexico’s 
National Service for Agri-Food Health, Safety, and Quality (SENASICA), which has 
successfully adopted the risk management concept. With the launch of its Health 
Intelligence Unit, the incorporation of preventive medicine services, and the creation 
of the Internal Rapid Alert Network for the timely exchange of data and generation 
of strategic information, the country has been able to successfully comply with the 
commitments it acquired upon joining the World Trade Organization, and over the 
past 10 years has doubled the value of its agri-food exports, which has reached 
US$30 billion. According to the OIE, Mexico’s preventive actions have enabled it to 
obtain an animal health status held by only five countries in the world (Australia, 
United States, Portugal, Switzerland, and Mexico).23 

1.11 Livestock health in Paraguay. Paraguay has obtained official status as an 
FMD-free country where vaccination is practiced and as a country free from classical 
swine fever (CSF), pursuant to the World Organisation for Animal Health’s 
Terrestrial Animal Health Code (OIE, 2017). Despite these achievements, the 
country is a prime example of potential vulnerability due to emergency risk 
scenarios. Indeed, Paraguay has the region’s highest proportion of farm animals to 
humans, which reduces its capacity to contain epidemiological outbreaks. And as a 
landlocked country with more than 3,500 km of land borders with three other 
countries, it is highly exposed to the entry of infectious agents (Naranjo, 2017).  

1.12 According to a study24 conducted in 2012, the country suffered losses worth 
US$54 million in beef cattle and US$74 million in dairy cattle due to brucellosis and 
tuberculosis, and lost revenue of US$33 million due to CSF and US$72 million due 
to Newcastle disease in poultry. In 2011, FMD reappeared in Paraguay. The impacts 
of this outbreak caused economic losses of US$170 million in exports alone, 
equivalent to 7.2% of the livestock contribution to GDP (Giménez Rolón, 2012). 
These figures are consistent with reports by the OIE, which attribute more than 20% 
of global livestock production losses to various diseases.  

1.13 Some economically important prevalent diseases25 are still having a significant effect 
on the productivity of the national livestock herd; these diseases have a high 
zoonotic risk and are included among export certification requirements. Addressing 
these diseases is a priority in order to reduce productivity gaps and minimize barriers 
to exportation, as well as because they pose a high risk to public health. Bovine and 
caprine brucellosis are both on the rise in the country. These diseases have high 

                                                
22  OIE, 2004. Handbook on Import Risk Analysis for Animals Products, Vol. 2 quantitative risk analysis. OIE, 

2010. Terrestrial Animal Health Code. Paris, France. 
23  National Service for Agri-Food Health, Safety, and Quality of Mexico. https://www.gob.mx/senasica/ 

articulos/unidad-de-inteligencia-sanitaria-101745?idiom=es. 
24  Análisis del Gasto Publico en Servicios de Sanidad Agropecuaria [Analysis of Public Expenditure on 

Agricultural Health Services] (Giménez Rolón, 2012).  
25  The prevalence of a disease is the total number of individuals who have the disease or a characteristic at 

a given time or during a given period of time, divided by the population at that moment in time or halfway 
through the period. It quantifies the proportion of individuals in a population who have a disease at a given 
time. 

https://www.gob.mx/senasica/%20articulos/unidad-de-inteligencia-sanitaria-101745?idiom=es
https://www.gob.mx/senasica/%20articulos/unidad-de-inteligencia-sanitaria-101745?idiom=es


  - 5 - 

prevalence rates and cause significant losses26 to affected producers (low 
reproduction rates due to abortions, subfertility, and infertility); they also are 
hazardous to human health, principally for family farmers (SENACSA, 2017). 
Although bovine tuberculosis has been sporadically detected in some breeding 
herds, up-to-date information that would make it possible to estimate its prevalence 
and incidence rates is not available. 

1.14 Health services in Paraguay. SENACSA27 is the national body responsible for 
making, regulating, coordinating, implementing, and overseeing the country’s 
policies on and management of animal health and quality. The Ministry of Agriculture 
and Livestock28 is responsible for furthering livestock policies in coordination with 
SENACSA. As the government veterinary service, SENACSA is committed to 
maintaining the health statuses achieved in Paraguay,29 as well as to eliminating 
prevalent diseases, including zoonotic diseases, making greater efforts to process 
samples for surveillance and control throughout the country, including on the 
borders.  

1.15 In 2013, the OIE evaluated SENACSA’s performance (OIE-PVS,30 2014), assessing 
the strengths and weaknesses of the government veterinary service. Among its 
strengths, the service has material resources, including infrastructure, equipment, 
and vehicles. It has been successfully administering the FMD control program for 
years, which has given it experience in managing health programs. SENACSA’s 
veterinary service is highly specialized in the fight against FMD and has 
demonstrated the ability to fulfill its professional obligations of surveillance, control, 
and certification for the safe export of beef to the most selective markets in the world. 
SENACSA has also demonstrated its high level of commitment to the OIE process 
of improving veterinary services. 

1.16 The following are among the weaknesses identified for SENACSA’s transition to a 
risk management approach: (i) shortage of highly trained human resources; (ii) lack 
of infrastructure and modern equipment; (iii) limited capacity for identifying health 
risks, as well as for the control and surveillance of prevalent and emerging diseases; 
and (iv) weaknesses with regard to simplifying procedures and processes that would 

                                                
26  Quantifications of losses due to brucellosis calculated in Brazil in 2013 show an average loss of 

US$120 and US$210 for each female infected with brucellosis in the meat and milk production systems, 
respectively (Bovine Brucellosis Program 2017, IICA-SENACSA). 

27  Law 2426/2004. 
28  SENACSA and the Ministry of Agriculture (Law 81/92) are two independent institutions with 

complementary functions. They coordinate to optimize their respective resources, plans, and programs. 
Specifically, the Ministry of Agriculture, through its Office of the Deputy Minister of Livestock Farming 
(Resolution 1783/11), enforces government policy on the livestock sector and proposes, evaluates, and 
coordinates the enforcement of regulations on the health and quality of products and inputs for national 
and international sales, as well as other functions.  

29  Such as the statuses achieved with regard to FMD, rinderpest, bovine spongiform encephalopathy, peste 
des petits ruminants (also known as sheep and goat plague), among other diseases.  

30  The PVS is the OIE Tool for the Evaluation of Performance of Veterinary Services. The PVS gap analysis 
allows the veterinary services to define the objectives to be reached in the next five years, in compliance 
with OIE quality standards and based on national priorities and limitations. The OIE PVS Tool determines 
the effectiveness of the veterinary services, identifies gaps and weaknesses, and establishes 
recommendations for 40 competencies grouped into four components: (i) human, technical, and financial 
resources; (ii) technical authority and capability; (iii) interaction with interested parties; and (iv) access to 
markets. Each competency is evaluated from 1 to 5, with the latter being the most advanced. The resulting 
values can be expressed as a percentage. In November 2017 the OIE performed a new PVS of SENACSA, 
which will be used as a baseline once published. 



  - 6 - 

make it possible to lower transaction costs.31 Paraguay achieved an average 
performance value of 64% in the PVS evaluation, which is worse than other 
countries in the region like Uruguay (83%), Chile (82%), and Colombia (70%).  

1.17 The PVS also identified the lack of an overall management system as one of the 
government veterinary services’ greatest weaknesses. With the current data 
management system, it is not possible to synthesize useful information for adequate 
analysis, control, and/or planning. SENACSA does have SIGOR32 (the regional 
office computerized management system) in place; this system can record and 
analyze data on establishments and producers, livestock inventories, cattle 
movements, progress on anti-FMD vaccine campaigns, etc. However, there are no 
computerized systems in place for the laboratories, quarantines, food producer 
inspections, and waste control, among other issues. Although SENACSA’s Animal 
Health Bureau uses an animal health system (SISA)33 that was designed to inform, 
store, and maintain a database about animal health in the country through 
SENACSA’s zonal units, it is not integrated into SIGOR. SIGOR and SISA are both 
key tools for the risk management model. 

1.18 In addition, according to the user survey and demand study (Ferrari, 2017), 
incorporating new information technologies into SENACSA’s services is a priority, in 
order to streamline procedures, lower transaction costs, and facilitate the expansion 
of services to users.34 The following key processes that can be improved were 
identified as a result of the study: (i) reduction of in-person procedures; (ii) 24/7 
availability of the online system; (iii) incorporation of functionalities for small livestock 
producers; (iv) strengthening of services associated with the opening and 
development of markets for new export chains; and (v) simplification of import and 
export procedures.  

1.19 Lastly, one of the main limitations observed in the PVS stems from the structure of 
SENACSA’s annual budget. Funds come from several sources: the National 
Treasury contribution (22%), internal resources from the provision of services (21%), 
and taxes on the movement of animals and meat exports (57%). This reliance on 
contributions from the livestock sector for services provided is a disadvantage of the 
government veterinary services’ specialization in beef production, as it can create a 
dependence on beef exports, meaning that if they are restricted for health reasons, 
funding could be affected. A recent analysis of the effectiveness of various health 
systems in Latin America (OVE, 2015) concluded that it was important to allocate 
resources to generating public goods from the services. This analysis highlighted 
the achievements of health campaigns in terms of reducing the effects of diseases, 
as well as the social return on those initiatives.  

                                                
31  In the 2013 PVS, SENACSA achieved scores of 66% and 53% in the categories of (i) human, technical, 

and financial resources; and (ii) technical authority and capacity, respectively.  
32  SIGOR is a web-based system developed to manage the services provided by SENACSA throughout the 

country. SIGOR manages health information, the control of poultry and cattle movement, revenue under 
Law 808/96, and proceedings in legal cases. The system is used in facilities including zonal units, livestock 
fairs, control posts, and meat packing plants. SIGOR has 12 modules in place and 3 online services offered 
through the institution’s portal. 

33  SISA has four modules in place (property georeferencing, immediate notification of diseases, attention to 
suspected cases, and monthly epidemiological records). 

34  This study sought to identify evidence of benchmarking associated with foreign trade practices involving 
similar procedures, but did not find any. SENACSA does not have any studies on procedure costs. 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/15%20LifeCycle%20Milestones/Draft%20Area/POD%20-%20Enlace%20opcional%20-%20Estudio%20de%20Demanda%20SENACSA%20-%20PR-L1148.pdf


  - 7 - 

1.20 The same assessment made recommendations for putting together joint strategies 
for the public and private sectors, promoting the recovery of costs for institutional 
sustainability, preventive health work, the economic evaluation of outcomes, and the 
development of new health capacities. In Paraguay, public-private collaborative 
efforts in animal health have been successful.35 SENACSA’s involvement with the 
cattle sector is effective and encouraged, due to the importance of beef exports to 
the country. However, coordination with other productive sectors, such as the dairy, 
pig, small ruminant, and poultry sectors, is still incipient (OIE-PVS, 2013). 
Accordingly, the Government of Paraguay is interested in emulating the public-
private sector coordination achieved in the cattle subsector in other livestock 
subsectors (e.g., pig, sheep, goat, and poultry). 

1.21 Bank experience. Between 2002 and 2014, the Bank approved 17 investment 
loans to strengthen agricultural health and food safety systems in the region, for 
US$359 million, approximately 10% of the total sector portfolio (OVE, 2015).36 Based 
on those operations, as well as on some recently approved ones (Peru 4457/OC-PE, 
Uruguay 3800/OC-UR, Bolivia 3797/BL-BO, Guyana 3798/BL-GY, and Mexico 
3864/OC-ME), and taking into account the conclusions and recommendations that 
issue from the OVE document Comparative Project Evaluation of Agriculture Health 
and Food Safety 2002-2014, Table 1 below shows the main lessons learned and 
how they have been incorporated into the design of the proposed operation. 

 
Table 1. Incorporation of recommendations into program design 

Recommendations  Incorporation into program design 

Participation of the private 
sector, through joint work and 
the incorporation of new 
information and 
communications technologies.  

The program makes it a priority to make more services 
available online, so as to streamline and improve the 
efficiency of service delivery. Animal health control programs 
will be executed in coordination with producers.  

Make the laboratories 
sustainable. 

The laboratories currently operated by SENACSA are self-
financed, but they do not have the capacity required to 
execute the public disease control programs. The program 
will finance the improvement of the laboratories’ capacities. 
The laboratories will continue to be self-financed. 

Evaluation and outcomes, with 
regard to the direct 

beneficiaries.  

The program includes a monitoring and evaluation program, 
and an impact assessment plan, which will analyze the 

impacts of the program actions on its direct beneficiaries. 

 

1.22 Country strategy with the sector. The project is first and foremost aligned with the 
guidelines and objectives of the National Development Plan 2030, the Agriculture 
Strategic Framework 2014-2018, and SENACSA’s Institutional Strategic Plan 
2013-2018. The project is linked to the following strategic pillars of the National 
Development Plan 2030: (i) inclusive economic growth and (ii) Paraguay’s 
international integration, as well as with the crosscutting pillar of efficient and 
transparent public management. The program will also contribute to the Agriculture 
Strategic Framework strategic pillar of “livestock and farm development,” which 
prioritizes establishing disease monitoring and control programs, maintaining and 

                                                
35  Law 808/96 declared the national FMD eradication program to be mandatory and created the Interagency 

Commission, forming a public-private partnership (PPP) made up of representatives of SENACSA and the 
Rural Association of Paraguay. 

36  Of the 17 loans approved for agricultural health between 2002 and 2014, none involved Paraguay. 



  - 8 - 

improving the health status of livestock production, and upgrading and modernizing 
the laboratory system. It is also aligned with the national contribution, which identifies 
livestock farming as a priority sector for climate adaptation and highlights the 
country’s commitment to reducing its vulnerability to climate change.37 

1.23 IDB country strategy. The operation is aligned with the IDB Country Strategy with 
Paraguay (2014-2018) (document GN-2769), since it contributes to the strategic 
objective of increasing “the supply of agricultural public goods and services.” 

1.24 Strategic alignment. The program is aligned with the Update to the Institutional 
Strategy 2010-2020 (document AB-3008) and with the challenge of productivity and 
innovation, by improving the provision of essential public goods, like health services 
for rural development and economic integration. The program is also aligned with 
the crosscutting areas of: (i) strengthening institutional capacity and the rule of law, 
by strengthening an institution that is strategic for rural development; and (ii) climate 
change and environmental sustainability, by providing mechanisms that contribute 
to climate change adaptation. It also contributes to the Corporate Results 
Framework 2016-2019 (document GN-2727-6), through the indicator: “government 
agencies benefitted by projects that strengthen technological and managerial tools 
to improve public service delivery.” In addition, the operation is included in the 2018 
Operational Program Report (document GN-2915). The program is also consistent 
with the first dimension of success of the Agriculture and Natural Resources 
Management Sector Framework Document (document GN-2709-5), which calls for 
achieving high levels of agricultural productivity in the region and proposes that 
high-quality health services and public goods be provided; the Food Security Sector 
Framework Document (document GN-2825-3) with regard to the dimension of 
access to safe and nutritious foods; and the Climate Change Sector Framework 
Document (document GN-2835-3), in that it promotes higher agricultural productivity 
through the adoption of climate change adaptation practices. 

1.25 Approximately 41% of operation resources will be invested in climate change 
mitigation and adaptation activities, in accordance with the Multilateral Development 
Banks’ joint methodology for estimating climate finance.38 These resources 
contribute to the IDB Group’s target of increasing financing of climate-change-
related projects to 30% of combined total approvals by the end of 2020. 

B. Objectives, components, and cost  

1.26 Objective. The program’s general objective is to help improve the productivity of the 
livestock sector. The specific objectives are to: (i) improve the effectiveness of 
animal health services with a risk management approach; and (ii) expand the 
coverage of veterinary services, including for smaller species. 

1.27 To those ends, investments are planned in two components, described below: 

1.28 Component I. Health risk management (US$10.8 million). This component will 
strengthen SENACSA’s capacities for identifying, assessing, and managing risk, by 
expanding the functions of its information systems to generate epidemiological 
information for decision-making. With a properly equipped monitoring network, 
inspection processes at entry points, and posts for monitoring farm animal 
movements, protocols will be established for responding to health events, and 

                                                
37  National Contributions of the Republic of Paraguay (Republic of Paraguay, 2015). 
38  See optional electronic link 5 for detailed information.  

https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://publications.iadb.org/handle/11319/7807
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-17


  - 9 - 

strategies will be drawn up for mitigating their potential effects. The institutional 
strengthening will also include the training of human resources and the provision of 
specific inputs and equipment. A health intelligence network will be implemented 
while improving physical infrastructure at certain identified priority points; this will 
involve equipping and modernizing the SENACSA laboratories. A network of public 
and private laboratories will also be set up and provided with a comprehensive 
management system to expand and speed up diagnostic and control capacities, as 
required by the risk management approach. In addition, given the potential of 
individual identification and traceability as a tool for health risk management, the 
component will finance the design of software and the procurement of the equipment 
necessary for animal identification and individual traceability. Moreover, in keeping 
with the risk management approach, the component will support the Reproductive 
Diseases Program in eradicating brucellosis, by helping to improve SENACSA’s 
capacities for managing, preventing, and responding to that type of health event. In 
short, this component will finance: (i) a health intelligence network (for identification 
and prevention, with an early alert system for preventive communication and an 
emergency response system); (ii) the modernization and expansion of physical 
infrastructure (in the various regions, at control posts, and on the border) and 
equipment to support the tasks of diagnosis, surveillance, and control; (iii) the 
identification of individual animals for traceability; (iv) support for the national 
brucellosis program; and (v) a program to modernize the organization. 

1.29 Component II. Expansion of services (US$3.1 million). This component will 
improve and expand service delivery to users by simplifying and digitizing 
procedures,39 emphasizing the most important ones, to decrease transaction costs. 
The component will also develop new computer functionalities, including expanding 
and optimizing SIGOR, to facilitate decision-making and the provision of health 
services. This will include not only expanding the systems’ capacities and improving 
telecommunications, but also securing computer services to ensure availability 
remotely and in zonal offices. The program will include training for human resources 
on generating services for users and risk management capacities. The expansion of 
SENACSA’s services is expected to involve the preparation and implementation of 
health plans that will include the identification, registry, health management, 
vaccination, surveillance, and certification of smaller species (sheep, goat, pigs, 
poultry). To facilitate the process of executing the health plans and providing 
services to small and medium-sized producers, the component will finance the 
formation and operation of a public-private partnership40 that will include 
representatives of SENACSA and of small livestock producer associations. The 
component includes support activities to obtain the effective participation of 
producers, such as: (i) training; (ii) certification of private technicians; and (iii) the 

                                                
39  This is aligned with the “infrastructure and connectivity” pillar of the digital agenda that the Bank is 

promoting in Paraguay; among other improvements, the ability to use an electronic signature for priority 
procedures will be incorporated.  

40  The PPP will be formed by representatives of SENACSA and of the small livestock production sector 
(Rural Association of Paraguay, associations of sheep, goat, pig, and poultry farmers). It will have one 
standing member and one alternate from each institution, who will be unpaid and will each have a single 
vote; it will be led by SENACSA, which will be responsible for auditing and certifying all national and 
international processes. It will have one coordinator, and the Commission will decide how the allocated 
resources are to be handled. Among its functions, the PPP will: (i) actively participate in health plans and 
campaigns; (ii) ensure the use of best practices with regard to animal wellbeing and the defense of the 
environment; (iii) implement compartmentalization for health campaigns; and (iv) update and train the 
various actors. 



  - 10 - 

preparation of materials for dissemination. To summarize, this component will 
finance: (i) the incorporation of new functionalities into the computer system, new 
online services, and the implementation of electronic signatures to improve 
efficiency in the delivery of services to users; and (ii) the preparation and 
implementation of health plans (identification, registration, health management, 
vaccination, surveillance, and certification) for small species (sheep, goat, pigs, 
poultry); a public-private partnership will be formed to that end, and will facilitate 
implementation of the health plans as well as the development and strengthening of 
small livestock chains. 

1.30 Program administration (US$1.1 million). Program administration resources will 
be used to fund the formation and operation of the Program Execution Unit (PEU), 
as well as for contingencies and reporting. 

1.31 Activities from both components, in particular those focused on identifying, 
monitoring, assessing, and managing health risks, and the training sessions for 
technicians and producers, contribute to climate actions (optional electronic link 5). 

C. Key results indicators  

1.32 The program has a Results Matrix agreed upon with the borrower (Annex II) that 
contains the program impact, outcome, and output indicators, and the respective 
baselines and targets. In line with the program’s objective, the principal impacts will 
be: (i) improved cattle offtake rate (proxy for improved productivity); and 
(ii) increased small species exports. The expected outcomes are: (i) improved 
effectiveness of the animal health services (SENACSA’s score on specific aspects 
rated in the PVS, including risk management); (ii) reduced prevalence of brucellosis; 
and (iii) health coverage expanded to new categories, emphasizing small livestock.  

1.33 The incorporation of the risk management approach and the implementation of the 
health surveillance unit represent important innovations that will improve the 
country’s health capacity. In this context, SENACSA will enter into partnership 
agreements with institutions that are leaders on this issue, such as Mexico’s 
SENASICA.  

1.34 Economic viability. An ex ante economic analysis (optional electronic link 2) of the 
program has confirmed its expected viability. Based on a comparison of the costs 
and benefits expected over a 20-year period, the analysis estimates that the 
program will have a net present value (NPV) of US$58.4 million and an internal rate 
of return (IRR) of 34.2%. 

1.35 These estimates take into account the potential positive effects of the program in 
terms of fewer losses from possible disease outbreaks, improved access to markets, 
improved productivity, and SENACSA’s more efficient service delivery. More 
specifically, the analysis includes the expected program benefits with regard to the 
following: (i) beef productivity, production, and exports, as a result of improved 
control of FMD, bovine brucellosis, and implementation of a traceability system; 
(ii) pork production and exports, as a result of improved control and prevention of a 
potential CSF outbreak; (iii) chicken productivity, production, and exports, as a result 
of improved control of avian influenza and Newcastle disease, and the expansion of 
SENACSA services to small species; and (iv) SENACSA’s administrative 
management of services. It should be noted that other important benefits (like the 
improvements in public health derived from the improved control of zoonotic 
livestock diseases) were not considered in the analysis due to the difficulty of 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-17
https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1395480667-18


  - 11 - 

accounting for them. Therefore, the program’s NPV and IRR may be 
underestimated. 

1.36 In terms of economic costs, the analysis took into account the program investment 
as well as the associated incremental costs, namely: (i) incremental costs incurred 
by SENACSA (on staff, transportation, control and monitoring, laboratories, 
traceability, and operation of the SISA); and (ii) additional sanitation costs incurred 
by the producers. 

II. FINANCING STRUCTURE AND MAIN RISKS 

A. Financing instruments 

2.1 The program is designed as a specific investment loan under the Flexible Financing 
Facility (document FN-655-1). It has a total cost of US$15 million, fully financed by 
the Bank from Ordinary Capital resources.  

 
Table 2. Program cost and financing (US$ thousands) 

Description IDB % 

Component I. Health risk management  10,860 73 

Component II. Expansion of services 3,074 20 

Administration (audit, evaluation, and contingencies) 1,066 7 

TOTAL 15,000 100 

 

2.2 The program’s disbursement period will be five years starting from the loan 
contract’s effective date. Program funds will mostly be disbursed as advances of 
funds, but the direct payment and reimbursement of expenditures modalities may 
also be used.  

 
Table 3. Disbursement schedule (in US$) 

 Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Year 5 Total 

Total 1,191,162 6,898,277 4,901,727 1,054,167 954,667 15,000,000 

% 8 46 33 7 6 100 

 

B. Environmental and social risks 

2.3 The program has been classified as a Category “B” operation according to the 
Bank’s Environment and Safeguards Compliance Policy (sector policy OP-703); 
Disaster Risk Management Policy (sector policy OP-704); Access to Information 
Policy (operational policy OP-102); Gender Equality in Development (sector policy 
OP-761); Indigenous Peoples Policy (sector policy OP-765); and Involuntary 
Resettlement Policy (sector policy OP-710). 

2.4 The Environmental and Social Analysis (optional electronic link 8) performed for the 
program indicates that the construction works for the service facilities (regional, 
zonal, and at border points) may have low to moderate localized, short-term 
environmental and social impacts, such as: elimination of the plant cover; increased 
noise levels; emission of gases, particulate matter, and dust; generation of waste; 
and increased accident rates. An environmental and social management plan 
(ESMP) was designed to prevent and mitigate these impacts. None of the projects 
analyzed will entail resettlement, expropriation of lands, or significant harm to 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1327205104-7


  - 12 - 

indigenous communities or territories. The ESMP also includes a plan for improving 
the environmental management of SENACSA’s central laboratory, to be 
implemented prior to the equipment procurement bidding process. Although natural 
threats in the project areas include drought, forest fires, and heat waves, the 
associated risk is considered to be low. Nonetheless, the ESMP includes measures 
to prevent exacerbation of the risk from heat waves (limiting construction work hours, 
ensuring systems are in place for providing water at the work sites) and fires 
(ensuring fire prevention systems are in place at the construction areas and in the 
design of projects). 

2.5 Meaningful consultations were held for the projects in Campo Aceval, Villa Hayes, 
Filadelfia, Puerto Casado, Puerto Falcón, and Ciudad del Este. Queries included 
requests for materials to be procured and labor contracted locally, and for horse 
tie-up sites to be planned. The consultations report was published on the Bank’s 
website (optional electronic link 9). The program will strengthen SENACSA by 
financing the design and implementation of a socioenvironmental management 
system. To ensure compliance with the program’s socioenvironmental 
commitments, the coordinating unit will include a socioenvironmental specialist.  

C. Fiduciary risks  

2.6 The following aspects of SENACSA’s institutional capacity were evaluated during 
preparation of the operation: capacity for programming and organizing; capacity for 
executing the programmed and organized activities, including systems for managing 
staff, goods, services, and finances; and control capacity. According to the 
evaluation, in general the executing agency has technical competencies in fiduciary 
matters, and the consolidated result of the evaluated capacities reveals that it has a 
satisfactory degree of development. However, its lack of prior experience in 
executing projects with multilateral financing, principally in the area of procurement, 
is considered a weakness. Accordingly, the project has been assigned a medium 
level of risk. As an action to mitigate the risk of delays in project procurement 
processes, the area responsible for procurement requires strengthening with 
competent staff knowledgeable about the policies of multilateral organizations, as 
well as through specific workshops and courses on IDB procurement policies. 

D. Other project risks  

2.7 The following principal risks were identified, with their principal mitigation measures: 
(i) as high risk: delay in processing of the loan law; and (ii) as medium risk: (a) a lack 
of candidates interested in holding key positions in the PEU; (b) limited internet 
connectivity and access speed; (c) traceability software not developed due to the 
lack of a legal framework; and (d) execution times or priority affected by a change of 
government. The respective mitigation activities were defined and agreed upon, and 
are especially supported by SENACSA and the Rural Association of Paraguay, with 
leading public and private sector agents, to reinforce the policy-level work in the 
critical institutions identified. 

III. IMPLEMENTATION AND MANAGEMENT PLAN 

A. Summary of implementation arrangements  

3.1 Borrower and executing agency. SENACSA will be the borrower and the 
executing agency. The guarantee by the Republic of Paraguay will be limited to 
SENACSA’s financial obligations in the context of the loan (including repayment of 

https://idbg.sharepoint.com/teams/EZ-PR-LON/PR-L1148/_layouts/15/DocIdRedir.aspx?ID=EZSHARE-1327205104-8


  - 13 - 

principal, payment of interest, and other lending charges) and will not cover 
performance obligations or local counterpart contributions.41 Accordingly, the Board 
of Executive Directors is being asked to approve a partial waiver of the Bank’s policy 
on Guarantees required from the borrower (document GP-104-2). The executing 
agency will be SENACSA, acting through the Project Management Unit (PMU) with 
the support of the Bureau of Administration and Finance (DIGEAF).  

3.2 For program management, the executing agency will form a Program Execution Unit 
(PEU), which will report to the program management unit (PMU) and will be directly 
responsible for and have jurisdiction over the program’s technical and operational 
issues. For execution and monitoring, the PEU will work in coordination with the 
DIGEAF for the fiduciary processes involved in program management.42 The PMU 
will play the strategic role of the program’s technical and operational management, 
and will also be responsible for coordinating relations with other institutions and 
SENACSA units involved in program execution. The program’s fiduciary procedures 
will be carried out through SENACSA’s DIGEAF, which will determine how to 
coordinate with the PEU and the functions for which the PEU is responsible.  

3.3 The key program execution positions established for the PEU are: (i) general 
coordinator; (ii) component I coordinator; (iii) component II coordinator; (iv) financial 
and administrative specialist; (v) procurement specialist; (vi) planning and 
monitoring specialist; and (vii) socioenvironmental specialist. 

3.4 The following will be special contractual conditions precedent to the first loan 
disbursement: (i) the PEU will have been formed according to the terms 
agreed upon with the Bank; and (ii) the borrower will have presented, to the 
Bank’s satisfaction, evidence that the program Operating Regulations have 
entered into force.43 These conditions will be fulfilled before the start of program 
execution. The program Operating Regulations define the basic rules applicable 
during loan execution (for example, field work, regional coordination and oversight, 
data processing and analysis, in addition to the fiduciary considerations), as well as 
the PEU members’ levels of responsibility.  

3.5 Procurement of works, goods, consulting and nonconsulting services. 
Procurement financed in whole or in party with Bank resources will be conducted in 
line with the Policies for the Procurement of Works and Goods Financed by the 
Inter-American Development Bank (document GN-2349-9) and the Policies for the 
Selection and Contracting of Consultants Financed by the Inter-American 
Development Bank (document GN-2350-9). Pursuant to document GN-2538-11 of 
October 2013, the use of the electronic reverse auction and competitive bidding 
subsystems of Paraguay’s public sector procurement system (SCSP) will apply to 
the operation in the terms specified in the Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements 
(Annex III). The Procurement Plan contains a breakdown of the procurement 

                                                
41  SENACSA is an autonomous, self-governing legal entity of the Republic of Paraguay subject to public law, 

which is able to finance its budget with resources from national and/or international loans. SENACSA has 
sufficient capacity to execute the obligations assumed with respect to the Bank. Therefore, the waiver will 
not affect the operation’s risk profile. 

42  This arrangement will be maintained while SENACSA requests that the Finance Ministry change the 
PMU’s status to Financial Administration Subunit and Procurement Operations Subunit, so it will be able 
to manage the program independently from the DIGEAF. 

43  For the Operating Regulations to enter into force, they must be approved by resolution of SENACSA’s 
highest authority. 



  - 14 - 

processes to be implemented during execution, as well as the procedures the Bank 
will apply to review them. 

3.6 The Fiduciary Agreements and Requirements (Annex III) establish the framework 
for the financial management, planning, supervision, and execution of procurement 
involved in program execution. No specific situations that require special 
arrangements or treatments are foreseen with regard to procurement. 

3.7 Disbursements. Disbursements will be made as established in the financial 
management guidelines set forth in document OP-273-6. Preferably, advances will 
be made on a semiannual basis, once at least 80% of the advanced amount has 
been justified with the required presentation of the accountability forms and the 
financial planning spreadsheet. 

3.8 Audits. During execution, the PEU will present, on an annual basis, the audited 
financial statements for the program, in the terms required by the Bank. An 
independent audit firm acceptable to the Bank will be selected for the program. The 
audited financial statements will be presented within 120 days following the close of 
the fiscal year, with the closing statements being presented within the 120 days 
following the date set for the last disbursement.  

B. Summary of arrangements for monitoring results  

3.9 The project has a detailed monitoring and evaluation plan that has been agreed 
upon with SENACSA, which, through the PEU, will be responsible for generating the 
information necessary to monitor the indicators contained in the Results Matrix, and 
for sharing it with the Bank. 

3.10 Monitoring. During project execution, the PEU will prepare semiannual monitoring 
reports and send them to the Bank no later than 60 days following the end of each 
six-month period. These reports will provide a detailed account of the physical and 
financial execution of the project, as well as of the progress made on all Results 
Matrix indicators. The reports will also provide a detailed account of the problems 
encountered during project execution and the corrective measures taken, and will 
explain any deviation from the project management instruments (multiyear 
execution plan, annual work plan, procurement plan). No later than the final quarter 
of each year of project execution, the PEU will present, to the Bank’s satisfaction, 
the AWP for the following year and the maintenance plan for the equipment 
purchased with loan proceeds, as well as compliance with the program’s 
environmental and social requirements established in the ESMP. Bank staff will 
make periodic inspection visits during which they will meet with PEU staff to discuss 
the progress made on the activities set forth in the AWP, the degree of compliance 
with the indicators established in the Results Matrix, the AWP for the following year, 
and the Procurement Plan for the next 12 months. 

3.11 Pursuant to the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan, the project will include a midterm 
and final evaluation. The midterm evaluation will be performed within 90 days 
following the date on which 50% of the loan proceeds are committed, or when the 
execution period is half over, whichever occurs first. The purpose of this evaluation 
will be to review the progress of all activities, analyze the causes of any potential 
deviations from the planned progress, and propose corrective measures. The final 
evaluation will be conducted within 90 days following the date on which 95% of loan 
proceeds have been disbursed. These reports will include: (i) financial execution by 
subcomponent and financing source; (ii) progress made with regard to the Results 



  - 15 - 

Matrix outputs, outcomes, and impacts; (iii) compliance with the ESMP; 
(iv) summary of the financial statements, procurement, disbursements, and internal 
control; (v) review of implementation; and (vi) lessons learned. The midterm and 
final evaluations will both be performed by non-PEU external consultants. 

3.12 Impact evaluation. As set forth in the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan (required 
electronic link 3), the program as a whole will be evaluated reflectively based on the 
indicators included in the Results Matrix. Given that the program is an intervention 
to strengthen a national institution, it is not feasible to construct a counterfactual 
analysis that would make it possible to compare the final value of the impact and 
outcome indicators with what would have occurred without the program being in 
place. 

3.13 Nevertheless, the impact of the reproductive diseases program, financed in 
Component I, will be evaluated, since the its characteristics make this possible. This 
program consists in the application of a treatment procedure to eliminate brucellosis 
in infected beef-production establishments. As a pilot program, it will only treat 
300 establishments, to be identified through serological tests of the cows brought to 
cattle fairs.  

3.14 The impact evaluation will follow an experimental methodology, using a treatment 
group of 300 establishments and a control group of the same size. Both groups will 
be selected randomly from among the infected establishments (of which there are 
around 3,000). Once selected, the establishments in both groups will be notified that 
they are infected. The control group establishments will be quarantined and will be 
given a document with recommendations for carrying out the treatment at the 
property. The treatment group establishments will be quarantined and the same 
treatment procedure (which was merely recommended to the control group 
establishments) will be performed there at no cost. 

3.15 The treatment process will last five years and will fundamentally consist in 
vaccinating the entire herd and in appropriately managing the infected animals, by 
separating them out. As part of the treatment process, and to monitor brucellosis 
prevalence and incidence rates, at each establishment a representative sample of 
animals will be taken. These animals will be identified with tags and will be tested 
throughout the treatment process. The information obtained from the samples at 
each establishment, together with the administrative information from the 
reproductive diseases program and a series of surveys performed at the beginning, 
middle, and end of the program, will be used to perform a difference in differences 
analysis of the treatment and control groups, before and after the reproductive 
diseases program has been carried out. 

3.16 The evaluation is important because it will make it possible to rigorously measure 
the effectiveness of the treatment program implemented by SENACSA versus the 
effectiveness of merely providing the producers with information on how to perform 
the procedure. There appears to be some evidence (from Chile and Uruguay) that 
the intervention of health authorities in implementing this type of treatment process 
is highly effective, leading to a notable reduction of the disease’s incidence rate in 
the short term. However, to date there is no rigorous empirical evidence showing 
that it does so, above all compared to the possibility of voluntary implementation for 
which the producers themselves are responsible. 

 



