












































Note to Executive Board representatives

Focal points:

Technical questions: Dispatch of documentation:

Henning Pedersen
Country Programme Manager
Asia and the Pacific Division
Tel.: +84 (4) 3726 5104
e-mail: h.pedersen@ifad.org

Alessandra Zusi Bergés
Officer-in-Charge
Governing Bodies Office
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2092
e-mail: gb_office@ifad.org

Benoît Thierry
Country Programme Manager
Tel.: +84 (4) 3726 5104
e-mail: b.thierry@ifad.org

Executive Board — 117th Session
Rome, 13-14 April 2016

For: Approval

Document: EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

E
Agenda: 9(a)

Date: 13 April 2016

Distribution: Public

Original: English

President’s report

Proposed grant to the Lao People’s
Democratic Republic
Strategic Support for Food Security and
Nutrition Project – Global Agriculture and
Food Security Program (GAFSP) funds



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

i

Contents

Abbreviations and acronyms ii
Map of the project area iii
Financing summary iv
Recommendation for approval 1
I. Strategic context and rationale 1

A. Country and rural development and poverty context 1
B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and results-

based COSOP 2
II. Project Description 2

A. Project area and target group 2
B. Project development objective 3
C. Components/outcomes 3

III. Project implementation 4
A. Approach 4
B. Organizational framework 4
C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and

knowledge management 4
D. Financial management, procurement and governance 5
E. Supervision 5

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits 6
A. Project costs 6
B. Project financing 6
C. Summary benefit and economic analysis 6
D. Sustainability 7
E. Risk identification and mitigation 7

V. Corporate considerations 7
A. Compliance with IFAD policies 7
B. Alignment and harmonization 7
C. Innovations and scaling up 8
D. Policy engagement 8

VI. Legal instruments and authority 8
VII. Recommendation 8

Appendices
I. Negotiated financing agreement

II. Logical framework



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

ii

Abbreviations and acronyms

GAFSP Global Agriculture and Food Security Program
NNSPA National Nutrition Strategy to 2025 and Plan of Action 2016–2020
NPCO national project coordination office
SSFSNP Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project
TSC technical service centre
VDP village development plan
WFP World Food Programme



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

iii

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Map of the project area



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

iv

A
p
p
en

d
ix II

[C
lick h

ere an
d
 in

sert E
B
 ../../R

..]

Lao People’s Democratic Republic

Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project
– Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP)
funds

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry

Total project cost: US$38.8 million

Amount of Global Agriculture and Food
Security Program (GAFSP) grant funds:

US$24 million
(supervised by IFAD)

US$6 million
(supervised by the World Food Programme [WFP])

Amount of cofinancing: Private sector: US$459,000

Contribution of recipient: US$5.4 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.9 million

Appraising institutions: IFAD and the GAFSP steering committee

Cooperating institutions: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic for the Strategic Support for Food
Security and Nutrition Project, as contained in paragraph 37.

Proposed grant to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
for the Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition
Project – Global Agriculture and Food Security Program
(GAFSP) funds

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Over the last two decades, the economy of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic

has experienced an average annual growth rate of 7 per cent, sustained by
macroeconomic liberalization, market-based reforms and large flows of foreign
direct investment into natural resource-based industries (such as mining and
hydroelectricity) and agriculture.

2. While the gross domestic product (GDP) share of agriculture declined from
53 per cent to 27.5 per cent between 2000 and 2014, this sector remains the
largest source of employment, with more than 70 per cent of the population
deriving its livelihoods from agriculture. This indicates that economic growth has
created few jobs in other sectors. The agriculture sector’s annual growth rate
averaged nearly 5 per cent at the end of the 1990s, but declined to just 2 per cent
in 2012. Much of the country’s growth has resulted from the expansion of
cultivation areas to accommodate a rural workforce that is growing by 2.5 per cent
per year. But overall productivity is still low in the farming sector and per capita
income is less than half the national average. Most of the country’s
650,000 farming households are engaged in subsistence and low-productivity
agriculture.

3. Economic growth has resulted in a steady decline of the national poverty index,
which dropped from 46 per cent of the population in the mid-1990s to 23 per cent
in 2012. Poverty and extreme poverty are most common in mountainous regions,
where the majority of the country’s indigenous peoples live. In upland areas, the
national poverty rate is as high as 43 per cent, compared with 28 per cent in the
lowlands. The country moved from a rice deficit in 1996 to surplus production in
2006. However, accessibility to rice and protein sources is highly contingent upon
geography and income. Malnutrition is high, with 44 per cent of children under 5 in
rural areas suffering from stunting (chronic undernutrition). The communities most
prone to undernutrition live in upland areas, where household economic activities
are increasingly constrained by unsustainable farming practices, large-scale land
concessions, limited adaptation to climate change and a lack of financing, access to
markets and support services.

4. In June 2015, the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP) – a multi-
donor financing facility – approved a US$30 million proposal presented by the
Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in support of food security and
nutrition. IFAD was selected as the supervising entity for the investment and the
World Food Programme (WFP) was chosen as the supervising entity for technical
assistance.



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

2

5. According to the provisions of the GAFSP Trust Fund transfer agreement entered
into by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) (as
trustee) and IFAD, IBRD shall transfer to IFAD the funds approved by the GAFSP
steering committee for project implementation. These funds shall be used by IFAD
in accordance with its policies and procedures, and in line with the decisions of the
GAFSP steering committee as specified in the approved project document.

6. In line with the transfer agreement, IFAD shall enter into an agreement with the
Government of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in accordance with the policies
and procedures of the Fund.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
results-based COSOP

7. The GAFSP grant for the Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project
(SSFSNP) is designed to pilot new approaches and technologies, and scale up
existing technologies and systems to accelerate the Government’s progress towards
national food security and improved nutrition. The SSFSNP is one of the first
development projects in the country to comprehensively address the agricultural
constraints to improved nutrition within the framework of the convergence
approach, as stipulated in the National Nutrition Strategy to 2025 and Plan of
Action 2016-2020 (NNSPA).

8. Project interventions will focus on the implementation of four nutrition-sensitive
agricultural activities among the NNSPA’s 22 priority interventions. Other
development partners’ projects and government programmes are addressing the
remaining interventions. The project will focus on building an enabling environment
for sustainable market-led improvements in nutrition-rich and diverse agricultural
production, and rural employment through: (i) participatory, bottom-up
village-level public investment planning and implementation; (ii) the empowerment
of women to improve family diets, especially during the first 1,000 days of life;
(iii) the development of farmer organizations linking men and women farmers to
markets; (iv) the application of a demand-driven extension approach emphasizing
decentralized farmer-to-farmer and enterprise-to-farmer extension; and (v) support
for private agribusiness investment, seeking business models that are clearly
aligned with both development and growth objectives. In addition, the project will
promote “green technology”, with all interventions having a neutral or positive
impact on communities’ ability to adapt to climate change.

9. The financing for SSFSNP is in line with the country strategic opportunities
programme (COSOP) 2011–2016, which comprises three strategic objectives:
(i) community-based access to and management of land and natural resources;
(ii) access to advisory services and inputs for sustainable, adaptive and integrated
farming systems; and (iii) access to markets.

II. Project Description
A. Project area and target group
10. Project area: The project will be implemented in 12 districts and approximately

400 villages in the four provinces of Oudomxay, Phongsali, Xiangkhouang and
Houaphan in the northern part of the country. The villages will be selected based
on: (i) poverty data; (ii) potential for agriculture-led growth, including expansion of
the agriculture and forest resource base, irrigation development and market
access; (iii) commitment of village leadership; (iv) an assessment of climate
change vulnerability; and (v) opportunities for convergence with other ongoing or
planned projects.

11. Target population: The target group will comprise poor rural households in the
400 selected villages. To ensure that women have equal and priority access to
project benefits, SSFSNP will include measures to increase women’s participation



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

3

and influence in their communities, including equal gender representation in
SSFSNP village development committees.

B. Project development objective
12. The goal of the project is to reduce extreme poverty and malnutrition in the poorest

communities. The development objective is to ensure that improved and diversified
agricultural production and household nutrition enhance livelihoods and well-being.

C. Components/outcomes
13. The project has three main components as well as a component for project

management:

Component 1: Strengthened public services. This component will underpin the
development of government capacities, procedures and technical skills to support –
and converge – community implementation of selected national nutrition strategy
interventions. It comprises: (i) the establishment of a tiered project planning,
supervision, monitoring and knowledge management system within the Ministry of
Agriculture and Forestry; and (ii) strengthening the capacities of district
departments of agricultural extension, district technical service centres and the
National Agriculture and Forestry Research Institute to deliver sustainable
climate-adapted and nutrition-sensitive agriculture and natural resource
management technologies and training.

Component 2: Community-driven agriculture-based nutrition interventions.
This component will be supervised by WFP. It has two subcomponents:

(i) Planning for improved nutritional outcomes. This comprises support for
multi-sector convergence planning at the district level to accelerate the
implementation of the NNSPA. It includes the mapping of various
stakeholders’ programmes and infrastructure assets to identify development
gaps at the village level. Simultaneously, the project will support improved
village development planning by building the capacity of village stakeholders
to lead the development process in their communities. The preparation of
three-year multi-sector, nutrition-sensitive village development plans (VDPs)
will be supported by experienced community planning service providers.

(ii) Women-led improvement in household nutrition. This encompasses the
rollout of a social behavioural change communication programme jointly
supported by SSFSNP and the World Bank-financed Health Governance and
Nutrition Development Project in all project villages. It aims to encourage
nutrition-enhancing behaviours that maximize the benefit of the project’s
investments in the four NNSPA agriculture interventions. The project will
support the establishment of monthly village-level “farmer nutrition schools”
to balance agricultural production, wild food collection and food purchase
throughout all seasons of the year. It will enable villages to increase the
availability of food for improved dietary diversity.

Component 3: Sustainable and inclusive market-driven partnerships. This
component includes two subcomponents:

(i) Profitable investment in nutrient-sensitive, climate-adapted
agriculture. The project will identify commodities that have investment
potential and that comply with the provincial socioeconomic development
plans. Commodities will be selected based on: their potential for commercial
production of nutritious food for export or import substitution; and the
likelihood of poor rural households to invest in increasing their production and
expanding employment. Strategic investment plans will be prepared in all
selected communities. These plans will inform the VDP process and provide a
framework for forming agriculture production groups and inviting
entrepreneurs to invest in the project area. Based on this exercise, the project



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

4

will co-finance VDP-identified communities’ and farmer organizations’
investments in profitable and sustainable, nutrient-sensitive agricultural
production through a village development fund.

(ii) Linking Farmers to markets. With support from the Ministry of Planning
and Investment, and the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, the project will
include a review of the current contract farming programme in the project
area and propose amendments to government legislation, regulations and
implementation procedures underpinning contract farming agreements. The
aim is to establish more equitable and productive agreements that benefit
farmers and investors alike. This will include technical assistance in support
of improved contract farming policies. Based on this experience, the project
will pilot the use of public-private partnership funding to promote investments
and job opportunities among rural enterprises and households.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
14. The SSFSNP will be implemented over a six-year period. Nutrition has been

mainstreamed into all three project components, and each activity will contribute to
improved nutrition. Simultaneous actions on food, childcare and feeding practices,
access to quality health care and water and sanitation will be undertaken for
greatest impact. The management structure will be based on the lessons learned
through previous IFAD projects in the country and the region, and will avoid parallel
management systems while implementing transparent mechanisms for financial
management and fund transfer.

B. Organizational framework
15. A national project steering committee will be responsible for overall direction of the

project and for the convergence of SSFSNP activities with those of other
development partners. This committee will comprise representatives from the
Ministries of Agriculture and Forestry; Finance; Planning and Investment; and
Health and from the National Chamber of Commerce and Industry, in addition to
the four provincial governors or vice-governors. It will be co-chaired by the Vice-
Ministers of Agriculture and Forestry, and Health. Steering committees will also be
established at the provincial level. Through its Department of Planning and
Cooperation, the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry will be the lead agency, with
overall responsibility for project implementation. This ministry will delegate
responsibilities to district administrations and to the national project coordination
office (NPCO) based in Vientiane. The NPCO will be supported by an internationally
recruited chief technical advisor.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

16. Planning, monitoring and evaluation. The project’s monitoring and evaluation
system will: (i) guide project implementation through the assessment and analysis
of project outputs, outcomes and impacts on poor households’ nutrition and
livelihoods; and (ii) share knowledge by capturing lessons learned, good practices
and successful innovations, and publishing them on knowledge platforms. The
system will monitor both operational and financial aspects of the project.

17. Learning and knowledge management. The project’s knowledge management
and learning processes will: identify, analyse, document and share knowledge,
support innovation dissemination; identify issues for advocacy with policymakers;
and provide information to support scaling up. This will include: (i) study tours,
discussions and workshops for project and ministry staff at the national and district
levels to promote nutrition-rich upland agriculture initiatives; and (ii) various



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

5

formats for dissemination of results, including farmer-to-farmer and enterprise-to-
farmer extension.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
18. Financial Management. As custodian of funds in the project account, the NPCO

will be responsible for project financial management. The NPCO will also be
accountable to the Government and IFAD for the proper use of funds in line with
the legal agreements and contractual arrangements for service providers. It will
provide detailed financial statements of project operations, resources and
expenditures for each fiscal year in accordance with standards and procedures
acceptable to IFAD. The financial management assessment of the project rated the
fiduciary risk as high. Mitigation measures will include close supervision, support
and oversight from the IFAD subregional office for: (i) the installation of
professional accounting software; (ii) the recruitment  of competent and qualified
financial management staff; (iii) the development of a financial manual integrating
controls linked to operations; (iv) bi-annual supervision missions from the
subregional office; and (vi) a control framework integrating periodic internal audits
and independent external audits.

19. Flow of funds. Project funding will flow from the GAFSP account to IFAD and WFP
in accordance with their assigned roles and established legal agreements. For
IFAD-managed funds (GAFSP grant), the Ministry of Finance shall open a
designated account denominated in United States dollars in the Central Bank of the
Lao People’s Democratic Republic. The designated account will be maintained and
managed by the Ministry of Finance. IFAD will advance funds to the designated
account in accordance with imprest account modalities.

20. The NPCO shall open and maintain a designated account denominated in Lao kips
(LAK) for project operations. The NPCO will submit replenishment requests to IFAD
through the Ministry of Finance with appropriate supporting documentation.

21. Procurement. The procurement of goods, works and consulting services financed
through this project will be carried out in accordance with IFAD Procurement
Guidelines. For component 2, WFP’s procurement rules will apply. National
procurement procedures and regulations will be applied provided that they are
consistent with IFAD’s guidelines.

22. Governance. The NPCO will prepare a project framework for investment
transparency and publicity. This framework will include provisions to ensure that
procurement (whether carried out by the districts or by the NPCO) is carried out in
accordance with IFAD rules and specifications. Measures will include: (i) the
publication of all procurements, calls for proposals, contract awards and business
partnership details in local newspapers and at district and provincial offices;
(ii) participation of end user representatives in bid assessments; and (iii) prompt
communication with bidders. The framework will also include an internal code of
conduct to be signed by all staff engaged in project implementation.

E. Supervision
23. The project will be jointly supervised by IFAD and WFP. WFP will focus on

component 2 while IFAD will supervise the remaining components and provide
overall financial management. A joint midterm review will be organized by the
government, IFAD and WFP before the end of 2018.



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

6

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
24. The total cost for the project is estimated at US$38.8 million as indicated in Table 1.

Table 1
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(In thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

GAFSP
IFAD

GAFSP
WFP

Government–
parallel

investment Private sector Beneficiaries Government Total
Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount

1. Civil works 318 86.1 - - - - - - 51 13.9 370
2. Vehicles 1 089 100 - - - - - - - - 1 089
3. Equipment 477 100 - - - - - - - - 477
4. Agricultural inputs 865 58.9 73 5 - - - - - - 531 36.1 1 469
5. Matching grant 13 881 72.9 1 800 9.5 459 2.4 2 900 15.2 - - 19 040
6. National technical

assistance 2 176 47.2 1 775 38.5 - - - - - - 658 14.3 4 608
7. International technical

assistance 362 26.5 1 003 73.5 - - - - - - - - 1 364
8. Capacity-building and

learning 1 714 35.2 3 150 64.8 - - - - - - - - 4 864
9. Salaries and

allowances 1 292 42.0 - - - - -- - 1 787 58.0 3 078
10. Other operating costs 1 827 75.0 - - - - - - 609 25.0 2 435

Total 24 000 61.9 6 000 15.5 1 800 4.6 459 1.2 2 900 7.5 3 635 9.4 38 794

B. Project financing
25. The project will be financed by a GAFSP grant of US$30 million. The private sector

is expected to contribute US$459,000 and beneficiaries will provide US$2.9 million.
The Government’s contribution is estimated at US$5.4 million comprising taxes,
duties, infrastructure, land use registration and project management staff costs. Of
the total US$30 million in GAFSP funding, IFAD will manage US$24 million
(components 1 and 3) and WFP will manage US$6 million (component 2 and
technical assistance under component 1). See table 2 for costs by component and
financier.
Table 2
Project costs by component and financier
(In thousands of United States dollars)

GAFSP
IFAD

GAFSP
WFP

Government
– parallel

investment
Private
sector Beneficiaries Government Total

Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount
1. Strengthened public

services 3 285 1 003 -- -- - 265 4 552
2. Community-driven

agriculture-based
nutrition interventions - 4 997 - - - 444 5 441

3. Sustainable and
inclusive market-
driven partnerships 16 167 - 1 800 459 2 900 525 21 851

4. Project
management 4 548 - - - - 2 402 6 950

Total 24 000 6 000 1 800 459 2 900 3 635 38 794

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
26. The cost-benefit analysis of the project is based upon the connections among

nutrition, education and income. The analysis compares the discounted stream of
incremental expected lifetime income to the discounted stream of SSFSNP costs. It
is assumed that the project interventions will impact beneficiary children’s ability to
complete school and earn higher wages in their adult lives. The overall project



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

7

economic rate of return is 8.7 per cent. The cost-benefit ratio of 2.92 indicates a
return of approximately US$3 for every US$1 invested. The sensitivity analysis
indicates a robust economic internal rate of return.

27. The project will target at least 400 villages – or 34,000 households. Assuming a
60 per cent success rate, the SSFSNP will lift approximately 20,400 households out
of poverty by project end. Direct benefits are expected to include diversification of
homestead food production, investments in agricultural production infrastructure,
and improved farming system productivity. These improvements will include: the
introduction of small and micro-irrigation; the introduction of forage and cash crops
into crop rotations; improved upland and lowland rice production; the introduction
of livestock enterprises such as fish and pigs; and expanded harvesting and
processing activities.

D. Sustainability
28. The project emphasizes capacity-building of public institutions from the village to

the national levels. This investment in public capacity will enable sustainable food
and nutrition security activities to remain embedded within the country’s civil
service and the society it serves. Once developed, public-sector capacity can be
expanded throughout the country as systems improve in the target provinces and
districts. The project will also emphasize the development of self-sustaining
community-based organizations and village users’ groups, which will play an
important role in the implementation and ongoing management of project activities.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
29. The main risks to this project’s success are in the areas of institutions, markets and

policy. Institutional risks include the prolonged approval processes and weak
technical capacities of public agencies. Mitigation measures include the
establishment of clear criteria and formats for all planning processes, and the
rollout of annual capacity-assessment and capacity-development plans. Market
risks include volatile commodity prices and difficulties in forging public-private
partnerships because of the dispersed and small-scale nature of poor farmers’
production. To mitigate these risks, the project will promote diversified production
and the delivery of market information at the local level, and provide training for
communities and farmer groups in order to aggregate production and improve
quality. Policy risks include the limited application of national contract-farming
frameworks and limited awareness of climate-change policies. Mitigation comprises
continuous policy dialogue at the national and provincial levels, with an emphasis
on practical approaches for contract farming arrangements and climate-change
adaptation.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
30. The project design is guided by the IFAD’s policies and strategies on targeting,

gender, indigenous peoples, environment and natural resource management, and
private sector engagement. In terms of environmental impact, the majority of
activities fall under Category C, while a limited number are classified under
Category B. The project is also in line with the 2011-2015 COSOP for the Lao
People’s Democratic Republic.

B. Alignment and harmonization
31. As noted above, the SSFSNP will be fully aligned with government priorities and

GAFSP targets, and implemented in the context of IFAD’s COSOP for the country. In
addition, the project will be aligned with regional and national development projects
including: the Lao People's Democratic Republic – Upland Food Security
Improvement Project; the Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice; the
Poverty Reduction Fund Project and the Health Governance and Nutrition



EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

8

Development Project, all supported by the World Bank; and the IFAD-supported
Food and Nutrition Security and Market Linkages Programme and Soum Son Seun
Jai Programme; the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA)-supported
Project for Enhancing Capacity in PIP Management; the European Union-supported
Global Climate Change Alliance programme; WFP’s Mother and Child Health and
Nutrition project, and Food Assistance for Assets programme; and several NGO-led
initiatives.

C. Innovations and scaling up
32. The most important innovation promoted by the SSFSNP is the convergence

approach, which aims to consolidate the impacts of complementary government
and development partner-implemented programmes for improved nutrition. This
approach, which addresses all 22 interventions in the Government’s nutrition
strategy, can be replicated and scaled up throughout the country. Good practices
will be identified and shared within the SSFSNP and with other projects by
developing linguistically and culturally appropriate learning approaches that take
into account beneficiaries’ low literacy.

D. Policy engagement
33. IFAD is the co-chair on the Agriculture and Rural Development Sector Donor Group.

While the investment made through this project is unlikely to influence national
policy, IFAD’s collective project experience will form the basis for ongoing policy
engagement by the IFAD Country Office and the subregional hub. Focus areas of
policy dialogue will include participatory decentralized planning, public-private
partnership frameworks, contract farming and mainstreaming of nutrition into
agricultural production. The Sector Group is one important platform where these
issues will be raised.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
34. A project financing agreement between the Lao People’s Democratic Republic and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached in appendix I.

35. The Lao People’s Democratic Republic is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

36. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
37. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the Global Agriculture
and Food Security Program to the Lao People’s Democratic Republic in the
amount of twenty-four million United States dollars (US$24,000,000) upon
such terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the
terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



Appendix I EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

1

Negotiated financing agreement: "Strategic Support for
Food Security and Nutrition Project"

(Negotiations concluded on 6 April 2016)

Grant Number: ________

Project Title: Strategic Support for Food Security and Nutrition Project (the "SSFSNP" or
"Project”)

The International Fund for Agricultural Development (the “Fund” or “IFAD”)

and

Lao People’s Democratic Republic (the “Recipient”)

(each a “Party” and both of them collectively the “Parties”)

hereby agree as follows:

Preamble

A. The Steering Committee of the Global Agriculture and Food Security Program
(GAFSP) Trust Fund, approved in June 2013 a USD 30 million grant requested by the
Recipient in support of Components: 1. Strengthened public services; 2. Community-
driven agriculture-based nutrition interventions established; and 3. Sustainable and
inclusive market-driven partnerships established of the Project.

B. The International Bank for Reconstruction Development (IBRD) in its capacity
as trustee of the GAFSP Trust Fund- and IFAD entered into a Transfer Agreement in
November 2010.  According to the provisions of the Transfer Agreement, the IBRD shall
transfer part (USD 24 million) of the allocated funds approved by the GAFSP Steering
Committee to IFAD for the implementation of the Project.

C. On the basis of the above and other considerations, the Fund has agreed to
make available to the Recipient, subject to the transfer of funds by the IBRD to IFAD,
part (USD 24 million) of the approved funds in the form of a Grant and in accordance
with the terms of the Transfer Agreement as well as with the terms and conditions set
forth in this Agreement for the implementation by the Recipient of the activities for
Component 1, except for Chief Technical Adviser, and Component 3 as noted in the
Preamble Paragraph A, and in Schedule 1 to this Agreement (the IFAD financed project
activities).

D. WFP has agreed to make available to the Recipient the remaining part of the
approved funds in the form of a Grant (the WFP Grant) and in accordance with the terms
of the Transfer Agreement between WFP and IBRD, as well as with the terms of an
agreement to be entered between the WFP and the Recipient (the WFP Agreement) for
the purpose of financing Component 2 "Community-driven agriculture-based nutrition
interventions" of the Project and the costs of the Chief Technical Adviser under
Component 1.

NOW THEREFORE, the Parties hereto hereby agree as follows:



Appendix I EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

2

Section A

1. The following documents collectively form this Agreement: this document, the
Project Description and Implementation Arrangements (Schedule 1) and the Allocation
Table (Schedule 2).

2. The Fund’s General Conditions for Agricultural Development Financing dated 2009
and amended as of April 2014 (the “General Conditions”) are annexed to this Agreement,
and all provisions thereof as may be subsequently amended from time to time, shall
apply to this Agreement. For the purposes of this Agreement the terms defined in the
General Conditions shall have the meanings set forth therein.

3. In accordance with Preamble C, the Fund shall provide a Grant to the Recipient
which the Recipient shall use to implement the IFAD financed project activities in
accordance with the terms and conditions of this Agreement.

Section B

1. The amount of the Grant is twenty four million United States Dollars
(USD 24 000 000). As an exception to Section 4.01 of the General Conditions, amounts
shall be credited to the Grant Account only when sufficient funds have been received by
the Fund from the IBRD.

2. The first day of the applicable Fiscal Year shall be 1st January.

3. There shall be a Designated Account in USD for the purpose of financing the IFAD
financed project activities. The Designated Account shall be opened and maintained in
the Bank of the Lao PDR or any other Bank acceptable to IFAD. Upon the Recipient’s
request, IFAD shall make one or more withdrawals from the Grants accounts on behalf of
the Recipient and deposit such amount in the Designated Account. The Designated
account shall be operated by the Ministry of Finance of the Recipient and shall be
protected against set off, seizure or attachment on terms and conditions proposed by the
Recipient and accepted by IFAD.

4. There shall be Project accounts at the National Project Coordination Office (NPCO)
the District Agriculture and Forestry (DAFOs) of participating districts where project
activities will be implemented and at the Department of Agricultural Extension and
Cooperatives (DAEC). The Project accounts will be denominated in LAK and opened in
commercial banks, acceptable to the Fund for project operations. The National Project
Coordinator and DAEC Director at central level and Managers at district levels shall be
authorized to operate their respective accounts.

5. The Recipient shall provide counterpart financing for the Project in the amount of
approximately USD 5.4 million. The Government contribution covers taxes, duties and
some rural infrastructure, land use registration, salaries for technical and Project
coordinators, and operating costs as specified in Schedule II of the Agreement.

6. Each disbursement by the Fund shall be made to the Recipient only if and to the
extent that the relevant funds under Transfer Agreement have been duly received by IFAD
for the specific purpose of funding the relevant IFAD financed project activities.

Section C

1. The Lead Project Agency shall be the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, through
its Department of Planning and Cooperation (DPC).



Appendix I EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

3

2. The Ministry of Health is designated as additional Project Party.

3. The Project Completion Date shall be the sixth anniversary of the date of entry into
force of this Agreement.

4. A joint mid-term review shall be organized by the Recipient, the Fund and WFP
after approximately 30 months of Project implementation. The terms of reference of the
mid-term review shall be agreed by the three Parties.

5. For the purposes of Section 8.03 (a) of the General Conditions, the Recipient shall
provide IFAD with annual progress reports on the implementation of the IFAD financed
project activities in the form requested by the Fund.

6. The Completion Report shall be forwarded to IFAD within six (6) months of the end
of the Project Implementation Period or of the termination of this Agreement.

Section D

The Grant will be administered and the Project supervised by the Fund.

Section E

1. The following is designated as additional grounds for suspension of the right of
Recipient to request withdrawals:

(a) The transfers from the IBRD under the IFAD-IBRD Transfer Agreement are
suspended, cancelled or do not reach IFAD on a reasonable period of time
after the submission of the Funds Transfer Request from IFAD to the IBRD.

(b) The Project Implementation Manual, or any provision thereof, has been waived,
suspended, terminated, amended or modified without the prior consent of the
Fund, and the Fund has determined that such waiver, suspension, termination,
amendment or modification has had, or is likely to have, a material adverse
effect on the Project.

(c) The right of WFP to request withdrawals under the WFP Agreement has been
suspended.

2. The following are designated as additional general conditions precedent to
withdrawal:

(a) The transfer of funds specified in the first Funds Transfer Request has been
received by the Fund.

(b) The Designated Account and the Project Account shall have been duly opened
for advance payments.

(c) The National Project Coordinator, Financial Manager/Key Staff with
qualifications acceptable to the Fund have been duly appointed.

(d) A computerized accounting system acceptable to the Fund shall have been
procured.

(e) A Project Implementation Manual (PIM) shall be drafted and shared with the
Fund for its approval.



Appendix I EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

4

3. The following are the designated representatives and addresses to be used for any
communication related to this Agreement:

For the Fund: For the Recipient:

The President Minister of Finance
International Fund for Agricultural Development Ministry of Finance
00142 Rome, Italy ____________

This Agreement has been prepared in the English language in two (2) original copies, one
(1) for the Fund and one (1) for the Recipient and will enter into force
_________________.

LAO PEOPLE’S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC

____________________
Authorized Representative

Date:

INTERNATIONAL FUND FOR
AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT

___________________
Kanayo F. Nwanze
President

Date:



Appendix I EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

5

Schedule 1

Project Description and Implementation Arrangements

I. Project Description

1. Target Population. The Project target groups will include the rural poor households in
about 400 villages, primarily populated by Ethnic Groups. Specifically, the Project will
target: (i) under-5 year olds through better nutrition programmes; (ii) primary school
children for behavior changing life knowledge; (iii) rural youth through employment
generation under force account, and (iv) farming households, particularly poor and
women-headed households, to associate to produce and market nutrient-rich food.  The
project will adopt measures to increase women’s participation and influence in project
activities community-based planning processes.

2. Project Area. The project will be implemented in 12 districts in four Northern
provinces, namely, Oudomxai, Phongsaly, Xieng Khouang and Houaphan. The villages will
be selected based on, inter alia, (i) poverty data; (ii) potential for agriculture-led growth
including the agriculture and forest resource base, irrigation development potential and
market access; (iii) commitment of village leadership; (iv) assessment of climate change
vulnerability, and (v) opportunity for convergence through on-going or planned support
projects.

3. Goal. The goal of the Project is to contribute to reducing extreme poverty and
malnutrition in the Project area.

4. Objectives. The Project’s objective is to ensure that improved and diversified
climate resilient agricultural production and household nutrition enhance life prospects.

5. Components. The Project shall consist of the following four Components:

5.1 Component 1: Strengthened public services. The component shall underpin the
development of government staff capacities, procedures and technical packages to
support and converge community implementation of selected National Nutrition
Strategy interventions. It comprises two main activities: (i) establishment of a tiered
project planning, supervision, monitoring, knowledge management system within the
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF), and (ii) strengthening of the capacities of
Provincial and District Agriculture and Forestry Offices, Technical Service Centres,
the National Agriculture and Forestry Research Institute (NAFRI) and the DAEC to
develop and deliver sustainable climate-adapted and nutrition-sensitive agriculture
and natural resource management technologies and training programmes to monitor
their impacts.

5.2 Component 2: Community-driven agriculture-based nutrition interventions.
This component will be supported and supervised by the World Food Programme
(WFP). It has two sub-components:

Sub-component 2.1: Planning for improved nutritional outcomes. This
comprises the support for multi-sectoral convergence planning at the district level to
accelerate the implementation of the National Nutrition Strategy and Plan of Actions
2016–2020 (NNSPA). This will include the mapping of different stakeholders’
programmes and infrastructure assets, to identify development gaps at village level.
Simultaneously, the Project will support improved village development planning in
terms of building the capacity of village stakeholders to lead the development process
in their communities. The preparation of three-year, multi-sectoral nutrition-sensitive



Appendix I EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

6

village development plans (VDPs) will be supported by experienced and existing
community planning service providers.

Sub-component 2.2: Women-led improvement in household nutrition. This
encompasses the roll out, in all project villages, of a social behavioural change
communication programme, jointly supported by the Project and the World Bank-
financed Health Governance and Nutrition Development Project (HGNDP). The
purpose is to encourage nutrition-enhancing behaviour that maximizes the benefit of
the Project co-financed investments in the four NNSPA agriculture interventions. The
Project will support the establishment of monthly village-level “farmer nutrition
schools” (FNS). The FNS will aim to balance agricultural production, wild food
collection and food purchase throughout all seasons of the year, thus enabling
villages to increase access to and availability of food for improved dietary diversity.

5.3 Component 3: Sustainable and inclusive market-driven partnerships. This
component includes two subcomponents:

Subcomponent 3.1: Profitable investment in nutrient-sensitive, climate
adapted agriculture. The Project will identify commodities that have investment
potential and which are in compliance with the provincial and district socio-economic
development plans (SEDPs). Commodity selection criteria will envisage a strong
potential for the commercial production of nutritious food export and/or import
substitution; involvement of poor rural households to undertake investments; and
creating incremental jobs. For each selected commodity, a Strategic Investment Plan
(SIP) will be prepared. The SIP will inform the VDP process and provide a framework
for inviting farmers to form production groups and for entrepreneurs to co-invest in
the Project area. Simultaneously, the Project will co-finance VDP-identified
community and farmer group investment in profitable and sustainable nutrient-
sensitive agriculture infrastructure and production through a Village Development
Fund (VDF).

Subcomponent 3.2: Linking Farmers to markets. The Project, with the support
of MAF and the Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI), shall review the current
contract farming programme in the Project area. The review shall propose
adjustments to government legislation, regulations and implementation procedures,
underpinning contract farming agreements with a view to establish more equitable
and more productive agreements benefiting farmer and investor alike. This will
include technical assistance in support of improved contract farming policy. Based on
sub-component 3.1 and 3.2, the project shall pilot the use of PPP funding to promote
investments and job opportunities among rural enterprises and households.

5.4 Component 4 Project Management

Support shall be provided for project coordination and implementation as outlined in
Section II below.

II. Implementation Arrangements

A. Organization and Management.

6. Lead Project Agency. The MAF, in its capacity as the Lead Project Agency, shall have
the overall responsibility for implementation of the Project. MAF, through its Department of
Planning and Cooperation (DPC), will delegate assigned responsibilities to the National
Programme Coordination Office (NPCO) based in Vientiane and to the provincial and district
line agencies concerned.

7. Governance. The Secretariat of the National Nutrition Committee shall act as the
National Project Steering Committee (NPSC).  At provincial level the Provincial Nutrition
Committee will act as the Provincial Project Steering Committees (PPSC) and, at district



Appendix I EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

7

level, the District Socio Economic Development Committee (DSEDC) shall act as the
District Project Steering Committee (DPSC).

7.1 The NPSC will be responsible for overall project guidance and direction,  approval of
AWPBs and for progress reports for submission to Ministry of Finance (MoF) and
IFAD, and will be the final arbitrator on issues relating to project design and
management.

7.2 At the provincial level, each PPSC will approve its respective AWPBs and annual
progress and financial reports prepared by participating kum bans (village clusters)
and districts. In addition to representatives of the  Provincial Department of
Agriculture and Forestry (PAFO), Department of Finance (DoF), Department of
Planning and Investment (DPI), Department of Health (DoH), and Department of
Industry and Commerce (DoIC), it will include provincial agri-business Lao Women’s
Union (LWU), Lao Farmers Network (LFN), international NGOs and civil society
representation. The Provincial Governor or his or her designate will head the PPSC.
The participating provinces will conduct PPSC meetings at provincial level on a semi
basis. The PPSC will report to the existing Provincial Nutrition Committee as required.

7.3 At District level, the DSEDC shall act as the District Project Steering Committee
(DPSC).

8. Management. The NPCO, based in the MAF-DPC in Vientiane, will assist MAF in
carrying out the project implementation and will be fully accountable for the performance
of the Project and the use of funds. More specifically, it will: (i) provide overall guidance
and technical support to SSFNSP implementers, and build verifiable/measurable district
capacities for SSFNSP implementation and coordination, and (ii) ensure overall
coordination and programme management. The NPCO will be led by a Project Coordinator
assigned by the MAF, and will be supported technically by a DAEC Technical Support Team.
The financial management of the project will be executed and facilitated by the MAF DOPC
and similar institutional arrangements will be established at the district level.

9. Other implementation actors.

Ministry of Health. The main role of the MoH is to ensure that the SSFSNP is aligned with
the implementation of the NNSPA.  For this, MoH will partner closely with the MAF, in
particular for the four agricultural priority nutrition interventions.

Multi-sectoral Technical Advisory Group (TAG). The NPCO will establish an independent
Multi-sectoral Technical Advisory Group (TAG) to support Project implementation. The
TAG will include representatives of key MAF and MoH departments, interested donor
partners and farmer and civil society organizations, and private sector stakeholders. The
TAG will meet on a semi-annual basis to provide technical guidance to Project
implementation.

District Agriculture and Forestry Offices. The DAFO will serve as a focal point for the
planning and monitoring of SSFSNP activities at district level. Each DAFO will coordinate
and consolidate planning and budgets for the preparation of AWPBs, manage SSFSNP
accounts for expenditure, carried out at district level, and prepare semester and annual
progress reports and financial statements.

Kum ban Pattana. Village Development Clusters will be the focal point for coordinating
participatory village level development/investment planning.

Lao Women’s Union. The LWU will play a key role in supporting SSFSNP women’s
empowerment and the development of nutrition programmes at village level.



Appendix I EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

8

WFP. In its capacity as the Technical Assistance Supervising Entity, WFP will implement
and supervise activities under Component 2: Community-driven agriculture-based
nutrition interventions, in close partnership and cooperation with concerned line agencies
at different levels and Development Partners.

UN-HABITAT may, as required, be engaged for the implementation of activities relating
to infrastructure development that cannot be managed through Community Force
Accounts (CFA) and local service providers / local companies.

FAO may, as required, provide technical services for project implementation in areas
such as contract farming and provision of new seed varieties.

B. Project Implementation Manual.

10. Preparation. The NPCO shall be responsible for the preparation of a PIM that shall
describe (i) implementation of Project activities; (ii) the administration of Grant proceeds
and Project Parties’ responsibilities; and (iii) monitoring and evaluation of Project progress
and results. The PIM shall be approved by the NPSC before IFAD’s non objection is
obtained.

11. Approval and Adoption. The Lead Project Agency shall forward the draft PIM to IFAD
for its non-objection. If IFAD does not comment on the draft PIM within thirty (30) days
after receipt, it shall be deemed to have no objections. The Lead Project Agency shall adopt
the PIM, substantially in the form approved by IFAD.

C. Other co-financing actors.

The Local private enterprise is expected to contribute approximately USD 0.5 million,
and the village beneficiary contribution will be approximately USD 2.9 million in kind.



Appendix I EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

9

Schedule 2

Allocation Table

1. Allocation of Grant Proceeds. (a) The Table below sets forth the Categories of
Eligible Expenditures to be financed by the Grant and the allocation of the amounts of the
Grant to each Category and the percentages of expenditures for items to be financed in
each Category:

Category Grant Amount Allocated

(expressed in USD)

Percentage of total
expenditures net of taxes

I Works 290,000 100%

II Goods, Services & Inputs 2,200,000 See below

III Grants & Subsidies 12,500,000 100%  net of all other
Contributions

IV Consultancies 3,830,000 see below

V Operating Costs 2,800,000 100% net of Government
Contributions

Unallocated 2,380,000

TOTAL 24,000,000

(b) The terms used in the Table above are defined as follows:

“Goods, Services & Inputs” under Category II, shall mean eligible expenditures
incurred related to:

(i) Equipment and Material under Component 1 and Project Management
Unit which shall be financed by the Grant 100% net of taxes under
Component 1 and Component 4.

(ii) Vehicles and Motorbikes under Component 1 and Component 4which shall
be financed by the Grant 100% net of taxes.

(iii) Agri-Inputs under Component 1 and 3 which shall be financed 100% by
the Grant.

“Grants & Subsidies” under Category III, shall mean eligible expenditures incurred
related to Matching Grants under Component 3, which shall be financed 100% by
the Grant net of Government and Beneficiaries’ contribution. The Government shall
finance 15% of the total cost under Infrastructure for Nutrition –rich agriculture.

“Consultancies” under Category IV, shall mean eligible expenditures incurred
related to consultancies services, capacity building and training activities under
Component 1 except for the Chief Technical Adviser, Component 2 and
Component 4.



Appendix I EB 2016/117/R.12/Rev.1

10

“Operating Costs” under Category V, shall mean eligible expenditures incurred
related to:

(i) Salaries & allowances for key staff in NPCO (i.e. Financial, Procurement,
Monitoring and Evaluation, Administrative Officers) which will be financed
by the Grant.

(ii) Operating costs which shall be financed 100% net of taxes for DSA of
local travel, operation and maintenance and annual meeting costs in
Project provinces and periodic field visits and audit. Other operating costs
except those covered by the Grant shall be financed 100% by Recipient.

2. Start-up Costs. Withdrawals in respect of expenditures for start-up costs
(computerized accounting system, PIM and start up related expenditures) incurred
before the satisfaction of the conditions precedent to withdrawal but after entry into
force of this Agreement shall not exceed an aggregate amount of USD 50 000.



A
p
p
en

d
ix II

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/1

1
7
/R

.1
2
/R

ev.1

1
1

Logical framework

Results Hierarchy
Indicators Means of Verification

Assumptions
Name Baseline YR1 MTR End Source Frequency

Responsi
bility

Goal:
Contribute to reduced
extreme poverty and
malnutrition

 Incidence of child malnutrition (height for
age) among two-year old children in
Project villages reduced from 60% at
present to 50% by project completion
(disaggregated by gender and ethnicity).

0 0 3% 10% RIMS,
UNICEF,
MICS,
GoL stats

Project
start, mid-
term and
end-
project

Project
manage
ment

Development Objective:
Improved and diversified
climate resilient
agricultural production and
household nutrition
enhance life prospects.
(inflation adjusted and
disaggregated by gender
and ethnicity)

 21,000 HH out of poverty by increasing
per capita income from the current level
to more than $270/yr) by Project-end
(inflation adjusted and disaggregated by
gender and ethnicity)

0 0 8000 21000 RIMS
surveys;
LECS
Surveys

Project
start, mid-
term and
end-
project

Project
manage
ment

 Continued government
commitment to multi-
sectoral approaches to
improved food security and
nutrition;
 Resource access and land

security of poor
communities is supported
and expanded.

 At least 21,000 households with
improved food security (measured as a
HFIAS1 score of 7.0 or lower
(disaggregated by gender and ethnicity).

0 0 8000 21000 RIMS
surveys
UNICEF
MICS

Project
start, mid-
term and
end-
project

Project
manage
ment

Outcome 1: Strengthened
public services

 30 technical service centres operating
sustainably using outcome-based farmer
contracts.

0 2 15 30 Project
M&E;
PAR
reports

Annual Project
manage
ment
DAEC

 DAEC, NAFRI and TSC
collaboration for technology
testing and dissemination;
 Comprehensive mapping

and use of proven/tested
tools within country and
Asian region
 TSC’s incentivised to

operate sustainably
 Programme financing is

disbursed in time to support
field implementation.

 10 sustainable climate-adapted and
nutrition-sensitive agriculture and natural
resource management technologies
adopted by more than 10,000 farmers
(disaggregated by gender and ethnic
group)

0 1 4 6 Project
M&E;
PAR
reports

Annual Project
manage
ment
DAEC

Output 1
Build government staff
capacities and procedures
and technical packages to
support and converge
community implementation

 12 districts have guidelines, tools and
core competencies for participatory
nutrition-sensitive, climate-adap ted
market-led agriculture and rural
development planning and
implementation

0 Partial Yes Yes Project
M&E
records

Annual Project
manage
ment
Service
Provider

 Technical coordination is
responsive to the
grassroots level needs.
 Effective mobilization of

service providers and
experts within govt. and

1 Household Food Insecurity Access Scale (HFIAS), (http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/user_upload/eufao-fsi4dm/doc-training/hfias.pdf)



A
p
p
en

d
ix II

E
B
 2

0
1
6
/1

1
7
/R

.1
2
/R

ev.1

1
2

of selected National
Nutrition Strategy
interventions

 At least 70% rural household
satisfaction with farmer-level technical
information services (gender,  age
ethnic and poverty disaggregated).

0 0% 50% 70% Project
M&E

Annual Project
manage
ment
DAEC

non-state actors

Outcome 2:: Community-
driven agriculture-based
nutrition interventions
established

 300 participatory village investment
plans show return on investment > 8%.

0 0 100 300 Project
M&E

Annual Project;
Service
provider

 VDPs are prepared and
implemented at field level;
 Service providers

successfully transfer
participatory development
skills to district
administrations
 Programme financing is

disbursed in time to support
field implementation;
 Convergence with other

programmes and nutrition
initiatives

 At least 21,000 households achieve a
household dietary diversity score of at
least 75 per cent of the HDDS of the top
income tercile in their kum ban
(disaggregated by ethnicity).

0 1,000 10000 21000 RIMS,
HDDS
studies,
FNS
records

Project
start, mid-
term and
end-
project

Project
manage
ment;
DHO

Output 2:
Planning for improved
nutritional outcomes

 34,000 beneficiary households
participate in VDP preparation
(disaggregated by gender and ethnicity
of HH-head);

0 3,000 20000 34000 Project
M&E

Annual Project;
Service
provider

Output 3:
Women-led improvement
in household nutrition

 28,000 women in project area of 15-49
years of age, consume at least 5 out of
10 defined food groups daily
(disaggregated by ethnicity)

0 0 10000 28000 RIMS
surveys

Project
start, MTR
and end-
project

Project,
MoH/DH
O

Outcome 3:
Sustainable and inclusive
market-driven partnerships
established

 Market-driven partnerships increase
income of at least 10,000 participating
farmers by at least 40% (disaggregated
by gender)

0 0 3000 10000 Project
M&E

Annual Project,
service
providers

 Adequate and timely
solutions provided to
smallholders (aggregation,
technology and policy,
financing);
 Contract farming and

cooperative laws put in
place and implemented by
GoL institutions to ensure
fair treatments and
reasonable benefits for
farmer groups/ associations
and cooperatives.;
 Productivity improvements

in areas with continued
growth in market demand.
 Villages receive fair terms

of trade for their products

 10,000 farmers with new land use rights
recorded (disaggregated by gender) in a
manner recognized by national or
customary law

0 1000 4000 10000 DAFO
records,
Project
M&E

Annual DAFO,
Project,
Farmers’
organizati
ons

Output 4:
Profitable investment in
nutrient-sensitive, climate-
adapted agriculture

 2,000 hectares of new irrigated land
established

0 100 700 2000 PAFO
records

Annual PAFO

Output 5:
Linking farmers to markets

 At least 20 private or public-private agro-
processing and quality control facilities
installed

0 0 6 20 Project
M&E
system

Annual Project,
DAEC
DAFO

 25 registered agricultural cooperatives
or community-based agro-enterprises
established with sound charters and
business plans

0 0 5 30 Project
M&E,
annual
surveys

Annual Project;
service
providers



