




















































President’s Report

Proposed Loan and Grant under the Debt
Sustainability Framework to the Togolese
Republic for the Shared-risk Agricultural
Financing Incentive Mechanism Support
Project


Togolese Republic

Shared-risk Agricultural Financing Incentive Mechanism
Support Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Togolese Republic

Executing agency: Ministry of Economy and Finance

Total project cost: US$35.07 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 3.3 million (US$3.75 million)

Amount of IFAD grant (under the Debt
Sustainability Framework):

EUR 3.3 million (US$3.75 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Highly concessional terms, interest-free but coupled
with a service fee of 0.75 per cent per year, and a
repayment period of 40 years (unless a shorter period is
requested by the borrower), including a grace period of
10 years. Amortization of the loan principal shall be at
the rate of 4.5 per cent for the first 20 years (11 to 30),
followed by 1 per cent for the subsequent years
(31 to 40)

Cofinancier: Private sector (financial institutions)

Cofinancing amount: US$6.31 million

Contribution of borrower/recipient: US$3.80 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.80 million

Financing gap: US$15.66 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: IFAD



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for proposed
financing to the Togolese Republic for the Shared-risk Agricultural Financing
Incentive Mechanism Support Project (ProMIFA), as set forth in paragraph 55.

Proposed Loan and Grant under the Debt Sustainability
Framework to the Togolese Republic for the Shared-risk
Agricultural Financing Incentive Mechanism Support
Project (ProMIFA)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. The West African country of Togo had approximately 7.6 million inhabitants in

2016, 77 per cent of them living below the poverty line and 75 per cent aged under
35. The country's economy is highly dependent on exports of phosphates and
agricultural products. The agriculture sector provides 60 per cent of employment
and contributes 41 per cent of GDP. Agriculture consists essentially of subsistence
family farms – with an average size of four hectares per household – with low levels
of producer integration into value chains and the market economy.

2. Although agriculture is the main sector of employment for thousands of young
people and women, financial sector operators hesitate to lend to them because of
perceived high risk. Investments and promotion of initiatives in the sector are
therefore limited. Just 0.2 per cent of financial sector resources go to agriculture,
and only 32 per cent of rural people have access to financial services. Use of
banking and financial services is very limited, with only 18 per cent of the country’s
population nationwide having a bank account. In 2017, the International Monetary
Fund indicated that the banking system lacked liquidity to provide financing to
private lenders, since the latter were funding public deficits.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and the
results-based country strategic opportunities programme

3. The Government of Togo has just adopted a new Five-year National Development
Plan (PND) for the 2018-2022 period, with the objective of achieving strong,
sustainable and resilient growth that will provide decent livelihoods and generate
social progress and well-being. The PND also aims to achieve the Sustainable
Development Goals, in particular SDG1 (no poverty), SDG2 (no hunger),
SDG8 (good jobs and economic growth) and SDG17 (partnerships for the goals).

4. Development of the agriculture sector has a central role within the PND, and the
Government has adopted specific sectoral strategies and policies, based on a
sustainable increase in productivity of organized agropastoral value chains, the
organization and professionalizing of value chain stakeholders, and facilitating
access to financial and non-financial services tailored to the needs of the small
producers and small and medium-sized enterprises in the value chains. To that end,
the Government introduced the Agricultural Financing Incentive Mechanism (MIFA)
and requested technical and financial support for it from IFAD.

5. Lessons learned. Togo is classified among the countries experiencing conditions of
fragility, particularly with regard to issues of governance, accountability and
institutional organization. The Shared-risk Agricultural Financing Incentive
Mechanism Support Project (ProMIFA) will capitalize on lessons learned from other
rural development projects in Togo and the subregion, in particular with regard to



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

2

the implementation of projects in countries with fragile situations. Performance of
the IFAD portfolio in Togo – and in particular its fiduciary aspects – have posed
challenges due to the weak capacities for implementation and results-based
management on the part of the participating parties. Greater attention to the
fiduciary aspects will be ensured, in particular through sustained capacity-building
and close monitoring through project oversight and the IFAD country team in Accra.

II. Project description
A. Objectives, project area and target group
6. The overall objective of ProMIFA is to contribute to poverty reduction, sustainable

and inclusive rural economic growth, and the creation of sustainable and decent
employment in rural areas, through organized and well-functioning value chains in
Togo.

7. Its development objective is to facilitate sustainable access to financial and non-
financial services tailored to stakeholders in organized, successful value chains.

8. Project area. ProMIFA will be aligned with the nationwide coverage adopted by the
Government’s incentive mechanism for agricultural financing (MIFA). Nevertheless,
its roll out in each region will be undertaken on a differentiated basis depending on
demand. For greater impact on the target group, namely women and youth,
ProMIFA will first support a limited number of key agropastoral value chains
(rice, market gardening, maize and poultry raising), which will be selected taking
into account: (i) their contribution to improving food and nutritional security of the
rural communities; (ii) the existence of demand for grains, vegetables and poultry
products from urban markets; (iii) the outlook for financial and economic cost-
effectiveness; and (iv) their potential for job creation – particularly for youth and
women – and for income generation.

9. Target group. ProMIFA will target: (i) smallholder farmers and their organizations
(cooperatives, unions and federations); (ii) vulnerable farm households; (iii) rural
small businesses and microenterprises and other actors upstream and downstream
involved in the production and distribution of inputs, marketing, processing,
handicrafts, the setting up and maintenance of farm equipment, and the provision
of other services.

10. ProMIFA seeks to reach at least 300,000 direct beneficiaries, or around 50,000 rural
households, especially rural young people (18 to 40 years of age), employed or
unemployed; and women who are producers or are active in the other segments of
the targeted value chains. Targeting and gender equality strategies will ensure that
young people of both sexes represent at least 40 per cent of the beneficiaries, and
adult women at least 30 per cent. Thus girls and adult women will account for
nearly half of ProMIFA beneficiaries.

B. Components/outcomes
11. ProMIFA’s activities will be organized into three components, namely:

Component 1: Technical support for value chain development and market
access

a) Technical support to the producers and other actors in the agropastoral value
chains: (i) overview of the selected value chains and inventory of service
providers; (ii) building of the technical/technological capacities of producers
and their organizations and of other value chain actors; and (iii) capacity-
building in financial literacy and business development services.

b) Support to the structuring of the value chains and market access:
(i) partnership strengthening within the links in the value chains; (ii) support
to interprofessional organizations; and (iii) support to the quality approach to
market access.



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

3

Component 2: Support for the development of financial products and
services

12. In order to meet the demand generated by the ongoing support under component
1, ProMIFA will help facilitate access to financial services for rural communities by
increasing loans to smallholder farmers – individually or in groups – and to small
and medium-sized rural enterprises; and by improving the quality of the
agricultural credit portfolio of ProMIFA’s partner financial institutions and the
operational and financial sustainability of these institutions.

13. These results will be achieved through the following measures: (i) technical
assistance to support establishment of a financing and risk mitigation mechanism,
and the development of new products; (ii) improvement in the quality of financial
services through capacity-building of the financial institutions and development of
tailored products; and (iii) effective establishment of the financing and risk
mitigation arrangements.

Component 3: Institutional support to MIFA; coordination and
management of ProMIFA

a) Institutional support to MIFA, with a view to its consolidation: the project will
finance the support needed (technical assistance, training programmes, study
tours, learning routes, monitoring and evaluation, etc.) for the
operationalization and consolidation of MIFA and its strategic planning within
the agricultural finance environment;

b) Coordination and management of ProMIFA will be undertaken by a simplified
project coordination and management unit (PCMU) working alongside MIFA –
and closely linked to it and to the MIFA Board of Directors (BoD).

Strategy for project implementation and phasing

14. ProMIFA will be implemented in two phases, following a staggered implementation
plan. Phase 1, with a duration of two years, is the preliminary phase of preparation
for implementation and phase 2, with a four-year duration, constitutes the
implementation and consolidation phase. The midterm review will make it possible
to review progress made, as a condition for passing from phase 1 to phase 2, which
will be launched subject to confirmation of the following six performance indicators:
(i) four key need and market studies finalized; (ii) at least two financial products
pre-identified in the studies, ready to be implemented; (iii) at least five financial
institutions having signed a partnership agreement with MIFA looking to finance the
actors in the selected value chains, with a multiplier effect; (iv) at least one
cofinancier committed to joining the Government and IFAD in support of MIFA;
(v) MIFA’s decision-making bodies in place and operational, in accordance with
Presidential Decree No. 2018-090 dated 25 April 2018 or any subsequent
amendments to it, the members of the BoD have been identified, the Director
General has been named and the key personnel have been put in place and trained;
and (vi) the financial management system is in place and MIFA’s capacity is in line
with the parameters defined by IFAD.

15. Confirmation of these indicators will occur at the time of the midterm review, which
is foreseen from the end of the second year. Unless all of the above-mentioned
performance indicators are confirmed, the project may not move forward to the
next phase, and suspension or even early closure of the project and withdrawal of
support to MIFA could be envisaged by IFAD.

C. Theory of change
16. The change envisaged by ProMIFA will make it possible to solve two major

problems for agricultural and rural development in Togo: (i) suboptimal value
chains with bottlenecks, poorly structured producers’ organizations and other issues
that discourage risk-taking by the financial sector; and (ii) very poor access on the



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

4

part of the rural population and micro-, small and medium-sized agricultural
enterprises to the financing needed for the development of their economic
activities.

17. The project rationale lies in strengthening the resilience and productivity of family
farms. The holistic and inclusive approach adopted – that of enabling family farms
to perform better and increase resilience and become true market-oriented
enterprises – will generate economic growth. Indeed, all categories of relevant
public and private stakeholders will participate in the project. ProMIFA’s activities
will address all links in the value chain, from production to marketing, while
integrating measures for sustainable natural resource management and climate
change adaptation.

D. Alignment, ownership and partnership
18. Alignment. ProMIFA is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025, which

encourages inclusive and sustainable rural transformation and with the strategic
commitments of the Eleventh Replenishment of IFAD’s Resources (IFAD11), while
taking into account the priority themes of nutrition, gender equality, youth and
climate change. ProMIFA is also aligned with IFAD engagement in Togo, as
described in the country strategy note 2018-2019, which focuses on two strategic
objectives, to: (i) facilitate access to employment and improve incomes for rural
youth and women through their greater inclusion in agropastoral value chains
within the structured framework of “agro-hubs”; and (ii) improve sustainable
access for the rural population (young people and women) to financial services
tailored to the development of agropastoral value chains and rural small businesses
and microenterprises.

19. Ownership. The Government is fully committed to MIFA; the latter is in fact a
central mechanism for implementation of its economic development strategy. There
is high demand for financial and in-kind support among producers, their
organizations and rural small businesses and microenterprises, which explains their
readiness to contribute payment for such services. The financial institutions are also
committed to MIFA, since it will contribute to mitigation of the risks associated with
financing the value chains.

20. Partnerships. By promoting the financial literacy of small producers and of other
actors in the agropastoral value chains and their access to short-term seasonal
loans, ProMIFA will encourage partnership-building between their organizations and
private sector actors operating upstream and downstream of production. ProMIFA
will focus on the capacity-building of the various parties involved (MIFA, the
financial institutions, the private banks and other institutions), assisting
beneficiaries in drafting business plans, and supporting financial institutions in
providing financial products that meet the needs of agropastoral value chain
stakeholders, thus enabling their access to financing over the medium term.

21. ProMIFA will also collaborate with the other initiatives under way in support of the
agricultural sector, within the framework of the National Plan for Agricultural
Investment and Food and Nutritional Security and entrepreneurship for women and
young people. A special partnership will be instituted with the National Programme
for the Promotion of Rural Entrepreneurship (PNPER), cofinanced by IFAD, which
targets young rural entrepreneurs. Other partners will also be sought, notably in
the private sector.

III. Project implementation
A. Approach
22. ProMIFA’s will follow a “faire-faire” and “faire-avec” approach which places the

beneficiaries at the centre of activities and gives them responsibility, particularly for
forming financial relationships with the financial institutions. Once the business plan



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

5

is drawn up and completed, with the support of the service provider, ProMIFA will
leave the project sponsor with responsibility for submitting and justifying the
project with the financial institutions. Once the funds have been obtained, ProMIFA
will provide the project sponsor with support to mobilize consultancy services for
project management within a contractual framework with the support provider,
based on a memorandum of understanding with ProMIFA.

23. To ensure that stakeholders have access to quality agricultural consultancy support,
business management services will be promoted by creating a network of skilled
rural young people interested in investing in business consultancy activities,
including keeping accounts and producing financial statements.

24. A key part of the project exit strategy will be the establishment of interprofessional
frameworks for dialogue and a mechanism to build organizational and institutional
capacity to provide quality services to members.

B. Organizational framework
25. ProMIFA will be implemented by a PCMU, which will be set up on the premises of

MIFA and will be linked to its BoD. This unit will have administrative and financial
management autonomy; it will be composed of a coordinator, an administrative and
financial manager and bookkeeper, a procurement specialist, a manager for
targeting/women/youth issues, a monitoring and evaluation specialist, a secretary
and two drivers.

26. Eventually the PCMU should close, with its functions absorbed within MIFA. The
midterm review, to be held towards the end of the second year of ProMIFA
implementation, will make it possible to assess the situation and propose a plan for
the transfer of functions to MIFA, based on: (i) MIFA’s charter and composition;
(ii) its level of organizational and operational maturity; (iii) its performance in
implementation of its workplan and the level of achievement of the expected
outcomes; and (iv) its management capacity, in particular in relation to fiduciary
management, and the quality of the human resources and management
instruments (manual of administrative, financial and accounting procedures manual
and integrated management system).

C. Planning, monitoring/evaluation, learning and knowledge
management

27. Planning. The preparation of the annual workplan and budget (AWP/B) will be
carried out with the MIFA team on the basis of a critical review of the previous year
and of the progress made. All stakeholders, in particular those in the Presidential
Delivery Unit (CPES), will participate in the preparation, thereby translating it into
coherent activities that are allocated the needed resources and linked to the
objectives of the logical framework and its performance measurement framework.
The AWP/B will be approved by the Board of Directors of MIFA not later than
30 November of each year, before being submitted to IFAD for its no objection
before 31 December. The project’s progress over the course of the year will be
assessed based on the rate of progress, outputs achieved and the disbursement
rate of the activities set out in the AWP/B.

28. Monitoring/evaluation. The system will draw on internal monitoring and on
periodic internal and external evaluations, which will be carried out with the
participation of the stakeholders. Information will be collected and analysed on:
(i) progress towards the expected outcomes, as described in the project’s logical
framework, and in the performance of all the actors involved in implementing the
activities set out in the AWP/B; (ii) assessment of the relevance of implementation
approaches and strategies and specific mechanisms for coordination and monitoring
of the various components and activities; (iii) assessment of the participation of the
beneficiaries at the various stages of implementation; (iv) the relevance and
effectiveness of the targeting and the attention given to cross-cutting aspects



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

6

(nutrition, gender, youth and climate change); and (v) annual surveys to assess
impact on the beneficiaries since the midterm review. A baseline survey will be
carried out at project inception and an impact assessment is planned at completion.

29. The PCMU of ProMIFA will work closely with the MIFA monitoring/evaluation unit
and the CPES in support of periodic analyses and documentation of the dashboard
indicators, which will serve as learning and decision support tools. The teams will
benefit from IFAD’s training programmes (AVANTI and Prime).

30. Learning and knowledge management. Knowledge management is an essential
function in the continuous improvement of performance and results; it aims to
capitalize on the knowledge and lessons derived from implementation experience,
so as to generate corrective measures in planning and implementation. It will be
based on (i) identification, documentation, building on and dissemination of
knowledge and (ii) networking among the practitioners, knowledge holders and
other participating parties. The monitoring and evaluation database, activity reports
and self-assessment sessions will all provide opportunities to pool the innovations
and good practices and disseminate them. Knowledge exchanges relating to
FIDAFRIQUE, recently given a new boost, will be actively promoted.

D. Administrative and financial management
31. ProMIFA’s financial management risk is deemed high prior to the establishment of

mitigation measures. The project will focus on the competitive recruitment of
qualified staff to set up an organizational, accounting and financial management
framework, accompanied by a control process and tools for transparent operational
management of the funds. In functional terms, the PMCU will have administrative
and financial autonomy, and the fact that it will initially be separate from MIFA, will
make it possible to hold it increasingly accountable, in line with the governance
principles agreed.

32. The management system described in the procedures manual will specify the
reporting and functional relationships between the officials on the administrative
and financial team. At project inception, an operational management tool will be
put in place in line with: (i) the regulatory accounting rules of the revised
SYSCOHADA accounting system; (ii) IFAD procedures with regard to project
management; and (iii) the national procedures in relation to awarding of contracts
and to personnel management. The manual will contain the management support
needed for implementation.

33. Flow of funds. A designated account will be opened to receive the loan and grant
resources. Three operational accounts will be opened respectively for the
expenditures of the PCMU, the agricultural development financing facility and the
risk mitigation fund.

34. An annual external audit of the financial statements will be carried out, in
accordance with international auditing standards and in observance of the IFAD
guidelines. The audited financial statements will be made public on the official IFAD
site.

35. Although the closing date has passed, the advances provided to the Support to
Agricultural Development Project still need to be accounted for or reimbursed to
IFAD. Definitive resolution of this issue will constitute a prerequisite for
disbursement of ProMIFA funding.

E. Procurement
36. Procurement. Procurement will respect national procedures, and will comply with

standards acceptable to IFAD.



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

7

F. Supervision
37. IFAD and the Government will undertake joint supervision of the project and will

organize at least one mission per year, plus thematic monitoring missions as
needed, so as to formulate recommendations for effective project implementation.

IV. Project costs, financing, and benefits
A. Project costs
38. The total cost of ProMIFA over a six-year period, including provisions for price rises,

comes to US$35.07 million. Its base cost is US$34.032 million. The provisions for
physical and financial contingencies come to US$1.037 million.

39. Project costs by component are as follows: (i) component 1: technical support for
value chain development and market access, US$13.4 million, or 38.3 per cent;
(ii) component 2: support for the development of financial products and services,
US$15.2 million or 43.4 per cent; and (iii) component 3; institutional support to
MIFA; coordination and management of ProMIFA, US$6.4 million or 18.2 per cent.



E
B
 2

0
1
8
/LO

T
/P.2

5

8

Table 1
Project costs by funding source and component
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan IFAD grant Financing gap Beneficiaries Government Private sector Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Technical support for value chain development and market access
1.1: Technical support to the producers
and other agropastoral value chain
actors 2 745 22.1 2 745 22.1 4 141 33.4 550 4.4 2 235 18.0 - - 12 416 35.4
1.2: Support for the structuring of the
agricultural value chains and market
access 36 3.5 36 3.5 713 69.5 - - 185 18.0 56 5.5 1 027 2.9
Subtotal 2 781 20.7 2 781 20.7 4 854 36.1 550 4.1 2 420 18.0 56 0.4 13 443 38.3

2. Support for the development of financial products and services
2.1: Technical assistance in support to
development and establishment of the
mechanisms for financing, risk coverage
and new products 110 28.0 110 28.0 102 25.9 - - 71 18.0 - - 392 1.1
2.2: Improvement in the quality of
financial services 13 1.0 13 1.0 1 071 80.1 - - 241 18.0 - - 1 337 3.8
2.3: Mechanisms for financing and risk
mitigation - - - - 6 000 44.4 1 250 9.3 - - 6 250 46.3 13 500 38.5
Subtotal 123 0.8 123 0.8 7 172 47.1 1 250 8.2 311 2.0 6 250 41.0 15 230 43.4

3. Institutional support to MIFA; coordination and management of ProMIFA
3.1: Institutional support to MIFA 438 13.0 438 13.0 1.770 52.5 - - 727 21.5 - - 3 373 9.6
3.2: Coordination and management 407 13.5 407 13.5 1 869 61.8 - - 341 11.3 - - 3 024 8.6
Subtotal 846 13.2 846 13.2 3 638 56.9 - - 1 068 16.7 - - 6 397 18.2

Total 3 750 10.7 3 750 10.7 15 665 44.7 1 800 5.1 3 799 10.8 6 306 18.0 35 070 100



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

9

B. Project financing
40. IFAD will provide EUR 6.6 million (US$7.5 million), or 21.5 per cent of the total

cost, apportioned between a loan (50 per cent) and a grant (50 per cent); the
Government (including through duties) will contribute US$3.8 million (10.8 per cent
of the total cost); the beneficiaries, US$1.8 million (5.1 per cent of the total cost);
and the private sector, US$6.2 million (18 per cent of the total cost). The financing
gap, amounting to US$15.6 million or 44.7 per cent of the total cost, will be
covered by other sources of financing, or by the next IFAD resource allocation cycle
for Togo, over the period 2019 to 2021 (IFAD11).



E
B
 2

0
1
8
/LO

T
/P.2

5

1
0

Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financing source
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Financing gap Beneficiaries Government Private sector Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

Capital expenditure
1. Goods, services, vehicles and
equipment 173 33.2 173 33.2 81 15.6 - - 94 18.0 - - 521 1.5
2. Technical assistance and
studies 1 333 18.6 1 333 18.6 3 168 44.1 - - 1 293 18.0 56 0.8 7 183 20.5
3. Training 1 999 16.7 1 999 16.7 5 119 42.9 550 4.6 2 268 19.0 - - 11 934 34.0
4. Loans - - - - 6 000 44.4 1 250 9.3 - - 6 250 46.3 13 500 38.5

Total capital expenditure 3 505 10.6 3 505 10.6 14 368 43.4 1 800 5.4 3 655 11.0 6 306 19.0 33 138 94.5

Current expenditure
1. Salaries and allowances 152 12.3 152 12.3 935 75.5 - - - - - - 1 239 3.5
2. Operating expenses 93 13.5 93 13.5 362 52.3 - - 144 20.8 - - 692 2.0

Total current expenditure 245 12.7 245 12.7 1 297 67.1 - - 144 7.5 - - 1 932 5.5

Total 3 750 10.7 3 750 10.7 15 665 44.7 1 800 5.1 3 799 10.8 6 306 18.0 35 070 100



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

11

C. Summary of the benefits and economic analysis
41. The economic analysis. Calculation of the financial return from the different

models shows that all of the models chosen (mixed market gardening, upland rice,
lowland rice and free range chickens) show a very attractive financial return. The
financial internal rate of return is positive for all of the models, with indicators of
between 17 per cent and 139 per cent. The net present value is also very positive,
between CFAF 119,000 and CFAF 8.7 million. The project’s internal economic rate of
return stands at 20.3 per cent and the net present value (at the economic
opportunity cost of capital of 6.5 per cent) comes to US$32.26 million. This result is
very satisfactory. The sensitivity analysis indicates that the results obtained are
robust. Even in the event of a decline in revenue of 30 per cent, a rise in costs of
30 per cent or a two-year delay in the appearance of profits, the rate of return
remains greater than the opportunity cost of capital (6.5 per cent), and the
minimum net present value is greater than US$17.4 million.

D. Sustainability
42. Project sustainability will be promoted first by the decision to empower actors in the

agropastoral value chains to be accountable for project activities. The second
measure to guarantee sustainability is the phasing approach that will
simultaneously make ProMIFA a tool to operationalize, consolidate and maintain
MIFA beyond project completion.

43. Among the effective mechanisms developed by ProMIFA are: making beneficiaries
accountable for the activities in which they are involved through their systematic
participation in decisions on the technical support needed to implement their action
plans. This will be realized through a tripartite partnership agreement established
between ProMIFA, the support provider and the beneficiary.

44. The cost-sharing system between the project and the beneficiaries will enable the
producers to contribute to the direct financing of their economically viable activities.
Similarly, with respect to the agricultural development financing facility, a
mechanism will make it possible to provide liquidity to MIFA’s partner financial
institutions for the financing of beneficiaries’ projects. This process will involve the
participation of the three sets of stakeholders: the farmers, ProMIFA and the
partner financial institutions.

45. The differentiated and calibrated support to the producers’ cooperatives and
organizations – by means of action plans that they themselves have designed – will
strengthen their institutional and economic capacity. The establishment of a
commercial relationship between the cooperatives and the market operators, along
with financial intermediation on the part of ProMIFA, will provide the producers with
autonomy. The specific and multifaceted support envisaged for building the
economic capacity of women and youth will contribute to the emergence of strong,
credible and economically promising entreprises led by women and young people.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
46. The project’s main risks are inherent to activities in the agricultural sector and rural

finance, and to markets, climate change and the country’s social and political
situation, in particular: (i) weak technical and management capacity of the
beneficiaries for ensuring the productivity and economic return of their activities;
(ii) low participation of women, due to cultural barriers and to men’s
monopolization of the most profitable links in the value chain; (iii) fluctuation in
prices of staples and the distortion caused by the parallel markets; (iv) disruption
of the markets by government policies to subsidize inputs and foodstuffs; (v) poor
quality of records, entailing drawn-out loan provision processes; (vi) delays in
establishing financing mechanisms, mitigating risks and conducting surveys;
(vii) fiduciary risks; and (viii) climate events that may place a strain on production
and repayment capacities. The project is classified as having moderate climate risk.



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

12

However, it will have many positive effects and is thus classified in environmental
category B.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
47. ProMIFA is in line with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2016-2025, which aims to

promote inclusive and sustainable rural transformation, and with IFAD’s rural
finance policy. ProMIFA will implement activities aimed at achieving IFAD’s three
strategic objectives: (i) improving the productive capacity of poor rural people in a
sustainable and resilient manner; (ii) adding to the benefits that these communities
draw from their inclusion/participation in the market; and (iii) strengthening
environmental sustainability and increasing the climate resilience of their economic
activities. It is also strongly aligned with IFAD’s planned country engagement as set
forth in the country strategy note for 2018-2019. ProMIFA is also in line with IFAD’s
rural finance policy, which calls for providing financial institutions with capital and
developing financial products tailored to the rural poor, including risk management
mechanisms, without creating distortion within the financial market.

B. Alignment and harmonization
48. ProMIFA will support the implementation of MIFA, a key instrument of the new five-

year PND (2018-2022), which will make it possible to facilitate the funding needed
for rural activities, so as to address the weak performance of agropastoral value
chains and poverty.

C. Innovations and scaling up
49. ProMIFA represents an innovative approach for mitigating risks linked to agricultural

financing, which is based on the scaling up of successful experiences from other
regions within the framework of a South-South partnership with Nigeria. MIFA is a
priority initiative of the President and plays a major role in the country’s
development strategy. It will be the gateway for the private sector, donors and
other partners. Since the beginning of the pilot phase of MIFA, IFAD, by supporting
ProMIFA, has been the only partner that has committed itself alongside the
Government and will benefit from a high level of visibility. IFAD’s direct
participation by providing a grant to strengthen the CPES – a service mechanism of
the Office of the President of the Republic of which MIFA is a priority project – is
also a major innovation whose results are eagerly awaited.

50. ProMIFA will build on and harness the experiences of projects with similar activities,
such as PEA Youth in Cameroon, NIRSAL in Nigeria, the Agribusiness Initiative Trust
in Uganda and the Private Agricultural Support Services Trust in the United Republic
of Tanzania.

D. Policy engagement
51. Since MIFA is a key implementation instrument for the Government’s development

strategy, ProMIFA – in support of MIFA – will contribute to strategic planning on the
key topics of: agropastoral value chains, professionalization of stakeholders and
rural finance. This contribution will be undertaken through mobilization of
specialized technical assistance, the financing of thematic studies, learning from
monitoring and evaluation, and building on and sharing good practices.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
52. The financing agreement between the Togolese Republic and IFAD constitutes the

legal instrument whereby the proposed financing will be granted to the
borrower/beneficiary. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as
appendix I.

53. The Togolese Republic is empowered under its laws to receive funding from IFAD.



EB 2018/LOT/P.25

13

54. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
55. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan to the Togolese Republic on
highly concessional terms in the amount of three million three hundred
thousand euros (EUR 3,300,000), upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

FURTHER RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Togolese
Republic under the Debt Sustainability Framework in the amount of
three million three hundred thousand euros (EUR 3,300,000), upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

Gilbert F. Houngbo
President





