










































President’s report

Proposed grant to the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan for the Support to National
Priority Programme 2



Islamic Republic of Afghanistan

Support to National Priority Programme 2

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Ministry of Finance

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock

Total programme cost: US$54.8 million

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 34.5 million (equivalent to approximately
US$48.5 million)

Cofinancier(s):1 Microfinance Investment Support Facility for
Afghanistan (MISFA)

Amount of cofinancing: US$2.5 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be confirmed

Contribution of recipient: US$1.7 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$2.1 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD

1 The National Priority Programme 2 is tentatively being financed by the Government of the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and
a group of financiers including the European Union, the World Bank and the Department for International Development of the
United Kingdom.



EB 2015/115/R.10

1

Recommendation for approval
The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan for the Support to National Priority
Programme 2, as contained in paragraph 52.

Proposed grant to the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan
for the Support to National Priority Programme 2

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Afghanistan is currently undergoing a major security, political and economic

transition that will fundamentally shape its future. In late 2014 and early 2015,
Afghanistan assumed responsibility for its own security and a new Government was
established. With the transition, development assistance is being transformed from
off-budget operations executed by external service providers to on-budget
operations managed and implemented by national institutions, with capacity-
building support as required. The present programme is fully aligned with these
changes.

2. Afghanistan’s population was estimated at 30.6 million in 2013, with an annual
growth rate of 2.4 per cent. The population is relatively young, with 64 per cent
under 25 years of age, and a median age of 17. Approximately 76 per cent of the
population lives in rural areas. Afghanistan is ethnically diverse, with some 25
distinct ethnic groups.

3. Following almost four decades of conflict, Afghanistan remains one of the poorest
nations in the world. An estimated 36 per cent of the population lives below the
poverty line. The Human Development Report ranked the country 169th out of 187
countries in 2013, with a human development index of 0.468. Its gender inequality
index was 0.712 in 2012, ranking it 147th out of 148 countries.

4. Afghanistan has received a substantial level of development aid since 2003. Public
institutions have been strengthened, health care and education significantly
improved, and road infrastructure constructed. There are indications that these
activities have generated positive development outcomes in terms of life
expectancy, health status, education levels and living conditions. In recent years,
external assistance has fuelled high economic growth, with the annual GDP growth
rate (constant prices) averaging 10.4 per cent for the 2009-2013 period.

5. Despite these improvements, most Afghans continue to endure conditions of
hardship and insecurity. Infrastructure has been ravaged by conflicts and internal
markets remain largely disrupted. Limited arable land per capita, low precipitation
and harsh climate conditions in many areas contribute to the hardship and resource
poverty endured by farmers. Poverty is multidimensional, involving a complex
interplay among a lack of assets, years of conflict and insecurity, disasters,
inadequate infrastructure, weak public services and traditional roles.

6. The agriculture sector contributes 24 per cent of GDP and employs approximately
70 per cent of the rural labour force. Afghanistan produces food and cash crops,
some export and industrial crops, and livestock products. At present, there is
increasing potential to overcome the devastation wrought by years of conflict and
develop the crop and livestock subsectors to increase output, food security and
rural incomes.



EB 2015/115/R.10

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

7. IFAD has historically been responsive to the specific needs of fragile states in terms
of policies, strategies and investments. Indeed, a substantial portion of the 2013-
2015 resource allocation cycle has been allocated to fragile states. This focus is
becoming increasingly structured and articulated, as requested by IFAD's governing
bodies. Two recent documents addressed the scaling up of engagement in fragile
States: A Strategic Vision for IFAD 2016-2025 (IFAD10/2/R.2), which prescribed
increased attention to the specific context and needs of fragile states, with
emphasis on building national capacities; and Enhancing IFAD’s business model for
inclusive and sustainable rural transformation (IFAD10/2/R.3), which outlined ways
to better engage in fragile situations and promoted the capacity-building of
community organizations and public institutions.

8. The present programme builds on this emerging strategic vision and adapts
relevant elements of the business model to the Afghan context. It focuses on
building national capacities and linkages across the agriculture sector – working
with community organizations, public agriculture services and the private sector –
to enhance community resilience and improve food security. It supports national
programmes, in complementarity and synergy with partners, in particular the
European Union. Consistent with the IFAD Guidelines for Disaster Early Recovery of
May 2011, it invests in high-impact crop and livestock activities with comparative
advantages, market demand and growth potential. Consistent with the Afghanistan
country strategic opportunities programme, it provides strategic and programmatic
support to the Government in agricultural sector transformation, rural economic
growth and poverty reduction.

9. The programme is fully aligned with the Government’s request to partners to
progressively align with the newly prepared national priority programmes, moving
from fragmented, project-based support to a sector-wide, programmatic approach
in support of coordinated development. It will enable IFAD to contribute to
sustainable, nationally driven development; to build the capacities of public and
private institutions and community organizations; to modernize the agricultural
sector; and to support the transition of smallholders from subsistence to
commercialized farming. It will also position IFAD to help the Government tackle
systemic sector challenges, particularly policymaking and public investment
programming.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
10. IFAD’s support for National Priority Programme 2 (NPP2) aims to achieve national

coverage over a three-phase implementation period of 15 years. The Support to
National Priority Programme 2 (SNaPP2) constitutes the first phase of IFAD support.
It will be implemented in three selected pilot provinces, namely Balkh, Herat and
Nangarhar, with planned geographical expansion to additional provinces over the
second and third phases. In the three pilot provinces, the programme will primarily
focus on six districts: Nahri Shahi and Dih Dadai in Balkh; Karukh and Zendhajan in
Herat; Darah e Noor and Khewa/Kuzkunar in Nangarhar. However, it will also invest
in other districts to the extent required by relevant agricultural backward and
forward linkages, value chain linkages, relevance of activities, synergy with other
development operations, and security considerations. Within the six identified
districts, the programme will cover about 589 community development councils
(CDCs) consisting of 57,000 households (427,500 people); it will also cover
additional CDCs and households in the other districts as required. Should security
deteriorate substantially in any selected district or province, the programme will
formally shift to another district or another province subject to consultations
between the Government and IFAD.



EB 2015/115/R.10

3

11. The programme has a three-tier target group: (i) at the subnational institutional
level, it will target provincial and district extension staff of the Ministry of
Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock (MAIL), community mobilizers of the Ministry of
Rural Rehabilitation and Development (MRRD), and farmers’ resource centres
(FRCs); (ii) at the local institutional level, CDCs, NGOs and relevant private sector
entities will be strengthened and serve as interlocutors; and (iii) at the grass-roots
level, target groups will include poor rural women and men, kuchis (nomadic
herders), small farmers and herders, producers’ groups and women’s groups.
Woman-headed households and rural youth will be the object of specific
programme targeting.

B. Programme development objective
12. The goal of IFAD financing will be to contribute to improving the food security and

economic status of poor rural households in the three selected provinces. The
programme has two objectives: (i) institutional development and capacity-building
of community organizations, public extension services and relevant private sector
entities; and (ii) sustained increased incomes for small farmers and herders
fostered by improvements in productivity and output, infrastructure and market
linkages.

C. Components/outcomes
13. The programme has two components. Component 1: Institutional

development – approximately US$14.0 million, 26 per cent of total programme
cost.

14. Subcomponent 1.1: Extension services. The programme will strengthen the
extension directorate’s structures by: (i) establishing a women’s extension
department in MAIL to coordinate a cadre of female extension workers across the
target areas; (ii) strengthening the male extension worker cadre at the district
level; (iii) targeting young graduates from local agricultural faculties for recruitment
as extension assistants; and (iv) incorporating updated techniques and approaches
into the agricultural curricula.

15. Subcomponent 1.2: Farmers’ organizations. MAIL and development partners are
establishing a national network of FRCs across Afghanistan. The capacities of FRCs
and other relevant community organizations will be upgraded to enable them to
broker business relationships among stakeholders, bringing together decentralized
MAIL and MRRD services, input suppliers, market integrators and small farmers.

16. Subcomponent 1.3: Private sector. Private sector linkages, contract farming and
value chain upgrading will be integrated with district extension services and
community groups. Market linkages among producers and private companies will be
promoted, as a range of agricultural products can be processed to increase shelf
life, year-round availability and output price. Business service packages will be
developed to address the needs of typical enterprises. The capacities of
entrepreneurs will be upgraded and their links with producers’ groups enhanced.

17. Subcomponent 1.4: Policy and implementation support facility. This facility will
provide technical assistance (TA) to MAIL for agricultural development
programmes; provide TA and capacity-building to other relevant ministries; and
strengthen MAIL and MRRD knowledge management and communication products.

18. Component 2: Strategic investments – approximately US$35.8 million, 65 per
cent of total programme cost.

19. Subcomponent 2.1: Infrastructure. The programme will invest in irrigation
infrastructure and other community productive infrastructure, in line with
government policy and priorities.

20. Subcomponent 2.2: Productive investments. The programme will help to improve
the productivity of rainfed wheat, horticulture and livestock production to improve



EB 2015/115/R.10

4

food security and increase household incomes in the target communities. Farmers
and herders will be trained in improved technologies, post-harvest activities and
information sharing.

21. Subcomponent 2.3: Rural financial services. The programme will invest in a range
of financial products and delivery mechanisms to improve target group access to
financial services. These will include: (i) targeting the ultra-poor; (ii) developing
value chain financing products; (iii) promoting sharia-compliant financial products;
(iv) offering TA and incentives to participating financial institutions; and (v) possibly
competitive grant schemes for agribusinesses in due course.

III. Programme implementation
ApproachA.

22. The MAIL will be the lead implementing agency and the MRRD an additional
implementing agency. Relevant programme approaches and activities will be
mainstreamed into their operations. However, in the light of MAIL’s current capacity
gaps at decentralized levels, specific activities will initially be implemented by other
contracted ministries, projects and service providers (national entities, as far as
possible). The capacity-building of relevant national public and private organizations
will be a key responsibility of all contracted service providers, and the programme
will seek full implementation by reputable national institutions as soon as possible.

B. Organizational framework
23. The programme’s governance framework consists of the programme steering

committee (PSC), a provincial coordination committee (PCC) in each province, and
the existing MAIL programme support team (PST).

24. At the national level, the PSC will be responsible for policy and strategic guidance,
overseeing management and implementation, approving annual workplans and
budgets (AWPBs) and reviewing progress. It will consist of senior representatives of
MAIL, the Ministry of Finance (MOF) and MRRD.

25. Each PCC will be convened by MRRD’s National Solidarity Programme (NSP)
management and chaired by a MAIL district representative. Their membership will
consist of representatives of provincial entities, contracted service providers and
PST personnel. PCCs will be responsible for coordinating the implementation of
activities and sharing information and knowledge.

26. The PST will be responsible for managing and coordinating the programme. It will
be expanded with the addition of a programme manager and technical specialists to
carry out relevant activities. Programme staff will be recruited on a competitive
basis in line with IFAD guidelines and subject to IFAD prior review.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

27. AWPBs and activity calendars, based on the design report and informed by
operational experiences and supervision missions, will constitute the programme
planning framework. The PST will prepare AWPBs through a consultative approach
involving community organizations, FRCs, MAIL, MRRD and other stakeholders.
Following PCC approval, provincial-level plans and budgets will be consolidated by
the PST into a programme AWPB and submitted to the PSC for approval and to
IFAD for concurrence at least two months prior to the start of each fiscal year. The
consolidated programme AWPB will contain a procurement plan, in compliance with
IFAD requirements. All plans will be disaggregated by gender.

28. The programme’s monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will collect data and
information to measure performance and progress towards objectives, and serve as
a learning tool by providing information for reflection on programme strategy and
operations. It will support decision-making at various levels and facilitate results-



EB 2015/115/R.10

5

based management. Where feasible, the programme will help to strengthen MAIL
M&E capacity.

29. Learning and knowledge management. The programme will formulate a
knowledge management strategy, in line with IFAD policy. Its website will be
completed within the first year of implementation and used as a knowledge-sharing
tool, hosted on IFADAsia. Information from M&E studies, reviews and study tours,
lessons and best practices will be shared through knowledge products such as
newsletters, publications, case studies and audio-visual reports. Knowledge-sharing
events will be organized at the community level and visits carried out to exchange
knowledge and learning by observing.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
30. Financial management. MAIL has extensive experience in managing IFAD-

financed projects. Current arrangements are efficient. Procedures are based on a
solid programme implementation manual (PIM) approved by IFAD in early 2014.
The PST finance unit has qualified and experienced staff confident in applying IFAD
procedures. For SNaPP2, the current PST staffing will be strengthened to enable it
to manage an additional programme. The IFAD contribution to SNaPP2 will be on-
budget and will rely on government systems. The PST will use, in addition to the
MOF public financial management system, its own accounting system to monitor
budget execution, control financial transactions, produce financial reports and
increase staff accountability. To ensure effective financial control, internal control
procedures applied under ongoing IFAD-financed operations, included in the PIM,
will be updated and applied to SNaPP2. An auditor will be contracted to undertake
internal audit activities in support of PST efficiencies.

31. Flow of funds. The flow of funds will be based on standard arrangements
applicable to on-budget externally financed projects. Funds from the Debt
Sustainability Framework (DSF) grant account will be transferred to a designated
account in United States dollars opened for this purpose in Da Afghanistan Bank or
another bank acceptable to IFAD. The designated account will be maintained and
operated by the MOF. IFAD will advance funds to the designated account, in
accordance with imprest account modalities.

32. Procurement. Programme works, goods and services will be procured by the PST
in compliance with IFAD Procurement Guidelines and the IFAD Procurement
Handbook.

33. Audit. Annual external audit of project accounts will be carried out by a
competitively selected, reputable auditor. The audit terms of reference will include
visits to contracted implementing partners and service providers, as well as field
visits, where appropriate. MRRD and all contracted service providers will submit
audited financial statements covering SNaPP2 activities to the PST within four
months following the end of each fiscal year. Where United Nations agencies are
exempt from such a requirement, they will submit unaudited annual financial
statements of expenditures to the PST.

E. Supervision
34. The programme will be directly supervised by IFAD. The supervision process will

guide the programme towards the achievement of its strategic objectives and broad
poverty reduction outcomes, while ensuring fiduciary compliance. A midterm review
and a programme completion mission will be undertaken, in programme year three
and at closure, respectively.

35. In the light of the prevailing security situation, the country team will assess
alternative methods to complement IFAD supervision and implementation support
processes, such as contracting and/or otherwise involving local organizations.



EB 2015/115/R.10

6

IV. Programme costs, financing and benefits
A. Programme costs
36. The total programme cost is estimated at US$54.8 million over a six-year

implementation period. This is inclusive of contingencies, cofinancing, beneficiary
contributions and counterpart funding. Programme costs are organized in three
components: (i) institutional development (26 per cent); (ii) strategic investments
(65 per cent); and (iii) programme management (9 per cent).

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD MISFA Beneficiaries Government Total
amount % amount % amount % amount % amount %

A. Institutional
development 12 862 92 - 0 - 0 1 134 8 13 996 26

B. Strategic and productive
investments 30 838 86 2 500 7 2 123 6 289 1 35 750 65

B. Programme financing
37. The programme is expected to be financed by: (i) an IFAD DSF grant in the amount

of US$48.5 million; (ii) Microfinance Investment Support Facility for Afghanistan
(MISFA) cofinancing in the amount of US$2.5 million; (iii) a Government
contribution equivalent to US$1.7 million; and (iv) a beneficiary contribution
equivalent to US$2.1 million.

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category
IFAD MISFA Beneficiaries Government Total
amount % amount % amount % amount % amount

1. Civil works 12 752 88 - - 1 417 10 289 2 14 458
2. Vehicles 132 41 - - - - 189 59 321
3. Equipment and materials 181 100 - - - - - - 181
4. Consultancies 538 100 - - - - - - 538
5. Goods, services and inputs 4 934 95 - - 241 5 - - 5 175
6. Grants 2 376 100 - - - - - - 2 376
7. Credit 9 000 78 2 500 22 - - - - 11 500
8. Capacity-building/training 11 872 100 - - - - - - 11 872
9. Salaries and allowances 4 956 94 - - - - 302 6 5 258
10. Operating costs 1 721 55 - - 465 15 922 30 3 108
Total Programme Costs 48 462 88 2 500 5 2 123 4 1 702 3 54 787

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
38. The programme will provide benefits to approximately 57,000 poor rural households

(427,500 women and men) represented by 589 CDCs. The immediate expected
benefits are increased productivity resulting from improved extension services,
farming and management practices, and access to markets and financial services.
These benefits will be expressed in terms of improved food security and increased
household incomes. In addition, participating households will have access to
training and capacity-building benefits. A number of other beneficiaries, such as
producers accessing rural financial services, woman-headed households adding
value to production, and youth receiving vocational training, have not been
quantified.

C. Programme management 4 762 94 - 0 - 0 279 6 5 041 9

Total programme costs 48 462 88 2 500 5 2 123 4 1 702 3 54 787 100



EB 2015/115/R.10

7

39. Additional benefits will accrue from capacity-building interventions. Participating
farmers will be able to access improved services from their CDCs, which will be
strengthened and supported. Women from the poor and very poor groups will be
empowered to manage their own social and economic development, with better
access to markets and inputs. The improvement of rural markets, rural access
roads and extension services will lead to higher output prices for farmers.

40. The programme’s economic internal rate of return is estimated at 24 per cent.
Sensitivity analysis shows the programme would be robust in the event of increases
in costs, decreases in benefits and delays.

D. Sustainability
41. The programme concept itself – support to a national priority programme rather

than a stand-alone project – directly addresses sustainability. Programme
management will be mainstreamed within existing ministerial structures and
financing will be on-budget rather than off-budget. Programme implementation will
utilize existing structures and arrangements to the maximum extent possible,
without creating new ones. The existing CDCs nurtured by the MRRD/NSP will serve
as the instrument for community engagement at all stages. Existing producers’
groups, such as farmers’ cooperatives and dairy unions, will be supported. District-
level capacities of extension services will be strengthened, with clear benefits for
sustainability. Similarly, FRCs will broker linkages between producers and the
private sector, which may be sustained, depending on the strength of the relevant
business relationships.

42. The programme exit strategy is to: strengthen public institutions at provincial and
district levels; gradually transfer full implementation responsibilities to ministries
and CDCs; foster profitable business relations between producers and markets; and
improve the capacities of poor rural women and men.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
43. The overarching risk relates to the recent political and security transition in

Afghanistan. Three post-transition scenarios, and the implications for the
programme, have been projected: (i) a best-case scenario, with a smooth political
transition, relative security, empowered institutions and economic growth; (ii) an
intermediate scenario, with a fragile political context, conflict confined to remote
areas and moderate economic growth; and (iii) a worst-case scenario, with political
instability, factionalism and continued conflict, and economic stagnation.

44. Many key elements related to the risk scenarios, such as a conflict-sensitive
approach to site selection, are already embedded in programme design. Other
elements, such as the configuration of TA, will be fine-tuned depending on the
prevailing scenario. During the initial stage of implementation, IFAD and the
Government will jointly reassess post-transition developments, update the
opportunities and risks under each scenario, and fine-tune the mitigation measures
and trigger points.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

45. As indicated earlier, the programme is consistent with policies, strategies and
investments relevant to fragile states, in particular A Strategic Vision for IFAD
2016-2025 and Enhancing IFAD’s business model for inclusive and sustainable rural
transformation. It is fully aligned with corporate policies on private sector
engagement, environmental impact and climate change mitigation and adaptation,
and gender mainstreaming. The programme’s environmental impact assessment
places it in category "B".



EB 2015/115/R.10

8

Alignment and harmonizationB.
46. The programme’s rationale is anchored in IFAD’s mandate of poverty reduction and

the Government’s priority to increase agricultural productivity. It is consistent with
national efforts to enhance development impact, reduce the duplication of aid
programmes and introduce programmatic approaches. It is aligned with the multi-
donor framework for agriculture production and market development, and in
particular with the assistance provided by partners such as the European Union,
World Bank, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Department
for International Development of the United Kingdom, German Agency for
International Cooperation and United States Agency for International Development.

Innovations and scaling upC.
47. The Government considers the programme a model for partner participation in the

NPP approach, which will be scaled up by MAIL when other partners provide funding
for NPP2. The programme is designed to expand, replicate, adapt and sustain
successful investments. Through its investment tools and forward-looking policy
support, the programme will create the pathways, drivers and spaces for scaling
up. Investments will be unbundled to facilitate operation of the core activities at
scale.

Policy engagementD.
48. The programme will inform agricultural sector policy through its implementation of

key NPP2 components and its structuring of the NPP2 governance and management
framework. The programme design process has already influenced overall
government policy as represented by NPP2. The programme’s policy and
implementation support facility will offer TA to all national institutions involved in
NPP2, in particular MAIL and MRRD.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
49. A programme financing agreement between the Islamic Republic of Afghanistan and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the
recipient. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an appendix.

50. The Islamic Republic of Afghanistan is empowered under its laws to receive
financing from IFAD.

51. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
52. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Islamic Republic of
Afghanistan in an amount equivalent to thirty-four million four hundred fifty
thousand special drawing rights (SDR 34,450,000) and upon such terms and
conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





