








































President’s report

Proposed loan to the Plurinational State of
Bolivia for the Integral Strengthening
Programme for the Camelid Value Chain in
the Bolivian High Plateau

Plurinational State of Bolivia

Integral Strengthening Programme for the Camelid
Value Chain in the Bolivian High Plateau

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Plurinational State of Bolivia

Executing agency: Ministry of Rural Development and Lands

Total programme cost: US$38.76 million

Amount of IFAD loan: SDR12.87 million (equivalent to approximately
US$17.89 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Blend: Maturity period of 25 years, including a grace
period of 5 years, with interest at a fixed rate of 1.25 per
cent plus a service charge of 0.75 per cent per annum

Contribution of borrower: US$16.5 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$4.3 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
loan to the Plurinational State of Bolivia for the Integral Strengthening Programme
for the Camelid Value Chain in the Bolivian High Plateau, as contained in
paragraph 47.

Proposed loan to the Plurinational State of Bolivia for the
Integral Strengthening Programme for the Camelid
Value Chain in the Bolivian High Plateau

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. In the past eight years, the performance of the economy of the Plurinational State

of Bolivia was sound, based on favourable macroeconomic policies despite slow
growth of major economies. From 2006 to 2013, the economy grew at an average
rate of 4.9 per cent, resulting in a fiscal surplus and a sustained increase in
international reserves. The debt-to-GDP ratio decreased from 51 per cent in 2006
to 27 per cent in 2010. Per capita income increased from US$1,100 in 2006 to
US$3,000 in 2014, with a GDP of US$30,000 million. Notwithstanding this, the
Plurinational State of Bolivia is one of the poorest countries in South America and
one of the most unequal: about 65 per cent of a total population of 10 million
inhabitants live in poverty and 2.7 million people live in extreme poverty.
Inequality remains high. The Gini index dropped from 0.59 in 2006 to 0.51 in
2009, and in rural areas from 0.64 to 0.53 in the same period. Poverty here has
the face of indigenous and peasant women, and the highest levels of food
insecurity. Of the 340 municipalities, 102 (30 per cent) are in an extremely
vulnerable situation.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and
RB-COSOP

2. The proposed programme is fully justified in taking into account poverty conditions,
food insecurity and vulnerability of the rural population in selected priority
municipalities in the targeted area. Moreover, programme interventions are
relevant, taking into account the important contribution of South American
camelids to the economy of the population in the Bolivian High Plateau, whose
welfare is associated with the income derived from breeding and processing, and
from the marketing of fibre, meat and hides. The proposed activities will help
reduce difficulties and obstacles in primary production such as: (i) low productivity,
low quality and livestock numbers in the Bolivian High Plateau; (ii) improper
handling of animals and herds; (iii) limited availability of feed and water due to
deterioration of natural resources and climate change; (iv) expansion of the
agricultural frontier for quinoa cultivation; (v) low value added to raw materials;
and (vi) inadequate access to services (veterinary, inputs, etc.). The programme
will also address limitations on processing and marketing, including: (i) lack of
technical assistance; (ii) high production costs; (iii) inadequate access to markets;
(iv) lack of access to financial services; and (v) absence of relationships among the
diverse actors in the production complex. In this context, a long-term strategy is
proposed based on the sustainability of joint venture projects with access to
markets, and strengthening of organizational actors. Programme implementation
will scale up development approaches promoted by other IFAD-funded projects in
the country.The programme contributes to achievement of the objectives of the



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

2

National Development Plan, the Patriotic Agenda 2025 and the Agricultural
Development Sector Plan 2014-2018 of the Ministry of Rural Development and
Lands (MDRyT): poverty eradication and financial, productive and natural resource
sovereignty, which emphasizes that agricultural production must be used to meet
domestic demand and ensure food security.

3. The proposed programme, although not included in the results-based country
strategic opportunities programme (RB-COSOP) for the Plurinational State of
Bolivia 2008-2012 and its 2013-2014 extension, is consistent with IFAD Strategic
Framework 2011-2015 objectives to assist rural poor people in improving their
food security, increasing their incomes and strengthening their resilience by
implementing cost-effective and sustainable initiatives, which can create
opportunities for wealth creation and employment in rural areas.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
4. Programme area. The programme has been designed to be implemented in

approximately 47 municipalities in three departments of the High Plateau: La Paz,
Oruro and Potosi. Selection of the programme area was based on: (i) poverty
conditions; (ii) indices of economic, social and environmental vulnerability; and
(iii) the production potential of South American camelids and their by-products.
The programme area concentrates 67 per cent of the population of camelids in the
country, representing 1,915,436 animals, with Oruro accounting for 57 per cent, La
Paz 33 per cent and Potosi 17 per cent.

5. The programme area is characterized by altitudes ranging from 3,600 to
4,600 metres, presenting low humidity, low rainfall and high solar radiation. The
climate is cold and dry, with extreme temperatures up to minus 15° C in winter
and annual average temperatures of 4-8° C. Frosts occur throughout the year, and
hail by the end of the rainy period, causing serious damage to the few crops and
native grasslands of the area.

6. Targeting and target groups. Implementation of the programme will be based
on geographical targeting in accordance with IFAD’s targeting policy. The
programme will be consistent with the definition adopted by IFAD for interventions
in the Plurinational State of Bolivia, which determines that the target population is
composed of small-scale producers, artisans, women and men microentrepreneurs,
rural populations living in extreme poverty and food insecurity, and marginalized
groups (indigenous peoples, women and youth). The target group includes: rural
populations (Quechua, Aymara) with moderate to extreme levels of poverty,
limited access to irrigation and water, lack of financial capital, difficulties in
accessing financial services, training and technology, limited employment
opportunities, poor or inadequate socio-economic organizational levels and
outmigration in areas with high environmental vulnerability. As part of the
targeting strategy, the programme will take into account the New State
Constitution, which explicitly recognizes the collective rights of indigenous peoples
and the right to consultation processes.

7. Target group. Using geographical targeting criteria, a typology of farm families,
and data from the 2012 census by the National Institute of Statistics, the
programme area comprises 106,571 rural families. Of this total, it is estimated that
63,942 families are engaged in breeding camelids.

8. Gender. The programme is consistent with the three strategic objectives of IFAD's
gender policy: (i) promote economic empowerment to give women and men an
equal opportunity to participate in profitable economic activities and benefit from
them; (ii) give women and men the opportunity to equally express themselves and
influence rural institutions and organizations; and (iii) achieve a more equitable
balance in workloads and the distribution of economic and social benefits for



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

3

women and men. It will ensure that these considerations are taken into account,
identifying inequalities and furthering affirmative action. The programme will
promote equitable leadership in productive organizations that contribute to the
economic empowerment of women’s associations and groups, taking into account
the workload these economic initiatives will entail. It will also systematize
experience by productive organizations in the implementation of measures for
gender equality and inclusion of youth, disseminating findings and
recommendations through events and publications.

B. Programme development objective
9. The main purpose of the programme is to improve living conditions of families and

productive economic organizations linked to the camelid production complex, while
ensuring sustainable management of natural resources. The programme will
contribute towards: (i) reducing rural poverty and child malnutrition; (ii) increasing
physical assets (productive infrastructure) and financial assets of programme
users; (iii) enhancing the integration of business initiatives of beneficiaries in
camelid value chains; (iv) increasing the incomes of participating families;
(v) furthering adoption of practices conducive to natural resource management;
and (vi) increasing the capacities of programme users (human and social assets)
based on the principle of social inclusion of women and youth.

C. Components/outcomes
10. Programme implementation includes three main components:

11. Component 1: Primary production and management of natural resources.
The objectives of this component are to strengthen access by poor families to
initiatives seeking to improve: primary production at the level of family production
units and communities, and sustainable management of natural resources.
Programme initiatives will improve the productive environment, increase resilience
to the effects of climate change, mitigate negative environmental impacts and
provide conditions for competitive entry into markets.

12. Implementation of this component will include two subcomponents:

(a) Improvement of primary production in nutrition, animal health and
management and support to small farm infrastructure. Implementation will
include the following activities: (a) programme information dissemination
workshops; (b) participatory territorial planning; (c) competitive financing of
household and community production unit initiatives; and (d) training in
gender equality, rural youth and experience-sharing.

(b) Sustainable use of natural resources. This subcomponent will be based on a
territorial management approach to implementation of natural resource
management, aimed at improving livelihoods ecosystems through the
following activities: (a) integrated community management of water
resources; (b) management and soil conservation; and (c) strengthening
local institutions for natural resource management and systematization of
experiences.

13. Component 2: Processing and marketing. The objective of this component is to
support families and their organizations in generating productive economic
infrastructure conditions to encourage private investment, improve transformation
processes for value creation and deepen competitive access to markets, while
increasing interaction among actors in the South American camelid production
complex. The component links the dynamics of improving production and
productivity of camelid breeders with transformation initiatives to generate added
value in the fibre, meat and hides value chains.

14. This component includes two subcomponents:



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

4

(a) Processing of fibre, meat and hides. Implementation will include the following
main activities: (a) training of programme teams in competitive allocation of
financial resources and financing of business plans; (b) strategic analysis of
the camelid production complex in its three value chains; and (c) financing of
business plans in processing and speciality export markets.

(b) Marketing of processed products. Implementation will include the following
main activities: (a) support to marketing processes and markets; and
(b) innovation and systematization in terms of gender equality and rural
youth.

15. Component 3: Access to financial services. The objective of this component is
to enhance knowledge, access to and inclusion of participating farmers,
organizations and business groups in the financial services and products offered by
financial entities. This component includes three subcomponents: (i) information
and financial education; (ii) mobilization of savings; and (iii) promotion of financial
services.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
16. The programme will pursue a territorial development approach in the context of the

camelid production complex. lt will strengthen the capacities of families and local
organizations to improve camelid productivity, while enhancing the management of
natural resources and resilience in order to support livelihoods and food and
nutritional security, in partnership with public and private stakeholders. Assistance
will be provided in developing the business skills of productive economic
organizations to help them gain access to markets through implementing business
plans and through strategic investments in the processing of intermediate products
of the camelid complex value chain. The programme will also promote and deepen
the provision of financial services, thus furthering financial inclusion. It will allocate
funds through competitive mechanisms for the implementation of various
production and business initiatives in accordance with existing public policies.

B. Organizational framework
17. Programme implementation will be the responsibility of a programme

implementation unit (PIU) within the MDRyT, and departmental technical units
(DTUs), located in the three departments in the programme area.

18. Implementation. The PIU will be responsible for day-to-day implementation of
the programme, with technical, administrative, financial and legal capacity. The
PIU will be staffed by a programme coordinator and by the professional, technical
and administrative staff required for the correct implementation of the programme.
Staff will be located in a central office in La Paz and in the three DTUs located in
the programme area.

19. Programme guidance. Overall guidance will be provided by a programme
steering committee (PSC). At the departmental level, the programme will establish
territorial rating committees, community juries and local productive initiatives
approval committees (LPIACs).

20. Programme steering committee. The PSC will be responsible for providing
strategic policy for interventions. It will be composed of five members,
representing the MDRyT – which will head the committee; ministries involved in
programme implementation; and programme users.

21. Territorial rating committees. These committees will assess proposed primary
production and food security and nutrition initiatives. They will be established at
the departmental level and composed of five members selected according to
custom. One of the members will be a subject-matter specialist or local expert.



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

5

22. Community juries. Participating communities will select an expert in natural
resource management according to local customs, who will qualify the physical
results in each community, together with a local municipal facilitator.

23. Local productive initiatives approval committees. Three LPIACs will be
established in the programme area and entrusted with selection and approval of
business plans submitted by potential users or beneficiary groups. The composition
of the committees and the requirements for the submission and approval of
business plans will be detailed in the programme implementation manual.

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

24. Planning. Operational planning will be based on annual workplans and budgets
(AWP/Bs) prepared through a participatory process. The PIU will submit quarterly
progress reports and an annual report to IFAD.

25. Monitoring and evaluation. M&E will be the responsibility of the PIU. Activities
will include preparation of a baseline survey, a midterm review (MTR) and a
programme completion report. The baseline survey will be prepared in parallel with
the collection and systematization of information under the Results and Impact
Management System (RIMS), which will be replicated at midterm and at
programme completion.

26. Learning and knowledge management. Programme implementation will involve
introduction of an effective knowledge management system involving all
stakeholders. The programme will develop activities to enable a process of
reflection to better understand what processes and programme outcomes are being
reached. Knowledge acquired will contribute towards lessons learned and towards
adjusting the implementation strategy of the programme if needed. The
programme will support systematization, exchanges of experiences, life stories and
the use of audiovisual techniques in evaluation. These will be disseminated through
information and communications technologies and will contribute greatly towards
knowledge-sharing.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
27. Financial management. The MDRyT, through the PIU, will be responsible for

overall financial management of the programme, including AWP/Bs, procurement,
flow of funds, disbursement, internal control, accounting, financial reporting and
audit. The programme will use the national Integrated System of Management and
Administrative Modernization software, in addition to programme-specific software
for budget and accounting to ensure compliance with IFAD requirements.

28. Flow of funds. The Ministry of Economy and Public Finance will open, in the
Central Bank of Bolivia, a designated account in United States dollars, within the
treasury single account system. The designated account will be operated by the
MDRyT and will be used exclusively for the proceeds of the loan.

29. Procurement. Procurement will follow national procurement procedures and
regulations to the extent that they are consistent with IFAD’s procurement
guidelines.

30. Audit. The programme’s consolidated financial statements will be audited annually
by private independent auditors in accordance with IFAD Guidelines on Project
Audits. All programme accounts will be audited, including all sources of funding,
IFAD, the Government, departmental and municipal governments and communities
of users. Annual audit reports will be submitted to IFAD within six months after the
end of each fiscal year.



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

6

E. Supervision
31. The programme will be directly supervised by IFAD, which will oversee compliance

with the programme financing agreement, including procurement and contractual
agreements, in collaboration with the PIU. Supervision missions will be scheduled
after consultation with the national authorities and the PIU.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
32. Total programme costs have been estimated at the equivalent of US$38.8 million.

The cost structure includes the three main components and programme
management: (i) primary production and management of natural resources,
US$18.3 million (47.2 per cent); (ii) processing and marketing, US$13.7 million
(35.9 per cent); (iii) access to financial services, US$1.4 million (35.4 per cent)
and; (iv) programme management, US$5.4 million (13.8 per cent).
Table 1
Indicative programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan

National
Government
counterpart Beneficiaries

Departamental
governments

Municipal
governments Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Primary production

and management of
natural resources 5 361 29.3 4 221 23.1 2 351 12.9 1 154 6.3 5 204 28.5 18 291 47.2

2. Processing and
marketing 7 005 51.0 1 901 13.9 1 461 10.6 2 747 20.0 610 4.4 13 725 35.4

3. Access to financial
services 808 58.5 55 4.0 518 37.5 - - - - 1 381 3.6

4. Programme
management 4 717 87.9 648 12.1 - - - - - - 5 365 13.8

Total 17 891 46.2 6 826 17.6 4 329 11.2 3 902 10.1 5 814 15.0 38 762 100.0



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

7

B. Programme financing
33. Programme financing comprises an IFAD loan of approximately US$17.9 million

(46.2 per cent); the Government contribution of US$16.5 million (49.7 per cent),
made up of the national government counterpart contribution of about
US$6.8 million (17.6 per cent), departmental governments US$3.9 million
(10.1 per cent), municipal governments US$5.8 million (15 per cent); and
contributions in cash from beneficiaries of about US$4.3 million (11.2 per cent).
Table 2
Indicative Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan

National
Government
counterpart Beneficiaries

Departamental
governments

Municipal
governments Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %
1. Grants and

subsidies 9 151 38.5 3 442 14.5 4 329 18.2 1 471 6.2 5 352 22.5 23 744 61.3
2. Training 2 299 48.6 2 407 50.9 - - - - 20 0.4 4 726 12.2
3. Works 150 4.9 29 0.9 - - 2 431 79.7 442 14.5 3 052 7.9
4. Consultancies 1 920 84.0 376 16.0 - - - - - - 2 287 5.9
5. Vehicles and

equipment 524 83.2 106 16.8 - - - - - - 630 1.6
6. Operating costs 3 848 89.0 475 11.0 - - - - - - 4 324 11.2

Total 17 891 46.2 6 826 17.6 4 392 11.2 3 902 10.1 5 814 15.0 38 762 100.0

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. Benefits and beneficiaries. Programme benefits will accrue as a result of

increased herd productivity, value addition in fibre, meat and leather, strengthened
partnerships with other actors in the value chain, better participatory territorial
management of the sustainable use of natural resources (water, soil and
grassland), and cofinancing of business plans, capacity-building of users and
greater participation by women and youth. It will benefit a total of 30,000 families;
equivalent to 47 per cent of the target population, encompassing a total of
1,996 rural communities.

35. Economic analysis. The programme’s financial feasibility was evaluated for
10 years, taking into account the opportunity cost relative to the bank rate
(11.5 per cent). For farm models, the internal rate of return (IRR) was estimated
at 22-37 per cent. Net present value (NPV) was positive in all cases, ranging from
US$107 to US$543, with incomes above the poverty line. Microenterprise models
showed an IRR from 18 to 56 per cent, and NPV ranged from US$5,882 to
US$45,312 with increased employment levels – implying a reduction of wage
labour outside the farm and greater commitment to business development. The
economic evaluation was projected for 20 years in terms of contributing to
improving the national economy. The evaluation considered adjustments in cash
transfers to programme users (competitions for primary production, management
of natural resources, productive infrastructure for proposed business plans and
savings). Price contingencies were adjusted, considering that imported inflation is a
distortion of actual prices. Adjustments were also made regarding economic input
prices (farm labour) and shadow prices (for tradable goods) whose ratio is
equivalent to US$1.24. Indicators show that the programme is economically
feasible and a good investment for the Government. The IRR is 27 per cent, NPV
US$23.5 million and the cost-benefit ratio 2.3:1, considering a discount rate of
12.67 per cent.

36. Sensitivity analysis shows that in terms of economic feasibility the programme is
more sensitive to the reduction of benefits than to increased costs. With reduced
benefits, the programme withstands up to 37 per cent, and with increases in costs,
up to 84 per cent. Considering delays, the programme withstands two-year delays,
maintaining positive benefits.



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

8

D. Sustainability
37. Sustainability of programme interventions is based on: (i) strengthened capacity of

families, communities and municipalities to undertake sustainable territorial
planning to manage their productive base – assuming the adoption of improved
management of natural resources; (ii) organizational strengthening of communities
and productive economic organizations, which will enable greater empowerment
and capacity for coordination in intervention areas and will generate public/private
partnerships; (iii) improved access by producers – as a result of technical and
business management training – and strategic investments in productive
infrastructure (jointly with municipal and provincial governments) will enable them
to fully participate in value chains, gaining access to local, regional, national and
international markets; and (iv) adoption of gender and generational approaches
will allow for greater participation by vulnerable groups such as women and youth.
All of the above will be reinforced through financial education supported by savings
mobilization, which will allow producers and productive economic organizations to
graduate from dependence on government funding and grants, allowing them to
grow independently. The MTR and M&E of the programme will facilitate design of
an exit strategy – considering progress made and prospects for sustainability of the
results in different dimensions (institutional/organizational, financial, technical and
environmental).

E. Risk identification and mitigation
38. The following risks have been identified: (i) possible duplication with upcoming

financing by the World Bank; (ii) delays in launching programme operations;
(iii) limitations on the processes of establishing or formalizing small- and medium-
sized enterprises; (iv) funding for new business ventures will require transfers to
producer organizations with low implementation capacity, including for fiduciary
duties, which may affect implementation of economic initiatives;
(v) implementation of infrastructure initiatives in conjunction with departmental
and municipal governments will require financial contributions that may not be
available; (vi) market acceptance, increased demand for diverse products in the
value chain, and reduced barriers resulting from measures designed to ensure food
safety, especially meat products; (vii) climate change events such as droughts,
frosts and hailstorms affecting agricultural primary production; (viii) increased
deforestation of native species in favour of the introduction of quinoa, based on
market demand; and (ix) difficulty in making progress in financial inclusion, owing
to geographical and cultural distance between financial institutions and potential
customers.

39. Mitigation measures will include: (i) coordination during the design of new projects
and leadership of national authorities in generating synergies in the
implementation stages and agreements between funders to avoid duplication of
efforts; (ii) IFAD and national authorities will facilitate the processes needed for
effectiveness, including prompt approvals and no objections; (iii) the programme
will facilitate establishment of new ventures through support to strengthening
corporate governance and compliance requirements; (iv) it will provide training to
programme users in managing trust mechanisms of the financial resources
transferred; (v) the programme will ensure that funding by departmental and
municipal governments is assured before the start of activities, and that
agreements have been signed to ensure compliance with the agreements made;
(vi) it will support producers’ groups in fulfilling food-safety certification
requirements when it begins sponsoring implementation of this type of initiative.
The programme will also follow up on ongoing measures designed to streamline the
obtaining of health certificates from the National Agricultural Health and Food
Safety Service (SENASAG) for infrastructure and meat products; (vii) it will provide
funding for initiatives by target groups to improve their environment and reduce
their vulnerability; (viii) the programme will implement awareness workshops on



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

9

environmental issues, keeping in mind the balance that must exist in the
man/nature relationship, and strengthening knowledge management activities
through learning routes and other mechanisms; and (ix) a strategy to reduce
geographical and cultural distances in accessing financial services will be adapted
to include financial education and temporary monetary savings incentives, which
have proved to be useful tools in stimulating demand for deposit-taking services.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
40. The programme is aligned with IFAD policies regarding: (i) targeting, by supporting

activities that benefit the rural population living in poverty; (ii) gender equality, by
furthering empowerment and promoting greater participation by women;
(iii) indigenous peoples, by adopting an intervention strategy based on sustainable
land management, strengthening the traditional local organization of production
units through a participatory approach and recognition of the value of ancestral
knowledge; (iv) management of natural resources, through more productive and
resilient ecosystems and activities including soil conservation, integrated water
resource management, and institutional strengthening of local communities and
municipal governments; (v) rural finance, by supporting access to financial services
and deepening access to credit for productive enterprises; and (vi) private-sector
development, through strengthening the capacity of camelid breeders to establish
partnerships with diverse actors in the fibre, meat and leather value chains
generated.

B. Alignment and harmonization
41. The programme is aligned with the Agricultural Sector Development Plan

2014-2018, which includes technological development, agricultural innovation, use
and management of soil, water and vegetation cover for agricultural production,
health and food safety, sovereignty and territorial management by indigenous and
peasant farmers. The programme will generate synergies and strategic alliances
with public and private entities that operate in some municipalities in the
programme area, thus contributing to harmonization of activities in rural territories
(e.g. the World Bank’s Rural Alliances and Community Investment in Rural Areas
Projects).

C. Innovations and scaling up
42. The programme will innovate by introducing participatory planning, and supporting

economic initiatives on a more continuous basis, including provision of diversified
technical assistance. It will scale up development approaches promoted by the
VALE, PROMARENA and PROSAT projects funded by IFAD in the country.1 The
scaling up process is possible in the context of a favourable regulatory framework
that supports innovation with a territorial perspective aimed at management of the
primary production base, an efficient management of natural resources, financial
inclusion and inclusion of women and youth.

D. Policy engagement
43. Policy dialogue will cover: governance of municipal territories and communities for

sustainable territorial management; strengthening of local institutions in natural
resource management; and capacity-building of communities and municipalities in
land-use planning and in natural resource and risk management, including
strengthening municipal productivity and risk management units. The programme
will further engage in analysing the policy approach of the MDRyT in the context of
its National Camelid Programme.

1 Enhancement of the Peasant Camelid Economy Support Project, Management of Natural Resources in the Chaco
and High Valleys Regions Project and Technical Assistance Services Project for Small Holders.



EB 2015/LOT/P.13

10

VI. Legal instruments and authority
44. A programme financing agreement between the Plurinational State of Bolivia and

IFAD will constitute the legal instrument for extending the proposed loan to the
borrower. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as appendix I.

45. The Plurinational State of Bolivia is empowered under its laws to receive financing
from IFAD.

46. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.

VII. Recommendation
47. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on blend terms to the
Plurinational State of Bolivia in the amount of twelve million eight hundred
seventy thousand special drawing rights (SDR 12,870,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms
and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





