












































Note to Executive Board representatives

Focal points:

Technical questions: Dispatch of documentation:

Glayson Ferrari dos Santos
Country Programme Manager
Tel.: +502 2384 3100
e-mail: g.ferraridossantos@ifad.org

Alessandra Zusi Bergés
Officer-in-Charge
Governing Bodies Office
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2092
e-mail: gb_office@ifad.org

For: Approval

Document: EB 2015/LOT/P.34

EDate: 12 November 2015Distribution: Public
Original: Spanish

President's report

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of
El Salvador for the National Programme of
Rural Economic Transformation for Living
Well - Rural Adelante



EB 2015/LOT/P.34

i

Contents

Abbreviations and acronyms ii
Map of the programme area iii
Financing summary iv
Recommendation for approval 1
I. Strategic context and rationale 1

A. Country and rural development and poverty context 1
B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-

COSOP 2
II. Programme description 2

A. Programme area and target group 2
B. Programme development objective 3
C. Components/outcomes 3

III. Programme implementation 4
A. Approach 4
B. Organizational framework 4
C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and

knowledge management 5
D. Financial management, procurement and governance 5
E. Supervision 5

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits 5
A. Programme costs 5
B. Programme financing 6
C. Summary benefit and economic analysis 6
D. Sustainability 6
E. Risk identification and mitigation 7

V. Corporate considerations 7
A. Compliance with IFAD policies 7
B. Harmonization and alignment 7
C. Innovation and scaling up 7
D. Policy engagement 8

VI. Legal instruments and authority 8
VII. Recommendation 8

Appendices

I. Negotiated financing agreement
II. Logical framework



EB 2015/LOT/P.34

ii

Abbreviations and acronyms

ASAP Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme
COSOP country strategic opportunities programme
DGDR Rural Development Directorate
IRR internal rate of return
NPV net present value
PMU programme management unit



iii

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.3

4

M
a
p

 o
f th

e
 p

ro
g

ra
m

m
e
 a

re
a



EB 2015/LOT/P.34

iv

Republic of El Salvador

National Programme of Rural Economic Transformation
for Living Well - Rural Adelante

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower: Republic of El Salvador

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock

Total programme cost: US$18.69 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 10.85 million (equivalent to approximately
US$12.13 million)

Amount of Adaptation for Smallholder
Agriculture Programme (ASAP) grant: SDR 3.56 million (equivalent to approximately

US$5.0 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: Ordinary: Maturity period of 18 years, including agrace period of 3 years, with an interest rate per
annum equal to 100 per cent of the IFAD reference
interest rate

Contribution of the borrower: US$500,000

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$1.06 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.34

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation on the proposed
financing to the Republic of El Salvador for the National Programme of Rural Economic
Transformation for Living Well - Rural Adelante, as contained in paragraph 46.

Proposed loan and grant to the Republic of El Salvador
for the National Programme of Rural Economic
Transformation for Living Well - Rural Adelante

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. El Salvador has the highest population density in Latin America, with an area of

just 20,742 km² and a population of 6,279,783 (2014). Demographic growth was
0.5 per cent per annum during the period 2001-2013, the lowest rate in Central
America and one of the lowest in Latin America as a whole, owing to negative
migratory flows and a low gross birth rate.

2. El Salvador is a middle-income country. The economy has transitioned from an
agrarian model to a model based on services, consumption, and nontraditional
agricultural and industrial exports. Real GDP grew 1.9 per cent per annum and GNI
per capita 1.19 per cent per annum during the period 2001-2013. Inflation in 2013
stood at 0.76 per cent compared to a high of 7.26 per cent in 2008. Low growth
results in part from low levels of investment – leading in turn to insufficient
employment that is poor in quality and limited income growth for the population.
The low level of economic growth is directly related to poor productivity both
overall and by sector, in addition to insecurity and crime.

3. Poverty in El Salvador is associated with both historic internal issues – the civil
war, the economic and market model and natural disasters such as the earthquake
in 2011 – and, more recently, a series of external shocks such as falling coffee
prices, the global recession and higher oil prices, all of which have contributed to
low economic growth and slow progress on social indicators. Poverty affects in
particular vulnerable and traditionally excluded population groups such as
indigenous peoples, children, young people, women and seniors. Among rural
young people between the ages of 18 and 35, 38 per cent live in poverty and are
seriously impacted by crime and violence. Among rural women, many of whom are
subject to unemployment and family violence, 42 per cent are poor. Although there
are no exact figures on the number of indigenous people in El Salvador, Ministry of
Health estimates indicate that in the Eastern region alone there are 32,725
indigenous people (2014), the vast majority of whom are living in poverty. This
population group has historically been marginalized, until 2014 when the
Legislative Assembly issued official recognition.

4. During the period 2000-2013 poverty declined in the country. The percentage of
households living in poverty fell from 38.8 per cent to 29.6 per cent with the
reduction in rural poverty of 18 per cent. Urban poverty also posted a slight decline
from 29.9 per cent to 26.2 per cent.

5. Despite the reduction in poverty overall and the decline in rural poverty, growth in
the agriculture sector has stagnated, as a result of the crisis in the traditional
export agriculture model, low levels of domestic and foreign private investment and
increasing environmental vulnerability. High price volatility within the agriculture
sector, for both inputs and products, has increased uncertainty and reduced
incentives to invest in agriculture. The sector's contribution to GDP fell slightly



EB 2015/LOT/P.34

2

during the period 2001-2013, from 10.12 per cent of GDP in 2001 to 10 per cent in
2013.

6. Climate change and increasing climate volatility pose one of the greatest
challenges to agriculture given the magnitude and frequency of extreme events,
which have caused significant losses and economic damage in recent decades. El
Salvador is one of the most climate change-vulnerable countries in the world. The
country's exposure to intense rainfall in the North-east and recurring drought in the
Eastern region, within the dry corridor, results in losses – particularly for
smallholder farmers.

7. The Government of El Salvador launched the Five-year Development Plan 2014-
2019 to spur economic and social growth. This document sets out a roadmap to
achieve equitable and inclusive development that will translate into living well for
the population. The plan highlights three priorities: productive employment, under
a model of sustained economic growth; education with inclusion and social equity;
and effective citizen safety. The plan also recognizes that environmental policy and
risk mitigation are a social and economic imperative. These priorities are geared to
achieve, within five years, a human development index of 0.7, associated with
countries at a higher level of human development.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

8. National and sector policy priorities call for a number of actions to generate
opportunities for living well for the population as a whole, while recognizing the
different needs of various population groups. IFAD's priorities and interests in the
country are aligned with government policies: areas of complementarity include
economic development; developing human potential; inclusion and equity,
especially for young people, women and indigenous people; sustainable production
with adaptation to climate change; government consultation with society by
promoting dialogue and citizen participation; and promoting results-based
management.

9. In addition, the programme is fully consistent with IFAD's strategic objectives as
outlined in the new results-based country strategic opportunities programme (RB-
COSOP) for El Salvador, which are as follows: (i) improve family farmers’ access to
resources, technologies and information to enable them to develop more
sustainable agriculture and adapt better to climate change; (ii) promote economic
empowerment of youth, rural women and indigenous peoples; and (iii) contribute
to the Government’s efforts to make public spending and investments in rural
areas more efficient, effective and equitable.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
10. During the first stage, the programme area will include the four departments

comprising El Salvador's Eastern region – La Unión, Usulután, San Miguel and
Morazán – and the 87 municipalities that lie within them. In view of their condition
of poverty and climate change vulnerability, first priority will be given to the
municipalities located in the region's north and central areas, followed by those
located in the south, in accordance with national and sector priorities. The eastern
region forms part of the dry corridor and is subject to cyclical drought, which is one
of the main causes of social, environmental, productive and economic crisis and
catastrophe.

11. The target group includes rural people living in poverty in the eastern region who
have productive and associative potential. The programme will pursue three
strategies to reach the target population: (i) a value chains-based strategy; (ii) a
targeting strategy based on selection by participating organizations; and (iii) a
social targeting strategy based on selection of families and people in the most
excluded groups: women, youth and indigenous people.



EB 2015/LOT/P.34

3

12. Through their participation in organizations, and on an individual basis in the case
of young people and adults participating in the technical training programme, a
total of 8,300 families will benefit directly and an estimated 32,000 people will
benefit directly and indirectly. Direct beneficiaries will be mainly women or men
heads of household, young people and women, acting as representatives for
purposes of the programme. Indirect beneficiaries will be members of the direct
representatives' families, estimated at four people per family.

13. Women account for 40 per cent of all direct beneficiaries of Rural Adelante, young
people 20 per cent and indigenous people 5 per cent. In the case of young people,
equal numbers of men and women are included to continue encouraging egalitarian
participation by both groups and the creation of a more equitable new generation
ready to take over.

B. Programme development objective
14. The development objective of Rural Adelante is to sustainably increase the incomes

of poor rural families in the departments of San Miguel, Usulután, La Unión and
Morazán and facilitate their adaptation to climate change. The programme will have
achieved its objective when at least 8,300 families (33,200 beneficiaries) have
received services under the project, 5,900 families with business plans have
improved their incomes1 and 5,000 producers (20,000 beneficiaries) have been
provided with more climate change-resilient organizational business plans.

C. Components/outcomes
15. The programme is structured in four interrelated components:

(a) Capacity-building for sustainable production adapted to climate
change. The objective of this component is to improve research, extension,
education and training services to develop priority value chains under a
climate change adaptation approach. The component seeks to generate
knowledge by: (i) setting up a climate information service; (ii) conducting
technology research and innovation; (iii) developing climate change
adaptation plans; and (iv) strengthening human talent. The latter includes
two actions: (i) developing training for producers linked to value chains; and
(ii) designing and implementing a technical training programme for young
people and adults.

(b) Competitive, sustainable and inclusive value chain development. The
objective of this component is to promote sustainable market access by
target groups – smallholder farmers, women, youth and indigenous people –
as a way of raising the incomes of poor rural families. To this end, a
competitive, inclusive and sustainable value chains approach will be
promoted, based on market demand. The expected outcome is for
organizations to make the necessary improvements to sell high quality
products demanded by the market. The programme will encourage value
chain actors – input suppliers, technical assistance and training providers,
financial service providers, private and public collection and
commercialization centres and marketers – to achieve more efficient
coordination and enter into strategic partnerships to strengthen links and
support services.

(c) Strengthening the public policy framework for rural development. The
objective of this component is to strengthen the institutional and policy
framework for rural development. This will be based on policy analysis,
formulation and implementation in connection with selected value chains –
with policies on gender, rural youth and indigenous peoples, the environment
and climate change adaptation. To this end, support will be provided for the
functional capacities of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (MAG), the
National Youth Institute (INJUVE), municipalities, and associations of

1 Measured by gross income increased by 100 per cent for one or more years, taking into account diversified income sources associated
with the programme.



EB 2015/LOT/P.34

4

producers, rural youth, women and indigenous peoples. The expected
outcome is strengthened capacities of women, rural youth and indigenous
peoples, to improve their participation in the rural development public policy
cycle.

(d) Programme management and M&E. This component covers programme
management and administration, and includes M&E.

III. Programme implementation
A. Approach
16. The programme approach is based on three pillars promoting sustainable action:

competitiveness, inclusion and sustainability. These provide the frame of reference
or approach guiding the strategic and operational decisions to be taken to achieve
the objectives and expected outcomes, i.e. they provide the elements that
determine whether a programme action can be included in accordance with these
three pillars.

17. Competitiveness refers to increased capacity on the part of organizations, families
and people to participate in markets for goods and services around selected value
chains with the required quality, quantity and frequency. Inclusion, besides
covering differences in gender, culture and economic sector of provenance, seeks
to create and defend a level playing field – equal conditions and opportunities for
all in accessing resources, opportunities, and participatory and decision-making
platforms under the programme. Sustainability calls for directing all programme
actions to respect and guarantee environmental quality, in order to avoid
environmental degradation, conserve and protect natural resources, promote the
generation and use of climate change adapted technologies, and employ mitigation
measures to address natural disasters and risk management, resulting in a
population with greater resilience to environmental risks.

B. Organizational framework
18. Responsibility for programme implementation will reside with Ministry of

Agriculture and Livestock. Setting up the programme management unit (PMU),
which will have functional autonomy but report to the Ministry of Agriculture and
Livestock, will be the responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock as
the implementing agency, through the Rural Development Directorate (DGDR). The
PMU will be headed up by programme management. Implementation will also
involve the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) as the agency
administering resources and specialized service providers, which will include among
its activities a capacity-building strategy for the Ministry of Agriculture and
Livestock in procurement.

19. The PMU will have a structure comprising a general manager, five advisory units
(administrative and financial; communication; capacity-building; inclusion, gender
and planning; and M&E and knowledge management). In addition, there will be
three specialists in thematic areas performing a coordination role: environment and
climate change adaptation, rural business and public policy. The PMU will have, as
part of financial administration, an administrator, an accountant, a procurement
specialist, an accounting assistant, a financial assistant responsible for the
integrated financial administration system (SAFI) and a logistics officer.

20. To implement the programme and its components, the PMU will enter into the
necessary agreements with local, national, public and private entities. To this end,
selection and accreditation processes will take place for service providers based on
value chain needs and strategies, organizational business plans and other
initiatives.



EB 2015/LOT/P.34

5

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

21. The programme will design and implement a planning and monitoring system to
serve as a management instrument to facilitate platforms for learning, exchange of
experiences, best practices and results dissemination, and generate updated
relevant information on programme performance, with an emphasis on results
measurement (outputs, outcomes and impact).

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
22. The DGDR of the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock, through the PMU

administrative and financial unit, will be responsible for the programme's financial
management – including the annual workplan, flow of funds, disbursements,
internal controls, accounting, financial reporting and audit. In addition, to improve
funds management, the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock will sign an
agreement with UNDP, which will support the programme in resource
administration and procurement. The programme will record accounting
transactions in SAFI.

23. Flow of funds. The borrower/recipient, through MAG, will open a designated
account exclusively for the loan proceeds and another designated account
exclusively for the ASAP grant proceeds at the Central Reserve Bank of El Salvador.

24. Procurement. Procurement of goods and contracting for works and consulting
services under the programme will be conducted in accordance with the guidelines
on the procurement of goods and contracting of works and services for IFAD
projects (IFAD guidelines).

25. UNDP will support the programme in procurement processes, and the agreement
between the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock and UNDP will cover capacity-
building activities to strengthen the procurement area within the Ministry of
Agriculture and Livestock.

26. Audit. The annual consolidated financial statements will be audited each year by
an independent auditor in accordance with IFAD guidelines on project audits. All
project accounts will be audited, including those designated for loan funds, grant
funds and national counterpart funds. The audit reports will be delivered to IFAD
six months after the end of each fiscal year.

D. Supervision
27. IFAD will provide direct supervision of the programme. Implementation support will

be provided from the outset of the programme to prepare properly for start-up.
IFAD and the borrower will perform a midterm review following year three.

IV. Programme costs, financing, benefits
A. Programme costs
28. The programme will have a total cost of approximately US$18.69 million, including

contingencies. Component 1 will involve an expense of US$3.64 million, equivalent
to 19 per cent, and component 2 will cost US$10.46 million, representing 56 per
cent of total investment. Component 3 will involve an expense of approximately
US$1.22 million, representing 7 per cent of the total. Finally, component 4 will cost
approximately US$3.37 million, or 18 per cent.



EB 2015/LOT/P.34

6

Table 1
Programme costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD loan ASAP grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

Counterpart Total

Component Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Capacity-building for sustainable
production adapted to climate
change

3 642 100 3 642 19

2. Competitive, sustainable and
inclusive value chain development

8 195 78 1 203 12 1 062 10 10 460 56

3. Strengthening the public policy
framework for rural development

992 81 155 13 72 6 1 219 7

4. Programme management and
M&E

2 940 87 428 13 3 368 18

Total 12 127 65 5 000 27 1 062 5 500 3 18 689 100

B. Programme financing
29. The combined programme financing breaks down as follows by financier: the

borrower will contribute US$500,000 (3 per cent), the IFAD loan will provide
approximately US$12.13 million (65 per cent), the ASAP grant will provide US$5.00
million (27 per cent), and the beneficiaries will contribute approximately US$1.06
million (5 per cent) in cash and in kind.

Table 2
Programme costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category

IFAD loan ASAP grant Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Vehicles, equipment and materials 456 91 42 9% 498 3

2. Technical assistance/ institutional
agreements

497 1 2404 83 2 901 16

3. Technical assistance/ service
agreements

3 248 93% 155 4 72 2 3 475 19

4. Subsidies/ rural business 5 712 64 2 203 25 1 062 12 8 977 48

5. Salaries/ operating costs 2 214 78 238 8 386 14 2 838 15

Total 12 127 65 5 000 27 1 062 6 500 3 18 689 100

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
30. The cost-benefit methodology was used for the economic analysis, based on a

calculation of the flow of net incremental annual benefits for the selected 10-year
period. The cost-benefit or profitability analysis was done using the internal rate of
return (IRR) and net present value (NPV). The IRR was calculated on the basis of
the economic flow of funds generated by Rural Adelante (economic IRR). Generally
a project is considered economically viable if the IRR exceeds the opportunity cost
of capital, 12 per cent in the case of this programme. In calculating the IRR,
economic benefits and costs for a 10-year period were taken into account.

31. The financial IRR for the programme overall is 20 per cent with an NPV of US$6.40
million, and US$22.20 million if the NPV is calculated for a 20-year period.

D. Sustainability
32. Since the Rural Adelante approach was put forward, plans have called for actions

and innovations to remain in place beyond the programme implementation period.
Specifically, sustainability is expected to be achieved once the target population is
able to replicate what is being proposed or implemented, and to go even further
upon achieving the capacity to continue developing innovations – i.e. the target
group has the potential to innovate by consciously making adjustments and
changes for their own benefit in the organizations and value chains in which they
participate. Equally, sustainability will have been achieved once the Ministry of



EB 2015/LOT/P.34

7

Agriculture and Livestock is replicating, improving upon and making adjustments to
innovations.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
33. The programme implementation risks identified have a low to medium probability

of occurring and little potential impact on achieving the objectives and expected
outcomes.

34. Among the main risks are: (i) natural and climate phenomena having a severe
impact on the eastern region; and (ii) an escalation of crime and violence in the
programme area.

35. Measures to mitigate these risks could include: (i) undertaking concrete risk
management actions to address natural and climate phenomena by Rural Adelante
and other IFAD projects operating in the region; and (ii) maintaining contingency
plans and clear safety regulations for programme staff and an ongoing dialogue
with the relevant authorities in the programme area.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
36. The programme proposal falls within the overarching goal of IFAD's Strategic

Framework 2011-2015 and contributes to achieving the strategic objectives to
improve access to services that contribute to poverty reduction and to promote
economic and natural assets that strengthen the resilience of disadvantaged rural
populations. In addition, the programme approach and implementation strategies
are aligned with IFAD's policies and strategies on policy dialogue, targeting rural
poor people, gender equality and women's empowerment, engagement with
indigenous peoples (including matters relating to free, prior and informed consent),
natural resource management and the environment, climate change, social,
environmental and climate evaluation procedures, rural finance and business
management risk, and knowledge management and innovation.

B. Harmonization and alignment
37. IFAD's priorities and interests in the country are aligned with the policies of the

Government of El Salvador. Areas of complementarity include economic
development; developing human potential; inclusion and equity, especially for
youth, women and indigenous people; sustainable production adapted to climate
change; government consultation with society by promoting dialogue and citizen
participation; and promoting results-based management.

38. Within the sector, IFAD is consistent with the priorities of promoting food
sovereignty and security; production development through value chains;
environmental sustainability and adaptation to climate change; developing family
farming; reactivating cooperatives and modernizing institutions.

39. In addition, the programme will directly address the strategic objectives of the RB-
COSOP 2015-2019.

C. Innovation and scaling up
40. For the Government of El Salvador and IFAD, this new operation offers an

opportunity to capitalize on the experiences of recent years around rural
development and rural poverty reduction in the eastern region. These experiences
include the Rural Development Project for the North-Eastern Region (PRODERNOR)
and the Rural Development and Modernization Project for the Eastern Region
(PRODEMORO) and, more recently, the Rural Territorial Competitiveness
Programme (Amanecer Rural) – in addition to participation in regional programmes
on, inter alia, gender, policy dialogue and remittances. IFAD's loans and grants
operations have generated significant human and social capital that is fundamental
to the qualitative leap the country intends to take in reactivating productive and
entrepreneurial capacity in rural areas by strengthening profitable economic
initiatives.



EB 2015/LOT/P.34

8

41. A new intervention in the eastern region is based on transforming the traditional
economic, social and environmental model, whereby the intention is to bring about
change with the following innovative elements: (i) targeting territory, organizations
and people coordinated under a single platform with a value chain orientation,
rather than on the isolated initiatives traditionally undertaken; (ii) competitiveness
and market demand driving value chains to generate income and permanent
quality employment and improve wellbeing; (iii) promoting collective participation
around a single chain in which various groups and actors come together as a
function of the market and strengthening business and financing criteria, such as
sustainability considerations; (iv) IFAD financing acting as a catalyst, distributed in
different proportions according to the expenditure category in the business plan
and the type of organization; (v) linking the target population with financial
services to reduce their dependence on nonreimbursable transfers, inculcating a
sustainable business rather than a welfare-based culture; (vi) developing value
chain businesses under an approach that protects natural resources, the
environment and adaptation to climate change; (vii) promoting inclusion and
equity in participation by young people, women and indigenous people as actors
that require support for their development.

D. Policy engagement
42. The programme will demonstrate experience with integrating public policy dialogue

around value chains at the regional level with other platforms for dialogue already
existing in the country, and with support for implementing public policies in support
of climate change adaptation and mainstreaming rural women, youth and
indigenous people.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
43. A financing agreement between the Republic of El Salvador and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/
beneficiary. A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an
appendix.

44. The Republic of El Salvador is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD and the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) Trust
Fund, through IFAD in its capacity as Trustee of the ASAP Trust Fund.

45. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria for IFAD.

VII. Recommendation
46. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolutions:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Republic of El Salvador in an amount equivalent to ten million eight hundred
fifty thousand euros (EUR 10,850,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that, under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP), the Fund shall provide a grant to the Republic of El
Salvador in an amount equivalent to three million five hundred sixty thousand
special drawing rights (SDR 3,560,000) and upon such terms and conditions
as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions
presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.34

1

Negotiated financing agreement

"Programa Nacional de Transformación Económica Rural
para el Buen Vivir - Rural Adelante"

(Negociaciones concluidas el 9 de octubre 2015)

Número del Préstamo: [insertar número]

Número de la Donación ASAP: [insertar número]

Programa Nacional de Transformación Económica Rural para el Buen Vivir - Rural
Adelante (el “Programa”)

El Fondo Internacional de Desarrollo Agrícola (el “Fondo” o el “FIDA”)

y

La República de El Salvador (el “Prestatario/Receptor”)

(cada uno de ellos por separado la “Parte” y los dos colectivamente las “Partes”),
acuerdan lo siguiente:

Preámbulo

CONSIDERANDO que la Junta Ejecutiva del FIDA en su 105º período de sesiones aprobó
la propuesta de creación del Fondo Fiduciario del Programa de Adaptación para la
Agricultura en Pequeña Escala (ASAP) del FIDA con el fin de financiar, en forma de
donaciones, componentes de la cartera básica de programas y programas financiados por
el FIDA para aumentar la capacidad de resiliencia de los agricultores en pequeña escala
al cambio climático en las cinco esferas principales de efectos del ASAP;

CONSIDERANDO que el Fondo ha acordado conceder un Préstamo y una Donación ASAP
al Prestatario/Receptor en los términos y condiciones establecidos en este Convenio;

CONSIDERANDO que el Prestatario/Receptor acepta que las actividades del Programa
sean financiadas de conformidad con el presente Convenio;

Las Partes acuerdan además lo siguiente:

Sección A

1. Los siguientes documentos conforman colectivamente este Convenio: el presente
documento, la Descripción del Programa y disposiciones de ejecución (Anexo 1), el
Cuadro de asignaciones (Anexo 2), y las Condiciones Generales para la Financiación del
Desarrollo Agrícola de fecha 29 abril de 2009 (las “Condiciones Generales”).

2. Las Condiciones Generales en sus sucesivas versiones enmendadas y cualquiera de
las disposiciones en ellas contempladas serán aplicables al presente Convenio. A los
efectos del presente Convenio, los términos definidos en las Condiciones Generales
tendrán el significado en ellas indicado.

3. El Fondo proporcionará un Préstamo y una Donación ASAP al Prestatario/Receptor,
que el mismo utilizará para ejecutar el Programa de acuerdo con los términos y
condiciones establecidos en el presente Convenio.



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.34

2

Sección B

1. A. El monto del Préstamo es de EUR 10 850 000 (Diez millones ochocientos
cincuenta mil euros).

B. El monto de la Donación ASAP es de DEG 3 560 000 (Tres millones quinientos
sesenta mil derechos especiales de giro).

2. El Préstamo se concede en condiciones ordinarias con un plazo de reembolso de
dieciocho (18) años, incluido un período de gracia de tres (3) años a partir de la fecha en
que el Fondo haya determinado que se han cumplido todas las condiciones previas para
el retiro de fondos. La tasa de interés será el tipo de interés variable de referencia que
determine el FIDA para préstamos en euro, que actualmente está basado en el EURIBOR
a seis meses más un margen variable.

3. La Moneda de Pago del Servicio del Préstamo será el Euro (EUR).

4. El Ejercicio Financiero o Fiscal del Prestatario/Receptor aplicable será del 1º de
enero al 31 de diciembre.

5. Los pagos del capital y los intereses serán pagaderos cada 15 de abril y 15 de
octubre. El capital será pagadero en 30 plazos semestrales comenzando 3 años después
de la fecha de cumplimiento de las condiciones generales y adicionales previas para el
retiro de los fondos. En dicho momento el FIDA comunicará al Prestatario/Receptor el
calendario de amortización correspondiente.

6. El Prestatario/Receptor, a través del Organismo Responsable del Programa,
proporcionará financiación de contrapartida por un monto equivalente a quinientos mil
dólares de los Estados Unidos de América (USD 500 000) para la financiación de
actividades. Adicionalmente a dicho monto, el Prestatario cubrirá los cargos por concepto
de impuestos para los bienes y servicios adquiridos con cargo a la Financiación.

7. El Prestatario/Receptor, a través del Ministerio de Agricultura y Ganadería (MAG),
abrirá en el Banco Central de Reserva de El Salvador, una Cuenta Designada
exclusivamente para los recursos de Préstamo y otra Cuenta Designada exclusivamente
para los recursos de la Donación ASAP. Ambas serán denominadas en dólares de los
Estados Unidos de América.

Sección C

1. El Organismo Responsable del Programa será el Ministerio de Agricultura y
Ganadería (MAG) del Prestatario/Receptor.

2. La ejecución del Programa se llevará a cabo por el MAG a través de la UGP descrita
en el Anexo 1.

3. El MAG por sí mismo o a través de las instancias que determine y en acuerdo con el
Fondo, llevará a cabo la Revisión de Medio Término como se especifica en la Sección 8.03
b) y c) de las Condiciones Generales, pudiendo las partes acordar otra fecha para llevar a
cabo la Revisión de Medio Término de la ejecución del Programa.

4. La Fecha de Terminación del Programa será el quinto aniversario de la fecha de
entrada en vigor del presente Convenio.



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.34

3

Sección D

1. El Fondo gestionará la contabilidad interna de las cuentas del Préstamo y de la
Donación ASAP y los desembolsos de los mismos y supervisará directamente el
Programa.

Sección E

1. Se considera que es motivo adicional a los previstos en las Condiciones Generales,
para la suspensión del presente Convenio: que cualquiera de las disposiciones del Manual
de Operaciones del Programa hayan sido objeto de cesión, renuncia, suspensión,
revocación, enmienda u otra modificación sin el acuerdo previo del Fondo, y éste haya
determinado, previa consulta con el Prestatario/Receptor, que tal cesión, renuncia,
suspensión, revocación, enmienda o modificación ha tenido, o es probable que tenga,
consecuencias adversas sustanciales para el Programa.

2. Se considera que son condiciones generales adicionales previas para el retiro de
fondos que:

a) El/la Gerente y Administrador del Programa haya sido seleccionado y
nombrado de acuerdo a lo establecido en el Anexo 1, sección II de este
Convenio.

b) Se disponga de un borrador del Manual Operativo del Programa aceptable
para el Fondo.

c) El Prestatario/Receptor, a través del MAG, haya abierto las Cuentas
Designadas en el Banco Central de Reserva de El Salvador.

d) Se hayan asignado, cuando corresponda, los fondos de contrapartida que se
utilizarán para cada año durante la ejecución del Programa, en el presupuesto
general del Prestatario/Receptor.

e) Se haya firmado el acuerdo con el administrador de recursos conforme al
Anexo 1, sección II de este Convenio.

3. El Prestatario/Receptor designa al Ministro de Hacienda como su representante a
los efectos de la Sección 15.03 de las Condiciones Generales, salvo con respecto a
aquellos asuntos que se indican en el siguiente numeral.

4. Representante para la ejecución del Proyecto.  El Prestatario/receptor designa al
Ministro de Agricultura y Ganadería como su representante a los efectos de la Sección
15.03 de las Condiciones Generales con respecto a:

a) Los retiros de la Cuenta del Préstamo y de la Donación ASAP (Sección 4.02 a
4.04, inclusive, y 4.08 de las Condiciones Generales).

b) Todos los demás asuntos relacionados con la ejecución del Programa y la
presentación de informes (Sección C y E del presente Convenio y Artículos VII,
VIII ,IX y X de las Condiciones Generales).



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.34

4

5. Se indican a continuación los representantes designados:

Por el FIDA:

Kanayo F. Nwanze
Presidente
Fondo Internacional de Desarrollo
Agrícola

Por el Prestatario/Receptor:

Carlos Enrique Cáceres Chávez
Ministro de Hacienda

Orestes Fredesman Ortez Andrade
Ministro de Agricultura y Ganadería

6. El presente Convenio de Financiación está sujeto a aprobación legislativa del
Prestatario/Receptor para su entrada en vigor.

7. Se indican las direcciones que han de usarse para el intercambio de comunicaciones
(avisos, notificaciones, solicitudes, e informes, entre otros) relacionadas con el presente
Convenio:

Por el FIDA:

Fondo Internacional de Desarrollo
Agrícola
Via Paolo di Dono, 44
00142 Roma, Italia

Por el Prestatario/Receptor:

Ministerio de Hacienda
Boulevard de Los Héroes No. 1231, San
Salvador, República de
El Salvador

Con copia a:
Ministerio de Agricultura y Ganadería
Final 1ª Av. Norte, 13 Calle Oriente y Av.
Manuel Gallardo, Santa Tecla, La Libertad,
República de El Salvador



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.34

5

El presente Convenio, ha sido elaborado en idioma español en dos (2) ejemplares, uno
(1) de los cuales es para el FIDA y uno (1) para el Prestatario/Receptor.

REPÚBLICA DE EL SALVADOR

___________________________________
Representante Autorizado

FONDO INTERNACIONAL DE DESARROLLO AGRÍCOLA

_____________________
Kanayo F. Nwanze
Presidente



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.34

6

Anexo 1

Descripción del Programa y disposiciones de ejecución

I. Descripción del Programa

1. Población-objetivo. La población-objetivo del Programa incluye a la población rural
en condición de pobreza de la región Oriental, con potencial productivo y asociativo. El
Programa utilizará tres estrategias para alcanzar su población objetivo: i) una estrategia
basada en cadenas de valor, ii) una estrategia de focalización basada en la selección de
las organizaciones participantes y iii) una estrategia de focalización social basada en la
selección de familias y personas de los grupos más excluidos: mujeres, jóvenes e
indígenas.

2. Meta y área el Programa. La meta del programa es “contribuir a reducir la pobreza
rural en la Región Oriental de El Salvador”, que comprende los Departamentos de San
Miguel, Usulután, La Unión y Morazán. El área del Programa podrá modificarse de común
acuerdo entre las Partes siempre que se tenga en cuenta los criterios de selección
iniciales.

3. Objetivos. El objetivo de desarrollo del Programa es “incrementar de forma
sostenible los ingresos de familias rurales en condición de pobreza en los Departamentos
de San Miguel, Usulután, La Unión y Morazán y facilitar su adaptación al cambio
climático”.

4. Componentes. El Programa consta de tres (3) componentes:

Componente 1. Fortalecimiento de capacidades para la producción sustentable con
adaptación al cambio climático:

El objetivo de este componente es mejorar servicios de investigación, extensión,
educación y capacitación para el desarrollo de las cadenas priorizadas, bajo un
enfoque de adaptación al cambio climático.

Las acciones programadas bajo este componente incluyen entre otros:

i) El establecimiento de un servicio de información climática;

ii) La realización de investigaciones e innovaciones tecnológicas;

iii) El desarrollo de planes de adaptación al cambio climático;

iv) El fortalecimiento del talento humano.  Esta última incluye dos actividades:
a) el desarrollo de una oferta de capacitación para productores vinculados con
las cadenas y b) el diseño e implementación de un programa de formación
técnica para jóvenes y adultos.

Componente 2. Desarrollo de Cadenas de Valor Competitivas, Sustentables e
Inclusivas

El objetivo del componente es promover el acceso sostenible de la población
objetiva a mercados, como un mecanismo para el incremento de ingresos de
familias rurales en condición de pobreza. Para tal fin, se promoverá un enfoque de
cadenas de valor competitivas, inclusivas y sustentables, basado en la demanda del
mercado.



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.34

7

Las acciones programadas bajo este componente incluyen entre otros:

i) La promoción de alianzas estratégicas para fortalecer los eslabones y servicios
de apoyo a la cadena;

ii) El desarrollo de condiciones en las organizaciones para que puedan auto-
gestionar la planificación de su negocio a través del Plan de Negocio de la
Organización (PNO);

iii) El fortalecimiento de capacidades a todos los niveles de las organizaciones y
en todos los aspectos.

Componente 3. Fortalecimiento del marco de políticas públicas de desarrollo rural

El componente tiene como objetivo fortalecer el marco de políticas e institucional
para el desarrollo rural.  A través de este se apoyará en el análisis, formulación e
implementación de políticas relacionadas con cadenas de valor seleccionadas, con
las políticas de género, juventud rural y poblaciones indígenas y las de medio
ambiente y adaptación al cambio climático. Se espera fortalecer las capacidades de
mujeres, la juventud rural y población indígena, para mejorar su participación en el
ciclo de las políticas públicas de desarrollo rural.

Las acciones programadas bajo este componente incluyen entre otras:

i) El diálogo de políticas públicas conectado a las cadenas;

ii) El diseño/implementación de la estrategia sectorial de adaptación al cambio ;

iii) El fortalecimiento institucional del INJUVE;

iv) La asistencia en políticas al MAG/OPPS para aplicar políticas nacionales de
género, juventud y poblaciones indígenas, en el área rural;

v) La promoción y realización de asambleas nacionales de jóvenes rurales como
también de foros regionales para mujeres y poblaciones indígenas.

II. Disposiciones de ejecución

1. Organismo Responsable del Programa

1.1 Designación. El Prestatario/Receptor designa como Organismo Responsable del
Programa al Ministerio de Agricultura y Ganadería (MAG).

1.2 Responsabilidades. El MAG será el responsable de la ejecución general del
Programa. El MAG, a través de la Dirección General de Desarrollo Rural (DGDR),
será la encargada de conformar la Unidad de Gestión del Programa (UGP), que
contará con autonomía de funcionamiento para su ejecución, pero responderá al
MAG, como unidad ejecutora del financiamiento. En la práctica, el Programa será
implementado por la UGP.

2 La Unidad de Gestión del Programa

2.1 La UGP estará dirigida por la gerencia del Programa. La DGDR asistirá a la UGP
para gestionar, ejecutar, supervisar y evaluar el Programa.

2.2 La UGP contará con una estructura conformada por: un Gerente General; cinco
unidades a nivel asesor (uno para el área específica: Administrativa-financiera,
Comunicación, Desarrollo de capacidades, Inclusión y género y Planificación,
seguimiento, evaluación y gestión del conocimiento). El Manual de Operaciones



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.34

8

detallará la estructura de la UGP. Adicionalmente se contará con tres especialistas
de áreas temáticas los cuales tendrán una función de coordinación, estas son:
Ambiente y adaptación al cambio climático, Negocios rurales y Políticas públicas.

2.3 Todo el personal del Programa será contratado mediante procesos públicos,
transparentes y competitivos, que se llevarán a cabo a través del PNUD como
administrador de los recursos del Programa.

2.4 La UGP estará establecida en la ciudad de San Miguel y podrán establecerse sedes
regionales durante la ejecución, para responder a las necesidades de las cadenas.

Las principales funciones de la UGP serán:

a. Presentar al FIDA y al MAG los informes anuales, semestrales y especiales
de ejecución.

b. Presentar al Fondo las solicitudes de desembolsos, los informes financieros,
y los informes anuales de auditoria.

c. Verificar que el Programa se ejecute dentro de los plazos, las normas y las
condiciones contractuales acordadas con el FIDA.

d. Preparar los planes operativos anuales, de inversión y presentar las bases
al PNUD para las adquisiciones, así como los reportes de avance en
coordinación con los procedimientos establecidos por el FIDA.

e. Coordinar con los representantes del FIDA la supervisión y todos los
aspectos relacionados con la ejecución y asegurar la comunicación y
coordinación permanente entre los diferentes actores e instancias.

f. Realizar el seguimiento y evaluación de la ejecución de los (PN) Planes de
Negocios y el alcance de objetivos con todas las actividades ejecutadas.

g. Instalar un sistema electrónico de seguimiento y evaluación en
coordinación con técnicos del MAG.

h. Llevar registro de todas las actividades técnicas y financieras llevadas a
cabo bajo el financiamiento del Programa.

i. Preparar el Manual de Operaciones del Programa y llevar a cabo las
actualizaciones del documento cuando corresponda.

j. Abrir las cuentas del Programa.

3 Comités de evaluación/aprobación

3.1 El Programa contará con dos comités de evaluación/aprobación de propuestas de
planes de negocio (PNO):

Comité de Evaluación Técnica (CET). El Comité de Evaluación Técnica (CET) será
el encargado de garantizar la pertinencia, la viabilidad técnica productiva,
económica, financiera y ambiental de los PNO.

Comité de Aprobación de Propuestas (CAP). El Comité de Aprobación de
Propuestas (CAP) realizará la aprobación final de los PNO, mediante un acto
público.

3.2 También se contará con un Comité responsable de la selección de estudiantes y
otorgamiento de becas y pasantías, del Programa de Formación Técnica, que
incluirá la participación de jóvenes.



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.34

9

3.3 El financiamiento de los PNO a las organizaciones será no reembolsable. Las
organizaciones suscribirán convenios para la ejecución de los PNO y la
administración de las transferencias del Programa.

4 Acuerdo de administración de recursos

Se suscribirá un acuerdo entre el MAG y el Programa de Naciones Unidas para el
Desarrollo (PNUD), para la administración de recursos. El Prestatario/Receptor, a
través del MAG, firmará un convenio que normará las relaciones entre el MAG y el
PNUD, determinando claramente las condiciones de transferencia y administración
de los recursos financieros y servicios, tales como: procesos de adquisiciones y
contrataciones; y pagos de bienes o servicios. Todas las operaciones, compras,
licitaciones entre otras, se realizarán compatiblemente con las normas y
procedimientos del Fondo. La suscripción del convenio entre el MAG y el PNUD
estará sujeta a la previa no objeción del Fondo.

5 Manual Operativo del Programa

5.1 El Manual de Ejecución o Manual Operativo del Programa (MOP) tendrá como
propósito definir el marco conceptual, institucional, normativo y técnico del
Programa, así como los niveles de responsabilidad de las instancias e instituciones
involucradas en su implementación. Asimismo, se definen las responsabilidades,
los procedimientos operativos, administrativos y financieros, y acciones que son
necesarias para su implementación, bajo un esquema flexible sujeto a los ajustes
que se definirán entre las partes facultadas para ello. El MOP será de uso
obligatorio para todos los funcionarios, directivos, técnicos, personal de las
diferentes instituciones responsables del cumplimiento de los objetivos del
Programa; así como de las organizaciones e instituciones públicas participantes.
Deberá ser elaborado por la Unidad de Gestión del Programa (UGP) y aprobado
por el MAG, el cual tendrá la responsabilidad de trasladarlo al FIDA para su no
objeción final.

5.2 En los casos que se requiera incluir modificaciones al MOP, éstas deberán ser
igualmente aprobadas por el MAG y la UGP, previa recomendación del FIDA y
posterior no objeción.



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.34

10

Anexo 2
Cuadro de Asignaciones

1. Asignación de los recursos del Préstamo y de la Donación ASAP. a) En el cuadro
que figura a continuación se presentan las Categorías de Gastos Admisibles que se
financiarán con cargo al Préstamo y Donación ASAP y la asignación de los montos a cada
Categoría, así como los porcentajes de los gastos correspondientes a los rubros que se
financiarán en cada Categoría:

Categorías

Monto del
Préstamo
asignado

(expresado en
EUR)

Monto de la
Donación ASAP

asignado
(expresado en

DEG)

Porcentaje de
financiación

1. Vehículos, equipos y
materiales

370 000 100% sin impuestos

2. Asistencia
Técnica/consultorías
(Convenios institucionales)

400 000 1 540 000 100% sin impuestos

3. Asistencia
Técnica/consultorías
(contratos de servicios)

2 610 000 100 000 100% sin impuestos

4. Negocios Rurales
(donaciones y
subvenciones)

4 600 000 1 410 000 100% de gastos totales

5. Salarios y costos
operativos

1 780 000 150 000

100% de gastos totales
para los salarios y 100%
sin impuestos para los

costos operativos

Sin asignación 1 090 000 360 000

TOTAL 10 850 000 3 560 000

b) Algunos de los términos que se emplean en el cuadro de asignaciones se
definen a continuación:

i. Asistencia Técnica/consultorías (convenios institucionales): Esta categoría se
refiere a los convenios institucionales entre el Programa e instituciones para
actividades de adaptación al cambio climático y de apoyo al marco de políticas
públicas de desarrollo rural.

ii. Asistencia Técnica/consultorías (contratos de servicios): Esta categoría se refiere
a los contratos de servicios entre el Programa y proveedores de servicios para
actividades de fortalecimiento de las organizaciones beneficiarias en aspectos
organizacionales, productivos, agregado de valor y de acceso a mercados.

iii. Negocios Rurales (donaciones y subvenciones): Esta categoría se refiere a los
fondos transferidos por el Programa a las organizaciones de beneficiarios para la
implementación de los planes de negocios.

El detalle de estas definiciones se incluirá en el Manual de Operaciones del Programa.



Appendix I EB 2015/LOT/P.34

11

2. Costos de puesta en marcha. El retiro de fondos de la cuenta del Préstamo respecto
de los costos de puesta en marcha realizados antes de satisfacer las condiciones previas
para el retiro no deberán exceder un monto total de USD 200 000 para la categoría 5
"Salarios y costos operativos", para financiar costos asociados con la contratación del
personal clave, la elaboración del MOP e la implementación del sistema contable.



1
2

Marco Lógico

Descripción resumida Indicadores básicos de resultados Medios de verificación Periodicidad/Responsable Hipótesis (H) / Riesgos (R)

Meta

Contribuir a reducir la pobreza rural en la
Región Oriental de El Salvador

Al finalizar el Programa:
 Reducción porcentual de la pobreza (3% en pobreza extrema)
 Los hogares,  en promedio,  incrementan los activos en un 10%, respecto a la

línea base (RIMS)
 % de reducción en la desnutrición infantil (RIMS)

 Línea de base
 Informes de pobreza
 Evaluaciones RIMS
 Evaluación final del

proyecto

 Año 5 del proyecto/MAG  Los objetivos, metas y
acciones priorizadas por el
Gobierno en las políticas
nacionales se mantienen

Objetivo de desarrollo del proyecto

Incrementar de forma sostenible los
ingresos de familias rurales en condición
de pobreza en los Departamentos de San
Miguel, Usulután, La Unión y Morazán y
facilitar su adaptación al cambio climático

Al finalizar el Programa:
 33.200 beneficiarios - 8300 familias (20% jóvenes, 40% mujeres, 5% indígenas)

reciben servicios del proyecto (RIMS 1.8.1)
 5900 familias con PN incrementan los ingresos a/
 20.000 beneficiarios - 5000 productores atendidos con PNO más resilientes al

cambio climático (RIMS 1.8.5) b/

 Línea de base sobre
ingresos

 Estudios  evaluativos
de ingresos

 Anualmente/MAG

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

 El compromiso político con
el sector  productivo
agrícola mantiene su
importancia como eje
dinamizador de bienestar
económico y social.

 Los fenómenos naturales y
climáticos en la región
Oriental se dan con poca
frecuencia y baja magnitud.

 La criminalidad y  violencia
en el país y la región se
mantiene en niveles
controlados.

Efecto directo 1/Componente 1
Instituciones públicas (MAG, CENTA, ENA,
MARN) cuentan con mayor capacidad
para transferir tecnologías de adaptación
al cambio climático (ACC), asociado a las
cadenas de valor

Al finalizar el Programa:
 100% de instituciones participantes han mejorado sus capacidades para transferir

tecnologías con ACC, respecto a la línea base c/
 5000 productores utilizan información climática para la toma de decisiones

 Línea de base
 Evaluaciones sobre

capacidades
institucionales

 Anualmente/MAG
 Año 3 y Año 5 del

proyecto/MAG

Efecto directo 2/Componente 1
Las organizaciones y los actores públicos y

privados regionales desarrollan
planes de gestión de riesgos
climáticos

Al finalizar el Programa:
 Al menos 60% de los planes de gestión de riesgo climático en funcionamiento

 Evaluación final
 Informes de

seguimiento

 Año 5 del proyecto/MAG
 Anualmente/MAG

Efecto directo 3/Componente 1

Personas (jóvenes, adultas)  preparadas
para el empleo en cadenas de valor con
ACC

Al finalizar el programa:
 Al menos un 40% de las personas formadas cuentan con empleo/autoempleo

(25% en organizaciones apoyadas) d/

 Registros de empleos
de las organizaciones

 Evaluación sobre
empleo

 Anualmente/MAG

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

 Existe interés  de la
población joven al trabajo
productivo ante opciones de
migración y remesas

Efecto directo 1/Componente 2

Actores regionales coordinan estrategias
para el desarrollo de las cadenas de valor

Al finalizar el Programa:
 Al menos 5 propuestas para mejorar el desempeño de las cadenas en la región

implementadas (según estrategias)
 100% de representantes de organizaciones con capacidades mejoradas para la

participación activa en las mesas  de las cadenas, respecto a la línea base

 Documentos de
alianzas establecidas

 Evaluación final

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

 Año 5 del proyecto/MAG

A
p
p
en

d
ix

II
E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.3

4



1
3

Descripción resumida Indicadores básicos de resultados Medios de verificación Periodicidad/Responsable Hipótesis (H) / Riesgos (R)

Efecto directo 2/Componente 2
Organizaciones cuentan con condiciones
para la planificación de negocios

Al finalizar el Programa
 100% de organizaciones (20% jóvenes, 40% mujeres, 5% indígenas) con

condiciones mejoradas para la planificación de negocios e/
 100% de organizaciones con habilidades para la identificación y gestión de

riesgos ambientales y climáticos (RIMS 2.6.5)
 5000 productores han adoptado tecnologías de adaptación al cambio climático
 Al menos 50% de organizaciones (tipos A,B) con acceso a servicios financieros f/
 Al menos 1 institución financiera (IF) con oferta de servicios adecuada, según el

grupo objetivo,  en implementación

 Estudio evaluativo
 Registros de

organizaciones/person
as con crédito

 Informes de
capacitación

 Ofertas de servicios de
IF

 Año 3 del proyecto/MAG
 Año 2, 3, 4 y 5 del

proyecto/MAG

 Anualmente/MAG

 Anualmente/MAG

 Factores (externos)
económicos que afecten la
producción y la
productividad agrícola, y/o
que desaceleren la
economía se mantienen
estables

Efecto directo 3/Componente 2
Organizaciones acceden mercados de
forma competitiva y sostenible

 60% de organizaciones con acceso a mercados mejorado g/
 Al menos 80% de organizaciones reportan mejora en la calidad de los productos
 Al menos 40% de organizaciones agregan valor a sus productos (prácticas BPM,

procesamiento básico)
 70% de locales de almacenamiento, comercialización y transformación en

funcionamiento (RIMS 2.4.3)

 Línea de base

 Evaluación final
 Informes de

infraestructura

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

 Año 5 del proyecto/MAG
 Anualmente/MAG

Efecto directo 1/Componente 3
Las organizaciones y los actores públicos y
privados fortalecen el diálogo de políticas
públicas en torno a las cadenas de valor

Al finalizar el Programa
 500 personas representantes de organizaciones (50% mujeres) y 50 funcionarios

de instituciones públicas cuentan con capacidades mejoradas para el diálogo de
políticas públicas, respecto a la línea  base

 100% de Instituciones del sector público participantes con capacidades
mejoradas para el diálogo de política sobre cadenas  de valor

 100% de propuestas de remoción de barreras  regulatorias identificadas por las
mesas insertadas en el dialogo de políticas nacionales

 Estudios evaluativos

 Informes de
seguimiento

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

 Anualmente/MAG

 Existe una coordinación
favorable por parte del
gobierno para el desarrollo
de las políticas a nivel
nacional y regional

Efecto directo 2/Componente 3
El sector público (MAG, MARN, INJUVE,
Municipalidades)  fortalecido en la
aplicación de políticas públicas para el
desarrollo rural y cambio climático

Al finalizar el Programa:
 Fomento de instrumentos de  políticas ambientales y de ACC  favorables a la

población rural pobre (RIMS 1.6.12)h/
 Fomento de políticas favorables a jóvenes, mujeres e indígenas (RIMS 2.61) i/
 MAG/OPPS, INJUVE y municipalidades con capacidades fortalecidas en

implementación de políticas públicas para el sector rural

 Informes de
seguimiento

 Documentos de
instrumentos
elaborados

 Anualmente/MAG

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

Efecto directo 3/ Componente 3
La juventud, mujeres e indígenas del área
rural fortalecen sus capacidades para
participar en el diálogo de políticas
públicas

 120 representantes de las organizaciones cuentan con capacidades mejoradas
para el diálogo de políticas.

 Línea de base

 Evaluación final

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

 Año 5 del proyecto/MAG

. *Datos según hombre, mujer, grupo etario, población indígena, Departamento, Municipio.
a/ Medido según ingresos (brutos) incrementados, en promedio, un 100% por un año o más, y considerando las fuentes de ingresos (diversificación) asociadas al Programa.
b/ Un productor aumenta su resiliencia al cambio climático si se cumple al menos dos de las siguientes condiciones i ) que utiliza información sobre el clima difundido por el proyecto, ii ) que implementa las actividades de
adaptación al cambio climático en el contexto de un plan de negocios cofinanciado por el proyecto , iii ) sus tierras o activos están cubiertos por un uno de los 10 riesgos climáticos y el plan de manejo de recursos naturales con el
apoyo del proyecto , iv ) que se encuentra en una de las 10 comunidades locales cuya planificación incluye el tema del cambio climático a través del apoyo del proyecto.
c/ Indicadores sustentadores (medidos antes y después) para cada institución participante, según variables (Ej. i) conocimientos/habilidades y destrezas, ii) aspectos operativos (equipamiento, software, materiales)
d/ Empleo: Cuando una persona al servicio de otra (patrono, empleador), mediante un contrato realiza su actividad profesional en forma continua a cambio de una remuneración o salario.
e/ Indicadores sustentadores: organizaciones identifican prioridades participativamente, formulan propuestas y gestionan alianzas con actores de la cadena
f/ Indicadores sustentadores: 50% organizaciones cuentan con créditos aprobados para la organización y/o para los asociados
g/ Indicadores sustentadores: Al menos 80% de organizaciones (familias) reportan incrementos en el valor de las ventas por  uno o más años, 40%  diversificado canales de comercialización
h/ Al menos un instrumento/proceso de política ambiental y de ACC elaborado con el apoyo del proyecto
i/ Al menos un instrumento de política para género, juventud, poblaciones indígenas elaborado

A
p
p
en

d
ix

II
E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.3

4



A
p
p
en

d
ix II

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.3

4

1
4

Logical framework

Narrative summary Performance indicators Means of verification Frequency/Responsible Assumptions (A) / Risks
(R)

Goal

Contribute to reducing rural poverty in the
Eastern Region of El Salvador

Upon programme completion:
 Percentage reduction in poverty (3% in extreme poverty)
 Households, on average, increase their assets by 10% over the baseline (RIMS)
 % reduction in child malnutrition (RIMS)

 Baseline
 Poverty reports
 RIMS evaluations
 Project completion

evaluation

 Year 5 of the project/MAG  Objectives, goals and
actions prioritized by
Government in national
policies are maintained

Project development objective

Sustainably increase the incomes of poor
rural families in the departments of San
Miguel, Usulután, La Unión and Morazán
and facilitate their adaptation to climate
change

Upon programme completion:
 33,200 beneficiaries – 8,300 families (20% youth, 40% women, 5% indígenous)

receive project services (RIMS 1.8.1)
 5,900 families with business plans increase their incomes a/
 20,000 beneficiaries – 5,000 producers provided with organizational business

plans more resilient to climate change (RIMS 1.8.5) b/

 Baseline income
 Income evaluation

studies

 Anually/MAG

 Year 3 and year 5 del
proyecto/MAG

 El compromiso político con
el sector  productivo
agrícola mantiene su
importancia como eje
dinamizador de bienestar
económico y social.

 Los fenómenos naturales y
climáticos en la región
Eastern se dan con poca
frecuencia y baja magnitud.

 La criminalidad y  violencia
en el país y la región se
mantiene en niveles
controlados.

Outcome 1/Component 1

Instituciones públicas (MAG, CENTA, ENA,
MARN) cuentan con mayor capacidad
para transferir tecnologías de adaptación
al cambio climático (ACC), asociado a las
cadenas de valor

Al finalizar el Programa:
 100% de instituciones participantes han mejorado sus capacidades para transferir

tecnologías con ACC, respecto a la línea base c/
 5000 productores utilizan información climática para la toma de decisiones

 Línea de base
 Evaluaciones sobre

capacidades
institucionales

 Anualmente/MAG
 Año 3 y Año 5 del

proyecto/MAG

Outcome 2/Component 1
Las organizaciones y los actores públicos y

privados regionales desarrollan
planes de gestión de riesgos
climáticos

Al finalizar el Programa:
 Al menos 60% de los planes de gestión de riesgo climático en funcionamiento

 Evaluación final
 Informes de

seguimiento

 Año 5 del proyecto/MAG
 Anualmente/MAG

Outcome 3/Component 1

Personas (jóvenes, adultas) preparadas
para el empleo en cadenas de valor con
ACC

Al finalizar el programa:
 Al menos un 40% de las personas formadas cuentan con empleo/autoempleo

(25% en organizaciones apoyadas) d/

 Registros de empleos
de las organizaciones

 Evaluación sobre
empleo

 Anualmente/MAG

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

 Existe interés de la
población joven al trabajo
productivo ante opciones de
migración y remesas

Outcome 1/Component 2

Actores regionales coordinan estrategias
para el desarrollo de las cadenas de valor

Al finalizar el Programa:
 Al menos 5 propuestas para mejorar el desempeño de las cadenas en la región

implementadas (según estrategias)
 100% de representantes de organizaciones con capacidades mejoradas para la

participación activa en las mesas de las cadenas, respecto a la línea base

 Documentos de
alianzas establecidas

 Evaluación final

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

 Año 5 del proyecto/MAG



A
p
p
en

d
ix II

E
B
 2

0
1
5
/LO

T
/P.3

4

1
5

Narrative summary Performance indicators Means of verification Frequency/Responsible Assumptions (A) / Risks
(R)

Outcome 2/Component 2
Organizaciones cuentan con condiciones
para la planificación de negocios

Al finalizar el Programa
 100% de organizaciones (20% jóvenes, 40% mujeres, 5% indígenas) con

condiciones mejoradas para la planificación de negocios e/
 100% de organizaciones con habilidades para la identificación y gestión de

riesgos ambientales y climáticos (RIMS 2.6.5)
 5000 productores han adoptado tecnologías de adaptación al cambio climático
 Al menos 50% de organizaciones (tipos A,B) con acceso a servicios financieros f/
 Al menos 1 institución financiera (IF) con oferta de servicios adecuada, según el

grupo objetivo, en implementación

 Estudio evaluativo
 Registros de

organizaciones/person
as con crédito

 Informes de
capacitación

 Ofertas de servicios de
IF

 Año 3 del proyecto/MAG
 Año 2, 3, 4 y 5 del

proyecto/MAG

 Anualmente/MAG

 Anualmente/MAG

 Factores (externos)
económicos que afecten la
producción y la
productividad agrícola, y/o
que desaceleren la
economía se mantienen
estables

Outcome 3/Component 2
Organizaciones acceden mercados de
forma competitiva y sostenible

 60% de organizaciones con acceso a mercados mejorado g/
 Al menos 80% de organizaciones reportan mejora en la calidad de los productos
 Al menos 40% de organizaciones agregan valor a sus productos (prácticas BPM,

procesamiento básico)
 70% de locales de almacenamiento, comercialización y transformación en

funcionamiento (RIMS 2.4.3)

 Línea de base

 Evaluación final
 Informes de

infraestructura

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

 Año 5 del proyecto/MAG
 Anualmente/MAG

Outcome 1/Component 3
Las organizaciones y los actores públicos y
privados fortalecen el diálogo de políticas
públicas en torno a las cadenas de valor

Al finalizar el Programa
 500 personas representantes de organizaciones (50% mujeres) y 50 funcionarios

de instituciones públicas cuentan con capacidades mejoradas para el diálogo de
políticas públicas, respecto a la línea base

 100% de Instituciones del sector público participantes con capacidades
mejoradas para el diálogo de política sobre cadenas de valor

 100% de propuestas de remoción de barreras regulatorias identificadas por las
mesas insertadas en el dialogo de políticas nacionales

 Estudios evaluativos

 Informes de
seguimiento

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

 Anualmente/MAG

 Existe una coordinación
favorable por parte del
gobierno para el desarrollo
de las políticas a nivel
nacional y regional

Outcome 2/Component 3
El sector público (MAG, MARN, INJUVE,
Municipalidades) fortalecido en la
aplicación de políticas públicas para el
desarrollo rural y cambio climático

Al finalizar el Programa:
 Fomento de instrumentos de políticas ambientales y de ACC favorables a la

población rural pobre (RIMS 1.6.12)h/
 Fomento de políticas favorables a jóvenes, mujeres e indígenas (RIMS 2.61) i/
 MAG/OPPS, INJUVE y municipalidades con capacidades fortalecidas en

implementación de políticas públicas para el sector rural

 Informes de
seguimiento

 Documentos de
instrumentos
elaborados

 Anualmente/MAG

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

Outcome 3/ Component 3
La juventud, mujeres e indígenas del área
rural fortalecen sus capacidades para
participar en el diálogo de políticas
públicas

 120 representantes de las organizaciones cuentan con capacidades mejoradas
para el diálogo de políticas.

 Línea de base

 Evaluación final

 Año 3 y Año 5 del
proyecto/MAG

 Año 5 del proyecto/MAG

. *Datos según hombre, mujer, grupo etario, población indígena, Departamento, Municipio.
a/ Medido según ingresos (brutos) incrementados, en promedio, un 100% por un año o más, y considerando las fuentes de ingresos (diversificación) asociadas al Programa.
b/ Un productor aumenta su resiliencia al cambio climático si se cumple al menos dos de las siguientes condiciones i ) que utiliza información sobre el clima difundido por el proyecto, ii ) que implementa las actividades de
adaptación al cambio climático en el contexto de un plan de negocios cofinanciado por el proyecto , iii ) sus tierras o activos están cubiertos por un uno de los 10 riesgos climáticos y el plan de manejo de recursos naturales con el
apoyo del proyecto , iv ) que se encuentra en una de las 10 comunidades locales cuya planificación incluye el tema del cambio climático a través del apoyo del proyecto.
c/ Indicadores sustentadores (medidos antes y después) para cada institución participante, según variables (Ej. i) conocimientos/habilidades y destrezas, ii) aspectos operativos (equipamiento, software, materiales)
d/ Empleo: Cuando una persona al servicio de otra (patrono, empleador), mediante un contrato realiza su actividad profesional en forma continua a cambio de una remuneración o salario.
e/ Indicadores sustentadores: organizaciones identifican prioridades participativamente, formulan propuestas y gestionan alianzas con actores de la cadena
f/ Indicadores sustentadores: 50% organizaciones cuentan con créditos aprobados para la organización y/o para los asociados
g/ Indicadores sustentadores: Al menos 80% de organizaciones (familias) reportan incrementos en el valor de las ventas por uno o más años, 40% diversificado canales de comercialización
h/ Al menos un instrumento/proceso de política ambiental y de ACC elaborado con el apoyo del proyecto
i/ Al menos un instrumento de política para género, juventud, poblaciones indígenas elaborado



