












































Note to Executive Board representatives

Focal points:

Technical questions: Dispatch of documentation:

Rym Ben Zid
Country Programme Manager
East and Southern Africa Division
Tel.: +257 2220 6034
e-mail: r.benzid@ifad.org

Alessandra Zusi Bergés
Officer-in-Charge
Governing Bodies Office
Tel.: +39 06 5459 2092
e-mail: gb_office@ifad.org

Executive Board — 115th session
Rome, 15-16 September 2015

For: Approval

Document: EB 2015/115/R.6

E
Agenda item: 6(a)(i)

Date: 18 August 2015

Distribution: Public
Original: French

President’s report

Proposed grant to the Republic of Burundi for
the Value Chain Development Programme –
Phase II (PRODEFI-II)



EB 2015/115/R.6

i

Contents

Abbreviations and acronyms ii
Map of the programme area iii
Financing summary iv
Recommendation for approval 1
I. Strategic context and rationale 1

A. Country and rural development and poverty context 1
B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities 2

II. Programme description 2
A. Programme area and target group 2
B. Programme development objectives 2
C. Components/outcomes 2

III. Programme execution 4
A. Approach 4
B. Organizational framework 4
C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and

knowledge management 5
D. Financial management, procurement and governance 5
E. Supervision 5

IV. Programme cost, financing, benefits 5
A. Programme cost 5
B. Programme financing 6
C. Summary benefit and economic analysis 7
D. Sustainability 8

V. Corporate considerations 8
A. Compliance with IFAD policies 8
B. Alignment and harmonization 9
C. Innovation and scaling up 9
D. Policy engagement 9

VI. Legal instruments and authority 9
VII. Recommendation 9

Appendices

I. Negotiated financing agreement
II. Logical framework



EB 2015/115/R.6

ii

Abbreviations and acronyms

ASAP Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Programme
CCDC communal community development committee
CDC community development committee
DPAE provincial department of agriculture and livestock
M&E monitoring and evaluation
PAIVA-B Agricultural Intensification and Value-enhancing Support Project
PFCU programme facilitation and coordination unit
PRODEFI Value Chain Development Programme
PRODEFI II Value Chain Development Programme – Phase II



EB 2015/115/R.6

iii

Map of the programme area

Burundi
Republic of Burundi for the Value Chain Development Programme – Phase II
President’s report



EB 2015/115/R.6

iv

Republic of Burundi

Value Chain Development Programme – Phase II
(PRODEFI-II)

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Recipient: Republic of Burundi

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock

Total programme cost: US$44.8 million

Amount of IFAD Debt Sustainability
Framework (DSF) grant:

SDR 26.1 million (equivalent to approximately
US$36.6 million)

Amount of IFAD Adaptation for
Smallholder Agriculture Programme
grant:

SDR 3.51 million (equivalent to approximately
US$4.9 million)

Contribution of Government: US$3.1 million

Contribution of beneficiaries: US$0.3 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/115/R.6

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
grant to the Republic of Burundi for the Value Chain Development Programme –
Phase II (PRODEFI-II), as contained in paragraph 64.

Proposed grant to the Republic of Burundi for the Value
Chain Development Programme – Phase II (PRODEFI II)

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Rural development and poverty. Burundi is among the world’s poorest countries,

ranking 178th of 187 according to the Human Development Index. In 2013, despite a
growth rate of 4.5 per cent, GDP per capita (US$298) was lower than in 1990
(US$497). The incidence of poverty remains high, with 67 per cent of the population
living below the poverty line.

2. More than 90 per cent of people living in Burundi derive their livelihoods from
agriculture. Family farming, which provides 95 per cent of the food supply, does not
meet nutritional needs, and the rate of self-sufficiency in food production1 is
estimated at just over 42 per cent. Malnutrition affects 70 per cent of children in
poor households, mainly in rural areas.

3. Most rural poor people are smallholders – mainly women and orphan heads of
household – cultivating plots of less than one hectare and subsisting on the food
crops they grow. Their poverty is attributable mainly to low productivity as a result
of: (i) extremely small landholdings, hence the need to intensify production; (ii) poor
soil fertility in the absence of livestock and manure, and soil degradation from
erosion; (iii) a lack of equipment and technical and financial capital; (iv) a lack of
inputs such as seed and fertilizer owing to limited purchasing power; (v) a lack of
technical knowledge; (vi) prolonged dry periods in recent years and reduced periods
of rainfall; (vii) the lack of water management systems; (viii) poor processing and
marketing capacity countrywide; (ix) emerging farmers organizations that have not
yet developed profitable activities to ensure sustainability; and (x) poorly managed
markets.

4. Policy, governance and institutions, political and economic issues. Burundi’s
economy is characterized by structural weaknesses, in particular isolation, poor
diversification, uncompetitive agricultural products and high demographic growth.

5. The Government undertook, in its Vision 2025, to lower the rate of demographic
growth to 2 per cent and, in the National Agricultural Investment Plan (PNIA), to
boost growth in the agriculture sector to 6 per cent per annum. In 2013, the country
joined the Scaling Up Nutrition movement and the Multi-sector Food and Nutritional
Security Platform in order to achieve the first Millennium Development Goal.

6. The electoral process now under way risks slowing expected progress as a result of
putting in place policies and regulatory frameworks, both at the macro-economic
level and in implementing programmes and projects.

1 Source: PNIA, "The food deficit for the year 2010 is evaluated at 471,884 tonnes of grain equivalents (GEs), out of total
estimated needs of 817,000 tonnes of GEs nationally, representing an unmet basic needs rate of close to 58 per cent".



EB 2015/115/R.6

2

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities
7. PRODEFI is the cornerstone of the country programme in that it encompasses

common implementation functions at the central and regional level, such as
procurement and financial management.

8. Needed action includes: (i) completing activities2 under PRODEFI and replicating
them on a larger scale to achieve sufficient production volume (milk and rice), to
facilitate structuring the value chains; and (ii) better supporting actors throughout
the value chain by linking activities under the rural youth employment component
with core programme activities.

9. In view of the agriculture sector’s vulnerability to climate change, IFAD proposes to
provide a complementary grant under the Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture
Programme (ASAP).

10. Nutritional considerations will be introduced into PRODEFI-II to raise awareness
around adopting best practices in diet and hygiene.

II. Programme description
A. Programme area and target group
11. The PRODEFI-II programme area will be identical to that of the first phase, i.e. the

provinces of Bubanza, Cibitoke, Gitega, Karusi, Kayanza, Muramvya and Ngozi, as
well as the province of Muyinga. The programme interventions will be implemented
in communes adjacent to those covered by the Agricultural Intensification and Value-
enhancing Support Project (PAIVA-B).

12. This decision is fully aligned with the strategy adopted by IFAD on geographical
concentration around managed wetlands to enhance the visibility and scale of
impact.

13. Targeting will be simultaneously by activity, by province and by commune. The
priority target group of PRODEFI-II will be smallholders, crop and livestock farmers,
women and rural young people promoting economic initiatives upstream, within and
downstream of the rice and milk value chains and other secondary value chains such
as bean, maize, plantain and banana.

B. Programme development objectives
14. Overall objective. The overall objective of PRODEFI-II will be to promote increases

in incomes and improvements in food security for poor households in the programme
area.

15. Development objective. The specific PRODEFI-II objectives are as follows:
increase physical productive capital by building the resilience of production systems
to climate change; intensify crop and livestock farming to improve nutritional status
and, ultimately, structure the milk and rice value chains, inter alia, to promote youth
employment and strengthen capacity of the actors.

C. Components/outcomes
16. The programme is structured around three main components:

Component 1: Sustainable growth in productive capital and institutional
capacity-building for value chain actors

17. The activities implemented under subcomponent 1.1 – Hydro-agricultural
improvements and infrastructure – will be as follows: (i) development of 2,330 ha of
new wetlands on nine sites; (ii) rehabilitation of 147 km of tracks over nine sections
of access roads to open up access to the new wetland sites identified and one stretch
of track for a developed wetland straddling the provinces of Karusi and Ngozi; (iii)
development of 23,300 ha of watersheds around the new wetland sites identified and

2 This will also provide an opportunity to complete PAIVA-B activities in shared intervention areas.



EB 2015/115/R.6

3

implementation of the second phase of watershed development in 17 wetlands,
undertaken under IFAD projects (10 PRODEFI sites and seven PAIVA-B sites), of
which close to 10 per cent are financed under ASAP; and (iv) capacity-building for
four communal land registration offices to accelerate the issuance of 5,000 titles.

18. Subcomponent 1.2 – Adaptation to climate change – will be divided into three
sections: (i) integrated protection of investments against climate risk at the
watershed level, over 1,000 ha (Ruvubu watershed); (ii) adaptation of rural
engineering designs to climate variability by setting national technical standards;
and (iii) building the resilience of erosion control structures and crops to climate
change by intensifying forage and legume crops.

19. Activities under subcomponent 1.3 – Agricultural intensification – will be as follows:
(i) input supply (e.g. quality seed, fertilizer and manure, phytosanitary products);
(ii) strengthening the community livestock solidarity chain (3,000 cattle) by
promoting small livestock among young people; and (iii) building the capacities of
crop and livestock farmers with farmers field schools (FFS) (39, 112 and 100 FFS for
rice, food crops and livestock, respectively). A climate early warning system will be
developed using ASAP financing.

20. Activities under subcomponent 1.4 – Inclusive community organization and
institutional linkages – will be as follows: (i) capacity-building for Burundi public and
private institutions such as the community development committees (CDC) and
communal community development committees (CCDC); (ii) development of a
gender equality strategy for IFAD-funded projects in Burundi; and (iii) awareness-
raising around fundamental women’s rights, adult functional literacy, support for
organizing and financing solidarity groups, legal and psycho-social support for
victims and post-traumatic reconstruction, and reduction of women’s workload.

21. Subcomponent 1.5 – Combating chronic malnutrition – will include the following
activities: (i) training 2,000 people in the home nutritional learning (FAN) method for
preventing chronic malnutrition; (ii) setting up 350 FAN; (iii) awareness-raising for
community leaders, including 200 rural development actors; and (iv) implementation
of 350 microprojects in livestock (pigs, chickens, rabbits, goats) and market
gardening (kitchen gardens).

Component 2: Value-addition and strengthening of value chains

22. Support provided under subcomponent 2.1 – Organizational framework and value
chain financing – will cover the following activities: (i) development of financial
instruments adapted to the programme area to finance production cycles and
storage and processing cycles; and (ii) professionalization of dairy cooperatives, rice
growers cooperatives and the three cooperatives operating in the maize value chain,
to enable them to provide services to their members.

23. Subcomponent 2.2 – Support for priority value chains – will have two sections.

24. Dairy value chain. Support will be provided to: (i) complete the installation of
facilities to secure milk (refrigerated tanks and milk collection centres in areas where
dairy livestock is already kept; (ii) promote the installation of sales points with a
target of one or two per milk collection centre; (iii) install two mini-dairies in areas
with high dairy potential (Gitega and Ngozi); and (iv) establish partnerships with
private actors.

25. Rice value chain. Support will be provided to: (i) install drying infrastructure
(7,800 m² of new drying areas) and storage infrastructure (2,600 m² of new
warehouses); (ii) set up two improved husking units and two mini-rice mills for
quality rice marketing; and (iii) strengthen the consultative platform for value chain
actors.

26. Secondary value chains. Support will be provided to: (i) lift constraints on
segments of the major value chains (bean, maize, banana) in the event of



EB 2015/115/R.6

4

bottlenecks, such as the lack of healthy varieties of banana, the lack of bean
varieties tolerant of higher temperatures; and (ii) install storage infrastructure and
processing equipment.

27. Under component 2.3 – Improving sustainable and decent employment for rural
young people – the following activities will take place: (i) put in place an enabling
institutional environment for youth employment; (ii) strengthen specialized
proximity structures (research, innovation and training centres) to enable them to
provide employment-related services to young people; and (iii) create jobs for 150
young entrepreneurs, and income-generating activities for 1,500 rural young people.

Component 3: Organizational support, knowledge management and
facilitation.

28. This component calls for good coordination and sound and transparent management
of the programme.

29. Subcomponent 3.1 calls for: (i) providing the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock,
specifically the provincial departments of agriculture and livestock (DPAE), including
at the communal level, with monitoring and evaluation (M&E) and planning
assistance to contribute to participatory planning of programme activities,
monitoring of implementation and dissemination of results; and (ii) capacity-building
for regional coordination units.

30. Under subcomponent 3.2: (i) overall coordination and administrative, financial and
procurement functions will be centralized in Bujumbura; (ii) technical functions will
be decentralized to facilitate the implementation and close monitoring of activities by
regional coordination units; and (iii) the PRODEFI programme facilitation and
coordination unit (PFCU) will manage the programme at the national level and two
regional facilitation and coordination units will manage it at the regional levels, one
in the centre covering Gitega, Karusi and Muramvya and one in the north covering
Kayanza and Ngozi.

III. Programme execution
A. Approach
31. The intervention will be based on the following approach: (i) expansion of activities

in the PRODEFI area such that the technical package is implemented in its entirety;
(ii) development of new wetland sites; (iii) gradual implementation of nutritional
activities in areas where dairy, rice, legume and food production has increased under
PRODEFI; (iv) implementation of rural employment activities in areas where
PRODEFI has successfully set up milk collection centres and dehusking units; and (v)
implementation of activities to intensify and develop forage crops under an ASAP
grant in areas where PRODEFI was first active. The aim is to consolidate PRODEFI
activities and gradually expand the intervention area to the new wetlands identified.

B. Organizational framework
32. Programme oversight and steering. The Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock will

continue to oversee PRODEFI-II. The strategic steering committee, which will provide
general steering and coordination, and the technical steering committee, which will
report to the Government on programme implementation and general
administration, will continue to be the supervisory bodies, one at the strategic level
and the other at a more technical level.

33. Organization and management. The regional coordination units will be set up by
redeploying the PRODEFI branch office heads, including two regional coordinators,
and the other branch office heads will be assigned to M&E or regional components.
Part of the PRODEFI technical staff will also be redeployed to regional coordination
units and additional staff will be recruited in the regions as needed.



EB 2015/115/R.6

5

C. Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning and
knowledge management

34. Monitoring and evaluation. The M&E manual used during the first phase of
PRODEFI will be updated to include a limited number of files. In addition, steps will
be taken to address the constraints encountered in the last phase, such as the lack
of centralized data, poor data analysis and insufficient capacity for information
systems management. The overall organization of M&E arrangements will be based
on the information provided by DPAE and communal technicians providing
government functions at the local level.

35. Learning, capitalization and knowledge management. The knowledge
generated by the M&E system, beneficiaries and exchanges of experience between
IFAD projects and those funded by other technical and financial partners will be
capitalized on. PRODEFI-II will draw on lessons learned during implementation of the
first phase of PRODEFI and of PAIVA-B, particularly in terms of organizing value
chains.

D. Financial management, procurement and governance
36. Capacity-building will be provided for the PRODEFI financial management team to

ensure better use of the TOM2PRO software (multi-site model) on all financial
matters: accounting, commitments, financial statements, budgetary monitoring, etc.
The PFCU will be responsible and accountable to the Government and to IFAD for
using the programme resources in compliance with the financing agreement signed
with IFAD. The accounting system will be consistent with internationally accepted
accounting principles and standards set by the Government of Burundi. The PFCU
will draw up quarterly statements of the accounting and financial situation and
transmit them regularly to the Government and to IFAD. The unit will also prepare
consolidated financial statements each year on the programme operations, resources
and expenditures. The financial management risk for PRODEFI is deemed moderate.

37. Procurement. The works, goods and specialized or consulting services required to
implement the programme and funded under the financing agreement, as amended
where applicable, will be provided in accordance with the procurement code
prevailing in Burundi. A procurement plan based on the AWP/B and stipulating
procurement methods, estimated costs and timelines will be prepared each year at
the national and regional levels.

38. Governance. To apply the principles of good governance and transparency in
programme implementation, the decentralized territorial collectivities will take part
in the planning process and in the monitoring of results.

39. M&E tools in the form of feedback and participatory evaluation workshops will be
built into the planning and M&E system to ensure beneficiaries transparency and
opportunities for continual feedback and to ensure that their recommendations are
taken into account in implementation.

E. Supervision
40. The programme will be supervised jointly by IFAD and the Government of Burundi.

One or two supervision missions will take place each year, in addition to missions in
support of implementation as activities are carried out. In addition, four internal
management control mission (quarterly audits) will be held each year at the central
and regional levels. A midterm review will be conducted jointly by IFAD and the
Government at the end of year three.

IV. Programme cost, financing, benefits
A. Programme cost
41. PRODEFI-II is being financed by a DSF grant from IFAD in the amount of US$36.6

million and an ASAP grant in the amount of US$4.9 million, cofinancing from the



EB 2015/115/R.6

6

Government of Burundi in the amount of US$3.1 million and a contribution in cash
and in kind from beneficiaries in the amount of US$0.3 million. Investment
expenditures are US$40.9 million, or 91.5 per cent of total cost, and recurring
expenditures are US$3.8 million, or 8.5 per cent of total cost. This is attributable to
the fact that the PRODEFI team already in place will be responsible for implementing
the second phase.
Table 1
Programme cost by component and by financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

IFAD grant ASAP Beneficiaries
Borrower/

counterpart Total
Component Amount Amount Amount Amount Amount

1. Sustainable
improvement in
productive capital
and capacity-
building for value
chain actors 26 578 4 926 - 2 584 34 087

2. Value-addition and
strengthening of
value chains 4 849 - 285 222 5 356

3. Organizational
support, knowledge
management and
facilitation 5 214 - - 334 5 548

Total 36 641 4 926 285 3 140 44 991

B. Programme financing
42. The DSF grant provided by IFAD represents 81.8 per cent of the total investment

and the ASAP grant 11 per cent. Cofinancing from the Government is estimated at
approximately 6.5 per cent of total investment, mainly in the form of tax waivers
and a contribution to the monitoring costs of the programme.

43. The beneficiaries will make a financial contribution to certain investments, including
those intended to add value to agricultural products. They will also contribute to
some development work such as levelling. The contribution of beneficiaries
represents 0.6 per cent of total additional costs.



EB 2015/115/R.6

7

Table 2
Programme cost by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure category
IFAD grant ASAP Beneficiaries

Borrower/
counterpart Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount
1. Civil and rural

engineering 10 794 71 1 635 11 8 0.6 2 750 18 15 277
2. Transportation

equipment 4 588 95 73 1.5 156 3.2 4 816
3. Studies, training,

technical assistance
and service agreements 7 573 86 1 231 14 19 0.2 8 823

4. Support fund 9 886 82 2 060 17 114 1 12 060
5. Operating and

maintenance 761 76 216 .24 977
6. Salaries 3 039 100 3 039

Total 36 641 81.8 4 926 11 285 0.6 3 140 6.5 44 992

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
44. Benefits. Development of paddy production in wetlands. Crop intensity with

and without the programme is 0.7 and 1, respectively. Rice generates annual
revenues of US$169 per ha, or US$0.46 per day on average, with economic value
addition of labour equal to US$3.04 per day worked. In total, an average plot of 0.28
ha generates US$67.92 per ha per year without the programme compared to
US$88.3 in the scenario with the programme. Additional paddy production will be
about 10,000 tonnes annually.

45. Development of paddy transformation. Two improved huskers are to be
installed. The quantity of paddy that could be processed by the two huskers planned
is 8,000 tonnes per year, with a maximum of 15 per cent broken grains. The huskers
to be installed with the new financing will have a theoretical production capacity of
5,205 tonnes of superior quality rice per year (realistic scenario), reduced by 20 per
cent to come closer to reality in financial and economic analysis. This represents a
total increase in capacity for paddy transformation of 6,000 tonnes per year. The
husking units will generate net annual revenues of US$140,550, for an annual
increase of US$122,746.

46. Increase in milk production. The new financing will make it possible to purchase
and put to work 3,000 cattle by the end of the programme in 2021. Total milk
production will be about 4,000 tonnes per year – 40 per cent for self-consumption
and 60 per cent for sale.

47. Development of milk marketing. Four 1,000 litre capacity and two 500 litre
capacity milk collection centres will be created with the new financing. This new
financing will therefore make it possible to increase collection and storage capacity
by four tonnes per day, or 1,460 tonnes of fresh milk per year.

48. Employment benefits. Agricultural intensification will enable a high proportion of
small and medium-sized farmers to increase their incomes. Intensification will also
result in increased labour needs for these farms. The increase in work days will
initially reduce underemployment at the family level and then at the local level, as
wage workers are hired.

49. Improvements in employment and incomes for women and young people.
PRODEFI-II proposes to reach women and young people at the rate of at least 30
per cent for women, including women heads of household (widows), as a priority,
and 30 per cent young entrepreneurs/ farmers, including those who are landless, for
marketing activities and to take employment in marketing agricultural products or
providing services.



EB 2015/115/R.6

8

50. The programme will provide representatives of farmers organizations with training
and technical support, particularly in the organization and management of wetlands
and watersheds. Better structuring of farmers organizations will ensure sustainability
of the programme impact.

51. Economic and financial analysis (2016-2021). Based on the general
assumptions and financial models used, the financial internal rate of return (FIRR)
for this second phase is 18.5 per cent, which is high for an integrated agricultural
development programme implemented in marginal areas with land and infrastructure
protection problems. Based on the general assumptions and assumptions of pricing
and economic benefits, the economic internal rate of return (EIRR) for the second
phase is 17.3 per cent. Both the FIRR and the EIRR are highly satisfactory as all
financial and economic costs have been taken into consideration while some of the
benefits have not been quantified, such as those relating to ASAP-funded activities
that will bring results over the long term.

D. Sustainability
52. The community and participatory development approach is a guarantee that the

beneficiaries will take ownership of the programme initiatives and achievements.
They will set up management committees responsible for maintaining and properly
managing the investments under the supervision of local authorities, supported in
turn by the programme to enable them to monitor activities following programme
completion.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
53. The risks to PRODEFI-II during implementation include: (i) an uncertain political

situation; (ii) limited capacity of actors to implement the hydro-agricultural
improvements; (iii) structuring and professionalization of organizations, which could
take more time than the programme duration; (iv) the random nature of the quality
of administrative and financial management; (v) deficiencies in terms of financial
reporting; and (vi) the lack of an internal audit function. Risk mitigation measures
are as follows: (i) adoption of a programme approach to recycle programme teams
already familiar with IFAD financial procedures; (ii) strengthening of long-term
international technical assistance for high-cost activities (hydro-agricultural
improvements); (iii) continuity and complementarity between old and new financing
in the same provinces, to develop value chains and build capacity among
organizations; (iv) organized redeployment of the team between the central and
regional levels; (v) establishment of a culture of communicating financial information
to ensure monitoring of management processes, specifically disbursements (reports
generated by accounting software); and (vi) creation of an internal audit unit to be
shared by all IFAD projects in the country to ensure compliance with procedures.

V. Corporate considerations
A. Compliance with IFAD policies
54. PRODEFI-II is aligned with IFAD’s Strategic Framework 2011-2015, in particular with

the objectives of achieving “a natural resource and economic asset base for poor
rural women and men that is more resilient to climate change, environmental
degradation and market transformation” and “access for poor rural women and men
to services to reduce poverty, improve nutrition, raise incomes and build resilience in
a changing environment”.

55. In addition, PRODEFI-II is aligned with the objective of “poor rural women and men
and their organizations able to manage profitable, sustainable and resilient farm and
non-farm enterprises or take advantage of decent work opportunities”.

56. The programme is aligned with IFAD’s policy on rural finance in that it will promote
access by beneficiaries and cooperatives to financial instruments, and with the policy
on gender equality and women’s empowerment as women and young people will



EB 2015/115/R.6

9

benefit from the same services as men. It is also aligned with the policy to improve
access to land and land tenure security in providing support for communal land
registration offices to issue land titles.

B. Alignment and harmonization
57. This second phase will also gradually harmonize IFAD-funded project and

programme structures, such as PFCUs, and will take another step towards setting up
the five regional facilitation and coordination units following the first phase of
creating two regional coordination offices as part of implementing PNSADR-IM (one
in the west for the provinces of Bubanza and Cibitoke and one in the east for the
provinces of Cankuzo, Rutana and Ruyigi). PRODEFI-II will be the third programme,
after PAIVA-B (additional financing) and PNSADR-IM, to align itself with the IFAD
country programme approach.

C. Innovation and scaling up
58. Innovations introduced under PRODEFI warrant scaling up during this second phase

and beyond. Among them are integrating nutritional activities and linking them to
agricultural intensification, and integrating rural youth employment activities with
value chain development. These two innovations, as well as those under the Project
to Accelerate Achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (PROPA-O) relating
to nutrition, could be integrated systematically in future projects and programmes
and lay the groundwork for drafting national legislation.

D. Policy engagement
59. The main contribution by PRODEFI-II to policy engagement will be through

implementation of subcomponent 1.2, which calls for establishing design standards
for infrastructure (hydro-agricultural improvements, tracks and storage
warehouses).

60. Moreover, PRODEFI-II will contribute to operationalizing the national youth
employment strategy developed under the rural youth employment component and
adopted by Parliament.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
61. A financing agreement between the Republic of Burundi and IFAD will constitute the

legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the beneficiary country. A
copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an appendix.

62. The Republic of Burundi is empowered under its laws to receive financing from IFAD.

63. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Lending Policies and Criteria.

VII. Recommendation
64. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the Debt Sustainability
Framework to the Republic of Burundi in the amount of twenty-six million one
hundred thousand special drawing rights (SDR 26,100,000), and upon such
terms and conditions as shall be substantially in accordance with the terms and
conditions presented herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant under the Adaptation
for Smallholder Agriculture Programme (ASAP) to the Republic of Burundi in an
amount equivalent to three million five hundred ten thousand special drawing
rights (SDR 3,510,000), and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President



Appendix I EB 2015/115/R.6

1

Negotiated financing agreement

Accord de financement négocié

Numéro du don: [….]

Numéro du don ASAP: [….]

Nom du programme: Programme de développement des filières-Deuxième phase
(PRODEFI-II) (“le Programme”)

La République du Burundi (“le Bénéficiaire”)

et

Le Fonds international de développement agricole (“le Fonds” ou “le FIDA”)

et

Le Fonds fiduciaire pour le Programme d’adaptation de l’agriculture paysanne (ASAP)
(“le Fonds fiduciaire ASAP”)

(désignés individuellement par “la Partie” et collectivement par “les Parties”)

conviennent par les présentes de ce qui suit:

Préambule

A) ATTENDU QUE le Bénéficiaire a sollicité du Fonds un don pour le financement
du Programme décrit à l’annexe 1 du présent accord;

B) ATTENDU QUE lors de sa cent cinquième session, le Conseil d’administration
du Fonds a approuvé la proposition de création d’un Fonds fiduciaire pour le Programme
d’adaptation de l’agriculture paysanne (ASAP) du FIDA aux fins du financement, sous
forme de dons, d’éléments du portefeuille des projets et programmes financés par le
FIDA, en vue de renforcer la capacité d’adaptation des petits paysans au changement
climatique dans les cinq domaines correspondant aux principaux résultats du programme
ASAP;

C) ATTENDU QU’il résulte, notamment, de ce qui précède que le Fonds ainsi que
le Fonds fiduciaire ASAP ont accepté d’accorder un don et un don ASAP au Bénéficiaire
pour contribuer au financement du Programme conformément aux modalités et
conditions établies dans le présent Accord;

EN FOI DE QUOI, les Parties conviennent par les présentes de ce qui suit:

Section A

1. Le présent accord comprend l’ensemble des documents suivants: le présent
document, la description du Programme et les dispositions relatives à l’exécution
(annexe 1), le tableau d’affectation des fonds (annexe 2) et les clauses particulières
(annexe 3).



Appendix I EB 2015/115/R.6

2

2. Les Conditions générales applicables au financement du développement agricole en
date du 29 avril 2009, amendées en avril 2014, et leurs éventuelles modifications
postérieures (“les Conditions générales”) sont annexées au présent document, et
l’ensemble des dispositions qu’elles contiennent s’appliquent au présent accord. Aux fins
du présent accord, les termes dont la définition figure dans les Conditions générales ont
la signification qui y est indiquée.

3. Le Fonds accorde au Bénéficiaire un don, le Fonds fiduciaire ASAP un don ASAP
(l’ensemble constituant “le financement”), que le Bénéficiaire utilise aux fins de
l’exécution du Programme, conformément aux modalités et conditions énoncées dans le
présent accord.

Section B

1. A. Le montant du don du Fonds est de vingt-six millions cent mille droits de tirage
spéciaux (26 100 000 DTS).

B. Le montant du don du Fonds fiduciaire ASAP est de trois millions cinq cent dix
mille droits de tirages spéciaux (3 510 000 DTS).

2. L’exercice financier débute le 1er janvier et clôture le 31 décembre.

3. Un compte de Programme libellé en franc burundais destiné à recevoir la
contribution du Bénéficiaire est ouvert au nom du Bénéficiaire auprès d’un établissement
bancaire acceptable pour le FIDA.

4. Deux comptes désignés libellés en dollars des Etats-Unis (USD) destinés à recevoir
les fonds provenant du don du Fonds et du don du Fonds fiduciaire ASAP sont ouverts au
nom du Bénéficiaire auprès de la Banque Centrale de la République du Burundi .

5. La contribution du Bénéficiaire au financement du Programme est évaluée à la
somme de 3 140 000 USD (trois millions cent quarante mille USD) environ. Ce montant
représente l’ensemble des droits, impôts et taxes sur les biens et services grevant le
Programme qui seront pris en charge par le Bénéficiaire au moyen d’exonérations des
droits et taxes sur les importations ou en recourant à la procédure des chèques tirés sur
le Trésor (à hauteur d’environ 2 900 000 USD) et la prise en charge d’une partie des frais
de gestion (à hauteur d’environ 240 000 USD). Le Programme sera inscrit au budget de
l’État.

Section C

1. L’Agent principal du Programme est le Ministère de l’agriculture et de l’élevage
(MINAGRIE).

2. La date d’achèvement du Programme est fixée au sixième anniversaire de la date
d’entrée en vigueur du présent accord.

Section D

Le Fonds assure l’administration du don du Fonds et du don du Fonds fiduciaire ASAP et
la supervision du Programme.

Section E

1. Les éléments ci-dessous constituent des conditions préalables aux décaissements.
Celles-ci s’ajoutent à la condition prévue à la section 4.02 b) des Conditions générales.



Appendix I EB 2015/115/R.6

3

a) la reconduction du personnel du Programme de développement des filières
(PRODEFI) et l’extension de leurs missions au Programme; le recrutement du
personnel additionnel nécessaire tel que prévu par le Rapport de conception
détaillée du Programme;

b) la mise à jour des manuels de procédures du PRODEFI pour répondre aux
exigences du Programme; et

c) l’ouverture des comptes désignés.

2. Toutes les communications ayant trait au présent accord doivent être adressées
aux représentants dont le titre et l’adresse figurent ci-dessous:

Pour le Bénéficiaire:

Ministère des finances et de la planification
du développement économique

B.P. 1830
Bd Yaranda
Bujumbura, République du Burundi

Pour le FIDA:

Président
Fonds international de développement agricole
Via Paolo di Dono 44
00142 Rome, Italie

Pour le fonds fiduciaire pour le Programme d’adaptation
de l’agriculture paysanne (ASAP) :

Président du Fonds international de développement
agricole

En sa qualité de gestionnaire du fonds fiduciaire pour le
Programme d’adaptation de l’agriculture paysanne (ASAP)

Fonds international de développement agricole
Via Paolo di Dono 44
00142 Rome, Italie



Appendix I EB 2015/115/R.6

4

Le présent accord, en date du [introduire date], a été établi en langue française en deux
(2) exemplaires originaux, un (1) pour le Fonds et un (1) pour le Bénéficiaire.

REPUBLIQUE DU BURUNDI

___________________
Pour le Bénéficiaire
[introduire nom et titre]

FONDS INTERNATIONAL DE DEVELOPPEMENT AGRICOLE

_____________________
Kanayo F. Nwanze
Président

FONDS FIDUCIAIRE POUR LE PROGRAMME D’ADAPTATION
DE L’AGRICULTURE PAYSANNE

_____________________________________________
Kanayo F. Nwanze
Président du Fonds international de développement
agricole

En sa qualité de gestionnaire du Fonds fiduciaire pour le
Programme d’adaptation de l’agriculture paysanne



Appendix I EB 2015/115/R.6

5

Annexe 1

Description du Programme et Dispositions relatives à l’exécution

I. Description du Programme

1. Population cible. Les bénéficiaires directs et indirects du Programme sont des
groupes sociaux identifiés en fonction de critères de pauvreté, d’accès aux ressources et
d’insécurité alimentaire. Ils sont répartis en cinq grands groupes: les ménages ou
personnes sans terre ou ne disposant que d’un accès très limité à celle-ci; les ménages
ou personnes disposant d’un accès limité à la terre mais sans surplus pour les marchés;
les ménages disposant d’un accès à la terre et qui participent déjà dans la production de
cultures pour le marché; les ménages pratiquant une ou plusieurs cultures de rente; et
les ménages disposant d’un accès à la terre et d’animaux en stabulation. Au sein de ces
groupes, des catégories spéciales seront ciblées d’une manière plus spécifique, il s’agit des
jeunes, hommes et femmes; des femmes veuves et orphelins chefs de famille; et  des
membres de l’ethnie minoritaire des Batwa. Ils représentent 77 588 familles au total, dont
33 534 familles bénéficiant directement du Programme. Le Programme touchera huit
provinces du Burundi, à savoir les provinces de Bubanza, Cibitoke, Gitega, Karusi,
Kayanza, Muramvya, Muyinga3 et Ngozi (“la zone du Programme”).

2. Finalité. Le Programme a pour finalité d'augmenter les revenus et améliorer la
sécurité alimentaire des ménages pauvres dans la zone du Programme.

3. Objectifs. Les objectifs du Programme sont de renforcer i) les capacités des petits
agriculteurs pauvres et des jeunes ruraux afin d'augmenter leurs revenus et leur sécurité
alimentaire et nutritionnelle à travers notamment le renforcement des filières agricoles
prioritaires, dont le riz et lait; ii) la résilience des systèmes de production face aux
changements climatiques et iii) un  partenariat durable avec les institutions publiques,
privées et la société civile.

4. Composantes. Les objectifs du Programme seront atteints par la mise en œuvre de
trois composantes: I. Accroissement durable du capital productif et renforcement des
capacités institutionnelles, II. Valorisation et renforcement des filières, et III.
Accompagnement des structures, gestion du savoir et facilitation.

Composante I. Accroissement durable du capital productif et
renforcement des capacités institutionnelles

La composante a pour objectif d’améliorer la sécurité alimentaire et nutritionnelle ainsi que
les revenus des ménages grâce à l’augmentation de la productivité et de la production
vivrière et animale consécutive aux aménagements hydro-agricoles, aux activités
d’adaptation aux changements climatiques, à l’intensification agricole, à la structuration
communautaire et à la lutte contre la malnutrition aigüe et chronique. Elle s’articule autour
de cinq sous-composantes:

Sous-composante 1. Aménagements hydro-agricoles et infrastructures.

3 La province de Muyinga ne sera concernée que par l’aménagement du bassin versant de la Ruvubu et
des marais connexes.



Appendix I EB 2015/115/R.6

6

La sous-composante comprend deux volets:

a) l’accroissement de la production du riz et d’autres cultures de marais et de
colline par l’aménagement de nouveaux sites pour permettre une bonne
maîtrise de l’eau d’irrigation; et

b) le désenclavement des sites de marais aménagés à travers la réhabilitation de
pistes existantes afin de faciliter la circulation et l’écoulement des produits.

Sous-composante 2. Adaptation aux changements climatiques.

La sous-composante comprend deux volets:

a) une approche intégrée de gestion des contraintes climatiques à travers des
investissements à l’échelle du bassin versant de la Ruvubu; et

b) une approche au niveau national de renforcement des capacités et des
normes de conception afin que les ouvrages de génie rural installés au
Burundi résistent mieux aux aléas climatiques.

Sous-composante 3. Intensification agricole.

La sous-composante a pour objectif d’améliorer la sécurité alimentaire et les revenus
des ménages au travers de quatre volets:

a) l’accroissement de la production et de la productivité agricoles grâce à
l’utilisation généralisée des intrants agricoles;

b) le repeuplement et le renforcement de la chaîne de solidarité communautaire
animale;

c) l’adoption de nouvelles techniques agricoles; et
d) le renforcement des capacités des agri-éleveurs à travers les champs écoles

fermiers.

Sous-composante 4.    Structuration communautaire inclusive et articulation
institutionnelle.

La sous-composante a pour objectif de renforcer les capacités des institutions
burundaises, publiques et privées comme les Comités de Développement Communautaire
(CDC) et les Comités Communaux de Développement Communautaire (CCDC), pour
qu’elles soient parties prenantes de partenariats de qualité dans un processus de
développement des filières sélectionnées et puissent répliquer les leçons tirées au niveau
national. La sous-composante a également pour objectif de traiter des questions d’appui
aux groupes vulnérables et d’inclusion de la dimension genre dans toutes ses activités.

Sous-composante 5. Lutte contre la malnutrition aigüe et chronique.

La sous-composante a pour objectif de renforcer l'intégration de la prise en charge de la
malnutrition et la promotion nutritionnelle au niveau communautaire afin d'améliorer
durablement l'utilisation et l'accès aux aliments nutritifs locaux.

Composante II. Valorisation et renforcement des filières

La composante vise à renforcer les appuis à la production et à la valorisation des deux
filières principales (le riz et le lait) sur toute la chaîne de valeur et des filières
secondaires.



Appendix I EB 2015/115/R.6

7

Elle s’articule autour des trois sous-composantes:

Sous-composante 1. Cadre organisationnel et financement des filières.

L’objectif de la sous-composante vise à ce que les cycles de production (du semis à la
récolte) et de stockage (de la transformation à la commercialisation) puissent faire l’objet
de prêts différenciés à deux entités distinctes, que sont  le groupement de producteurs qui
va céder sa production et la coopérative qui est l’organisme stockeur. Pour cela, le
Programme va appuyer la mise en place d’instruments financiers adaptés à la zone du
Programme. La mise en œuvre des activités sera confiée à des opérateurs.

Sous-composante 2. Appui aux filières prioritaires et secondaires.

La sous-composante comprend trois volets:

a) appui à la filière prioritaire du lait : l’appui consiste à compléter les
équipements et infrastructures de collecte et de transformation de lait dans les
zones d’intervention du PRODEFI, promouvoir des réseaux de collecte de
proximité et structurer davantage la  plateforme de concertation de la filière
lait.

b) appui à la filière prioritaire du riz : l’appui consiste à installer des infrastructures
de séchage et de stockage ainsi que des équipements de décorticage et à
structurer davantage  la plateforme de concertation  de la filière riz.

c) appui aux filières secondaires que sont le haricot, le maïs et la banane : l’appui
consiste à appuyer les segments de ces filières dans les contextes spécifiques
où il existe un goulet d’étranglement et à mettre en place des équipements et
infrastructures de séchage et de stockage.

Sous-composante 3. Amélioration de l’emploi durable et décent des jeunes ruraux par le
renforcement des structures spécialisées.

La sous-composante comprend trois volets:

a) la mise en place un environnement institutionnel favorable à l’emploi des
jeunes;

b) le renforcement des structures de proximité spécialisées afin qu’elles offrent
des services liés à l'emploi des jeunes principalement dans les filières du
PRODEFI et du PRODEFI-II; et

c) la création et la diversification des emplois et activités génératrices.

Composante III. Accompagnement des structures, gestion du savoir et
facilitation

La composante a pour objectifs la bonne coordination et la gestion saine et transparente du
Programme. Elle s'articule autour de trois sous-composantes:

Sous-composante 1. Renforcement des capacités des acteurs locaux et des unités de
facilitation et de coordination (UFCR) régionales.

Un appui sera apporté pour renforcer les capacités des directions provinciales de
l’agriculture et l’élevage ainsi que les UFCR.



Appendix I EB 2015/115/R.6

8

Sous composante 2. Facilitation, coordination et gestion du Programme au niveau
national.

La coordination générale ainsi qu’une partie des fonctions administrative, financière et de
passation des marchés seront centralisées à Bujumbura et seront réalisées par l’Unité de
Coordination et de Facilitation du Programme (UFCP)  actuelle du PRODEFI.

Les fonctions techniques et l’autre partie des fonctions financière et de passation de
marchés seront décentralisées pour faciliter l’exécution du Programme et le suivi rapproché
des activités.

II. Dispositions relatives à l’exécution

5. Agent principal du projet

5.1 Désignation. Le Ministère de l’agriculture et de l’élevage (MINAGRIE), en sa qualité
d’Agent principal du Projet, assurera la tutelle du Projet.

6. Pilotage du Programme: Comité stratégique d’orientations (CSO) et Comité
Technique de Pilotage (CTP)

6.1 Comité stratégique d’orientations (CSO)

6.1.1 Établissement. Le CSO sera constitué par un arrêté de la deuxième Vice-
Présidence de la République.

6.1.2 Composition. Le CSO est présidé par le Ministre en charge de
l’Agriculture et de l’Elevage et la Vice-présidence est assurée par le Ministre ayant les
finances dans ses attributions. Le CSO est composé des représentants des Ministères en
charge de l’Agriculture et de l’Elevage, des Finances, de la Planification et du
développement Economique, de la bonne Gouvernance, du genre, du Développement
communal et de la Décentralisation, de l’Environnement, de l’Emploi, de la Santé
publique, de la Justice et de tout autre Ministère technique pouvant être impliqué dans la
mise en œuvre du Programme, de la société civile et du secteur privé.

6.1.3 Responsabilités. Le CSO a pour responsabilités d'instruire les orientations
générales pour le pilotage et la coordination du PRODEFI et du Programme. Il informe le
gouvernement sur la mise en œuvre du Programme et son administration générale. Il se
réunit au démarrage du Programme, à la mi-parcours et à l'achèvement. Le
coordonnateur de l’ Unité de facilitation et de coordination du Programme (UFCP) assure
le Secrétariat du CSO.

6.2 Comité technique de pilotage ( CTP )

6.2.1. Établissement. Le CTP sera constitué par ordonnance ministérielle.  Il se
réunira en séance ordinaire au moins une (1) fois par an et en séance extraordinaire si
cela est nécessaire.

6.2.2 Composition. Le CTP sera composé des représentants désignés des ministères
impliqués dans la mise en œuvre du Programme (Secrétaires Permanents, Directeurs
Généraux, Assistants des Ministres ou Conseillers), des Gouverneurs des Provinces de la
zone du Programme, du coordonnateur du PRODEFI et du Programme ainsi que des



Appendix I EB 2015/115/R.6

9

coordonnateurs des autres projets financés par le FIDA intervenant dans la zone du
Programme. Le CTP sera présidé par le MINAGRIE, la Vice-présidence sera assurée par le
Ministère ayant les finances dans ses attributions et le Secrétariat sera assuré par le
coordonnateur du Programme.

6.2.3. Responsabilités. Le CTP supervise l’état d’avancement du Programme et
veille à l’atteinte de ses objectifs et au respect de sa stratégie d’intervention. A ce titre,
le CTP aura pour rôle de : i) approuver les programmes de travail et budgets annuels
(PTBA); ii) approuver les rapports annuels d’exécution; iii) examiner et approuver les
rapports d’audit; iv) vérifier l’application des recommandations des missions de
supervision, de revue à mi-parcours et d’audit; et v) veiller à la cohérence du Programme
et de ses PTBA avec les stratégies, politiques et projets en cours. Des comités techniques
de pilotage seront mis en place dans les régions, constitués de représentants des
ministères présents dans le CTP mais aussi de représentants d’autres partenaires
techniques et financiers présents dans la région, de la société civile et du secteur privé.
Les CTP régionaux seront présidés, par alternance, par les gouverneurs des provinces
concernées. Les CTP régionaux se réuniront régulièrement pour avaliser le PTBA régional
et de manière ad hoc en cas de contrainte technique conjoncturelle dans la mise en
œuvre du Programme.

7. Coordination du Programme: au niveau national par l'Unité de facilitation et de
coordination du Programme (UFCP) et au niveau régional par les Unités de facilitation et
de coordination régionales (UFCR)

7.1 Coordination nationale: l'Unité de facilitation et de coordination du Programme
(UFCP)

7.1.1 Établissement. L'UFCP a été créée par ordonnance ministérielle. L'UFCP déjà
établie à Bujumbura dans le cadre du PRODEFI assure la coordination du Programme au
niveau national. Un redéploiement du personnel déjà en place dans le cadre du PRODEFI
et un recrutement du personnel additionnel nécessaire seront effectués pour la gestion
du PRODEFI et du Programme.

7.1.2. Composition. L’UFCP est dirigée par le coordonnateur du PRODEFI et son
adjoint et est organisée en deux sous-unités, l’une technique et l’autre administrative et
fiduciaire. Au niveau technique, l’UFCP est composée par:  i) un responsable en génie
rural; ii) un responsable en développement des filières, iii) un responsable en emplois
jeunes ruraux, iv) un responsable genre et v) un responsable nutrition. Au niveau
administratif et fiduciaire, l’UFCP est composée par i) un responsable administratif et
financier,  ii) un comptable, iii) un assistant administratif, iv) un secrétaire, v) un
responsable en suivi-évaluation, vi) un responsable en passation de marché, vii) un
planton–coursier; viii) un agent de sécurité; ix) cinq chauffeurs et x) tout autre cadre
d’appui convenu entre le gouvernement et le FIDA.

7.1.3 Responsabilités. L’UFCP assure la coordination au niveau national et disposera
de l’autonomie administrative et financière nécessaire. Elle est responsable de la mise en
œuvre du Programme, et en ce sens elle assurera: i) la programmation et la coordination
budgétaire, notamment l’élaboration du PTBA et le suivi-évaluation des activités des
PTBA; ii) la préparation, en concertation avec les services techniques concernés, des
dossiers d'appel d'offres des travaux, des fournitures et des services et la passation des
marchés; iii) le suivi technique et budgétaire des activités et des résultats; iv) la
préparation des rapports semestriels et annuels d'activités; v) la coordination des actions
transversales du Programme; vi) l'organisation de la circulation de l'information entre les
différents partenaires concernés; vii) l'assistance, l'appui technique, le suivi des deux
unités de facilitation et coordination régionales (au centre et au nord) du Programme
dans la mise en œuvre des différentes activités; viii) le contrôle de la qualité des



Appendix I EB 2015/115/R.6

10

réalisations et de la performance des prestataires de service et, ix) le suivi de la mise en
œuvre des orientations instruites par le CSO et le CTP, la mise en cohérence et la
coordination avec les autres projets financés par le FIDA et les partenaires techniques et
financiers au niveau national.

7.2 Coordination régionale: les Unités de facilitation et de coordination régionales
(UFCR)

7.2.1 Établissement. Deux unités régionales, au centre et au nord, sont établies et
sont placées sous la responsabilité hiérarchique de l’UFCP.

7.2.2 Composition. Chaque UFCR est composée de i) un coordinateur régional qui
sera assisté par  ii) un spécialiste en infrastructures rurales, iii) un spécialiste
filières/agronome, iv) un spécialiste en élevage, v) un assistant en suivi-évaluation, vi)
un assistant en passation de marché, vii) un assistant administratif, viii) un planton–
coursier, ix) un agent de sécurité et x) deux chauffeurs.

7.2.3 Responsabilités. Les UFCR assurent la mise en œuvre des activités et ont pour
responsabilités i) la coordination du Programme à l’échelle régionale et les liens avec
l’administration déconcentrée et les collectivités territoriales; ii) l’élaboration des PTBA
régionaux, iii) l’évaluation des contrats de performance avec les prestataires de services
locaux, iv) le suivi rapproché des activités mises en œuvre dans le cadre du Programme
par les différents acteurs et, v) la passation de petits marchés avec l’appui du
responsable de passation de marché national.



Appendix I EB 2015/115/R.6

11

Annexe 2

Tableau d’affectation des fonds

Affectation du produit du don du Fonds et du don du Fonds fiduciaire ASAP. Le tableau ci-
dessous indique les catégories de dépenses admissibles à un financement sur le produit du
don du Fonds et du don du Fonds fiduciaire ASAP ainsi que le montant du don du Fonds et
du don du Fonds fiduciaire ASAP affecté à chaque catégorie et la répartition en
pourcentage des dépenses à financer pour chacun des postes des différentes catégories:

Catégorie

Montant alloué au
titre du don du

Fonds (exprimé en
DTS)

Montant alloué au
titre du don du
Fonds Fiduciaire

ASAP (exprimé en
DTS)

Pourcentage

1. Génie civil et rural 6 910 000 1 050 000

100% HT et Hors
Contribution des
Bénéficiaires et

du
Gouvernement

2. Moyens de transport et
équipement 2 950 000

100% HT et Hors
Contribution des
Bénéficiaires et

du
Gouvernement

3. Études, formation, assistance
technique et contrats de service 4 850 000 790 000 100% HT et HorsContribution du

Gouvernement

4. Fonds d'appui 6 330 000 1 320 000
100% HT et Hors
Contribution des

Bénéficiaires

5. Entretien et fonctionnement 500 000
100% HT et Hors

Contribution du
Gouvernement

6. Salaires 1 950 000 100%

Non alloué 2 610 000 350 000

TOTAL 26 100 000 3 510 000



Appendix I EB 2015/115/R.6

12

Annexe 3

Clauses particulières

Conformément aux dispositions de la section 12.01 a) des Conditions générales, le Fonds
peut suspendre, en totalité ou en partie, le droit du Bénéficiaire de solliciter des retraits
du compte du don si le Bénéficiaire n’a pas respecté l'une quelconque des clauses
énoncées ci-dessous, et si le FIDA a établi que ladite défaillance a eu, ou risque d'avoir,
un effet préjudiciable important sur le Programme:

1. Suivi et évaluation (S&E). Le Fonds mettra en place un système de missions de
supervision du PRODEFI et du Programme qui seront organisées sur une base annuelle
avec la participation du MINAGRIE. Le système de S&E du Programme s’alignera sur le
système de S&E du PRODEFI. L’étude de la situation de référence du PRODEFI sera
actualisée mais fera ressortir les indicateurs à mesurer pour le Programme.

2. Recrutement. La sélection des cadres supplémentaires à recruter par le
Programme se fera par voie d’appel d’offres national publié dans la presse selon les
procédures actuelles du Bénéficiaire, excluant toute discrimination. Le recrutement de
ces cadres se fera sur la base de contrats renouvelables ne pouvant, en toute hypothèse,
excéder la durée du Programme  et le cas échéant, la décision de rompre leur contrat,
sera décidée en accord avec le Fonds. Le personnel chargé de mettre en œuvre le
PRODEFI  et le Programme sera soumis à des évaluations de performances organisées
annuellement. Il pourra être mis fin à leur contrat en fonction des résultats de ces
évaluations. Le recrutement et la gestion du personnel d’appui seront soumis aux
procédures en vigueur sur le territoire du Bénéficiaire.

3. Égalité. Toute discrimination fondée sur le sexe, l’âge, l’appartenance ethnique ou
religieuse ne sera pas admissible lors du recrutement du personnel du Programme,
conformément aux lois en vigueur sur le territoire du Bénéficiaire. Cependant, le
Bénéficiaire s’engage, à compétence égale, à privilégier les candidatures de femmes,
notamment aux postes techniques à pourvoir dans le cadre du Programme.



1
3

A
p
p
en

d
ix

II
E
B
 2

0
1
5
/1

1
5
/R

.6

Logical framework

Composante/Sous-Composante Indicateurs Source de vérification Risques et mode d'atténuation et de contrôle

Objectif global : Contribuer à l'augmentation des
revenus et à l'amélioration de la sécurité alimentaire
des ménages pauvres dans les zones d'intervention
du projet par le bais du  renforcement des filières
agricoles prioritaires

1. Taux  de prévalence de l’insécurité alimentaire dans les zones concernées par le
programme baisse de 75% à 65% à l'horizon 2020;
2. Diminution du taux de l'insuffisance pondérale4 de 30,6% à 22,6 % à horizon
2019;
3. Réduction de 15 % de la prévalence de la malnutrition infantile chronique
(garçons et filles) passant de 64,4% à 49,4% à l'horizon 2019;
4. Augmentation des revenus des bénéficiaires  surtout les jeunes et les femmes
au moins de 30%;
5. Au moins 33 542 familles sont bénéficiaires du programme;
6. Au moins 2 00 000 agriculteurs/femmes/jeunes sont bénéficiaires du programme;
7. 8 000 ménages ciblés devenant plus résilients5 au changement climatique.

Evaluation d’impact par rapport à
l’enquête socioéconomique de base
(incluant la situation de référence) par
des consultants externes; Enquête de
vulnérabilité et la sécurité alimentaire;
Rapports de suivi et évaluation; Rapport
d’activités annuels par l’équipe du projet
Etudes des effets et impacts du
programme à mi-parcours et à
l’achèvement du programme par le
expertise externe6;  Revue à Mi-Parcours
et Rapport de la mission d’achèvement7

Les risques liés à l'insécurité et à l'instabilité politique sont atténués
par une adaptation du calendrier du projet en tenant compte des
rendez-vous électoraux; prévoir dans le costing une marge pour
couvrir  les imprévus liés à l’ inflation non maitrisées

Objectif de développement : Accroître le capital
physique productif, en augmentant la résilience des
systèmes de production au changement climatique,
intensifier l’agriculture et l’élevage y compris pour
améliorer l’état nutritionnel dans le but ultime de
structurer les filières lait et riz, y compris pour
augmenter l’emploi des jeunes et renforcer la capacité
des acteurs

8. Production  du riz augmentent de 1 à 4,5 par hectare entre 2016 et 2020 et de 5
à 9 l/jour;
9. Augmentation de la marge nette de 50 000 USD environ pour les CCL de 1000 l
et 18000 pour les CCL de 500 l,;
10. Augmentation de la marge nette de 40 000 environ à 218 000 USD environ pour
les décortiqueuses;

Rapport d'activités annuels par l’équipe
du programme;  Rapports de supervision
annuels;, , Etudes d’effets et d’impacts à
mi-parcours et à l’achèvement du
programme et Etude de la situation de
référence par expertise externe; Revue à
Mi-Parcours et Rapport de la mission
d’achèvement

La complémentarité et l’intégration des sous composantes va
contribuer à lever les contraintes au développement des filières qui
restent peu développées. L’articulation du PRODEFI II avec le
PRODEFI va permettre de consolider les acquis lors de la première
phase du programme.

Composante 1: Accroissement durable du capital productif et renforcement des capacités institutionnelles des acteurs des filières

Sous-Composante 1.1:Aménagements hydro-
agricoles et infrastructures

11. 23 300 ha  bassins versants aménagés;
12. 2 330 ha de  marais et périmètres aménagés organisés et gérés par des AUM;
13. 155 kms de pistes réhabilitées et/ou créées (km);

Rapports d'activités annuels par l’équipe
du projet; Rapports d'évaluation des
prestataires semestriels par l’équipe du
projet; Rapport de supervision annuels
par le FIDA;; Etude de la situation de
référence au démarrage, Etudes des
effets et impacts du programme à mi-
parcours et à l’achèvement du
programme par expertise externe,
Rapports de supervision annuel par le
FIDA, Revue à Mi-Parcours et Rapport
de la mission d’achèvement

Le Remplacement  le cas échéant de certains marais non
aménageables par d'autres sites adaptés; Sensibilisation  des
éleveurs et des services techniques de l'Etat sur les méthodes de
gestion de l'exploitation des dispositifs antiérosifs pour éviter les
dégâts des animaux; Sensibilisation  des  services de l'Etat à la
nécessité de cofinancer un programme national de l'inventaire des
terres domaniales et communales

4 0 à 2 ans.
5 Dans le cadre du PRODEFI II, un ménage est considéré comme ayant amélioré sa résilience au changement climatique s’il remplit les conditions suivantes : (i) il bénéficie d’une superficie dans le
bas-fonds protégée contre les inondations, (ii) il pratique des actions de lutte contre l’érosion et d’intensification fourragère telles que promues sur le bassin versant de concentration des activités
ASAP, (iii) il bénéficie d’infrastructures pouvant résister à des évènements extrêmes comme les inondations provoquées par le changement climatique ou, (iv) la commune où il réside a intégré un
volet de gestion des risques climatiques dans son Pan Communal de Développement Communautaire (PCDC).
6 Les Etudes d’Effets et impacts sont réalisées par le programme dans le cadre du système de Suivi-Evaluation mis en place.
7 Ces deux missions sont dirigées par le FIDA.



1
4

A
p
p
en

d
ix

II
E
B
 2

0
1
5
/1

1
5
/R

.6

Sous-Composante 1.2: Adaptation aux changements
climatiques

14. Schéma directeur d’aménagement élaboré, approprié et utilisé par toutes les
parties prenantes;
15. 70% de la valeur infrastructures protégées contre les extrêmes climatiques
conservés;
16. processus national d’élaboration de normes mené en 2019;

Rapports d'activité annuels et Rapports
d'évaluation des prestataires semestriels
par l’équipe du programme; Rapports de
supervision annuels par le FIDA; Etude
de la situation de référence au
démarrage, Etudes des effets et impacts
du programme à mi-parcours et à
l’achèvement du programme par
expertise externe, Revue à Mi-Parcours
et Rapport de la mission d’achèvement

La réalisation du schéma est amorcée dès le démarrage du
programme sur les fonds de démarrage; Coordonner
l’aménagement  des ouvrages de voie d'eau et l’aménagement des
marais Renforcement des capacités , Sensibilisation amont des
autorités compétentes et interaction avec la plateforme nationale
sur les CC pour accélérer la revue des normes; Evaluation des
dossiers techniques par l'expertise GR internationale du PRODEFI;
Les actions innovantes seront développées à l’échelle test avec un
appui des institutions spécialisées régionales expérimentées en
terme d'innovation et  de recherche-action pour un partenariat
solide avec les bénéficiaires;

Sous-Composante 1.3: Intensification de la
production agricole

17. 39, 100, 112 CEP rizicoles, vivrières, et d’élevage réalisées;
18. .240  ACSA autonomes;
19. Au moins 5 000agriculteurs (trices) formés dans les CEP et adoptant les
nouvelles techniques (N);
20. Au moins 3 000 ménages bénéficient de vaches de race améliorées;
21. Au moins 30% des ménages bénéficiaires ayant adopté le SRI.

Rapports d'activité annuels et Rapports
d'évaluation des prestataires semestriels
par l’équipe du programme; Rapports de
supervision annuels par le FIDA; Etude
de a situation de Référence au
démarrage,  Etudes des effets et impacts
du programme à mi-parcours et à
l’achèvement du programme par
expertise externe, Revue à Mi-Parcours
et Rapport de la mission d’achèvement

possibilité de remplacer le riz par des spéculations et/ou d'autres
variétés  plus adaptées au zones de haute altitude Responsabiliser
et former les comités de suivi de la chaîne pour éviter l’érosion
améliorer les techniques de vulgarisation pour une adoption
optimale des innovations et mettre en place des mécanismes de
durabilité

Sous-Composante 1.4: Structuration communautaire
inclusive et articulation institutionnelle

22. Au moins 35 CDC and  16 CCDC formés ();
23. Au moins 2000  veaux/velles de 2ème et 3ème génération redistribuées le long de
la CSCB.

Rapports d'activité annuels; Rapports
d'évaluation des prestataires semestriels
par l’équipe du programme; Rapports de
supervision annuels par le FIDA;  Etude
de a situation de référence au
démarrage, Etudes des effets et impacts
du programme à mi-parcours et à
l’achèvement du programme par
expertise externe, Revue à Mi-Parcours
et Rapport de la mission d’achèvement

Instabilité des comités des structures communautaires: renforcer
les capacités des nouveaux élus;  pourcentage de femmes et de
jeunes membres des comités faible: sensibiliser et former les
membres sur l'approche genre et l’intégration des jeunes

Sous-Composante 1.5: Lutte contre la malnutrition
aigüe et chronique

24. Au moins 5000 ménages en situation de difficultés alimentaires touchés par le
projet
25. Au moins 15 000 enfants et d’adultes ayant changé de comportements
nutritionnels (N);
26. 3 500 personnes ayant bénéficié du Foyer d’Apprentissage Nutritionnel (FAN)
(N);

Rapports d’activités annuels par l’équipe
du projet ainsi que les rapports
semestriels par l’équipe du programme.
Etude de la situation de référence au
démarrage, Etudes des effets et impacts
du programme à mi-parcours et à
l’achèvement du programme par
expertise externe, Revue à Mi-Parcours
et Rapport de la mission d’achèvement

Ouverture d'esprit et motivation des autorités locales pour les
changements d'habitudes alimentaires/ femmes pour devenir
mamans lumières disponibles; Femmes  volontaires pour devenir
mamans lumières disponibles

Composante 2: Valorisation et renforcement des filières

Sous-Composante 2.1: Cadre Organisationnel et
financement des filières

27. Au moins 3 000 bénéficiaires des crédits de campagne (octroyés à travers des
organisations de producteurs);
28. Au moins 1 500  bénéficiaires des crédits de stockage et de transformation;

Rapports d'activité annuels et rapport
d’évaluation des IMF semestriels par
l’équipe du programme; bilans des
institutions financières, Etude de la
situation de référence au démarrage,
Etudes des effets et impacts du
programme à mi-parcours et à
l’achèvement du programme par
expertise externe, Revue à Mi-Parcours
et Rapport de la mission d’achèvement

IMF ne s'intéressent pas aux bénéficiaires des sites du projet: mise
en place de mesures incitatives et d’intermédiation  permettant aux
IMF à offrir des  produits adaptés et services  dans les sites du
projet pour répondre aux besoins (achat d’intrants, crédits
commerciaux..) ; renforcement des capacités de coopératives pour
établir des partenariats

Sous-Composante 2.2: Appui aux filières

29. Augmentation des capacités de stockage d’au moins 25%  et de transformation
d’au moins 20 % de la filière riz;
30.  Augmentation des capacités de stockage d’au moins 25% et de transformation
d’au moins 100% de la filière lait;
31. Au moins 2 filières secondaires appuyées;

Rapports d'activité annuels et  Rapports
d'évaluation des prestataires semestriels
par l’équipe du programme; Rapports de
supervision annuels du FIDA,  Comptes
d'exploitation des unités de production;
Etude de la situation de référence au

certaines spéculations sont inadaptées à certaines zones agro-
écologiques: ou il y a nécessité de diversification;



1
5

A
p
p
en

d
ix

II
E
B
 2

0
1
5
/1

1
5
/R

.6

démarrage, Etudes des effets et impacts
du programme à mi-parcours et à
l’achèvement du programme par
expertise externe, Revue à Mi-Parcours
et Rapport de la mission d’achèvement

Sous-Composante 2.3: Amélioration de l’emploi
durable et décent des jeunes ruraux par des
structures spécialisées

32. Au moins 150 entreprises créées par les jeunes et les femmes (N);
33. Au moins 4 000emplois durables créés par les jeunes et les femmes (N);
34. Au moins 1 500 AGR créées par les femmes et les jeunes.

Rapports d’activités annuels et rapport
d’évaluation des prestataires semestriels
par l’équipe du programme; Etude de la
situation de référence au démarrage,
Etudes des effets et impacts du
programme à mi-parcours et à
l’achèvement du programme par
expertise, Revue à Mi-Parcours et
Rapport de la mission d’achèvement
externe

Faible capacité des CRIF à offrir les services aux jeunes et aux
entrepreneurs: mise en place d'un appui technique, institutionnel et
pédagogique destiné aux gestionnaires et personnels des CRIF;
Les administrations communales, les associations des jeunes et
les organisations de producteurs s’approprient le projet;

Composante 3: Accompagnement des structures, gestion du savoir et facilitation

Sous-Composante 3.1: Renforcement des capacités
des acteurs locaux et des UFC Régionales

35. Au moins 25 formations prévues dans le plan de formation et réalisées;
36. Au moins 50%  DPAE renforcées et fonctionnelles en matière de SE (%);

Rapports d’activités annuels par l’équipe
du programme, Revue à Mi-Parcours et
Rapport de la mission d’achèvement

L'appui  aux DPAE est tributaire à leur participation active au moins
au niveau du suivi. Les fonctions régaliennes sont assurées par
l'Etat. Le projet y aura recours autant que possible; Appui ponctuel
au système existant qui permet de mieux rendre compte des
résultats atteints par le projet.

Sous-Composante 3.2 : Facilitation, coordination et
gestion du programme PRODEFI au niveau national

37. Au moins 80% de Taux d'exécution budgétaire ;
38. Au moins 80% Taux d'exécution des PTBA;
39. 100% de rapports attendus effectivement produits (%);
40. Au moins 80% du budget alloué aux UFC réalisé.

Rapports d’activités annuels par l’équipe
du Programme,  PTBA et PPM,
Rapports d’audits externes,  Etude de la
situation de référence au démarrage,
Etudes des effets et impacts du
programme à mi-parcours et à
l’achèvement du programme par
expertise externe, Revue à Mi-Parcours
et Rapport de la mission d’achèvement

Budget, Assistance technique internationale dans les thèmes
principaux: aménagement, transformation/commercialisation,
emplois jeunes ruraux; utilisation du dispositif  et des cadres déjà
en place (PRODEFI)



