






























































President’s report

Proposed loan and grant to the Kingdom of
Swaziland for the Smallholder Market-led
Project

Kingdom of Swaziland

Smallholder Market-led Project

Financing summary

Initiating institution: IFAD

Borrower/recipient: Kingdom of Swaziland

Executing agency: Ministry of Agriculture

Total project cost: US$21.1 million

Amount of IFAD loan: EUR 8.55 million (equivalent to approximately
US$9.6 million)

Amount of IFAD grant: SDR 0.36 million (equivalent to approximately
US$0.5 million)

Terms of IFAD loan: 18 years, including a grace period of three years, with
an interest rate equivalent to one hundred per cent of
the variable interest rate, as determined annually by the
IFAD Executive Board

Cofinancier(s): To be identified

Amount of cofinancing: US$3.8 million

Terms of cofinancing: To be determined

Contribution of borrower/recipient: US$6.6 million

Contribution of private sector: US$0.6 million

Appraising institution: IFAD

Cooperating institution: Directly supervised by IFAD



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

1

Recommendation for approval

The Executive Board is invited to approve the recommendation for the proposed
financing to the Kingdom of Swaziland for the Smallholder Market-led Project
(SMLP), as contained in paragraph 46.

Proposed loan and grant to the Kingdom of Swaziland for
the Smallholder Market-led Project

I. Strategic context and rationale
A. Country and rural development and poverty context
1. Although Swaziland is classified as a middle-income country, with a relatively high

GDP of US$2,415 per capita, 63 per cent of the population live below the national
poverty line and an estimated one in four of the adult population is affected by
HIV/AIDS. The predicament of the most vulnerable worsened during the recent
fiscal crisis, which had an adverse impact on employment and key social
programmes, including basic health and educational programmes. Recent economic
growth, which owes much to higher Southern African Customs Union (SACU)
revenues over the past two years, has not been pro-poor and there are indications
that the terms currently enjoyed by Swaziland in SACU may soon become less
favourable.

2. Poverty in Swaziland is predominantly rural and varies among the country’s four
regions and between different ecological zones. Regionally, the prevalence of
poverty in 2010 was greatest in Lubombo region at 69 per cent, followed by
Shiselweni region at 68 per cent.

3. The main factors contributing to rural poverty are small landholdings and low land
productivity, compounded by frequent droughts that lead to crop failure and loss of
livestock. People are often isolated from markets and information sources and have
limited access to off-farm employment opportunities. All these factors are
aggravated by the very high prevalence of HIV/AIDS, trapping the poor in poverty
and militating against recovery. Frequent drought has been attributed to climate
change and has led to a decline in Swaziland‘s food production. About a quarter of
the Swazi population is food insecure and dependent on assistance, and a third of
children under five are stunted.

B. Rationale and alignment with government priorities and RB-
COSOP

4. Poverty and food insecurity are still widespread in rural areas, in spite of the
country’s economic development. The high poverty rates suggest that past
government policies and programmes have not been able to adequately address the
needs of the poor rural population. Smallholder agriculture remains the backbone of
rural livelihoods, while it is often drought prone and characterized by low
productivity and isolation from markets. IFAD projects, namely the Lower Usuthu
Smallholder Irrigation Project (LUSIP), the Lower Usuthu Sustainable Land
Management Project (LUSLM) and the Rural Finance and Enterprise Development
Programme (RFEDP), demonstrate the potential for smallholder farming systems to
(a) cover basic food needs; and (b) enter into remunerative value chains, if the
right inputs, services and market linkages are provided together with a strict focus
on targeting the poor and disadvantaged.

5. The above projects demonstrated the relevance of access to irrigation water for
smallholder crops such as maize, but even more so for potential high-value crops



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

2

such as vegetables. The RFEDP developed a honey value chain, which was adopted
by wholesalers and has become very prominent among farmers with small
landholdings and few livestock. The experience shows that the productivity of staple
crops such as maize can be enhanced through access to irrigation, inputs and
better farming technology, leading to better nutrition and food security among food
deficient households. More advanced, economically active households have strong
potential for entering remunerative value chains with the surplus produce of high-
value crops such as vegetables, which they are able to produce with the support of
dedicated business development services and dedicated wholesalers.

II. Project description
A. Project area and target group
6. The project will be implemented over a six-year period in 25 chiefdoms in the

rainfed Middleveld and Lowveld areas of the Lubombo and Shiselweni regions. It
will target poor smallholder farmers that are (i) food-deficient and living at a
subsistence level; and (ii) economically active and able to sell surplus production.
The farmers will be assisted in increasing their farm productivity and production
through access to irrigation, inputs, training and access to services. Economically
active farmers will sell surplus production to wholesalers to increase income. Along
selected value chains, employment opportunities will be created for young people,
for example in managing collection and information centres. The activities are
tailored to the capacities of smallholders, including women and families affected by
HIV/AIDS.

B. Project development objective
7. The project’s goal is to contribute to national poverty reduction. The development

objective is to enhance food and nutrition security and incomes among smallholder
producer families through diversified agricultural production and market linkages.
By the end of the project, rural poverty should be reduced by 20 per cent in the
targeted chiefdoms and food insecurity reduced by 50 per cent in currently food
deficient households. The project’s three major outcomes are: (i) the project
chiefdoms engage in effective planning and decision-making; (ii) soil and water
resources are sustainably managed for market-led smallholder agriculture in the
project chiefdoms; and (iii) smallholder producers in the project chiefdoms supply
crop and livestock products to market partners, while subsistence farmers are
enabled to produce sufficient nutritious food for themselves.

C. Components/outcomes
8. The project will have three components:

9. Component 1: Chiefdom development planning. In each chiefdom, community-
based development planning will be the starting point to identify and direct
development activities to the targeted households. To this end, an institutional
framework supporting decision-making by the traditional leadership will (where
needed) be established and strengthened. Community development committees
(CDCs) will be assisted in processing information on the chiefdom’s resource base,
population, any bottlenecks and opportunities, and development options and
priorities for inclusion in a chiefdom development plan.

10. Component 2: Infrastructure for soil and water conservation. Investments in
soil and water conservation at sub-catchment and homestead levels will help
harness irrigation and drinking water resources for both enhanced subsistence and
market-led agricultural production. The infrastructure will be designed for erosion
control and water catchment to improve and safeguard productive land. The main
interventions will focus on preventing silting in water reservoirs and harnessing
run-off for agricultural production. This component will comprise erosion control,
the rehabilitation of approximately 18 existing and construction of approximately
two new small earth dams and the installation of rainwater-harvesting equipment.



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

3

11. The process of planning, design, construction and operation and maintenance of the
above infrastructure combines oversight by the CDC, active participation of the
producers benefiting from the infrastructure, and sound engineering services
through existing or hired specialized agencies. The new construction of dams
requires a rigorous planning process, with environmental impact assessments and
checks and balances on engineering and aftercare. Producers benefiting from this
infrastructure will form users’ groups to operate, maintain and guard the
infrastructure.

12. Component 3: Market-led smallholder agriculture. The project will support
smallholder farmers in enhancing their crop and livestock production through
improved access to efficient technical advice, agricultural technology including post-
harvest processing and storage, farm inputs and irrigation. In addition to achieving
higher productivity, especially in the case of food deficient farm households,
economically active households will be linked to markets, including small local
traders and larger wholesalers such as the National Agricultural Marketing Board
(NAMBoard) and Eswatini Kitchen, a private company.

13. The project will concentrate on commodities that respond to the food and income
requirements of farmers and the productive capacity of the project area.
Commodities identified thus far include beekeeping, legumes, vegetables, fruits,
indigenous chicken and goats. In addition, technical support will be provided for
major staple crops such as maize and sorghum to safeguard household food
security.

14. The main approach for developing value chains will involve setting up innovation
platforms, where representatives of wholesalers, buyers, extension services,
business development services, rural finance services and smallholder farmers will
identify together the required improvements and innovations. Measures include
providing market information, estimating market demand, sourcing from new
internal and external markets, business plan development, financial services,
backward and forward linkages between wholesalers/buyers and producers, and
extension services. These activities aim to establish pro-poor value chains by using
existing unmet market demand as the entry point for agricultural development, and
will help gear agricultural practices to the specifics – in terms of quantity, quality
and timeliness – of that market demand, and ultimately raise incomes and increase
food availability among poor rural households.

III. Project implementation
ApproachA.

15. The Smallholder Market-led Project (SMLP) is a six-year project that uses the
availability of confirmed markets as a driver for promoting smallholder production
for household nutrition and sale of marketable surplus. Both intervention areas
follow a clear value chain development approach that includes all players from
production through to processing, services and marketing.

16. Chiefdom development planning (CDP) is the starting point to involve both food
deficient and economically active households. Investments in soil and water
conservation are the next step to increase productivity in smallholder farms and to
safeguard a sustainable natural resource basis for market-led production. The
involvement of wholesalers such as NAMBoard and Eswatini Kitchen will bring the
essential pull for the smallholders, while they also bring in the essential technical
services for improvements in agricultural production and marketing. Business
service providers, for instance TechnoServe, will bring in the required know-how for
both producers and wholesalers, in terms of technical and business-related aspects
such as business planning and access to finance. The project approach builds on
existing policies, approaches and market demands, and offers an opportunity to
apply them on a larger scale while maintaining a focus on poor rural areas.



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

4

17. The choice for market-led development builds on the success of earlier projects,
notably RFEDP, LUSIP and LUSLM, in promoting smallholder agricultural production.
Support in terms of agricultural extension for better crop and livestock husbandry
and better capture of soil moisture and rainwater resulted in larger volumes of
agricultural produce. The surplus produced was, however, absorbed locally, with
little or no produce reaching national markets or sold at national market prices.
Although smallholders clearly have productive potential, national wholesalers are
either unable to cover their markets or have resorted to sourcing their demand
from producers elsewhere. Current demand for agricultural products in Swaziland
has not been linked to the agricultural potential of smallholder producers.

Organizational frameworkB.
18. The Ministry of Agriculture will be the lead agency for SMLP and will delegate day-

to-day project implementation to the Swaziland Water and Agriculture Development
Enterprise (SWADE), a parastatal with proven experience in the management and
implementation of similar projects. At the outset – to ensure smooth project start-
up – SWADE will be supported and strengthened with short-term technical
assistance on financial management and monitoring. SWADE will establish a
dedicated project implementation unit (PIU), which will work under Ministry of
Agriculture oversight comprising a project steering committee (PSC) and two
technical committees. The PSC will provide strategic advice on project
implementation and review and approve the results-based annual workplan and
budget (AWP/B), procurement plan and financial and technical progress reports. It
will be chaired by the Principal Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and
composed of high-level representatives of the Ministries of Natural Resources and
Energy, Economic Planning and Development and Finance. Other participants may
include NAMBoard, the Swaziland Environment Authority and other important
stakeholders.

19. The technical committees will guide the PIU with technical advice on CDP and
infrastructure, and on market-led infrastructure. Both committees will host the
relevant ministries, technical agencies and private sector. Project partners will be
engaged under service agreements. Wholesalers already identified include
NAMBOARD and Eswatini Kitchen.

Planning, monitoring and evaluation, and learning andC.
knowledge management

20. Planning. The main planning tools for SMLP comprise the logical framework, the
monitoring and evaluation (M&E) framework with its indicators and targets, and the
results-based AWP/B. The logframe provides the overall targets for project
implementation at the output, outcome, development objective and impact levels.
The results-based AWP/B breaks down these targets by year and assigns financial
resources by financier.

21. Every year, each project partner will prepare a results-based AWP/B, for
consolidation by the PIU. Guidelines and templates provided in the project
implementation manual will facilitate the planning and reporting process. The
AWP/Bs will be prepared under a participatory approach based on the chiefdom
development plans (see component 1). They will incorporate information from the
M&E systems of the PIU and project partners, and recommendations from IFAD
supervision and implementation support missions. The PSC will approve
consolidated draft AWP/Bs, which will then be submitted to the Government and
IFAD to seek their concurrence.

22. Monitoring and evaluation. The project will undertake regular monitoring of
activities, output and outcomes. Regular outcome surveys will provide information
on progress at the household level, and how project activities have led to change
and impact. Chiefdom socio-economic profiles will be used as a basis to monitor
and assess progress and targeting of development activities, as well as periodic



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

5

review of agreements reached between market partners in the innovation
platforms. Project M&E will be based on IFAD’s results and impact management
system (RIMS) and be complemented with indicators and surveys as required.

23. The project will conduct baseline studies using RIMS and multidimensional poverty
assessment tool methodologies. In addition to standard collection of gender and
age disaggregated data, the baseline and follow-up surveys will employ the women
empowerment in agriculture index, which measures women’s empowerment
relative to that of men at household level. SMLP has also been identified as a
potential candidate for the IFAD impact assessment studies.

24. Learning and knowledge management. Learning and sharing knowledge will be
firmly based on the project’s M&E system. The PIU will issue progress reports on a
quarterly basis to be reviewed by the PSC and technical committees. Besides
project reports, policy workshops and short publications will be prepared on key
lessons learned and disseminated to inform the public and trigger feedback at
national and regional levels.

Financial management, procurement and governanceD.
25. Financial management. The project’s financial management system will be in

compliance with Swaziland’s and IFAD’s financial regulations and procedures. Under
these procedures, the project will adopt an appropriate financial management
system that will include financial planning through AWP/Bs, financial accounting and
reporting, funds flow management, procurement and audit. The project will ensure
that adequate capacity in terms of human resources and equipment are in place.
The PIU financial management team will open and maintain appropriate accounting
records including books of account, asset and contract registers. The chart of
accounts will be based on government accounting codes to ensure full compliance
with the national system in addition to meeting IFAD requirements of cost analysis
by financier, expense category and component. Previous experience with exchange
visits of financial management staff between countries in the region was successful
in promoting the adaptation of financial management best practice. Financial
statements and reports will be prepared at the end of each quarter for oversight by
the project director. The reports will be consolidated and presented in semi-annual
physical and financial progress reports. SWADE uses the accrual-basis International
Financial Reporting Standards and audits are conducted in accordance with
International Standards on Auditing, the same standards as IFAD. Well-reputed
private-sector audit firms have in the past issued unqualified audit opinions on the
three areas required by IFAD: financial statements, withdrawal applications and the
designated account.

26. Flow of funds. IFAD and any cofinancing funds will be disbursed to the project
through the Ministry of Finance into designated accounts held at the Central Bank
of Swaziland. The accounts will be operated by the authorized representative(s) of
the Ministry of Finance. Separate operational accounts in local currency will be
opened by the project for each funding source, including Government counterpart
funds. Payments of cash expenses will be in line with the approved AWP/B.

27. Procurement. All project procurement of goods, works and services will be carried
out in line with the approved project procurement plan, in accordance with the
Public Procurement Act and Procurement Regulations to the extent consistent with
IFAD’s 2010 Procurement Guidelines. The Government procurement legal
framework accommodates provisions of IFAD guidelines where there is conflict.

28. Governance. An enhanced framework for good governance has been developed for
SMLP to ensure: (i) transparency; (ii) accountability in the use of resources; and
(iii) participation, with people having a voice in decisions that may affect them. Key
features of the framework include: (i) inclusive targeting of women and
disadvantaged households; (ii) participation of community representatives in local-
level planning; (iii) community and participatory monitoring of project activities,



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

6

including a complaints mechanism; (iv) internal and external audits of project
accounts; (v) IFAD supervision and support; (vi) regular outcome surveys to
provide information on the coverage and quality of project outputs; (vii) reporting
of results to the PSC, IFAD and national government institutions, with key
information published on a project website; and (viii) a complaints and remedies
mechanism. The framework will support the transparent use of funds and
constitutes a preventive measure against misuse of project funds.

SupervisionE.
29. The project will be directly supervised by IFAD, with a focus on: (i) fiduciary

aspects; (ii) achievements and quality of project implementation; and
(iii) implementation support. Direct supervision will be a continuous process
requiring sustained communication and engagement with the Government,
specifically the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry of Finance, the PIU, project
partners and the target group. Instruments for guiding and improving
implementation will include continuous policy dialogue with the Government,
adjusting AWP/Bs, revising implementation manuals, supervision and midterm
review missions, and amending legal agreements as appropriate.

30. During the start-up phase, supervision will focus on ensuring that the institutional
arrangements to support project implementation are in place. IFAD will support a
series of workshops and training sessions to sensitize all potential stakeholders,
service providers and beneficiaries to the project objectives and their own roles and
responsibilities. Targeted training during the start-up phase will aim to increase
technical capacities and ensure adequate implementation quality.

IV. Project costs, financing, benefits
A. Project costs
31. Total investment and recurrent costs, including contingencies, over the six-year

project life are estimated at US$21.1 million or 244.1 million Swazi emalangeni
(SZL). The parameters underpinning these costs are: (i) project duration of six
years; (ii) cost price inflation at 6 per cent for the project period and 3 per cent per
annum for six years for foreign inflation, in line with International Monetary Fund
estimates; (iii) an exchange rate calculated in constant purchasing power parity
from a base of SZL 10.6:US$1; (iv) government financing or waiver of all taxes on
goods, works and services procured under the project. Taxes have been estimated
using information from the Swaziland Revenue Authority that includes duties and
value added tax; (v) base costs are real costs at July 2014 prices; and (vi) physical
contingencies estimated at 5 per cent for the civil works. Price contingencies are
based on local and foreign inflation. The component estimates are summarized in
the following table:
Table 1
Project costs by component and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Component IFAD loan IFAD grant Private sector
Government
of Swaziland

Unidentified
financing Total

1. Chiefdom development
planning

700 200 - 600 800 2 300

2. Infrastructure for soil and
water conservation

2 200 - - 1 200 3 000 6 400

3. Market-led smallholder
agriculture

5 600 100 600 2 900 - 9 200

4. Project management 1 100 200 - 1 900 - 3 200

Total 9 600 500 600 6 600 3 800 21 100



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

7

B. Project financing
32. The loan will be provided on IFAD ordinary terms and conditions with a three-year

grace period and an 18-year maturity. IFAD will provide a grant equivalent to
US$500,000 to enhance the project’s start-up capacity, such as designing baseline
and impact studies and establishing the overall project M&E framework and
financial reporting system.

33. The project will be financed by IFAD, the private sector, the Government and
unidentified financiers. The IFAD financing will be in the form of a loan in an
amount equivalent to US$9.6 million and a grant in an amount equivalent to
US$0.5 million, for a total IFAD contribution of US$10.1 million. The Government
will contribute US$6.6 million and the private-sector contribution is estimated at
US$0.6 million. The financing gap of US$3.8 million is expected to be funded by the
Global Environment Facility (GEF) or another cofinancier to be identified.
Table 2
Project costs by expenditure category and financier
(Thousands of United States dollars)

Expenditure
category

IFAD loan IFAD grant Private sector Government
Unidentified
financing Total

Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount % Amount %

1. Consultanciesa 4 800 71.4 500 8.1 200 3.6 200 3.3 400 6.5 6 100 29.1
2. Equipment and

materials
1 200 65.5 - - - - 200 14.0 400 20.5 1 800 8.6

3. Goods, services
and inputsb

1 200 86.2 - - - - 200 14.3 - - 1 400 6.6

4. Works 1 300 26.2 - - - - 700 14.0 3 000 60.4 5 000 23.6
5. Operating costs 1 100 86.2 - - - - 200 13.8 - - 1 300 6.2
6. Salaries and

allowances
- - - - 400 6.3 5 100 93.7 - - 5 500 25.9

Total 9 600 45.6 500 2.4 600 2.7 6 600 31.5 3 800 17.8 21 100 100.0
a Includes studies, technical assistance and training.
b Includes vehicles.

C. Summary benefit and economic analysis
34. The overall economic internal rate of return of the project is estimated at

23 per cent for the base case. The net present value of the net benefit stream,
discounted at 5 per cent based on the Central Bank of Swaziland benchmark
interest rate/discount rate, is SZL 259.9 million (US$24.8 million). The analysis
shows significant net incremental benefits for farmers and rural entrepreneurs in
the project area.

35. An estimated 55,250 households will benefit directly from the project, of which
about 70 per cent or 40,000 households are classified as poor. It is estimated that
30 per cent of the target group will fully take up the project interventions related to
value chain activities, which in turn will lead to substantial increases in incomes and
the availability of nutritious food.

36. Benefits will accrue from: (i) efficient planning and implementation of pro-poor
development activities at chiefdom level; (ii) increased and sustainable access to
water for irrigation and drinking; (iii) increased productivity in livestock, crop and
horticulture production; and (iv) sustainable access to markets, services
(extension, finance) and inputs.

D. Sustainability
37. Project sustainability will be supported by close alignment with the policy and

planning framework in Swaziland. The project will assist in addressing emerging
needs, e.g. by increasing agricultural productivity and supplying consumer markets
with national products. CDP is expected to become a simpler tool that is easy to



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

8

apply and fully meets people's needs. Moreover, it will foster transparency in
decision-making and funding for development activities at community levels. The
introduction of soil and water conservation will protect the key resources of
smallholder farmers from degradation and in turn enhance productivity. Efficient
knowledge management will be the key element to distil successful approaches and
disseminate them widely. The Ministry of Agriculture will ensure that extension
services are better equipped and regularly trained to serve the chiefdoms.
Wholesalers such as NAMBOARD are likely to continue investing in smallholder
farmers, provided that the project succeeds in setting up value chains. This will also
encourage other wholesalers to undertake similar arrangements to source
agricultural produce from smallholders. The focus on commodities, already being
produced by smallholders and of high nutritious value, will generate long-term
benefits for the health of rural people.

E. Risk identification and mitigation
38. The principal risk areas affecting project execution include:

(i) Slow start up due to limited institutional capacity may reduce the likelihood
of the project reaching its targets. This risk has been mitigated by the
preparation of a draft project implementation plan and a financial
management manual during project design. The Government will finalize the
project manuals before project start-up. IFAD will finance start-up costs up to
US$500,000 equivalent to enhance technical capacity in project management,
especially for baseline surveys, M&E and financial management.

(ii) Non-availability of project financing would lead to a reduction of the
project area from 25 to about 20 chiefdoms. IFAD and the Government are
exploring mobilizing additional funds through PBAS reallocation as well as
cofinancing from GEF under GEF-6. In the case of both financing opportunities
being realized, the GEF funds will be used to increase complementary
activities and/or scale up the geographic scope. The SMLP, with its focus on
sustainable land management and climate-sensitive design, would be an ideal
baseline project for a GEF-6 grant.

(iii) Fiduciary risks. The inherent fiduciary risk in Swaziland is medium, based on
Transparency International and Rural Sector Performance Assessment scores.
Tools for effective financial management are present in SWADE, with strong
capacities in many areas. The challenges encountered in the past pertain to
the application and implementation of the control framework: financial
reporting, budgeting, staffing, mingling of financier and government funds,
and internal audit reports not being acted upon. Close collaboration was
needed on the preceding IFAD-funded project to achieve acceptable financial
management results. Consequently SMLP’s initial fiduciary risk assessment at
design is high, but these risks will be mitigated with technical assistance and
the application of lessons learned, starting with the incorporation of internal
control mechanisms into the financing agreement. Consequently, fiduciary risk
rating is expected to drop to medium during the first year of implementation.
The Ministry of Finance has a strong oversight role in management of external
funds and participates in the PSC. During design, a financial management
manual was prepared to guide the PIU on appropriate management of the
fiduciary aspects of the project. IFAD will provide close oversight through its
supervision and implementation support.

(iv) Reliability of existing market demand has been extensively researched during
project design. The involvement of NAMBoard in a number of the market chains
with smallholders suggests a fair degree of stability. Similarly, Eswatini Kitchen is a
confirmed reliable partner. Existing market demand may also be affected by
production in South Africa and by changes in global demand. The development of a



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

9

market information system under the project will mitigate this risk by
communicating early, allowing for mitigation measures in case of falling demand.

V. Corporate considerations
Compliance with IFAD policiesA.

39. Project design is compliant with the applicable IFAD policies and strategies. Both a
strategy for gender mainstreaming and targeting mechanisms have been
incorporated in the project design in accordance with the IFAD Policy on Gender
Equality and Women’s Empowerment and the IFAD Targeting Policy. The IFAD
Policy on Improving Access to Land and Tenure Security has informed the project’s
approach to addressing issues of land tenure insecurity under traditional
authorities. Potential negative environmental impact has been analysed and
mitigation measures designed in line with IFAD’s Environment and Natural Resource
Management Policy.

Alignment and harmonizationB.
40. Aside from harmonization with the Government’s Poverty Reduction Strategy and

Action Plan and with the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development
Programme and United Nations Development Assistance Framework, the project
will complement, derive lessons from and sustain positive initiatives emerging from
the Swaziland Agricultural Development Programme cofinanced by the European
Union (EU) and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. The
project will create space for learning between similar projects, such as the recently
started High-Value Crop and Horticulture Project funded by EU and European
Development Fund.

Innovations and scaling upC.
41. SMLP is based on experiences and lessons learned from its precursors and aims to

replicate successful practices on the largest scale possible in terms of both direct
inclusion of poor rural households and policy influence. The project applies an in-
built learning loop, whereby interventions start off on a small scale, then are
assessed for effectiveness and subsequently fine-tuned for replication on a wider
scale. This applies especially to results and lessons learned on innovation in market
linkages through the innovation platforms established by NAMBoard, Business
Development Services and buyers such as Eswatini Kitchen. Once approaches have
been tested and fine-tuned, the project can help roll out the innovation to the
entire designated project area.

Policy engagementD.
42. The project will inform policymakers on three key policy aspects: (i) efficient local

planning processes for development with CDP simplification; (ii) management of
small-scale irrigation by end users; and (iii) implementation of the new land law.
The project is well positioned to engage with policymakers and other stakeholders
as it can report the needs of smallholders, bring in the farmers’ representatives and
private-sector views, and provide quantitative and qualitative assessments for
policy discussions.

VI. Legal instruments and authority
43. A financing agreement between the Kingdom of Swaziland and IFAD will constitute

the legal instrument for extending the proposed financing to the borrower/recipient.
A copy of the negotiated financing agreement is attached as an annex.

44. The Kingdom of Swaziland is empowered under its laws to receive financing from
IFAD.

45. I am satisfied that the proposed financing will comply with the Agreement
Establishing IFAD and the Policies and Criteria for IFAD Financing.



EB 2015/LOT/P.9/Rev.1

10

VII. Recommendation
46. I recommend that the Executive Board approve the proposed financing in terms of

the following resolution:

RESOLVED: that the Fund shall provide a loan on ordinary terms to the
Kingdom of Swaziland in an amount of eight million five hundred fifty
thousand euros (EUR 8,550,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall
be substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented
herein.

RESOLVED FURTHER: that the Fund shall provide a grant to the Kingdom of
Swaziland in an amount of three hundred sixty thousand special drawing
rights (SDR 360,000) and upon such terms and conditions as shall be
substantially in accordance with the terms and conditions presented herein.

Kanayo F. Nwanze
President





