























































World Bank Document


COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: PIDISDSC17290

Date Prepared/Updated: 18-Nov-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Kenya Project ID: P154784
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

Project Name: Kenya Climate Smart Agriculture Project (P154784)
Region: AFRICA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

17-Oct-2016 Estimated 
Board Date:

31-Jan-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): The National  Treasury
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock and Fisheries

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT 29.70
International Development Association (IDA) 250.00
Total Project Cost 279.70

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Concept 
Review 
Decision:

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

Other Decision 
(as needed):

B. Introduction and Context

Country Context
1. Kenya's economy is larger and growing faster than previously estimated. Rebasing of its 


Gross Domestic Product (GDP) reveals that Kenya?s economy is the ninth largest in Africa and 
fifth largest in Sub-Saharan Africa (after Nigeria, South Africa, Angola, and Sudan)  . Kenya?s 
growth compares favorably with other countries. It no longer lags behind its regional peers or 
other lower-middle-income countries. Average growth between 2010 and 2013 was 6.2 percent?
significantly higher than the 5.3 percent average for Sub-Saharan Africa. Kenya?s 2013 growth 
rate of 5.7 percent was above the 5.0 percent average growth rate for lower-middle income 
countries.  In December 2014, Kenya?s GDP was estimated at US$55.2 billion (up from US$44.1 
billion before rebasing), with GDP per capita standing at US$1,246 (up from US$994). Kenya is 
now a lower-middle-income country, according to the World Bank classification, with Gross 
National Income (GNI) per capita of US$1,160 in 2013.   The economy was estimated to have 
grown 5.4 percent in 2014 and expected to grow by 6 percent in 2015 on the backdrop of 
significant improvement in external and internal balances, such as falling oil prices; and public 
investment, mainly in infrastructure (energy and the standard gauge railway). The World Bank 
projects that Kenya?s GDP will grow 6.6 percent in 2016, and 7.0 percent in 2017. 
 
2. Although poverty rates in Kenya seem to have fallen, formidable challenges at reducing 
poverty and increasing shared prosperity, in particular in rural areas, remain. Poverty reduction 
has been driven by solid growth across most sectors of the economy. But improvements in 
income are not evenly shared amongst people and inequality appears to be rising among regions.  
According to the World Bank Group Kenya Country Partnership Strategy (CPS 2014-2018), 
Kenya?s poverty rate has been falling?from 47 percent in 2005/06 to about 39 percent based on 
best estimates in 2012/13. But in the remote, arid, sparsely populated north-eastern parts of the 
country (Turkana, Mandera, and Wajir), poverty rates are above 80 percent.  The scale of 
consumption poverty in Kenya is staggering, and is concentrated in rural areas. Based on the last 
national household budget survey, close to half of the population (nearly 17 million Kenyans) was 
poor in 2005. The vast majority of the poor lived in rural areas and were more likely to depend on 
income and consumption from crops and livestock, as their main source of livelihood. Revised 
poverty estimates indicate that in 2013 nearly 4 in 10 Kenyans continue to live in extreme 
poverty.  
 
3. As the roles of national and county governments are restructured, and new county 
institutions are created, a fundamental challenge is to maintain the delivery of agricultural 
services. Under the new constitution adopted in 2010, the central government is devolving 
responsibility for multiple functions to 47 elected county governments and providing a minimum 
of 15 percent of national revenues to counties to carry out those functions. The main functions for 
agriculture (crop and animal husbandry services, extension, agricultural marketing and other 
related services) were transferred in August 2013 (the national government remains in charge of 
policy and research). With some exceptions, County agricultural services are in an embryonic 
state, with limited and in some cases no technical and/or operational capacity.
Sectoral and Institutional Context
4. In Kenya, agriculture remains one of the most important sectors of the economy. But 
about 83 percent of Kenya?s land area is in the Arid and Semi-Arid Lands (ASALs), which are 
mainly pastoral areas and the remaining 17 percent (where 80 percent of population lives) is 
classified as medium to high agricultural potential zone. In 2013, the sector contributed almost 27 
percent to the national GDP . The crops, livestock and fisheries sub-sectors contributed 
approximately 78, 20 and 2 percent to agricultural GDP respectively. The sector employs more 
than 75 percent of the workforce (also accounts for more than one-fifth of formal employment), 
generates most of the country?s food requirements, and plays a key role in poverty reduction. It 


also generates nearly two-thirds (65 percent) of merchandise exports and roughly 60 percent of 
foreign exchange earnings.  
 
5. Overall, Kenya?s agricultural sector performance has been highly volatile with growth 
rates dipping into negative territory in nine years between 1980 and 2012 (Figure 1 below). 
Kenya?s agricultural growth rate has averaged between 3.4 percent during 1995-2003 and 
decreased to an average of 2.1 percent in 2003-2011 period. Recent years have witnessed 
increased volatility in agricultural growth rates with debilitating impacts on rural households 
incomes and employment; urban and rural food security, poverty reduction and the country?s 
overall economic growth. The sector?s growth in real gross value-added decelerated in 2013 to 
2.9 percent from a revised growth of 4.2 percent in 2012. The lowest agricultural GDP growth 
rate and value-added was noted in 2008, during a period which Kenya experienced the post-
election violence following the country?s 2007 general elections. 
   
6. Extreme weather events, largely droughts and to a lesser extent floods, have been the 
principal driver behind the volatility in the agricultural sector?s performance in Kenya.  The 
frequency and intensity of severe weather events have increased and this trend will be further 
amplified in the future as temperatures rise due to climate change . The World Bank?s agricultural 
sector risk assessment (2014) highlighted that recurring drought has profound effects on the 
agricultural sector, particularly in maize (main staple food) and livestock (in pastoral systems) 
production. Frequent drought events resulted in precipitous crop losses, livestock deaths, spikes in 
food prices, increased food insecurity and malnutrition for the poor and led to rural population 
displacement (temporary migrations).  
 
7. Kenya?s strong reliance on rain fed maize production system in meeting its food needs 
and growing consolidation of production toward maize (and dry beans) has rendered the country 
increasingly vulnerable to supply disruptions and food shortages. Amid declining yields, 
productivity gains have come largely through land expansion into marginal areas that receive 
lower and more variable rainfall. This trend, coupled with Kenya? increasingly erratic rainfall, 
has made the country?s maize production more susceptible to moisture stress and year-on-year 
yield variability, with significant implications for national food security.  This has contributed to a 
growing structural deficit in maize/food production, a gap currently filled by rising imports, 
aggravating the country?s exposure to globally-driven commodity price shocks. Emergency food 
aid and other ex-post responses has helped fuel growing dependency and declining resilience, 
particularly among the poorest and especially those in the ASALs. 
 
8. Livestock production plays an important socio-economic role in many areas across 
Kenya, particularly in the ASALs where it accounts for as much as nine-tenths of employment 
and family income. Extensive livestock systems and pastoralists in Kenya?s northern rangelands 
are particularly vulnerable to the effects of drought. Estimated losses to livestock populations 
from droughts that have occurred within the most recent decade amount to more than US$1.08 
billion. Ancillary losses related to production assets and future income and the costs of ex-post 
response measures are likely several times that figure. The increased incidence of droughts across 
the ASALs in recent years means that affected communities have less time to recover and rebuild 
their assets. This has weakened traditional coping mechanisms and handicapped household 
resilience against future shocks. 
 
9. Climate variability is already having an impact on agriculture and food security in Kenya, 


as a result of increased prevalence of extreme events (especially droughts) and increased 
unpredictability of weather patterns.  For example, severe droughts that occurred in 1991/92, 
1995/96, 1998/2000, 2004/2005, and 2008-11, resulted in precipitous crop losses, livestock 
deaths, spikes in food prices, increased food insecurity and malnutrition for the poor, and led to 
rural population displacement (temporary migrations). Two noteworthy extreme climate events 
are the 1998 El Nino and the 2009 drought, which resulted in a combined total cost of US$2.8 
billion (about 7 percent of the 2010 GDP equivalent).   Frequent droughts also make Kenya 
significantly food insecure.  In 2015, it ranked 83rd of 109 countries, on the Global Food Security 
Index (GFSI).   Kenya is also highly vulnerable to climate change risks. The Center for Global 
Development ranks Kenya 13th out of 233 countries globally for ?direct risks? due to ?extreme 
weather? and 71st out of 233 for ?overall vulnerability? to climate change, even when adjusted 
for coping ability.  
 
10. Kenya?s average annual temperatures increased by 1Â°C between 1960 and 2003 , and 
by 1.5Â°C in the country?s drier regions.   Climate change is projected to reduce agricultural 
yields and livestock productivity, worsening the effect of climate shocks on the food system. 
Agriculture in Kenya is largely (98 percent) rain fed and thus extremely vulnerable to increasing 
temperatures and droughts.  Estimates of crop yield and livestock losses will vary greatly, but 
most global climate models project severe and adverse consequences, especially for the most 
food-insecure regions.  In Kenya, studies also show that by 2030, under a business as usual 
scenario, climate change will most likely reduce yields of staple crops (by 12 percent in maize, 23 
percent in rice, and 13 percent in wheat).  Crop land suitability is also expected to change, 
especially in wheat and maize. Depending on the region and types of production systems, water 
scarcity will result in less productive pastures, lower dairy yields, and higher risk of the spread of 
diseases.   
 
11. Climate change will exacerbate the vulnerability of Kenya?s agricultural sector as 
projections show increases in mean annual temperature of 1Â°C to 1.5Â°C by 2030. 
Consequently, changes in rainfall distribution and more frequent extreme events, such as 
prolonged drought and floods are predicted to result in more water shortages, especially in ASAL 
regions. While precipitation is projected to increase between 0.2 and 0.4 percent per year in 
Kenya, the direction and magnitude of change will vary considerably across regions, and 
warming-induced increases in evaporation rates are likely to offset the benefits of precipitation 
increases in some regions. Meeting this challenge will require both investments in building 
resilience to near-term shocks and in adapting to long-term climate change. In this context, 
climate smart agriculture (CSA) offers an appropriate strategic framework for responding to and 
reducing the adverse effects of climate change.  
 
12. Agriculture is the largest source of Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions in Kenya, 
contributing about 58.6 percent to total GHG emissions. Contributions of other sectors to national 
GHG emissions are: energy (25.3 percent), industry (3.2 percent) and waste management (1.2 
percent).   The agricultural sector is also a key driver of deforestation and land degradation, which 
account for an additional 32 percent of national GHG emissions.  Agricultural emissions are 
likely to increase from 20 MtCO2e in 2010 to 27 MtCO2e in 2030, largely driven by livestock 
methane emissions, which account for 96.2 percent of agricultural emissions. Agriculture, 
therefore, needs to reduce its GHG emissions and become part of the solution to tackle climate 
change. The sector plays an important role in sequestering carbon in soil and trees on farms.  It 
has the biophysical potential to offset and sequester about 20 percent of total annual emissions 



through improved soil management techniques.   Currently, the world?s soils hold three times 
more carbon than the atmosphere. Soils also have significant potential to absorb a larger amount 
of carbon from the atmosphere than they currently do.  Restoring this carbon to the soil will not 
only sequester carbon from the atmosphere, but also boost productivity, increase water retention 
(leading to greater resilience when droughts occur), bring land back into production (thereby 
reducing pressure on biodiversity and forests), and boost incomes (thereby benefiting the rural 
poor). Similarly, Kenya?s livestock GHG emission intensities (i.e. amount of GHGs emitted per 
unit of product) amongst the highest in the world; this is mainly due to low livestock productivity. 
With the continuing rising demand for livestock products this threatens to become a growing 
problem.  Increasing livestock productivity (e.g., through improved forages and providing 
adequate year-round feed resources) would increase incomes, protect people?s asset base, as well 
as reduce GHG e/unit of product.  
 
13. The proposed CSA project can help Kenya meet the rising demand for food; and attain 
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) of ending poverty (SDG1) and hunger (SDG2), and 
combating climate change and its impacts (SDG13). But this would require investing in 
agricultural technologies, innovations and management practices (TIMPs) that would lead into 
CSA?s triple-win: increased agricultural productivity, enhanced resilience to climate change, and 
reduced GHG emissions. 
 
14. Kenya has a wide spectrum of CSA policies, strategies and plans that would help secure 
the triple-win. The Vision 2030 recognizes the significance of agriculture to its goal of achieving 
an average GDP growth rate of 10 percent per year up to the year 2030. This level of growth will 
be crucial for attaining the SDGs 1 and 2 of ending poverty and hunger, respectively.  Kenya?s 
Agricultural Sector Development Strategy (ASDS, 2010?2020) operationalizes the Vision 2030 
by focusing on transforming smallholder agriculture from low-productivity subsistence activities 
to more innovative, agri-business oriented agriculture. Regarding adaptation to climate change, 
ASDS prioritizes investments in weather information systems, research on drought tolerant crop 
varieties, soil and water conservation, water harvesting, and strengthening integrated pest 
management systems. For livestock, it prioritizes improved management of grazing systems, 
biogas, livestock diversification, and improved breeding of animals.  
 
15. Kenya also has a National Climate Change Response Strategy (NCCRS, 2010) that 
provides a framework for integrating climate change into development priorities. The National 
Climate Change Action Plan (NCCAP, 2012)  operationalizes the NCCRS, and emphasizes low-
carbon, climate-resilient development pathway for the economy that is critical for achieving SDG 
13 of combating climate change and its impacts.  In the NCCAP, Kenya planned for a low-carbon 
Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs) pathway for six sectors, namely energy, 
transport, industry, agriculture, forestry and waste management.  The first activity undertaken 
under the NAMAs process was the analysis of emissions from the forestry and agriculture sectors. 
Selected practices for mitigation in the NCCAP included restoration of forest on degraded lands; 
REDD+; agroforestry; increase tree cover to 10 percent of total land area; conservation tillage; 
limiting use of fire in cropland; rangeland management; improved cook stoves; biogas; and 
management of agricultural wastes. The proposed Project will support these interventions, which 
are aimed at achieving the CSA triple-win of increasing productivity, building resilience to 
climate change, and reducing GHG emissions. 
 
16. The Kenya Climate Change Bill (2014) is about to be approved by the President, after 


undergoing a public hearing and passing through the Senate. More recently, Kenya has developed 
a Climate-Smart Agriculture Program (CSAP, 2015?2030), that will be jointly implemented by 
MoALF, the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (MENR), and the Ministry of Water 
and Irrigation (MoWI). The Vision for the CSAP is a ?climate resilient and low carbon growth 
sustainable agriculture that ensures food security and contributes to national development goals in 
line with Kenya Vision 2030.?  In addition, Kenya has a National Policy on Climate Finance 
(2015) that seeks to position Kenya to better access climate finance through a variety of 
mechanisms. With support from the World Bank, the International Center for Tropical 
Agricultural (CIAT) recently developed a Kenya CSA Country Profile. The Profile systematically 
assesses the state of CSA nationally, including agricultural practices that deliver higher 
productivity, improved resilience, and lower emissions. It also assesses the institutional, policy, 
and finance entry points for taking CSA options to scale. The Profile will be an important 
mechanism for building awareness of country options, facilitating dialogue, and helping identify 
high-interest CSA options and opportunities for investments to deliver on the triple win. The 
Profiles coupled with prioritization tools  can provide in depth analyses of agricultural practices, 
detailed assessments of their ?climate-smartness?, and costs and benefits of various investments. 
The ongoing development of County-level CSA risk profiles and prioritization of interventions 
would bring this information to the relevant level of devolved governance in Kenya. 
 
17. At the international level, Kenya has been actively engaged in dialogue on mainstreaming 
climate change into agricultural policies, plans, and actions. The country is a signatory to the 
United Nations Conventions on Combating Desertification (UNCCD), Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (UNFCCC) and Conservation of Biological Diversity (UNCBD). Regionally, 
Kenya is implementing the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Programme 
(CAADP) Framework (2010) and the East African Community Climate Change Policy 
(EACCCP). Both of these frameworks emphasize sustainable land and water management for 
improved agricultural productivity through research, technology adoption and dissemination; and 
agricultural GHG emissions reduction. In July 2015, Kenya declared its Intended Nationally 
Determined Contributions (INDC) to UNFCCC that by 2030, the country seeks to abate its total 
GHG emissions by 30 percent relative to the ?business as usual? scenario of 143 MtCO2-e. It is 
suggested that US$40 billion would be required to finance the mitigation and adaptation efforts 
across six key sectors until 2030.
Relationship to CAS/CPS/CPF
18. The Kenya CPS (2014-2018) highlights achieving rapid and uninterrupted growth over a 
decade or more as the foundational challenge for Kenya. The CPS indicate that for Kenya to make 
a huge dent on poverty, support for the growth and realization of people?s potential must focus on 
sectors and locations where the majority of the poor can benefit. In rural areas, the single most 
sustainable impact would be to improve agricultural performance, both in terms of increased 
productivity and resilience to shocks, including climate change risks. The proposed KCSAP aims 
at fulfilling two priority domains of the CPS: (i) Domain 2 ? ?Protection and potential for shared 
prosperity?, KCSAP will contribute to Outcome 4 (Greater agricultural productivity), and 
Outcome 6 (Improved capacity to manage risks from Climate Change); and (ii) Domain 3 ? ?
Consistency and equity in delivering a devolution dividend?, KCSAP will contribute to Outcome 
8 (Better provision of agricultural extension services by counties) and Outcome 9 (Adequate 
systems to monitor performance of services delivery by counties). The proposed project is also 
well aligned with current GoK policies and priorities as articulated above.  
 
19. The proposed Project is also in line with the Africa Climate Business Plan: Accelerating 

Climate Resilience and Low-Carbon Development. The Plan aims at boosting the region?s ability 
to adapt to the changing climate while reducing GHG emissions through a number of concrete 
actions in various sectors. For agricultural sector, the Plan is focusing on promoting climate-smart 
agriculture, creating climate-resilient landscapes, and promoting integrated watershed 
management. It underscores that there is a range of agricultural management solutions, which can 
improve crop productivity, enhance resilience to climate shocks and reduce carbon emissions.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
20. The proposed development objective is to increase agricultural productivity and build 
resilience to climate change risks in the targeted smallholder farming and pastoral communities in 
Kenya. 
 
21. The PDO is informed by the CSA concept; one that ambitiously aims to integrate climate 
change risks responsiveness into agricultural development activities. The CSA outcomes are 
increased productivity, enhanced resilience, and reduced GHG emissions. While the concept is 
new and still evolving, many of the practices that make up CSA already exist worldwide and are 
used by farmers to cope with various production risks – particularly droughts and floods. The 
utility of CSA then comes in as a way of explicitly integrating productivity, adaptation, and 
mitigation planning, often done in isolation; and understanding of expected outcomes of CSA 
investments on different users and locations over time.

Key Results (From PCN)
22. Achievement of the proposed PDO will be measured using the following outcome 
indicators: (i) Increased yields of selected crop and livestock value chains (percent); (ii) Direct 
project beneficiaries adopting TIMPs leading to CSA triple-win (percent);  (iii) Increased land 
covered due to adoption of agro-forestry and sustainable land management (SLM)  practices 
(percent); (iv) Improved access to agro-weather, technical and market information by direct 
beneficiaries(percent);  and (v) Direct project beneficiaries (number), of which female (percent).  
A detailed results monitoring framework and indicators will be developed during the project 
preparation, and enhanced by quantitative modeling of uncertainties along the impact pathway .

D.  Concept Description

A. Concept  
 
23. Climate resilient agriculture that increases productivity requires a major shift in the way 
land, water, soil nutrients and genetic resources are managed to ensure that they are used more 
efficiently, effectively and equitably. Making such a shift requires considerable investments in 
ongoing and new technologies, rural/production infrastructure, financing/credit mechanisms, as 
well as improving farmers? access to climatic information and markets. Actions to build climate 
resilience can, in many cases, also mitigate climate change by reducing GHG emissions or 
increasing carbon sinks.  
 
24. Kenya has three main agricultural production systems. The smallholder mixed crop-
livestock system found in areas that receive more than 1,000 mm of rainfall annually (high 
potential zones), spreading from central Kenya, through the central Rift Valley to western Kenya 
and the coastal strip. This system takes the form of a maize-based, dairy production system with 
or without cash crops, such as coffee, tea and horticulture. The crop-livestock-tree production 



(Agro-silvo-pastoral) system found in areas that receive between 750 and 1,000 mm of rainfall 
annually (medium potential zones). This system focuses on integration of livestock and crops, soil 
and water conservation, and growing drought tolerant and early maturing crops. In some areas, 
irrigation schemes have also been set up to enhance crop production. The pastoral/extensive 
livestock production system  found in areas receiving 200?750 mm of rainfall annually (low 
potential zones), stretching from north and north-eastern Kenya to the southern parts bordering 
Tanzania. Livestock production, mainly beef animals and small ruminants, are the major 
enterprises under small-scale, but also some large scale ranches 
 
25. KCSAP will primarily focus on supporting interventions aimed at increasing productivity 
and building resilience to climate change, with reduction of GHG emissions as a potential co-
benefit , where possible and appropriate, through: (a) Promoting sustainable, community?driven 
rangeland management and improved access to quality livestock services in ASALs (i.e. in 
pastoral/extensive livestock production systems); (b) Improving water/soil management, 
especially within smallholder maize systems in the marginal rainfall zones (i.e. in smallholder 
mixed crop-livestock, crop-livestock-tree production (Agro-silvo-pastoral systems), and crop-
forest production (agro-forestry)); (c) Supporting the generation and dissemination of improved 
agricultural technologies,  innovations, and management practices, and building a sustainable 
seed system; and (d) Enhancing access to quality climate/agro-weather, advisory services, and 
market information among farmers/herders for improved decision making. 
 
26. KCSAP interventions will be concentrated in selected counties within the crop-livestock-
tree production system and pastoral/extensive livestock production system (mainly in ASALs), 
with high potential for increasing production, but ones that are also prone to droughts. To 
maximize the impact of project interventions, about 15 - 20 counties will be selected using these 
criteria: (a) vulnerability to climate change, extreme weather events, and variable rainfall; (b) 
potential for increasing agricultural and livestock production; (c) current share in national 
agricultural production; (d) climate change projections; and (e) poverty distribution and rates. The 
project design would be informed by the following seven main principles:   
 
(i) Prioritization of promising TIMPs: CSA is very context specific?what is CSA in one 
place is not necessarily CSA in another place?so there is a need to prioritize technologies that are 
most promising for specific places and provide the best value for money. The CCAFS-CIAT CSA 
Prioritization Framework is one such approach that entails a series of activities to filter a long list 
of possible CSA options into a set of best-bet practices and services for an area ;   
 
(ii) Scaling-up promising TIMPs: The Bank and other donor-funded projects in Kenya, such 
as the Kenya Adaptation to Climate Change in Arid and Semi-Arid Lands (KACCAL) and Kenya 
Agricultural Productivity and Sustainable Land Management Project (KAPSLMP) have used 
participatory and community-driven development (CDD) approaches to pilot a number of 
adaptation and mitigation TIMPs including financing options, such as the Payment for Ecosystem 
Services (PES). While existing TIMPs are a good starting point and their broader application 
needs to be scaled up, new technologies must be developed to achieve the CSA triple-win;  
 
(iii) Value chain (VC) approach:  An approach that focuses on developing priority, promising 
agricultural and livestock commodities in the respective counties, through interventions covering 
production, value addition and links to markets will be taken. This approach will look at supply 
chains, delivery channels, and enabling environment issues, to identify and address bottlenecks 


and leverage points in the chains. Innovation platforms and methodologies, such as LINK  
developed by CIAT provides approaches for developing innovative business models that take a 
value chain approach and link smallholder farmers to markets; and IFC can finance private sector 
investments, such as in animal health services, commercial-scale bio digesters, solar-pumps, 
micro-and-drip irrigation, seed production and distribution, on-farm storage, weather info/
advisory/climate services, rural credit, and processing facilities; 
 
(iv) Gender sensitivity: Looking at various interventions through a gender lens to ensure that 
the project benefits women as much as possible. Alternative livelihood interventions would be 
primarily geared for women participants. Special care would be paid to ensure that intervention 
do not contribute to increased drudgery and burden for women; 
 
(v) Nutrition informed: Favoring those interventions and leveraging activities that have a 
direct and indirect links with improving the nutritional outcome (dietary/nutrients diversification 
using fruit tree and vegetables ) of the project beneficiaries, particularly women and children 
under the age of five;  
 
(vi) Collaboration with other World Bank Group Agencies: The VC development approach 
will require a close collaboration with the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the 
Multilateral International Guarantee Agency (MIGA), which have greater roles to play in 
agricultural value addition, linking smallholder farmers to markets (i.e. inputs, outputs and 
financial markets); and abating political risk for local and international private investors, 
respectively; and 
 
(vii) Complementarity with other interventions: Ensuring that synergies and alignment with 
other Bank-funded projects, such as the National Agricultural and Rural Inclusive Growth Project 
(NARIGP), and the Rural Roads Project (RRP), given that could be operating in the same 
counties, will allow for greater complementarity and impact. 
 
27. Although reduced GHG emissions might be co-benefits, these will nonetheless be 
measured. At appraisal stage, the project will undertake GHG accounting to estimate the impact 
of project interventions against a baseline. It is expected that by improving per unit efficiency, the 
project will have a positive impact on GHG net emissions.  
 
Project Components  
 
28. The proposed project will comprise four components briefly presented below: 
 
Component 1: Upscaling Climate-Smart Agricultural Practices (US$100 million) 
 
29. This component aims at supporting and incentivizing smallholder farmers to implement 
TIMPs that provide triple-wins: increased productivity, stronger resilience and reductions in GHG 
emissions, as co-benefits. It will comprise two subcomponents. 
 
Subcomponent 1.1: Supporting Pastoral/Extensive Livestock Production Systems (US$40 
million) 
 
30. Livestock production is a key contributor to CSA?s three strategic outcomes: (i) 



agricultural productivity and food security - animals contribute directly (through meat and milk 
output) and indirectly (through fertilization, draft power) to food production and also to income 
diversification; (ii) adaptation to climate change - livestock represents a diversification asset, a 
coping mechanism for households (risk management tool, that contributes to household 
resilience), and a contributor to the management of organic matter in soils (through manure), 
which improves water retention and drought resistance; and (iii) mitigation - there is typically a 
great potential for reducing GHG emission intensity among low productivity ruminant systems, 
and carbon sequestration in pastures.  
 
31. This subcomponent will therefore support interventions aimed at: (a) increasing 
productivity of livestock (e.g. feeding practices, animal health, herd management and off-take 
rates); (b) promoting integrated soil fertility and SLM practices based on crop-livestock 
integration (e.g., manure management, biogas production, use of crop residues and food products) 
and modern inputs; and (c) supporting market access (e.g., stock routes/migratory corridors, 
watering points, quarantine or holding grounds and animal markets). 
 
32.  In the arid lands, ensuring that pastoralists can access feed and water resources at critical 
times is essential to resilience. Demography and increased pressure on land and water are greatly 
challenging the traditional arrangements through which sedentary and mobile populations have 
managed resources. The project will thus support the development of new management practices 
and institutional arrangements that can secure pastoralists? access to resources, especially during 
drought and the dry season. In the semi-arid lands, interventions may aim at increasing the 
efficiency of animal production (e.g., feeding practices, animal health, herd management and off-
take rates), increasing crop-livestock integration (e.g., manure management, use of crop residues 
and food by-products), and increasing institutional mechanisms and markets for resilience.  
 
33. Interventions inter alia could promote: (i) innovative rangeland co-management (state and 
local community) approaches that leverage customary forms of collective action and economic 
instruments to reward sound pasture management; (ii) development of fodder production, storage 
and marketing; (iii) small-scale fattening operations managed by pastoral communities, to which 
young animals from mobile herds could be sent for fattening before commercialization; and (iv) 
sustainable resource use practices, including  contour ridges and barriers, cisterns for storing 
rainfall and runoff water, controlled/rotational grazing, grazing banks, homestead enclosures, 
residue/forage conservation and other practices ensuring access to feed and water resources 
during drought. ILRI has relevant research outputs to contribute to these interventions.  
 
Subcomponent 1.2: Supporting Smallholder Mixed Crop-Livestock-Tree Systems (US$60 
million) 
 
34. The smallholder mixed crop-livestock-tree systems account for more than 70 percent of 
total maize output in Kenya. Characterized by low productivity, these systems are increasingly 
vulnerable to extreme and variable weather. Thus, achieving national food security will require 
concerted efforts and targeted investments to improve yields and strengthen their resilience. 
 
35. This subcomponent will therefore focus on: (a) improving water and soil management; 
(b) promo ting livelihoods and crop diversification, including drought-tolerant crops (e.g., 
legumes - beans, cowpeas, pigeon pea etc.,), intensive dairy production and agro-forestry systems; 
(c) investing in small-scale irrigation development; and climate risk mitigation initiatives, 



including exploring the smallholder adapted crop insurance options.  
 
36. KCSAP support under this component will aim at promoting sustainable intensification 
and increasing climate resilience of Kenya?s small-scale, rain fed production systems. This will 
be achieved through myriad, yet mutually-supportive interventions designed to improve crop 
yields and reduce losses (pre-and post-harvest) in the near-term, and to mitigate climate change 
impacts via adaptation over the long-term. Project interventions will focus on, inter alia, curbing 
rainfall run-off, improving soil nutrition and moisture holding capacity, and strengthening 
fertilizer- and water-use efficiency. This will be achieved via incentivizing broad farmer adoption 
of improved water, soil and land resource TIMPs. To promote income diversification, the project 
will promote take-up of animal husbandry, micro-gardening, agro-forestry and other income 
generating activities less dependent on rainfall. 
 
37. KCSAP investments will be guided by County Integrated Development Plans (CIDPs)  
and community priorities. Integrating project activities within the CIDPs will ensure alignment, 
sustainability and optimization of outcomes. In the case of high agricultural (medium-to high 
rainfall) potential areas in the central and western highlands, interventions will broadly focus on 
improving maize yields and farm-gate prices via quality, drying and storage upgrades. In more 
marginal, more variable rainfall zones, greater emphasis will be placed on stimulating farmers? 
uptake of more robust, drought-tolerant crops (e.g., cowpeas, cassava, millet and sorghum). 
Project interventions will also aim to enhance risk-sharing and strengthen smallholder access to 
markets across target food commodity chains via catalyzing upgrades (i.e. product, process) and 
downstream linkages (horizontal and vertical).   
 
38. Matching grants will be provided to common interest groups (CIGs) organized along the 
VCs to finance community micro-projects. The grants will enable smallholder farmers adopt 
TIMPs developed under Component 2. Making direct payments to farmers conditional on 
adoption of climate adaptation and mitigation practices will lead to better CSA triple-win 
outcomes.  
 
Component 2: Strengthening Climate-Smart Agricultural Research and Seed Systems (US$60 
million) 
 
39. Building strong research capacity and seed systems at the national level is critical for 
achieving the CSA triple-win: increasing productivity, building resilience and reducing GHG 
emissions. Strong and sustained support to agricultural research and development (R&D) can 
have large payoffs as evidenced by R&D?s significant contribution to the impressive agricultural 
growth achieved in Brazil, China and India. More broadly, returns to investment in agricultural 
research have been high and the benefits will only rise as the losses from climate-induced crop 
and livestock systems failure increase. Investments in seed and animal breeds research and their 
market-driven distribution systems will better equip farmers and livestock keepers with timely 
access to quality, affordable seeds (also for forage crops - grasses, legumes, herbage, fodder trees 
and regeneration practices) and planting materials; and animal breeds that respond to their 
specific needs (e.g., higher-yielding, fast maturing, drought resistant, and heat tolerant breeds) 
and that would help them better manage growing climate change risks. This component will have 
two subcomponents ? supporting CSA research and innovations, and building competitive and 
sustainable seed system. 
 


Subcomponent 2.1: Supporting Climate-Smart Agricultural Research and Innovations (US$40 
million) 
 
40. A renewed urgency, and international and national commitment, is needed to sustain CSA 
research to deliver needed science-based solutions. Kenya should act now given that developing 
improved TIMPs can take many years. Developing improved seeds, planting materials and 
livestock breeds that are more adapted to changing climates to meet rising food demand, while at 
the same time reducing GHG emissions will need significantly more investment in agricultural 
research and development.  It also requires commitment to strengthen the Kenya Agricultural and 
Livestock Research Organization (KALRO); build partnerships with international research 
institutes (e.g., CGIAR institutes, such as the World Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF) and the 
International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI), International Center for Tropical Agriculture 
(CIAT), ICRISAT, which operate in Kenya) and local universities (e.g., University of Nairobi, 
Jomo Kenyatta University of Agriculture and Technology (JKUAT), Moi and Egerton); and 
engage the private sector (contracted extension services delivery model) to facilitate the uptake of 
TIMPs at local levels.  But agricultural research and innovation processes require long-term 
political commitment, financial stability, human resources, and institutional strength. Thus this 
subcomponent would finance activities aimed at strengthening national agricultural research 
system (NARS) and competitive collaborative research grants focusing on CSA research and 
innovations. 
 
Subcomponent 2.2: Building a Competitive and Sustainable Seed Systems (US$20 million) 
 
41. Kenya has one of the more developed cereal (maize and wheat) seed systems in Africa 
with over 70 registered seed merchants. But legume seed systems are poorly developed. Highly 
regulated, the formal cereal seed system produces over 30,000 tons of seed per annum. But only 
supplies about one-quarter of the country?s total seed needs. The remaining supply mostly comes 
from recycled seeds. While robust seed research by KALRO and CIMMYT, among others, have 
resulted in the release of dozens of improved maize and other varietals (e.g., drought-tolerant, 
high-yielding, disease-resistant, and short-season) that can help farmers better respond to climate 
and market signals and manage uncertainty, adoption among smallholders remains low. Even in 
ASAL regions that receive less than 500 mm of rainfall per annum, farmers continue to grow 
maize rather than drought-tolerant crops, such as sorghum and millet.  Such areas could benefit 
more from short duration legumes, such as beans, cowpea and pigeon pea. As a result, the 
productivity of many staple crops (e.g., wheat and maize) remains below regional averages.  
 
42. The project will promote pluralistic seed systems model depending on level of crop 
development. Working with KEPHIS , Kenya Seed Company (KSC), KALRO, CIMMYT , 
ICRAF  and other stakeholders, KCSAP will finance activities geared towards strengthening seed 
research (e.g., seed production and processing equipment, TA and training, grants for community-
level seed multiplication, etc.,), as well as promoting commercially viable multiplication and 
distribution systems to ensure that farmers and pastoralists have access to the right seeds at the 
right time. Specifically, KCSAP will finance interventions related t o: (i) strengthening the 
capacity of KALRO?s research centers/institutes in the production of foundation seed; (ii) 
supporting private sector companies involved in the commercial seed production and community-
based seed multiplication systems; (iii) promoting the use of selected drought-resistant seeds; (iv) 
strengthening seed associations and inter-professional organizations; (v) supporting innovative 
mechanisms of seed marketing; and (vi) strengthening seed policy, production and distribution 

strategies and institution al support to the national seed control and certification agency.  
 
Component 3: Supporting Agro-weather, Market, Climate and Advisory Services (US$30 million)
 
43. Improving productivity and resilience of smallholder farmers requires access to timely, 
cost-effective, and personally relevant information on improved agricultural practices, markets, 
prices, inputs, weather?and news of impending disasters. Integrating information on weather and 
markets into planning for CSA interventions and sustainable agriculture development entails: (a) 
use of modern tools for climate data sourcing and analysis, including automatic meteorological 
measurements and satellite data products on a near real-time basis; (b) analysis of weather risks 
and assessment of impacts using advanced crop?weather interactions modeling; (c) formulation of 
highly practical advice that farmers can apply directly to their operations; and (d) dissemination 
of weather and market advisories to farmers using modern information and communication 
technologies (ICT). 
 
44. The quality of these climate and market information services are critically low or non-
existent in many parts of Kenya. Under this component, KCSAP will address this obstacle by 
developing modern agro-weather forecasting and dissemination tools, as well as marketing 
information system to help farmers address the challenges of climate variability and change and 
enhance their resilience. 
 
45. Building on infrastructure already provided to KALRO under the Kenya Agricultural 
Productivity and Agribusiness Project (KAPAP), as well as experiences of BNPP-funded Agro-
weather Tools for Climate Smart Agriculture pilots in Embu, Kenya,  this component will finance 
interventions related to the following: (i) improving agro-meteorological forecasting and 
monitoring; (ii) developing climate-smart, location-specific agro-weather and market information 
system and advisories using ?big data?; and (iii) building institutional and technical capacity for 
agro-meteorological observation, forecasting and market advisory dissemination.  
 
Subcomponent 3.1: Improving Agro-meteorological Forecasting and Monitoring (US$15 million) 
 
46. One of the main obstacles to effective meteorological forecasting is Kenya?s limited 
agro-meteorological observation network. To improve data collection and geographic coverage, 
existing agro-meteorological and hydro logical stations will be upgraded, whilst modern, near real 
time automated weather stations (AWS) will be installed in areas lacking the facilities. KCSAP 
will work with other initiatives that are already in-place to expand the country?s agro-
meteorological and hydrological network to meet international standards. This subcomponent will 
therefore finance the following investments: (a) installation of new AWS, hydrometric stations 
and rain gauges to complement existing weather infrastructure; (b) upgrade and modernization of 
the existing agro-meteorological network and priority hydrological stations country-wide; (c) 
establishment of agro-meteorological centers in targeted counties to improve drought and flood 
forecasts; and (d) development of the Kenya Meteorological Services (KMS) early warning 
system (EWS), and building institutional capacity for disaster preparedness and mitigation.  
 
Subcomponent 3.2: Developing Integrated Weather and Market Information System (US$5 
million) 
 
47. Systems that integrate agro-weather and market information are either non-existent or 
rudimentary in Kenya. KCSAP will address this problem under this subcomponent by financing 
activities related to: (a) developing ?big data? for CSA; (b) developing Market Information 
Systems (MIS) and services; and (c) delivering integrated weather and market advisory services 
using ICT.  Big data  crop-weather analytics help farmers in making decisions on what, when, and 
where to plant. Using advanced statistical and data mining/machine learning algorithms,  time 
series data of crop yields will be combined with weather observations at daily resolution  from 
agro-meteorological stations and satellite data,  soil and management factors to reveal climate and 
weather patterns, and detect the limiting factors for crop production. This would subsequently be 
used to generate timely and site-specific recommendations on crop cultivars, soil preparation, 
sowing rate and time, fertilization, irrigation, pest and diseases control, harvest time, and storage 
options. Access to reliable market information from the MIS using ICT empowers farmers to 
obtain and negotiate fair market prices for their crops subsequently improving their income and 
livelihoods. It also reduces their overall risk and results in greater price stability in supply and 
demand, in addition to improving overall market transparency. Using multiple ICT channel to 
reach target users will allow bi-directional information exchange - allowing the collection of data 
from farmers, as well as information delivery to farmers. Rapid and geographically targeted agro-
weather information will be disseminated using SMS and smart phone applications, and through 
more conventional radio, television, bulletins and print messages. Interactive Voice Response 
(IVR) systems that render weather conditions into human speech will also be incorporated. 
 
Subcomponent 3.3: Building Institutional and Technical Capacity (US$10 million) 
 
48. The capacity for agro-meteorological observation, forecasting and advisory dissemination 
needs to be strengthened at the MoALF, KMS, KALRO, and at county governments. KCSAP will 
finance activities related to human and institutional capacity building at these agencies. This will 
include: (a) defining proper configuration of the main elements of the system; including 
automated monitoring, new forecast techniques, big data analytics and modernization of 
management; (b) analyzing and utilizing big data for various purposes; and (c) providing the 
hardware and software needed for interaction of data from a variety of sources in a way that is 
efficient and scalable. Capacity of scientists at national and county levels will be strengthened in 
the area of crop modeling, using both deterministic and statistical models of different complexity 
levels. KCSAP will partner with national and international research and academic institutions to 
provide state-of-art training in agro-meteorology, climate science, including downscaling and 
weather predictions, artificial neural network and machine learning applications, seasonal 
forecasting, ICT, GIS and remote sensing. KALRO?s capacity to implement a national soil 
information service based on soil spectroscopy and remote sensing technology to help target 
interventions and monitor impacts on soil health will be further enhanced . 
 
Component 4: Project Coordination and Management (US$20 million) 
 
49. The Project will be implemented by MoALF with close collaboration with MENR and 
MoWI at the national level and county governments at subnational level. Activities financed 
under this component will comprise coordination, fiduciary aspects, M&E, safeguards monitoring 
and compliance, and day-to-day implementation of the project; and consists of three 
subcomponents. 
 
Subcomponent 4.1: Project Coordination (US$15 million) 
 


50. The purpose of this subcomponent is to ensure that the project is implemented in 
accordance with the Financing Agreement. A Project Coordination Unit (PCU) and a small team 
of experts located at the national and participating county levels will be established. Costs related 
to national and county level project coordination (i.e., salaries of the contract staff, operations and 
maintenance (O&M), office space rental, fuel and spare parts of vehicles, office equipment, 
furniture and tools, among others) will be financed. Safeguards monitoring and compliance will 
be carried out under this subcomponent.  
 
Subcomponent 4.2: Monitoring & Evaluation and Impact Evaluation (US$5 million) 
 
51. An M&E system will be established to collect and process appropriate information, to 
verify the output, effects and eventually the impacts of project activities over time. Baseline 
information for M&E will be collected as part of the preparation process. In addition to the 
routine M&E functions (e.g., data collection, analysis and reporting), it will also finance the 
baseline, mid-point and end of project impact evaluation of the project; and the development and 
operation of the ICT-based Climate Smart Agriculture Information System. Where possible, 
M&E approaches will be harmonized with continental and global efforts (e.g., Global Alliance for 
CSA and the Alliance for CSA in Africa) to build robust and harmonized evidence of the impacts 
of TIMPs supported by the project to achieve CSA triple-win.  
 
Subcomponent 4.3: Contingency Emergency Response (US$0 million) 
 
52. This subcomponent will finance natural disasters risk management (DRM) activities in 
the agriculture sector. The contingency emergence response financing will be triggered through 
formal declaration of a national emergency and upon a formal request from the GoK.  In such 
cases, funds from unallocated category and other project components could be reallocated to 
finance emergency response expenditures and meet crises and emergency needs.  
 
53. The subcomponent will finance the training and capacity building for disaster risk 
management (DRM); community-managed disaster risk reduction (CMDRR) interventions; 
development of an EWS; and response, mitigation, recovery and reconstruction following 
climate-induced natural disasters. Implementation of this subcomponent will follow the 
provisions of the DRM Manual. 
 
54. Annex 3 outlines in more detail some key interventions envisioned under each project 
component.

II. SAFEGUARDS
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)
29. The project will be implemented at selected locations on a national scale. The activities will 
be implemented in the rural areas and will include projects in rural infrastructure, such as watering 
points, quarantine or holding grounds and animal markets of fodder production, storage and 
marketing sustainable resource use practices, including  contour erosion and barriers, cisterns for 
storing rainfall and runoff water, controlled/rotational grazing, grazing banks, homestead enclosures, 
residue/forage conservation and other practices ensuring access to feed and water resources during 
drought, agro-forestry projects and hydromet systems/stations.


B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
30. The MoALF will the implementing agency of KCSAP. MoALF will work closely with 
MoENR and MoWI. These ministries have adequate capacity and experience of implementing Bank-
funded projects, including knowledge for implementing World Bank safeguards in the devolved 
context. However, the implementation of previous projects identified a number of significant 
capacity issues in monitoring and enforcement of environmental and social safeguards compliance. 
KCSAP will allocate resources to build the counties’ capacity in for safeguards implementation, 
based on institutional capacity assessment that would be carried out at the project preparation stage.

C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Gibwa A. Kajubi (GSU07)
Svetlana Khvostova (GEN01)

D. POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes The initial scoping of the proposed project 
interventions suggests that due to the nature of 
proposed activities, the potential environmental and 
social impacts will be moderate, largely reversible 
and site-specific. The identification mission noted 
that the potential project investments in rural 
infrastructure and agriculture VCs will trigger the 
Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01). 
 
Given that specific micro-project designs and 
locations would not be known at the time of project 
preparation, the project will take framework 
approach to managing safeguards. There are three 
framework reports that will need to be developed by 
GoK: (a) Environmental and Social Management 
Framework (ESMF); (b) Resettlement Policy 
Framework (RPF); and (c) Vulnerable and 
Marginalized Group Framework (VMGF). These 
frameworks will need to cover the types of activities 
envisioned; identify potential impacts of these 
activities; propose screening mechanisms and 
processes of assessing their impacts; and designing 
mitigation measures. The scope of these frameworks, 
the exact implementation arrangements and costs 
will be identified during project preparation. The 
preparation of ESMF, RPF and the VMGF will 
include wide public consultations and will be 
disclosed prior to project appraisal. During project 
implementation, based on the screening, an 
Environmental Assessment (EA)/ Environmental 
Management Plans (EMPs), Resettlement Action 


Plans (RAPs) and Vulnerable and Marginalized 
Group Plans (VMGPs) will be developed for 
individual subprojects.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD Applicability of this policy will be confirmed during 
project preparation, based on the target areas of 
project interventions.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 TBD Applicability of this policy will be confirmed during 
project preparation, based on the target areas of 
project interventions.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes The project is envisioned use of agrochemicals to 
implement activities such as fodder production and 
agro-forestry projects. A Pest Management Plan 
(PMP) will be prepared to promote the adoption of 
an Integrated Pest Management (IPM) approach, 
which stresses non-chemical pest management 
methods as much as possible, with use of 
agrochemicals only as a “last resort” when  
other methods are not sufficiently effective. The 
PMP would describe specific actions needed to be 
implemented, timeframes, estimated costs, 
monitoring indicators, institutional and beneficiary 
roles and responsibilities etc.).

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

TBD Applicability of this policy will be confirmed during 
project preparation, based on the target areas of 
project interventions.

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

TBD Applicability of this policy will be confirmed during 
project preparation, based on the target areas of 
project interventions. Should it be confirmed during 
the project preparation that the implementation will 
cover the areas where vulnerable and marginalized 
groups are present, the project will prepare the 
VMGF, which will then guide the preparation of 
VMGPs, where required.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

Yes The project activities may require land acquisition 
and may result in the loss of community resources. 
To guide the process of compensation, the project 
will prepare the RPF and publicly disclose it in 
Kenya and in the World Bank InfoShop prior to 
project appraisal.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 TBD

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

TBD

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

TBD


E. Safeguard Preparation Plan
1. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS
26-Sep-2016
2. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage 
ISDS.
The ESMF, RPF and VMGF will be prepared, consulted upon and publicly disclosed before project 
appraisal in November 14, 2016.


