














































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Guinea Bissau Emergency Food Security Project (P174336) 

 
 

  
 Page 1 of 10  

     

 
 
      

 

Project Information Document (PID) 
 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Jul-2020 | Report No: PIDA29687 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 

The World Bank  
Guinea Bissau Emergency Food Security Project (P174336) 

 

 

  
 Page 2 of 10  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Guinea-Bissau P174336 Guinea Bissau Emergency 
Food Security Project 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

AFRICA WEST 18-Jun-2020 28-Jul-2020 Agriculture and Food 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Ministry of Finance Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural Development 

 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
(i) to support increased food crop production; and (ii) increase access to food for consumption by food insecure 
households in Guinea Bissau 

 
Components 

Support to Agricultural Production 
Support to Community Safety Nets 
Support to Risk Mitigation 
Project Management 
Contingent Emergency Response 

 
OPS_TABLE_FCC The processing of this project is applying the policy requirements exceptions for situations of urgent need of 
assistance or capacity constraints that are outlined in OP 10.00, paragraph 12.     
Yes 

 

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions) 
   

SUMMARY-NewFin1  
 

Total Project Cost 15.00 

Total Financing 15.00 

of which IBRD/IDA 15.00 

Financing Gap 0.00 

 
   
DETAILS-NewFinEn h1 



 

The World Bank  
Guinea Bissau Emergency Food Security Project (P174336) 

 

 

  
 Page 3 of 10  

 

World Bank Group Financing 

     International Development Association (IDA) 15.00 

          IDA Grant 15.00 

    

Environmental and Social Risk Classification 

Moderate 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate     
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 

 
Country Context 

1. Guinea-Bissau is one of the most fragile countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, plagued by political 
turmoil and coup d’états since independence in 1974. Between 2000 and the present, the country has 
had 16 Prime-Ministers appointed to lead different Governments. The internal instability, often 
associated with problems in the political and military structure of the country, has prevented the 
formation of stable and accountable institutions and had devastating effects on the economy.   

2. The incidence of poverty is high, with over 69 percent of the population living below the poverty 
line (2011 PPP at US$1.90 per person per day), making it one of the poorest countries in the world. 
Poverty is more entrenched in rural areas where it is compounded by deprivation of social services, human 
capital, and infrastructure. Average real GDP growth, although modest, improved from 0.3 percent per 
year in 2013 to 6 percent per year in 20171, mainly driven by increased global demand for cashew nuts - 
the country’s main export crop. Per capita GDP is now estimated at US$780, although the Gini coefficient 
is high (sharply increasing from 0.35 in 2002 to 0.5 in 2010), pointing to high levels of inequality- with 
economic growth mostly benefiting the top income group. The country ranks 178th out of 189 countries 
on the 2019 United Nations Development Program (UNDP) Human Development Index, and thus falls 
under the low human development category. 

3. The impact of COVID-19 on the overall economy is expected to be severe. The main transmission 
channels include external (falling global cashew demand and price, tighter financial conditions, and low 
oil prices) reduced remittances, and domestic (economic disruptions caused by lockdowns and direct 
health impact of a wider spread of COVID-19). Health sector capacity is low and government effectiveness 
is weak. Guinea-Bissau has no fiscal and financial sector buffers to counter a sharp economic downturn, 
but it benefits from regional monetary buffers in the short-term. In the baseline scenario where 
lockdowns are short-lived, growth is projected to decline from 4.6 percent in 2019 to -1.5 percent in 2020 
and the fiscal deficit to increase from 5.1 to 6.2 percent. In the downside scenario, where lockdowns are 
sustained, growth would decline to -3.1 percent in 2020. The crisis could undo the modest gains made in 
poverty reduction2. 

 
1 Declined to 3.8 percent in 2018 due to a sharp drop in cashew production and somewhat lower international cashew prices. 
2 Guinea-Bissau: The Economic Impact of the COVID-19 Global Crisis. World Bank Note (April 30, 2020). 



 

The World Bank  
Guinea Bissau Emergency Food Security Project (P174336) 

 

 

  
 Page 4 of 10  

 

4. Although Guinea Bissau has mineral resource endowments that could generate substantial 
revenues and greatly contribute to economic growth and development, agriculture is still the mainstay 
of the country’s economy. Over 80 percent of population relies on agriculture for their livelihood and the 
sector employs close to 70 percent of the country’s work force (most of whom are women)3. The sector, 
driven by cashew nut production, generates most - 95 percent - of the country’s foreign exchange, 17 
percent of fiscal revenues, and accounts for over 47 percent of GDP. 

5. Guinea-Bissau is one of the countries that are most vulnerable to climate change. Recent climate 
scenarios portend significant changes in the climate of Guinea-Bissau. These scenarios systematically 
signal increased average daily temperatures of up to +1.4°C for the period 2016-2045, potentially reaching 
up to +2.2°C in the 2046-2075 period, per a low emissions assumption. Under a high emissions scenario, 
the changes are in the order of +1.6°C to +3.1°C for the period 2046 to 2075. These changes are expected 
to lead to a dramatic reduction in rainfall, with serious implications on agriculture, especially production 
of rice, the main staple. 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

6. Agriculture (defined as crops, fisheries, livestock and forestry) is the dominant sector in the 
economy, contributing about 47.5 percent of GDP. Agriculture represents the primary source of income 
for 85 percent of the population and provides the livelihood for most of the poor. Within agriculture, the 
production and export of raw cashew nut is the dominant sector, acting as the main source of income for 
more than two thirds of households and for virtually all smallholders in the country. It also accounts for 
more than 95 percent of total export revenue and 17 percent of its fiscal revenues. High concentration in 
and dependence on cashew nuts exposes the country’s economy to both external and internal shocks on 
the sector.   

7. While the favorable ecological and climatic conditions render more than 60 percent of the total 
land area suitable for crop production, less than 12 percent is currently under permanent or seasonal 
cultivation. Years of instability destroyed household capacity as well as productive relationships, 
traditional markets, infrastructure, and social and economic institutions that support the sector. In 
addition, chronic public sector underinvestment in agriculture (less than 1 percent of GDP) undermines 
delivery of public goods and as a result, the sector is characterized by low productivity - with yields of key 
crops lagging behind those of the country’s regional peers (for example: 320 kilograms per hectare for 
cashew nuts compared to 520 kilograms per hectare in Cote d’Ivoire; and 1.7 tons per hectare for rice, 
compared to 4 tons per hectare in Senegal). Any increases in aggregate production have largely been 
achieved through area expansion, rather than improvements in total factor productivity and average 
annual sector growth has barely kept pace with population growth.  

8. A confluence of the comparatively superior benefits from cashew production (see Table 1), gaps in 
the land property law (which incentivize tree planting as a way of strengthening tenure security), and lack 
of an enabling environment4, has  over the last four decades, mediated a strong shift in the country’s 
agriculture production system towards cashew production.  

 
3 Female employment in agriculture in Guinea Bissau was 70.7 percent in 2019, compared with 65.8 percent for male 
employment-http://datatopics.worldbank.org/gender/country/guinea-bissau 
4 Including poor infrastructure, constrained access to inputs, technology, knowledge, markets, capital and availability of skilled 
labor. 



 

The World Bank  
Guinea Bissau Emergency Food Security Project (P174336) 

 

 

  
 Page 5 of 10  

 

Table 1. Comparative advantage of the cashew crop in relation to main crops in Guinea-Bissau. 

Crop option Days spent Added value per day (CFA) Advantage compared with cashew (CFA) 

Paddy rice 312 232 -2,478 
Pluvial rice 109 177 -2,533 
Maize 70 1657 -1,053 
Sorghum 94 870 -1,840 
Millet 114 618 -2,092 
Peanuts 78 660 -2,050 
Cotton 115 987 -1,723 
Cashew 118 2710 0 

9. From 14,000 ha in 1978, area under cashew cultivation has expanded at an average annual growth 
rate of 8 percent and now stands at 223,000 ha, which is about 56 percent of total area (about 400,000 
ha) under cultivation. Most farming households maintain a disproportionately higher share of their 
cultivated area under the perennial cashew, devoting the rest to food production- mainly rice, sorghum, 
millet, maize, peanut, and cassava. Farmers also use income from cashew sales to finance the purchase 
of agricultural inputs necessary to produce the food crops. 

10. Low average productivity5 and the already smaller acreage devoted to food crops, constrains, not 
only the production of amounts of food crops enough to meet farming households’ food requirements, 
but also the generation of marketable surpluses that could feed into the domestic market. 
Consequently, most farmers are also net food buyers and yet again use cashew nut proceeds to meet, in 
some cases up to 6 months of their food needs. Because of insufficient domestic production, the country, 
as a whole, relies on imports to bridge the gaps in domestic production. These food imports are mostly 
financed by forex revenues accruing from cashew exports. 

11. Guinea Bissau’s food security is therefore intimately tied to the cashew nut sector and any market 
volatilities or shocks to the cashew sector, are wired to have wide ranging implications on food security. 
The COVID-19 pandemic vividly spotlights these links. The country is now reeling from the effects of 
COVID-19 related cashew value chain disruptions on food security. Among others, due to stalled cashew 
sales: (i) most farmers cannot access necessary input and now face the dire prospect of not engaging in 
the forthcoming food crop growing season; (ii) those who rely on cashew sales and wages from the cashew 
value chain to meet some of their food security requirements are already experiencing challenges in 
accessing food; and (iii) food imports required to fill the demand gaps, are expected to be constrained by 
the limited foreign exchange reserves as a result of both the delayed cashew sales as well as the expected 
lower prices. The prevailing political uncertainty exacerbates these food security challenges. 

12. Government strategies acknowledge the risk posed by the high concentration in and high 
dependence of the economy on a single commodity. Within its limited resource and capacity constraints, 
the Government has been increasingly intentional in supporting more diversified agricultural production 
to wean the country off the raw cashew nut sector. The Government, with support from the World Bank 
Group has also supported the emergence of a cashew processing industry to reduce marketing risks and 
to help the country capture a larger share of final cashew prices through value addition. In the specific 
case of the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, Government has made available about US$0.65 million to help 
16,359 agricultural households to access input for the coming cropping season. There are also ongoing 
discussions with the International Fund for Agriculture Development (IFAD) for a US$43.8 million project 

 
5 Mainly due to limited access to advisory services, inputs, technologies, financing, and poor physical infrastructure. 



 

The World Bank  
Guinea Bissau Emergency Food Security Project (P174336) 

 

 

  
 Page 6 of 10  

 

targeting diversification of production (some of the proceeds of which could go towards supporting 
increased food production in the short to medium term), as well as the African Development Bank for 
assistance with responding to the food security challenge and to support the cashew campaign. In 
addition, the Government also used the WAEMU/Central Bank facility to borrow FCFA 15 billion to support 
the cashew marketing campaign implemented through an MOU with the five locally based commercial 
banks. This operation contributes to these  efforts and will focus on: (i) provision of agricultural input 
(seed, fertilizer, small equipment, and labor) necessary to engage in food production in the short term; 
(ii) provision of a community safety net tied to a public works program; and (iii) developing market risk 
reduction strategies for the raw cashew nut sector. 

C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  

13. The objectives of the project are: (i) to support increased food crop production; and (ii) increase 
access to food for consumption by food insecure households in Guinea Bissau. 

Key Results 

14. The Project is expected to: (i) reach 50,000 farming households with agricultural assets or services; 
(ii) contribute to the production of 205,000 metric tons of food crops; and (iii) provide immediate 
conditional cash support to 10,000 poor beneficiaries through participation in public works (cash-for-
work). Overall, the Project is expected to reach 378,000 beneficiaries, at least 50 percent of whom will be 
women. 

D. Project Description  
 

15. The proposed project seeks to urgently support the government of Guinea Bissau to proactively 
mitigate the short-to-medium-term food security challenges that the country is expected to face, as result 
of COVID-19 impacts on cashew nut production and marketing and on food production and prices. In 
addition, financing will be provided to strengthen the resilience of the cashew sector to market risks.  The 
project will be organized around five components as described below. 

Component 1: Support to Agricultural Production (US$10.0 million) 

16. The objective of this component is to support an accelerated supply response focused on 
preserving/restoring the productive capacity of 50,000 eligible farming households to enable them to 
effectively engage in continued and expanded production of key staple foods in the short - to medium -
term (6-24 months). The project will finance: (i) procurement and distribution of improved seeds and 
planting materials, with a focus on key food crops and vegetables; (ii) access to necessary farm equipment 
and labor; and (iii) provision of requisite advisory services in support of improved production, productivity 
and production system resilience to climate change. Special focus will be provided to market gardening, 
an important farming activity in the urban and peri-urban areas, which is mainly a women’s vocation. 
Where deemed critical to household food security, the project will support livestock services, including 
vaccination, deworming, and disease management. In addition, support under this component will go 
towards promoting climate-smart agriculture (CSA) techniques and practices, drought-resistant seeds, 
and capacity-building of the farmers.  

Component 2: Support to Community Safety Nets (US$2.5 million) 

17. The COVID-19 pandemic shock on the cashew nut sector is expected to lead to job losses along the 
value chain.  The impact of these job losses is expected to be greater for the multitude of unskilled laborers 



 

The World Bank  
Guinea Bissau Emergency Food Security Project (P174336) 

 

 

  
 Page 7 of 10  

 

in the value chain, for whom the daily labor wages are the only source of income for household food 
security. The anticipated escalation in food prices (partly due to projected lower domestic production and 
higher import prices), is expected to amplify the shock on their household food security.  

18. Investment under this component is to ensure household food security for sections of the 
communities affected by job losses, by mitigating the expected shortfalls in their incomes through support 
for public works community-level works. This activity will target 10,000 beneficiaries, and its focus will be 
on establishing public assets that would contribute to or enhance the impact of support under Component 
1 as well as those that foster adaptation to climate change. These could include support to the distribution 
of inputs, rehabilitation of storage facilities, opening of access roads to agriculturally productive areas, 
public irrigation infrastructure, construction of local markets, rehabilitation of rice fields, etc. Presence of 
clear post operation maintenance mechanisms will be key in choice of public works to be funded to ensure 
sustainability. The daily wages for the cash-for-work activities will be below the local level for unskilled 
labor thus providing an ‘in-built” self-targeting mechanism for the conditional cash transfers that would 
also ensure that the public works do not compete with agriculture for seasonal labor. Where high levels 
of structural unemployment dictate against self-targeting, beneficiary selection will be guided by local 
leadership. Beneficiary selection would be sensitive to gender considerations. 

Component 3: Support to Risk Mitigation (US$1.5 million) 

19. The COVID-19 pandemic, has unveiled the significant vulnerability of Guinea Bissau’s economy to 
shocks, occasioned by high dependence on the quasi monoculture of a singular crop. While diversification 
is the ultimate panacea for this vulnerability, a number of ex-ante risk management measures (e.g. 
forward contracting, insurance, hedging, improved storage, etc.) as well as ex-post risk management 
instruments (e.g. contingent risk financing) can reduce the specific vulnerabilities of the cashew sector to 
market risks. The proposal is to explore the feasibility, and then pilot the implementation of locally 
appropriate market risk management measures for the cashew sector. This would serve to strengthen the 
resilience of the sector to market risks that the sector is increasingly exposed to (e.g. a price drop in 2018, 
current disruptions to the global supply chains) and would lay the ground for a sustainable recovery.  

Component 4:  Project Management (US$1.0 million).   

20. The objective of this component is to support MARD in facilitating   efficient implementation of 
project activities and tracking of results. The component will finance activities related to project 
coordination and management, including developing annual work plans and budgets, financial 
management (FM) and procurement, safeguards compliance, project monitoring and evaluation (M&E), 
citizen engagement as well as a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM).    

Component 5: Contingent Emergency Response (US$0 million) 

21. This zero-cost, contingent emergency response component (CERC) will finance eligible expenditures 
in case of natural or man-made crises, disasters, severe economic shocks, or other crises and emergencies 
in Guinea Bissau. Implementation of this component will follow a detailed Contingent Emergency 
Response Implementation Plan (CERIP) satisfactory to the World Bank that will be prepared for each 
eligible crisis. 

.

.  



 

The World Bank  
Guinea Bissau Emergency Food Security Project (P174336) 

 

 

  
 Page 8 of 10  

 

Legal Operational Policies 

            Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50             No  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60             No  

 

Summary of Assessment of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts 
. 

22. The project is expected to have positive impacts by targeting mitigation of food crisis due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic outbreak through the support of crop diversification, helping smallholders to find 
alternative income besides from cashew value chain production, provide a community safety net tied to 
public works program; and support market risk reduction for raw cashew nuts. As project locations are 
yet to be agreed upon, an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared 
covering environmental and social risks and impacts caused by the civil works, use of pesticides and 
fertilizers and generation of waste during the implementation of the project. The ESMF sets out the 
principles, rules, guidelines and procedures to assess the impacts from civil works provided by the project 
and help guide the preparation of site-specific (Environment and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) and 
Environment and Social Management Plans (ESMPs). It includes screening, measures and plans to reduce, 
mitigate and/or offset adverse risks and impacts, provisions for estimating and budgeting the costs of such 
measures, and information on the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) responsible for 
addressing project risks and impacts, including on its capacity to manage environmental and social risks 
and impacts of the project activities. The ESMF will include general Environment Health and Safety 
Guidelines (EHSGs), Good International Industry Practice (GIIP) and Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) 
measures for the identified sub-projects. In addition, a Pest Management Plan (PMP) will also be 
developed for proper handling and use of pesticides. The recipient will also prepare an Environmental and 
Social Commitment Plan (ESCP), with the support of the Bank. The ESCP will include the commitment and 
the timeline for the preparation of subsequent ESIAs. 

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

23. Project implementation will be the responsibility of MARD, through a Project Coordination Unit 
(PCU) to be set up in MARD with project support. The primary responsibility of this PCU will be: (i) ensuring 
coordination, timeliness and technical soundness of implementation; (ii) contracting of implementation 
support partners; (iii) monitoring implementation and reporting to the Bank. For these functions, the PCU 
will be staffed with a competitively selected Coordinator, Agricultural Specialist, Monitoring and 
Evaluation expert, Environment and Social Safeguards specialists, Procurement Specialist, Financial 
Management Specialist, as well as a Communication Specialist. The PCU will also work closely with 
technical staff from the relevant MARD directorates, to provide backstopping support to implementation. 
The relevant MARD staff will be identified as part of the assessment that would need to be conducted. As 
needs arise, other expertise would be hired into the MARD-PCU.  

24. Because of potential delays in establishing a functional PCU against a backdrop of the emergency 
nature of the operation, project implementation will start with the support of the Food and Agriculture 



 

The World Bank  
Guinea Bissau Emergency Food Security Project (P174336) 

 

 

  
 Page 9 of 10  

 

Organization (FAO) which will manage Component 1 and Component 2 implementation in close 
collaboration with the MARD. In this context, FAO will support the sourcing and distribution of production 
inputs, provision of advisory services to beneficiary farmers, and identification of eligible beneficiaries 
under the cash-for-work activities, overseeing implementation of the cash-for-work activities and 
payments to beneficiaries. Similarly, project procurement and financial management will be initially 
delegated to the Project Implementation Unit of an on-going IDA-financed Safety Net and Basic Services 
Project (P163901), established within the Ministry of Economy, Planning and Regional Integration. Once 
the PCU under MARD is fully functional, it will take full charge of implementation, including for Component 
3 activities. 

25. A Project Steering Committee (PSC), chaired by the Minister, MARD (or his/her representative), will 
be established to provide general oversight of the project. The PSC will include representatives from the 
Ministries of Economy and Finance, Trade, Social Affairs, cashew sector stakeholders, FAO6, and other 
entities deemed relevant. The PSC will be responsible for providing overall implementation and policy 
guidance. The PSC will meet four times a year. 

 
. 
   
CONTACT POINT 

 

  World Bank 
 

Kadir Osman Gyasi 
Senior Agriculture Economist  

 

Abel Lufafa 
Senior Agriculture Specialist  

 

Marie Caroline Paviot 
Senior Agriculture Economist 

  

 

  Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Ministry of Finance 

 

 

 
 

  Implementing Agencies 

 

Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development 

Malam  CASSAMA 

Permanent Secretary 

malones69@yahoo.com.br. 
 

 
6 As technical advisor and a non-voting member 



 

The World Bank  
Guinea Bissau Emergency Food Security Project (P174336) 

 

 

  
 Page 10 of 10  

 

 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

 

Task Team Leader(s): 
Kadir Osman Gyasi 
Abel Lufafa 
Marie Caroline Paviot 

 

  Approved By 

Environmental and Social Standards 
Advisor: 

  

Practice Manager/Manager:   

Country Director: Amadou Oumar Ba 06-Jul-2020 
 

    
 
 
 
 
 
 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects


