























































World Bank Document



COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: PIDISDSC17964

Date Prepared/Updated: 18-Jul-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: India Project ID: P158522
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

Project Name: Tamil Nadu Irrigated Agriculture Modernization Project (P158522)
Region: SOUTH ASIA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

15-Feb-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

15-Mar-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): Republic of India
Implementing 
Agency:

Water Resources Organization, Public Works Department, GoTN

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
Borrower 136.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 318.00
Total Project Cost 454.00

Environmental 
Category:

A - Full Assessment

Concept 
Review 
Decision:

Track II - The review did authorize the preparation to continue

Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

Other Decision 
(as needed):

The Decision Review Meeting discussed the risk ratings of the project and 
agreed to the proposed overall project risk rating of Moderate.  The review 
meeting discussed project safeguard issues and agreed with the 
proposed classification as Category A in view of potential issues related to dam 
safety, increased pesticides and fertilizer usage. The safeguard responsibility will 
remain with RSA.

B. Introduction and Context

Country Context
India in recent years witnessed impressive economic growth and poverty alleviation. During the 
past decade, India's Gross Domestic Product (GDP) grew at 7.6% annually and poverty incidence 
reduced on average by 1.5 percentage points per year during 2005-10. Also,improvements in key 
development indicators have been remarkable: life expectancy increased from 31 years in 1947 to 
68 years in 2015 and adult literacy increased from 18% in 1951 to 71% in 2015. 
 
Despite such impressive progress in economic growth, poverty alleviation, and improved human 
development indicators, India remains home to 263 million poor people (80% of whom reside in 
rural areas) living on less than US$1.90/day and the country is still at the bottom of the group of 
middle-income countries. To address these challenges, the Government of India (GoI) through its 
12th Five-Year Plan (FY2013-17) put forward an ambitious goal for economic growth, poverty 
reduction, job creation, and environmental management. The plan foresees during this period an 
annual GDP growth of 8.2%, a reduction in poverty rate by 10 percentage points, and 50 million 
of new jobs.
Sectoral and Institutional Context
Tamil Nadu is the second largest state economy in India with one of fastest growth rates: over the 
past three years its Gross State Domestic Product (GSDP) grew at 9.2% per annum.  The average 
annual per capita income of the state is around INR 61,500 (at 2010/2011constant prices), which 
is around 42% higher than the national average. Tamil Nadu is also the most urbanized state in 
India with around 48% of population living in cities. 
 
Agriculture and allied sectors in Tamil Nadu account for 12% of the state's GSDP. About 40% of 
state's population is dependent on agriculture for their employment and more than two thirds of 
state's poor people live in rural areas and are engaged in predominately in agriculture activities. 
The majority of farmers are small and marginal with average family landholdings of 0.83 ha. The 
main crops are rice, maize, pulses, groundnut, sugar cane, vegetables, and banana. Rice dominates 
both consumption and agriculture production accounting for 34% of total gross cropped area and 
60% of irrigated area. Due to seasonality and scarcity of water supply, cultivation is mostly 
limited to only one crop per plot per year. 
 
Tamil Nadu is one of the driest and most water stressed states of India with average annual 
rainfall of 925 millimeters, which is well below the national average of 1,200 millimeters. Per 
capita availability of water in the state is around 900 cubic meters a year compared with the 
national average of 2,100 cubic meters.  The agriculture sector in Tamil Nadu is highly exposed 
to climatic risks, especially droughts, floods, cyclones, and erratic rainfall, which have frequently 
affected the performance of agricultural sector in the past. The dry season lasts five months 
(January through May) even in good years, and droughts occur in three out of ten years.  Climate 
change is likely to exacerbate the vulnerability of agricultural sector with increasing erratic 
weather patterns and climatic shifts.  A clear example is the consequence of devastating floods 
that occurred in November-December 2015, which severely damaged irrigation infrastructures in 
three districts and affected Chennai, the capital city of Tamil Nadu as well. 
 
The state is heavily dependent on irrigated agriculture and over the years an impressive inventory 
of irrigation and water infrastructure was built in the state. There are 89 major reservoirs, 39,000 
tanks (traditional water harvesting structures) and 3 million wells. Irrigated agriculture is the 


largest consumer of water in the State accounting for 75% of total water usage. About 3 million 
ha of land (54% of total crop land) is under irrigation with different sources of water: 30% of total 
irrigated area is under canal irrigation, 21% is under tank irrigation, and 49% is irrigated by wells. 
 
In recent years the state's agriculture sector has grown modestly at less than 3% per annum 
compared with 6-9% growth of the state's economy. The productivity of major crops has largely 
stagnated:  the current average yields of rice and maize are slightly higher than the national 
average, the average yields of vegetables, cotton, and pulses are lower than the national average. 
To unlock the full potential of agriculture sector growth, there is a strong need for policies and 
programs to focus on: (i) improvement of water use efficiency; (ii) intensification of cropping 
systems and diversification into high value crops; (iii) enhancement of post-harvest management 
and value addition; and (iv) improvement of the resilience of agriculture system in order to deal 
with increasing threats of climate change. 
 
The Bank-supported Tamil Nadu Irrigated Agriculture Modernization and Water-Bodies 
Restoration and Management Project (TN IAMWARMP), which was concluded in 2015, has had 
a significant development impact in the state by modernizing irrigation infrastructure, improving 
water use efficiency, enhancing yields and productivity of agriculture, livestock and fisheries, and 
promoting diversification to high value crops. It also supported the introduction of participatory 
irrigation management in the state and the establishment of water users associations (WUAs). 
Under the project 5,300 tanks and irrigation supply canals were rehabilitated and modernized, and 
2,800 WUAs were established resulting in increases of fully irrigated areas by 39% and water 
conveyance efficiency by more than 30%. The total area under high value crop was also doubled. 
Moreover, the project helped the state improve its water resource planning and implementation 
capacities.  These achievements and lessons learned during implementation of TN IAMWARMP 
serve as a good base for further enhancing the performance of irrigated agriculture in the state 
through the proposed project.
Relationship to CAS/CPS/CPF
The proposed project is fully consistent with the India Country Partnership Strategy (CPS) for 
FY2013-17 to support poverty reduction and shared prosperity in India. In line with the pillar for 
Transformation, the project promotes inclusive rural growth, development and dissemination of 
new agricultural technologies, climate-resilient agriculture, enhanced market linkages for small 
and marginal farmers, and improved water and natural resource management. Further the 
proposed project will have a positive impact in terms of environmental protection, and reduced 
greenhouse gas emissions by disseminating high efficiency irrigation systems, and promoting 
diversification into high value crops, which significantly reduce water consumption. 
 
The proposed project will contribute to the Inclusion pillar of CSP by enhancing the livelihoods 
of small and marginal farmers through crop diversification, enhanced market access, and also by 
improving disaster management abilities of GoTN and the local communities through the 
enhanced design and restoration of irrigation infrastructure with better flood protection features.

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Proposed Development Objective(s) (From PCN)
To enhance agriculture productivity, water use efficiency, climate resilience of irrigated 
agriculture and increase post-harvest value-addition for smallholder farmers and agro-
entrepreneurs in Tamil Nadu. 

The project beneficiaries are farmers, including small and marginal, water users associations, 
farmer producer organizations, and other entrepreneurs.

Key Results (From PCN)
The key project indicators (KPI) will be: 
 
(i) Increase in water use efficiency (resilience, water use efficiency); 
(ii) Increase in agricultural productivity (productivity); 
(iii) Increase in areas cultivated by non-paddy crops (diversification and value added);  
(iv) Adoption of resilient technologies and practices (resilience); and  
(v) Total number of project beneficiaries (including number of female beneficiaries).

D.  Concept Description

The design of the proposed project will include innovative aspects that build on lessons learned 
from TN IAMWARMP and also reflect the evolving needs of the state when it comes to 
modernization of irrigated agriculture. These include improved designs of irrigation 
infrastructure, stronger focus on the demand-side of irrigation with aim to improve water-use 
efficiency, further advances in agricultural diversification, agri-entrepreneurship, and movement 
toward climate resilient agriculture with relevant agriculture-water related investments and 
substantial improvements of participatory irrigation management practices by beneficiaries.  
Improved resilience of agriculture production systems is expected to be achieved under the 
project through e.g. higher water use efficiency, increased adoption of sustainable technologies 
and practices, and enhanced diversification of production systems. Activities under the project 
will be duly complimented by use of innovative ICT and new media technologies for enhanced 
efficiencies and faster turnaround time for delivering services to project beneficiaries.  As 
requested by GoTN, the project is also expected to finance on-retroactive basis, rehabilitation and 
modernization of tanks and other irrigation infrastructures damaged by the flooding of 
November/-December 2015 floods in three districts of Tamil Nadu. 
 
The total project cost is expected to be around US$454 million, of which the Bank will finance 
$318 million (70% of total project cost) and the GoTN will finance US$ 136 million (30% of total 
project cost). The project activities will cover the entire state of Tamil Nadu (its individual 
components will cover different geographic areas) and will be implemented over seven year 
period.    The project activities would be grouped into three main components: (i) Agriculture 
Water Management; (ii) Agriculture Productivity Enhancement, Diversification, and Value 
Addition; and (iii) Project Management Support. The individual components are summarized 
below: 
 
Component A: Irrigation and Water Management 
 
This component addresses irrigation and water management in a holistic fashion by covering both 
supply and demand simultaneously.  It consists of four inter-related sub-components, including: 
(i) institutional strengthening and capacity building of water management; (ii) irrigation systems 
modernization; (iii) participatory irrigation management;   and (iv) converged service delivery at 
the grass-root level.     
 
Sub-component A.1: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building of Water Management 
 


This subcomponent aims to assist the GoTN in addressing the pressing water sector issues, 
including: (i) need for integrated water resources planning, bulk water allocations  and 
management in a basin context, involving all water using sub-sectors to improve the efficiency 
and productivity of limited water resources; (ii) need to improve the knowledge base and 
instruments; (iii) need to improve the financial sustainability of water sector assets, and cost 
effective reliable service delivery; and (iv) need to promote participatory irrigation service 
management. These will be done through strengthening of capacities for enhancing policy 
analysis and implementation, knowledge base, analytical capacity, staff mobility, filling of subject 
matter specialists/experts gap, technology induction, office facilities, and related technical/
logistical support.  
 
Sub-component A.2: Irrigation Systems Modernization 
 
This sub-component will modernize irrigation infrastructures, including tanks, and irrigation 
canals.  The modernization of irrigation infrastructure will focus on improving the bulk water 
delivery to irrigation systems through rehabilitation and modernization of approximately 4,800 
tanks, and 477 anicuts in 66 sub-basins out of total 127 sub-basins.  Activities under this sub-
component will be carried out based on individual sub-basin development plans specifically 
developed and tailored to local conditions, and will aim to revive traditional water bodies (tanks) 
that are either part of or outside the state➢❨ s irrigation systems network.  The sub-component 
will finance civil works, equipment, consultancies, training and incremental operational costs 
associated with modernization of the schemes, and the work will be carried out by WRD, and as 
required  with direct involvements of WUAs.  
 
Sub-component A.3:Participatory irrigation Management 
 
This sub-component aims to integrate participatory irrigation management (PIM) practices into 
the operations of the Water Resource Department as a distinct unit within the Department in order 
to improve Operation and Maintenance (O&M) of modernized and rehabilitated irrigation 
infrastructures.  The sub-component will assist in strengthening and establishing new water users 
associations (WUAs), including operationalizing WUAs to undertake O&M, water distribution, 
and asset rehabilitation works within their command areas.  
 
Sub-component A.4: Converged Service Delivery at Grass-Root Level 
 
For effective service delivery to farmers, all departments involved in the water sector need to 
collaborate. This convergence for service delivery will be promoted through establishing and 
strengthening Single Window Information and Knowledge Centers (SWIKCs), and facilitating 
Community Collaborative Water Management (CCWM) at village level. CCWM will sensitize 
local communities about the water situation and enable them to draw community level action 
plans for sustainable use of water in their villages for all water users. 
 
The overall component will be supported by information and communication technology (ICT) 
Innovative ICT and new media solutions coupled with robust monitoring and evaluation systems 
for real time submission of information related to the project activities will be designed, 
developed and deployed under Component A in addition to leveraging on the existing ICT 
solutions developed during IAMWARM.  In particular, specific ICT interventions to be 
undertaken under this components will be:  (i) Operationalization and enhancement of Enterprise 


Information Managemenget System platform developed under IAMWARMP through retroactive 
financing and (ii) Implementation of Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition systems based 
upon sensors based inputs for automation of at least one canal network. 
 
Component B: Agriculture Productivity Enhancement, Diversification, and Value Addition 
 
The interventions of this component are aimed at increasing productivity, promoting 
diversification of agriculture production systems, and improving farmers➢❨  access to markets in 
project sub-basins. The component will adopt climate-resilient approaches that promote 
sustainable use of land and water resources. The component will consist of two sub-components:  
(i) sustainable intensification and diversification of agriculture production systems; and (ii) 
marketing, value-addition and post-harvest management.  
 
Sub-component B.1: Sustainable intensification and diversification of agriculture production 
systems 
 
Sustainable intensification and diversification of agriculture production systems will be achieved 
through a large scale program of awareness creation and on-farm demonstrations on new seeds 
and promising technologies, capacity building and training activities; and by leveraging private 
sector investments in water management and farm mechanization.  Climate risk resilience will be 
built into crop and horticulture production systems by:  (a) promoting cultivation of short 
duration, high yielding, drought-, pest- and disease-tolerant crops/varieties of pulses, maize, 
oilseeds, millets, vegetables and fruits; (b) installation of micro irrigation drip and fertigation 
systems; and (c) promoting water saving agronomic practices like the system of rice 
intensification and the sustainable sugarcane initiative.  For linking production with market 
demand, farmers will be supported and trained to grow those crops and commodities for which 
significant market demand exists, including a shift from paddy to crops with low water 
consumption in which Tamil Nadu is deficient.  ICT-based leveraged activities will be introduced 
like E-velanmai, Farmer Cropping Advisory.  
 
Animal husbandry activities will aim at improving production potentials of livestock through 
adoption of sustainable and climate resilient animal husbandry practices (including fodder 
cultivation) technologies, strengthening of input, extension, and service delivery systems, 
establishing ICT based MIS and infrastructure strengthening and capacity building in breeding, 
disease surveillance and food safety. 
 
Fisheries activities will aim at improving fish productivity mainly in reservoirs, tanks and ponds 
through demonstration of climate resilient modern technology packages such as: short production 
cycle models involving improved fast growing fish varieties; improved reservoir fisheries 
management; introduction of suitable formulated fish feed using locally available ingredients; 
promotion of innovative technologies such as cage fish culture and pen fish farming in an 
environmentally sustainable manner; and facilitation of suitable market linkages for better access 
to markets.   
 
Related to above activities, the project will finance the incremental requirements of contractual 
subject matter experts and support staff, goods and equipment, consultancies, studies, trainings, 
civil works, and incremental operating costs. The Project will also support the GoTN in 
improving existing policies, regulations, and procedures to achieve a climate-resilient and 



sustainable agriculture system by commissioning feasibility studies, preparing detailed action 
plans and implementation guidelines.  
 
Sub-component B.2: Value Addition and Post-Harvest Management 
 
This subcomponent will aim at enhancing farmers' linkages to markets by providing alternative 
marketing channels and improving farm level post-harvest management and value addition.  The 
project will support the setting up of an Agribusiness Promotion Facility, development of farmer 
producer organizations/companies, integration of commercial value chains of agricultural 
commodities, and will facilitate public-private partnerships to enable direct buying arrangements.  
Support will also be provided for modernization and upgrading of selected Regulated Markets 
dealing with project produces and weekly farmers➢❨  markets/rural markets (Varashanthais) on 
cost sharing basis, innovative pilots, institutional strengthening and capacity building of 
Agriculture Marketing and Agribusiness Department. The GoTN is currently in the process of 
amending the Agriculture Produce Market Act of 1987, which would bring in substantial reforms, 
and among others, would create a conducive environment to development of more efficient 
markets with extensive usage of latest ICT technologies. 
 
Component C: Project Management Support 
 
The project will adopt the model of multi-departmental coordination and convergence, and will 
follow the general institutional structure of IAMWARM. The Multi-Disciplinary Project Unit 
(MDPU) established under the IAMWARM will also serve as the management and coordination 
unit for the proposed IAMP, with modifications as needed to be considered during project 
preparation. The MDPU will be responsible for ensuring support to preparation and 
implementation of overall project budget, sub-basin development plans, and implementation 
progress reports by the line departments. The MDPU will provide M&E, procurement and 
fiduciary support as needed to the project implementing agencies. 
 
The activities to be undertaken under the component will also be supported by: i) implementation 
of mobile application and associated back-end software tools for Geo Tagging and remote sensing 
based monitoring of project outcomes and  ii) Implementation of GIS based data acquisition and 
analysis system for studying emission of Methane and other Green House Gases (GHG) in project 
area. Citizen Engagement including Grievance Redressal is to be done by respective department 
as per agreed system.

II. SAFEGUARDS
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented in 66 sub-basins, including the areas experiencing droughts, floods 
and other climate/natural shocks, particularly in coastal areas. The project activities might  influence 
a diverse set of habitats/ecosystems, including, coastal, plains, hilly, wetlands, rivers and sub-river 
basins as explain below.

B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The primary implementing agency has developed some capacity in managing social and 
environmental impacts under IAMWARM Project, which is the first phase to this project    but 
remain weak when it comes to monitoring and reporting of environmental and social manageent 




aspects. Moreover, officials, particularly engineers, who were engaged in the previous project may 
move out due to transfers and this may require additional capacity building measures for the current 
staff. The implementing agency has some familiarity in preparing secondary data based 
environmental atlas for sub-basins, undertaking minor Social and Environmental Assessments, 
preparing Environmental Status Reports and contracting special studies of the river basins in the 
State. However, the second phase project will cover new sub-basins, a fresh full environmental and 
social assessment would be required for which the borrower will prepare and share with the Bank a 
detailed Terms of Reference. A multi-disciplinary project unit (including environmental and social 
experts) is being set up to facilitate the preparation and implementation of this project and based on 
experience of the previous project, will require additional support of external experts to facilitate the 
assessment both during preparation and then during operational phase for implementing the 
mitigation measures.

C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Anupam Joshi (GEN06)
Samuel Thangaraj (GTC06)

D. POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment 
OP/BP 4.01

Yes Significant physical investments are expected under 
the project and although the nature of these 
investments would be largely rehabilitation of 
existing assets, improper construction could result in 
adverse impacts. An Environmental and Social 
Assessment will be undertaken and an 
Environmental and Social Management Plans would 
be developed for managing risks and maximize 
environmental and social opportunities. These will 
take into account earlier work and experiences of the 
TN WRCP project and consideration of new 
activities proposed in the TN IAMWARM project.

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 Yes This is triggered, as a large number of tanks will be 
rehabilitated, including carrier system, which may 
impact natural habitats, particularly wetlands. 
Careful mapping using remote sensing will be 
undertaken as part of conducting the environmental 
assessment.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No No impacts on forests are expected and the project 
will not affect existing forest management practices.

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes No pesticides and fertilizers are expected to be 
financed directly by the project; however, there may 
be induced impacts of increased fertilizer and 
pesticide use due to improved agricultural 
intensification and diversification. The project will 
support scaling-up state-wide Integrated Pest 


Management and Integrated Nutrient Management 
efforts and support for safer and organic food 
production and marketing. A pest management plan 
will be prepared as part of the EA.

Physical Cultural Resources 
OP/BP 4.11

TBD No significant adverse impacts on cultural property 
expected, but this issue will be examined during the 
ESA (particularly in relation to proper management 
of any religious and other physical cultural property 
associated with tanks during rehabilitation).

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 
4.10

TBD A Tribal Mapping of 66 sub-basins to identify areas 
in the sub-basins that are categorized as belonging to 
Schedule 5 areas where GoTN's Tribal Sub-Plans 
and where Forest Rights Act are implemented  will 
be undertaken as part of Social Assessment to 
determine whether or not the OP/BP 4.10 is 
triggered.

Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP 4.12

Yes Modernization of irrigation systems and 
rehabilitation and required civil works are likely to 
involve involuntary resettlement. Though efforts will 
be made to avoid this, necessary structures and 
processes to mitigate adverse impacts, if any will be 
put in place in the Social Management Plan.

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes The dam safety policy is triggered as some tanks 
may have embankments higher than 15 m, though it 
will be confirmed once tanks are identified. The 
proposed project will draw technical resources from 
the ongoing World Bank funded Dam Rehabilitation 
and ImprovementProject (DRIP) in the State of 
Tamil Nadu, including the participation of the Dam 
Safety Review Panel. During preparation, the 
specific needs for supporting safety of Dams and 
tank systems will be assessed comprehensively and 
interventions needed will be determined. This 
includes the necessary monitoring system.

Projects on International 
Waterways OP/BP 7.50

No The project does not fall on any international 
waterways.

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/
BP 7.60

No The project is not in any disputed areas.

E. Safeguard Preparation Plan
1. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS
29-Dec-2016
2. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be 
needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage 
ISDS.
An Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) shall be completed by November 30, 2016, which 


will be for the entire project period. A number of safeguards instruments are expected to be 
prepared. An Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared, as all 
investments and their locations would not be known by appraisal. An Environment Management 
Plan (EMP) and a Social Management Plan (SMP) will be prepared by appraisal for at least one 
large infrastructure sub-project. In addition, a Pest Management Plan (PMP) will be prepared that 
will be applicable through the project period. Based on the assessment to trigger the policy on 
Indigenous Peoples, an Indigenous Peoples Framework may be prepared.  Finally, A Resettlement 
Action Plan (RAP) will also be prepared.


