























































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
NIGERIA: COVID-19 Action Recovery and Economic Stimulus (P174114) 

 
 

  
May 15, 2020 Page 1 of 11  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Program Information Document 
 (PID) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 08-Jun-2020 | Report No: PIDC223395 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

A. Basic Program Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Program Name 

Nigeria P174114  NIGERIA: COVID-19 
Action Recovery and 
Economic Stimulus 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date 
Does this operation 
have an IPF 
component? 

AFRICA WEST 14-Sep-2020 15-Oct-2020 Yes 

Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency Practice Area (Lead) 

Program-for-Results 
Financing 

International Economic 
Relations Department of 
Federal Ministry of Finance 

Federal Project Support Unit Social Protection & 
Jobs 

 

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)  
   

To protect livelihoods and food security of poor and vulnerable families and facilitate recovery of local economic 
activity in all participating states across Nigeria 

  

COST & FINANCING 
   
FIN_SRC_TABLE1 
SUMMARY (USD Millions) 
 

Government program Cost 770.00 

Total Operation Cost 770.00 

Total Program Cost 750.00 

IPF Component 20.00 

Total Financing 750.00 

Financing Gap 20.00 

 
  
FINANCING (USD Millions) 

Total World Bank Group Financing 750.00 

     World Bank Lending 750.00 
 


Concept Review Decision 
The review did authorize the preparation to continue 

     
 
 
 

B. Introduction and Context 
 
1. This program document outlines a proposed Program-for-Results (PforR) operation in the amount of US$750 
million to support the States of the Federal Government of Nigeria in their efforts to mitigate the impact of the COVID-
19 pandemic on the livelihoods of poor and vulnerable households and microenterprises in the country. The proposed 
PforR is an emergency operation designed to support budgeted program of expenditures and interventions at the State 
level targeting existing and newly vulnerable and poor households, agricultural value chains, and micro and small 
enterprises affected by the economic crisis. The operation provides financial support to the States to fulfill program 
objectives in four key results areas: (i) strengthening institutional support for coordination and delivery; (ii) increasing 
cash transfers and livelihood support to poor and vulnerable households; (iii) increasing food security and safe 
functioning of food supply chains for poor households; and (iv) preventing collapse and facilitating recovery of 
household/micro enterprises. It is fully aligned with the forthcoming World Bank 2020–24 Country Partnership 
Framework for Nigeria, as well as Nigeria’s Economic Reform and Growth Plan for 2017–20 and the National Economic 
Council’s COVID-19 action plan.1   
 
Country Context 
 

2. Even before the COVID-19 pandemic, poverty and vulnerability levels were already high in Nigeria. Measured 

using the national poverty line, the poverty rate in 2018/19 was 40 percent nationally, with poverty rates significantly 

higher in rural areas (52 percent) compared to urban areas (18 percent).2 Geographically, all three Northern regions have 

higher poverty rates compared to the Southern regions. The poverty rate in the North East (70.2 percent) is more than 

seven times higher than in the South West (9.7 percent). In addition to 40 percent of the population who fall below the 

poverty line, additional 25 percent of Nigerians are vulnerable to falling back into poverty in 2018/19.3 In the North East 

and North West, most individuals are either poor or vulnerable. Besides monetary poverty, Nigeria ranked sixth lowest 

globally in the World Bank’s Human Capital Index in 2018, with one in every three children under the age of five suffering 

from chronic malnutrition. In 2018, 63 percent of children in the poorest quintile were stunted compared to 18 percent 

in the richest quintile and only 29 percent of primary school age children from the poorest quintile were in school 

(adjusting for attendance) compared to 89 percent from the richest quintile, starkly highlighting the fact that the human 

capital indicators were far worse for the poorest segment of the population compared to the averages. The COVID-19 

crisis strikes at a time when Nigerian youth were already facing severe lack of job opportunities, with overall 

unemployment increasing from 8 percent in 2015 to 23 percent in 2018.4  

 

3. COVID-19 is expected to negatively affect economic growth in Nigeria, primarily due to the steep fall in global 
oil prices. Nigeria enjoyed relatively high and stable economic growth from 2000-2014, before the country went into a 
recession following the oil-price shock in late-2014. Growth averaged 6.1 percent between 2000-2014 before dropping 
below 3 percent in 2015 and turning negative in 2016. Nigerian economy has been recovering slowly since with the uptick 
in oil prices, but growth has stayed below 3 percent in subsequent years. As Nigeria’s economy and the government’s 
finances are highly dependent on revenues from sales of crude oil, current projections estimate the Nigerian economy to 
contract by at least 3 percent in 2020, due to the fall in oil prices caused by COVID-19.5  It is further expected that 
consolidated government revenues will fall by US$ 12 billion (3 percent of GDP) or more, severely constraining the 
government’s ability to respond to the crisis and at a time when fiscal resources are urgently needed to protect the poor 
and vulnerable from the negative impact of COVID-19. 
 
4. While the number of confirmed COVID-19 cases have grown slowly in Nigeria compared to the West, it is already 
having a severe impact on the lives and livelihoods of Nigerians. To prevent the spread of COVID-19, the Nigerian 
government had previously announced total lockdowns in urban centers in Lagos, Ogun, and Abuja. The prolonged month-
long lockdown severely impacted informal firms and workers in urban areas first before impacting rural areas, where many 
of Nigeria’s poor reside. An economic crisis such as the one caused by COVID-19 could push large segments of non-poor 
households back into poverty. With economic growth expected to decline by at least 3 percent in 2020, the poverty 
headcount rate is estimated to increase from 40.1 percent in 2019 to 42.5 percent in 2020 and will continue to rise absent 
any change in government policy. By 2022, the forecasts suggest that almost 100 million Nigerians will be below the 
poverty line, an additional 16.4 million poor people compared with today, which arises from both the rising poverty rate 
and natural population growth. While only 15.9 percent of the current poor are urban dwellers, 29.9 percent of the new 
poor in 2020 are predicted to be in urban areas. It is expected that consumption will fall across the distribution, leading 
to a rise in the poverty headcount rate and increase in the poverty gap index.  
 
5. The Government of Nigeria has taken important measures to stop the spread of COVID-19 and has put in place 
measures to cushion the poor and vulnerable against the negative impact of the crisis. A fiscal stimulus package in the 
form of a COVID-19 intervention fund of N500 billion (US$1.4 billion), has been approved by the President to support 
healthcare facilities, provide relief for taxpayers, and incentivize employers to retain and recruit staff during the downturn. 
Regulated fuel prices have been reduced, and an automatic fuel price formula introduced to ensure fuel subsidies are 
eliminated. The President also ordered an increase of the social register by 1 million households to 3.6 million to help 
cushion the effect of the lockdown. The Central Bank has instituted a N50 billion targeted credit facility for households 
and Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) that have been affected by COVID-19. The president also approved the 
establishment of a N500 billion COVID-19 crisis intervention fund while the restructuring of the Treasury Single Account 
(‘TSA’) is in progress to better mobilize cash donations from people and corporate bodies across the country. 
 

Sectoral (or multi-sectoral) and Institutional Context of the Program 
 

 
6. The proposed PforR is part of a broader emergency package offered by the World Bank Group, which is 

anchored by the key measures taken by the government, and complemented by support from other development 

partners, to put in place measures to respond to the pandemic. The Government of Nigeria is establishing a multi-

faceted economic, fiscal and health response to COVID-19 at the federal and state level and has requested a significant 

package of support from the World Bank. Based on request from the Federal Ministry of Finance, Budget and Planning, 

the World Bank is preparing a multi-pronged package of support of between USD 2.5 billion and USD 3 billion over the 

 

next six months, which includes the Nigeria CARES PforR. The broader support package includes programs designed to: 

(i) Contain the COVID-19 outbreak and prepare for a more severe outbreak (REDISSE); (ii) Immediate fiscal relief for the 

federal government (CoFFER) and funding to protect core government functions to the State level (SFTAS); and (iii) 

Support for protecting livelihoods, local economic activity, and enabling recovery (CARES and NAASP).  

 
 
7. Existing social safety nets programs can be leveraged to mitigate the effect of COVID-19 on vulnerable groups 
but the targeting mechanisms needs to be expanded and adapted to capture the people who will be vulnerable due to 
the COVID-19.  A total of more than 5.4 million Nigerians (adults and children) have benefited from existing social safety 
net interventions (Cash Transfer, Public Workfare, Special Grants to Vulnerable and Skills for Job). However, identification 
of the poor in Nigeria remains challenging due to the inadequacy of data. Multiple definitions of poverty and vulnerability 
and lack of clarity on welfare measures adds to existing challenges. In recent times, the State Social Registry and the 
National Social Registry of poor and vulnerable households have been established under the World Bank financed Youth 
Employment and Social Support Operation6 and National Social Safety Nets Project (NASSP)7 using a combined 
geographical and community-based identification and targeting system verified through proxy means testing to rank 
households. The state level registry that started in 2016 has limited coverage in many of the urban locations. There is a 
renewed effort to rapidly expand the coverage of the registries and use other objective criteria of vulnerability to capture 
the new poor especially in urban areas.  The newly created Ministry of Humanitarian Affairs, Disaster Management and 
Social Development is planning to provide the appropriate platform for interagency collaboration. The new National Living 
Standard Survey 2018/19, provides an opportunity to validate and strengthen the social registries at State and National 
level and to ensure harmonization with other existing beneficiary registries.  
 
8. The Community and Social Development Project supports the empowerment of communities and vulnerable 
groups within communities to develop, implement, and monitor social infrastructure service micro-projects (such as in 
basic services – health, education, water, roads, skills centers, among others) and natural resource management 
interventions. It also strengthens the capacity of local government authorities, LGAs and sectoral public agencies to 
support communities and build a partnership between them. The CSDP is currently managed at the State level by State 
Agencies established by Law of the States. 30 States of the Federation and the Federal Capital Territory are participating 
in the project. Kaduna State has just established its own Community and Social Development Agencies CSDA. Delta and 
Rivers has CDD/PIUs imbedded in relevant Ministries that operates like CSDAs and supported by SEEFOR -a World Bank 
assisted project in the Niger Delta.  Only Lagos, Kano and Jigawa are not participating in CSDP but do have community 
engagement agencies and departments. There is a Federal Project Support unit responsible for coordination, technical 
support, monitoring and evaluation and finance resources mobilization and management. A total of 4,600 Community 
Development plans and over 600 Group Development Plans are now approved and funded as of December 2019.  The 
North East States continued to improve on the number of CDPs and GDPs. Over 2 million people are benefiting from the 
CSDP interventions in the North East while across all the participating state, well over 7 million individuals are benefiting 
from CSDP as of December 2019.  
 

 
6 YESSO a State level Social Safety Net Operation started the State Social Registry in 2015 from a USD 400m IDA credit. It also supports 3 major 
interventions at the State level- Pubic workfare, Special Grants to the Internally Displaced persons in North East and the Aged and physically 
challenged, and Skills for Job. It is closing in June 2020. 
7 NASSP, through its exiting budget available from the IDA of USD 500 million and USD 321 million from the government through Abacha Restituted 
Fund, will be scaled up horizontally and vertically to support the existing 1 million poor and vulnerable households (over 5 million people) currently 
benefiting from CCT and will enroll additional 1 million poor and vulnerable households (5 million people) from the National Social Registry to 
receive Cash Transfer support for at least 1 year to cushion the impact of COVID-19 on poor and vulnerable households.  



 
The World Bank  
NIGERIA: COVID-19 Action Recovery and Economic Stimulus (P174114) 

 
 

  
May 15, 2020 Page 6 of 11  

     

9. The National Fadama Development Project is a state-level intervention coordinated by the Federal 
Government. Beginning in 1990 with a pilot agricultural project (Fadama I) designed to bring basic irrigation and 
productive support to farmers in selected Nigerian states, the Fadama series have evolved through two subsequent 
innovative and adaptive pro-jects (Fadama II and III) that are now well established nationally. Fadama II, launched in 2003, 
introduced a groundbreaking Community-Driven Development (CDD) model to Nigeria’s rural areas and helped 
institutionalized local stakeholder engagement in community decision making. Since 2009 when Fadama III series 
commenced, it has contributed to the Government of Nigeria’s development objectives and policy in terms of gross 
domestic product, food security, rural development, and employment generation. Cassava farmers under Fadama III, and 
it’s two additional Financing Facilities realized more than N20.6 billion as revenue and a gross margin of N13 billion in 
2019. Similarly, rice, sorghum and tomato farmers realized gross margin of N104.4 billion, N60.9 billion and N19.2 billion 
respectively during the project’s life span. The project performance evaluation report showed that 100 percent of the 
beneficiaries have increased their real income by at least 40%. Yield rose from a baseline of 5.27t/ha to 25.34t/ha for 
cassava (380.83%), 2.83t/ha to 4.93t/ha for rice (74.2%), 1.54t/ha to 2.4t/ha for sorghum (55.84%), and 1.6t/ha to 
30.44t/ha for tomato (1,802.5%).  
 
10. The Fadama structure has been successfully deployed to provide solutions to national challenges, including 
delivering inputs and services to farmers, investing in various types of productive agricultural infrastructure and assets, 
improving food supply chains in underserved areas, and supporting programs to increase employment of graduate 
youths. Specifically, the project had, in 2017 competitively empowered 6,916 unemployed youth and women graduates 
who indicated interest in becoming agricultural entrepreneurs. Fadama project has proved to be a reliable platform for 
implementing rural based intervention and activities that could target the poor and the vulnerable with sufficient national 
spread and capacity. There is a National Fadama Coordinating Unit responsible for coordination, technical support, 
monitoring and evaluation to the State Level operation.  A total of 18,650 Business Plans have been prepared and over 
220,551 farmers across 19,469 production groups in 3,051 Production Clusters have received various trainings.  In the 
Conflict affected North East region, Fadama has helped to restore the livelihoods (crops, livestock, fisheries, and non-
agricultural enterprises) of 32,480 farming households with 950,400 man-days of work provided to the beneficiaries. Over 
1,218,824 people have benefited from the Fadama interventions across the country.  
 
11. In many of the States there are SME support Agencies of the State Government and also Ministries of Commerce 
and Industry as well as Ministries of Cooperatives with programs and initiatives on promotion and facilitation of 
household enterprises (micro and small). Some of the Ministry, Departments and Agencies (MDAs) provide small loans 
and grants to registered businesses. Registration and regulations of local firms and enterprises are also managed by the 
MDAs. At the Federal level there is the Government Enterprise and Empowerment Program (GEEP) initiative administered 
by the Bank of Industry exist in all 36 States of the Federation and FCT. The GEEP provides loans of between ₦10,000 ($28) 
and ₦300,000 ($835) to traders, artisans, enterprising youth, and farmers. The program commenced in 2016 and has 
empowered 2.2 million such micro-enterprises with interest-free loans to grow their businesses up to date, making it the 
largest public microcredit program. The majority of these micro-enterprises are in over 2,100 clusters and markets across 
all 36 states of Nigeria, and the capital. As of today, about 5 million GEEP candidates are connected to the Consolidated 
Beneficiary Register for the National Social Investment Program. The number is growing. Candidates can also be served 
on other programs i.e. school feeding, cash transfers, etc. The GEEP program has over 4,300 local agents nationwide to 
verify beneficiaries and perform credit check before loans are disbursed to the beneficiaries’ mobile wallet. Funds can be 
cashed out with minimal intermediation to reduce transaction costs and fraud. The program, in addition to provide quick 
financial intermediation to the needed enterprises, can also serve in more data capture.  Partnership between state MDAs 
supporting household enterprises (micro and small) and GEEP can be a veritable mechanism especially at this time when 
local economy is at the mercy of the health crisis and the economic downturn. 
 



Relationship to CAS/CPF 
 
12. The proposed PforR supports the World Bank Group’s Nigeria CPF for 2020-24 and is aligned with the framework 
of support proposed by the World Bank Africa region and the WBG Social Response Framework. The CPF reflects 
Nigeria’s aspiration for faster, more inclusive, and sustained economic growth in the next decade to help the government 
in its ambition to lift 100 million people out of poverty. This PforR directly supports the CPF’s Pillars on “Investing in human 
capital and social inclusion”, “Fostering Jobs and Economic Transformation”, and “Reducing fragility and building 
resilience”. More specifically, the PFORR: (i) enables the States to continue to build and expand their social protection 
systems to strengthen safety nets and basic services; (ii) prevents disruptions and job losses in agricultural supply chains 
by supporting linkages between farmers and markets; and (iii) helps micro and small enterprises wither the impact of the 
economic crisis by providing support in the form of credits and grants. The PFORR also addresses priorities outlined in the 
2019 Systematic Country Diagnostic for Nigeria by averting further erosion of human capital, supporting private firms and 
microenterprises to stay afloat, and continuing the provision of basic services to the most vulnerable groups. The PFORR 
is also fully aligned with the Africa region’s framework of protecting lives, livelihoods, and the future to address the 
pandemic and the multifaceted action plan proposed in the WBG Social Response Framework of saving lives, protecting 
the poor and vulnerable, securing jobs and the economy, and accelerating a resilient recovery. 
 
Rationale for Bank Engagement and Choice of Financing Instrument 
 

13. The PforR instrument allows the States to access funds for budgeted programs of expenditures and comes at a 
time when the decline in revenues threatens the ability of the government to respond to the crisis. Unprecedented 
decline in oil prices (70 percent since the start of the crisis) has constrained the government’s ability to respond to the 
crisis. 80 percent of Nigeria’s exports, 30 percent of banking-sector credit, and 50 percent of general government revenues 
rely on sales of crude oil. Much of the nonoil industrial and services sectors also rely on foreign-exchange inflows 
generated by the oil industry. With the Nigerian economy expected to contract 5 percentage points below the pre-COVID 
19 economic growth forecast, States will require substantial funds to quickly and effectively respond to the crisis. Some 
of the ₦500 billion funds allocated as the federal government’s fiscal stimulus package will be implemented at the State 
level and would need to be reflected in the State government’s budget. As the PforR is designed for a 2-year emergency 
response, using and strengthening existing programs and platforms also has the added benefit of building capacity of 
those platforms to ensure sustainability beyond the duration of the program. The PforR aims to build strong coordination 
mechanisms between the Federal and State level of the government. Strong level of Federal oversight and support could 
help States lagging in capacity to implement programs to protect livelihoods and food security of poor and vulnerable 
households and facilitate recovery of local economic activities.  The PforR instrument also allows states to quickly access 
funds using existing government programs and systems, reducing the transaction processes. Finally, the program is 
designed to disburse against tangible results and provides flexibility to the States to achieve the results that are best suited 
to their needs.  
 
C. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators 
 
Program Development Objective(s) 

 
To protect livelihoods and food security of poor and vulnerable families and facilitate recovery of local economic activity 
in all participating states across Nigeria 
 
PDO Level Results Indicators 
 



14. To achieve the development objective, the proposed Program would include the following four result areas: 
  

a. Increased social transfers, basic services, and livelihood support to poor and vulnerable households; 
b. Increasing food security and safe functioning of food supply chains for poor households; 
c. Facilitating recovery and enhancing capabilities of micro and small enterprises (MSEs); 
d. Strengthened institutional support for coordination and delivery; 

 
Figure 1: Proposed Project Development Objective and Program Results Areas for CARES 

 
 
D. Program Description 

 
PforR Program Boundary 

 
15. Results Area 1 aims to address the immediate needs of poor and vulnerable households by providing income 

and consumption support and access to basic services.  Through this results area, the program will support existing 
platforms that provide social transfers to vulnerable groups including the aged, disabled, and chronically ill and support 
income generating opportunities of economically active poor and vulnerable households through cash transfers and labor-
intensive public works. Existing programs that provide services to poor and vulnerable communities through funding of 
basic social and economic infrastructure microprojects will also be eligible for funding support. Selected programs must 
provide clear and measurable criteria to evaluate results that contribute to improved consumption and welfare of poor 
and vulnerable households. 

 
results area, the P4R will support existing platforms that support poor and vulnerable households to increase production 
of food, maintain economic activities along food value chains, and enable safe access to food markets as buyers or sellers. 
The immediate needs to support agricultural livelihoods could include distribution of inputs, provision of services 
(extension, mechanization, animal services), farm agricultural assets, replacement of small ruminants, etc. Similarly, the 
future capacity to produce food could be supported through small-scale irrigation infrastructure, on-farm soil conservation 
measures, etc. Investments to increase food accessibility in future could be supported through sanitary infrastructure in 
wet markets, feeder roads to enable access to markets, increased capacity for small-scale processing, among others. The 
selected program areas must provide clear and measurable results that contribute to increasing food availability, 
accessibility and utilization and can be generated within the 18-24 months’ timeframe. 

 
17. Results Area 3 will support Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) intervention programs and initiatives at Sub-

National level in Nigeria. Leveraging existing State-level MSE platforms, the program will support initiatives that eases 
financial constraints on MSEs, provide financing to support operational expenses of existing MSEs to cover a portion of its 
operational cost including salaries of permanent staff and rental expenses, and invest in MSEs’ infrastructure and IT 
(digital) development. Existing platforms that support both formal and informal firms will be eligible. However, targeting 
mechanisms will be supported to identify vulnerable and viable firms with clear timeline to phase out in order to maximize 
the fungibility of the financing resources. 
 
E. Initial Environmental and Social Screening 
 

18. Based on current available information in terms of the scope of the Program, no high Environmental and Social 
risks are anticipated due to proposed program activities. In terms of potential environmental impacts, there could be 
risk of waste management, soil and ground water contamination, pest management, construction related risk and impacts 
including capacity to manage the grant component for MSMEs. There could be moderate risks and impacts posed due to 
small scale land acquisition causing resettlement during rehabilitation / construction of secondary / tertiary irrigation 
canals; rehabilitation of tertiary roads; rehabilitation / construction of agricultural warehouse; upgrading of sanitary 
infrastructures in wet markets. These infrastructure activities could also pose labor risks, GBV and community health risks 
when contractors/labor force are brought into remote areas for certain project activities including potential cumulative 
impacts. These will be further reviewed and assessed during the Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) 
that would be prepared prior to appraisal. This current rating would be adjusted accordingly as additional information 
becomes available and based on the outcomes of the ESSA assessment.   
 
 . . 
 
Legal Operational Policies                                  Triggered? 

Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50  

Projects in Disputed Areas OP 7.60  

 
Summary of Screening of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts of the IPF Component 
 




