













































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Additional Financing - Horticulture Development Project (P164226) 

 
 

  
Oct 09, 2017 Page 1 of 15  

     

 
 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 06-Dec-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSA23288 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 

The World Bank  
Additional Financing - Horticulture Development Project (P164226) 

 

 

  
Oct 09, 2017 Page 2 of 15  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Uzbekistan P164226 Additional Financing - 
Horticulture Development 
Project 

P133703 

Parent Project Name Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date 

Horticulture Development Project EUROPE AND CENTRAL 
ASIA 

28-Nov-2017 25-Jan-2018 

Practice Area (Lead) Financing Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency 

Agriculture Investment Project 
Financing 

Republic of Uzbekistan Rural Restructuring 
Agency 

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) Parent 
 
The project development objective is to enhance the productivity and profitability of horticulture sector in the project 
area. 
 
 
Components 

Agricultural Support Services 
Access to Credit 
Project Management 

 

Financing (in US$, millions) 

 

FIN_SRC_TBL 

Financing Source Amount  

Borrower 17.98  

Free-standing Cofinancing Trust Fund 25.00  

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 500.00  

LOCAL: BENEFICIARIES 98.14  

Total Project Cost  641.12  
  
 

Environmental Assessment Category 

Partial Assessment (B) 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     



 

The World Bank  
Additional Financing - Horticulture Development Project (P164226) 

 

 

  
Oct 09, 2017 Page 3 of 15  

 

 
 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
Uzbekistan is gradually moving away from a state driven development model towards a more diversified and 
private sector led economy. This structural change – which has accelerated significantly in the past year – is 
also taking place within the context of significant macroeconomic policy shifts, the most prominent of which 
has been the recent move towards greater currency convertibility and a significant devaluation in September 
2017. These developments play a strong role in shaping the country’s development agenda going forward. 
 
Agriculture continues to play an important part in Uzbekistan’s economy and in 2016 accounted for 17 percent 
of GDP, 15 percent of export revenues, and over one-third of employment. As noted in the May 2016 
Systematic Country Diagnostic, the agriculture sector can produce significant results in terms of economic 
growth and employment in the medium-term and diversification of outputs and exports have considerable 
space to expand.  
 
Horticulture plays an important role promoting a gradual shift away from the traditional crops (cotton and 
wheat) and public intervention towards a more liberal and diversified agricultural sector. Agriculture value 
added has grown at an average annual rate of 6.5 percent since 2003 and the strongest growth has come from 
crops other than wheat and cotton. With a growing domestic and export market, the area devoted to 
horticulture has increased steadily, primarily by displacing land used to grow cotton. The economic impact of 
the fruit and vegetables subsector is also large, accounting for 50 percent of the value of crop output and over 
35 percent of agriculture export value. Despite delayed returns and higher investment costs, horticultural 
crops generate revenues to farmers significantly higher than wheat and cotton.  The horticulture sector 
provides an important source of all-season jobs in rural areas and is a significant employer of women.   
 
The proposed Additional Financing will also contribute to Uzbekistan’s accelerating reform agenda, which is 
creating rapid structural change. Structural reforms will create both opportunities and risks – exchange rate 
depreciation has created a clear opportunity to expand exports. Price liberalization is also expected to 
contribute to the development of more competitive industries and a diversified economy. At the same time, 
the negative impacts of reform could include job losses in inefficient industries and lower overall growth while 
the economy adjusts. Significant fiscal resources may also be required to maintain currency reserves and 
address financial risks in state-owned enterprises and the banking sector. In this context, additional 
investment to increase private sector participation in the economy and finance sectors with the potential for 
growth and job creation can be an important element to mitigate the costs of structural transition. 

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

The Horticulture Development Project (HDP) is part of a portfolio of agricultural investments aimed at 
diversifying agriculture into higher value crops, intensifying agricultural yields and productivity, and fostering 



 

The World Bank  
Additional Financing - Horticulture Development Project (P164226) 

 

 

  
Oct 09, 2017 Page 4 of 15  

 

greater and better rural jobs. Approved in June 2014, HDP focused on addressing several constraints facing the 
horticulture sector: (i) improving access to technologies, knowledge and markets; (ii) strengthening technical 
and managerial capacity in the farming and agri-business sectors; and (iii) introducing new financial products. 
The design of HDP drew on the implementation experience of the Rural Enterprise Support Program (RESP), 
which established a successful model for long term agricultural finance through private and state owned 
banks.  
HDP’s primary project beneficiaries are farmers, farmer groups, private enterprises, agro-firms, and agro-
processing enterprises, involved in the country’s horticultural sub-sector. Secondary beneficiaries are the 
Participating Financial Institutions (PFIs) through improved skills and acquisition of a more diverse menu of 
suitably adapted financial products; and the national network of private growers through training and 
technical assistance. At the same time, the project was designed to support the growth and development of 
small and medium enterprises in the rural areas, creating more and better paying jobs in the agro-processing, 
trading and export sectors, and increasing the value added of the agricultural sector. 
 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance the productivity and profitability of the horticulture 
sector in the project area. The project has three components: Component 1 (Agricultural Support Services); 
Component 2 (Access to Credit); and Component 3 (Project Management). The original Project IBRD Loan in 
the amount of US$150 million was approved by the Board of Directors on June 12, 2014 and became effective 
on October 5, 2015.  The project was restructured in 2016 to accommodate new co-financing for HDP through 
a technical assistance program by the European Union (EU). This grant will total Euro $21.0 million and replace 
IBRD financing for Component 1.   
 
To date, 92 percent of the loan (US$137.9 million) has been disbursed primarily under Component 2. Thus, 
during the first two years of implementation 97 percent of funding for the second component was disbursed 
to finance 223 sub-loans.  
 
The rapid rate of disbursement of the project’s Access to Credit Component demonstrates the significant 
demand for credit in the horticulture sector. This was anticipated, given the RESP experience, the sector 
analysis, and expressions of interest by potential PFIs. The PFIs have a pipeline of sub-project beneficiaries 
that meet the criteria in the HDP Credit Guidelines. In view of rapid credit line disbursement and significant 
unmet demand for investment in the agribusiness sector, the Government of the Republic of Uzbekistan has 
submitted a request to the World Bank for an additional loan to scale-up the investment and working capital 
sub-loans and lease financing activities. 

 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
 
Original PDO  
The project development objective is to enhance the productivity and profitability of horticulture sector in the project 
area. 
 
Current PDO  

 



 

The World Bank  
Additional Financing - Horticulture Development Project (P164226) 

 

 

  
Oct 09, 2017 Page 5 of 15  

 

No change is proposed to the PDO, which will remain “to enhance the productivity and profitability of 

horticulture sector in the project area”.  The project area, however, will be expanded to all thirteen regions 

(full coverage of the country) and the closing date is proposed to be extended a further two years to 2023.  

 
Key Results 
 

PDO level results will continue to measure changes in productivity and agribusiness performance levels and 

have been adjusted to accommodate the scale up within the project. Some intermediate results indicators 

have been adjusted to reflect the increase in the volume of credit and scale out to additional beneficiaries. 

Adjustments have also been made to Component 1 indicators and technical assistance related activities.  

 
Project performance has demonstrated solid achievements and the additional financing will build on positive 
results. A preliminary beneficiary survey was carried out in July and August 2017 among fifty-five randomly 
sampled HDP beneficiaries. The survey found:  

 

 Strong job creation, with the number of permanent jobs within HDP financed enterprises increasing 
on average 78 percent after the enterprise received sub-project financing. Of these new jobs, more 
women were hired than men, with sub-loan beneficiaries reporting a doubling in permanent jobs 
held by women.  

 Enterprise sales increased on average 281 percent and enterprise profits 250 percent.  

 Increased exports with a 10 percentage point (from five to 15 percent) increase in exports after 
receiving HDP support. Several beneficiaries reported entry into entirely new export markets 
(Turkey, Ukraine, India, Great Britain, Malaysia, Turkmenistan) 

 Adoption of new crops, varieties or agronomic practices, with 15 percent of HDP loan recipients 
introducing new crops or new crop production systems.  

 
 
D. Project Description  
 

 
The project design will maintain the same three components with the additional financing supporting the 
scaling-up of the original project’s credit line for loans and leases under Component 2 - Access to Credit. This 
component will continue to focus on improving access to financial services for farmers and agribusinesses and 
will support additional financing for the purchase of new cultivars, seeds/seedlings, water-saving irrigation 
facilities (such as drip irrigation), cold storage and other cold chain facilities, and value added 
handling/processing equipment and facilities.  
 
The institutional arrangements will remain the same. The environmental safeguards category will remain “B.” 
The results monitoring framework has been revised to reflect the additional credit, introduce new sector 
indicators, and revise some target values given changes in circumstances both within and outside of the 
project. 

 
E. Implementation 
 



 

The World Bank  
Additional Financing - Horticulture Development Project (P164226) 

 

 

  
Oct 09, 2017 Page 6 of 15  

 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

Overall responsibility for implementation continues to rest with the Rural Restructuring Agency (RRA). The 
RRA is a specialized organization that was created for implementing investment projects in the agriculture and 
rural sector. The additional financing will use the same on-lending modality to channel resources through PFIs 
on the same lending terms and conditions used under the parent HDP. Under the original HDP, nine banks 
have been qualified as PFIs and it expected that additional banks will apply under the proposed additional 
financing. The same due diligence process will be followed new PFIs as were used in the parent HDP. Terms 
and conditions of the credit line and the associated credit line guidelines will remain largely the same with 
minor adjustments. 

 

 
  

 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

Project activities under the first component will take place as planned under the original project within the 
fields and laboratories of participating research institutes and on farm demonstrations among participating 
producers. Under the second component, the sub-projects to be supported by the Credit Line will be based 
on demand for proposed activities. Project activities will now be implemented in all 13 provinces of the 
country, expanding the project area from the original eight provinces. The main physical characteristics of 
the new provinces are as follows: (1) Bukhara province is primarily desert plain. Water resources are limited 
and agricultural production is reliant on the Zarafshan and the Amudarya rivers. The Amu-Bukhara and 
Amu-Karakul machine canals draw water from the Amudarya for the irrigated oasis located in the south 
(Gijduvan, Bukhara and Karakul). Horticulture activities are primarily located in these irrigated oasis. (2) 
Karakalpakstan includes the southern half of the Aral Sea, where significant ecological change is occurring. A 
new salt marsh desert Aralkum is being formed due to the drying out of the Aral Sea and the lower reaches 
of the Amudarya River are drying up. The desert occupies more than 13.67 million hectares (more than 80 
percent of the territory). Horticulture production is limited but does occur in irrigated areas. (3) Navoi 
province is occupied by the Kyzylkum plateau in the northwestern part of the region, the Nurata mountain 
ranges in the east, and the Zerafshan River in the south. The climate is continental, deserted, and arid. 
Horticulture production is widespread within the region with a number of processors and exporters located 
in the region. (4) Syrdarya province is located in the center on the west side of the Syr Darya river and 
immediately west of Tashkent province. The steppe occupies part of the region and the south-eastern part 
of the region is vulnerable to crop damaging dry winds and dust storms in the summer. Horticulture 
production is widespread within the province, although concentrated in higher rainfall areas. (5) 
Surkhandarya province is located in the extreme south east with flat areas in the central and southern parts 
of the region and mountains in the north, west and north-west. The climate ranges from the dry desert in 
the south, to the sub-tropical in the north (Uzun). Horticulture production is widespread in the river valley 
and the central zones of the region. 

 
 



 

The World Bank  
Additional Financing - Horticulture Development Project (P164226) 

 

 

  
Oct 09, 2017 Page 7 of 15  

 

G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Arcadii Capcelea, Environmental Safeguards Specialist 
Nina Kolybashkina, Social Safeguards Specialist 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 
SAFEGUARD_TBL 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The OP is triggered as the proposed project activities 
and subproject that would be supported under 
credit line, could generate a series of adverse 
impacts. Category A-type subprojects are excluded 
by the project. To address other activities the client 
has updated the parent Environment and Social 
Management Framework(ESMF) which will guide the 
EA process during the project implementation. The 
updated ESMF takes into consideration the new 
geographic locations and, in particular, the scaling-
up credit line resources and the needs for further EA 
institutional capacity building. In this regard under 
the Project AF, the RRA will hire additional 
Environmental Specialists in all participating oblasts, 
where regional RRA PIUs will be established. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
The ESMF provides screening criteria to be applied 
to exclude any projects that could have an impact on 
natural habitats. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 

The ESMF provides screening criteria for exclusion of 
any projects that could have an impact on forests, 
rights of forest communities or traditional uses of 
forests. 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

As in the case of agricultural production or agro-
processing sub-projects, there might be needed pest 
management activities if this OP is triggered. The 
ESMF has a special section specifying provisions for 
preparation of simple pest/pesticide management 
plans as part of the application process and 
supporting IPM. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
The ESMF provides screening criteria for exclusion of 
any projects that could have an impact on physical 
cultural resources. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No This OP is not applied in the country 



 

The World Bank  
Additional Financing - Horticulture Development Project (P164226) 

 

 

  
Oct 09, 2017 Page 8 of 15  

 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 No 

The project will support construction of new 
buildings and processing, and cold storage facilities 
only in the case when land acquisition is not 
necessary and when people have not been displaced 
prior to the application for purposes of the proposed 
subproject and there are no resettlement issues. For 
such cases the investor should have the 
landownership title as well as proof that the land at 
the moment of subprojects application is not 
occupied or used illegally. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
The project will not support activities which are 
dependent on an existing dam (e.g. irrigation works). 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 

Any credit investments would be limited to 
rehabilitation or modification of existing minor 
schemes in ways which would not increase the 
amount of water abstracted or have any other 
impact on the water source or local hydrological 
regime (e.g. replacing conventional irrigation with 
drip irrigation in an existing irrigation scheme would 
be still eligible). Creating a new scheme which will 
lead to increasing water abstraction from the rivers 
will not be financed under the project. This 
determination would be made in the screening 
process. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
The project will not support any activities in disputed 
areas. 

 
 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 OPS_SAFEGUARD_SUMMARY_TBL 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will maintain its category B classification and will not trigger any new safeguards policies. The scope and 
scale of the project’s activities will continue to be limited as they will occur through the project’s existing sub-project 
mechanism. As a result, the project’s safeguards issues can be addressed by application of the rules and procedures 
established under the HDP Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) as well as by any implementing 
mitigation and monitoring measures stipulated in any site specific Environmental and Social Management Plans 
(ESMPs).  
 
Potential environmental impacts. The project will continue supporting various types of horticulture related production 
and processing sub-projects. Subprojects will remain limited in terms of spatial scale and take place through sub-
projects of limited duration and size. HDP’s credit line guidelines prohibit financing to category A sub-projects and as a 
result, no significant environmental impacts that fall under the Category A classification and for which a full 



 

The World Bank  
Additional Financing - Horticulture Development Project (P164226) 

 

 

  
Oct 09, 2017 Page 9 of 15  

 

Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) would be required are expected. Credit guidelines also prohibit selection of 
sub-projects located in protected areas, critical habitats or culturally or socially sensitive areas.  
 
A portion of sub-projects are expected, however, to show the potential for limited adverse environmental impacts 
that would fall under the Category B under Bank OP/BP 4.01. This is primarily due to activities related to small-scale 
agro-industries; small-scale rehabilitation, maintenance, and upgrading of various premises or storage facilities; and 
plantation of new orchards and/or vineyards.  The potential adverse environmental impacts of proposed types of sub-
projects can be summarized as follows: (a) agricultural production: soil erosion, loss of soil productive capacity, soil 
compaction, soil pollution, surface and underground water pollution, loss of biodiversity; (b) agro-processing: 
contribution to surface-water pollution, wastes generation, odor; (c) small-scale construction and/or rehabilitation of 
the existing premises: soil and air pollution; acoustic, construction wastes, and potential asbestos issues, etc. All these 
impacts are expected to be easily mitigated through good project designs and best implementation practices. 
 
The sub-projects to be implemented under the Credit Line are also expected to generate a number of both direct and 
indirect positive impacts. Direct positive impacts will be generated by increased production, products and goods which 
would result in creation of new jobs and respectively, more employment and increased income. Indirect positive 
impacts will relate to overall improving of business environment, introduction of advanced agricultural technologies 
and techniques, contribution to poverty reduction and food safety.  
 
Potential social impacts. Issues related to the risks of child and forced labor in the cotton harvest have been a 
challenge in the agricultural sector in Uzbekistan and efforts to eliminate these practices have received high level 
support within Government. Production in the horticultural sector is significantly more labor intense than in cotton 
and wheat, the peaks of seasonal labor demands are more dispersed across various crops, and the profits are higher. 
To mitigate any residual risks of child and forced labor, and to ensure that the project contributes to improved labor 
relations and practices in the agricultural sector of the country, the project envisions continued close collaboration 
with the International Labor Organization (ILO). Starting from 2018, research activities to monitor labor relations in 
the horticultural sector and to provide recommendation for creating decent working conditions would be 
implemented jointly with the ILO.  The project will also participate in the Third Party Monitoring (TPM) and Grievance 
Redress Mechanism (GRM) set up by the World Bank for the agricultural portfolio in the country to focus on issues of 
child and forced  adult labor. The TPM/GRM will be funded by a separate TF.  
  
Acquisition of land. As all proposed activities are likely to be implemented within the existing agricultural land and 
settlement boundaries, the proposed project will likely not have an impact on wildlife and natural habitats and thus, 
OP/BP 4.04 (Natural habitats) is not triggered. It is also expected there will be no impact on physical cultural 
resources, which are generally not placed in the vicinity of agricultural land. Therefore OP/BP 4.11 "Physical Cultural 
Resources" is not triggered.  
    
 Private businesses will be eligible to become project beneficiaries under the condition that they have not acquired 
and/or would not acquire land for the needs of activities to be supported with the project proceeds, through a process 
which involved and/or would involve officially supported expropriation. Additionally, project funds will not support 
any sub-loans used to invest in a business which would require the involuntary displacement of existing occupants or 
economic users of any plot of land, regardless of its current ownership, or loss of, or damage to, assets including 
standing crops, kiosks, fences and other. The project operational manual will define a screening procedure to be filled 
by PFIs, and the implementing agency will closely monitor the screening procedure, with the support of the Bank task 
team. With these restrictions in place, the project does not trigger OP/BP 4.12 "Involuntary Resettlement". 
 



 

The World Bank  
Additional Financing - Horticulture Development Project (P164226) 

 

 

  
Oct 09, 2017 Page 10 of 15  

 

 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
 
The cumulative negative impact of expanded horticultural production and processing is expected to be limited, 
particularly as expansion of the horticulture sector and successful implementation of sub-project activities are 
expected to lead to more efficient use of land and water resources compared to Uzbekistan’s current dominant 
commercial crop sector (cotton and wheat). The expected cumulative impacts are expected to be mostly positive and 
includes improved knowledge on best agricultural and manufacture practices, with consequent improvements in the 
status of the environment in the country. 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
Project design includes a prohibition on category A sub-projects which is expected to prevent larger scale negative 
impacts.  A "no project" scenario was considered but would result in continuation to the the current structure of 
agricultural prodution, which is dominated by cotton and wheat, which also have specific negative evnrionmental and 
social impacts. 
 
To boost employment of women, and encourage access of female entrepreneurs to loans, the project will closely 
collaborate with the Women’s Committee of Uzbekistan and the Association of Business Women of Uzbekistan for 
policy level activities for mainstreaming gender in the sector, publicizing information about female role models, as 
well as providing targeted capacity building to female entrepreneurs to enable them to access funding through the 
project. 
 
The project will have explicit focus on targeting more vulnerable farmers, both directly and indirectly. To achieve 
indirect effects, eligibility criteria for sub-loans would also consider the social impact of the project, including direct 
job creation, the multiplier effects of supporting suppliers down the value chain, as well as contributions towards 
improving community infrastructure. Trainings for the PFIs on social responsibility of business and labor rights would 
be conducted, to ensure better screening. Through Additional Financing, a share of the project resources would also 
be ring-fenced to target smaller farmers and entrepreneurs directly. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
Safeguards instruments. The primary instrument for managing safeguards policy issues is the ESMF prepared for the 
initial HDP project and which remains valid for the additional financing to the project. The document has been 
updated for the AF to address the new geographic locations and any other relevant changes from the parent project, 
including in terms of Environmental Assessment  (EA) capacity building activities (see below). The ESMF document 
outlines environmental assessment procedures and mitigation requirements for first component’s activities and the 
sub-projects which is supported by the second component’s Credit Line and, it provides details on procedures, criteria 
and responsibilities for subprojects preparing, screening, appraisal, implementing and monitoring. The document also 
includes Environmental Guidelines and Best Practices for different types of proposed sub-projects providing analysis of 
potential impacts and generic mitigation measures to be undertaken for subprojects in agricultural production, agro-
processing and storage and cooling manufacturing sectors at all stages - from identification and selection, through the 
design and implementation phase, to the monitoring and evaluation of results.  Furthermore, the ESMF provides a 
monitoring plan format which considers monitoring indicators, timing, methods, institutional responsibilities, etc. in all 
phases of the project's implementation.  
 
The project's original social assessment, prepared in 2014, was updated to cover the new regions, as well as provide a 



 

The World Bank  
Additional Financing - Horticulture Development Project (P164226) 

 

 

  
Oct 09, 2017 Page 11 of 15  

 

summary of more up to date analysis of the key issues. Issues related to labor rights and working conditions in 
horticulture sector, as well as access of women entrepreneurs to credit were flagged up. To address these, additional 
capacity building measures to be implemented in collaboration with the ILO, the Farmers Council and the Association 
of Business Women were designed for implementation under the additional financing. The project also participates in 
the Third Party Monitoring (TPM) and Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) set up by the World Bank for the 
agricultural portfolio in the country to focus on issues of child and forced  adult labor. To date RRA has been found in 
compliance and the GRM is actively receiving and responding to inquiries, however no complaints issued thus far.  
 
Institutional capacity. The project will continue be managed and implemented by the Rural Restructuring Agency 
(RRA), an institution that is currently implementing the Second Rural Enterprise Support Project, GEF Climate Change 
and Land Degradation Project, and other donors' projects. The RRA's capacity for implementation of the ESMF and of 
the participating Financial Intermediaries (PFIs) are adequate, based on the Bank supervision missions in 2016-2017. 
All sub-projects have been subject to screening and assessment and for those classified as Category B separate 
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs) have been prepared. Supervision has confirmed these are being 
implemented in a satisfactory manner and no outstanding issues have been identified.   
 
Further capacity building is anticipated with respect to several technical asepcts of horticulture production, as 
identified during the initial project implementation which are related to Integrated Pest Management (IPM), soil and 
water conservation, including field demonstrations. New training on EA is also required for Participating Financial 
Intermediaries (PFIs) which should strengthen the ability of their representatives to identify potential environmental 
and social impacts as well as their knowledge on the EA rules and procedures. The revised ESMF proposes necessary 
activities in this regard.  
 
To accommodate the scaling up of activities for the project, it was agreed the RRA will hire additional Environmental 
Specialists in all participating oblasts, where regional PIUs will be established for all WB and other IFIs RRA projects will 
be implementing (including for Livestock Development Project which was recently approved by the Board). While the 
RRA ES will have the major coordinating role on EA, the PIU ESs will be responsible for assisting the PFIs in 
implementation of the Credit Component of the project, including reviewing environmental EIA studies and/or 
environmental management plans, monitoring their implementation, advising and guiding PFIs on specific 
environmental issues and management options and ensuring that potential cumulative impacts are addressed. One of 
the major area of their responsibility will be inspection of environmental compliance at worksites, ensuring the ESMP 
provisions are fully implemented. The PIUs ESs will advise PFIs in terms of integrating environmental requirements 
into bidding documents, and analyzing contracts and their implementation in terms of environmental management 
and mitigation issues. ESs will be responsible also for analyzing the environmental conditions of the subprojects’ area 
and identify main environmental parameters. On a quarterly basis PIUs ESs will prepare short reports on implementing 
ESMF and site specific ESMPs for supported sub-projects. They will also identify the status of environmental 
compliance of sub-projects implementation, and, when needed will undertake relevant measures and agree with the 
sub-project beneficiaries on corrective measures and/or proposing to the PFIs and RRA canceling sub-project 
financing. 
 
The project will also support a series of activities on human capacity building. This would include: (a) capacity building 
in collaboration with the ILO to increase compliance with national legislation and ILO conventions on child and forced 
labor, and broader labor issues, ratified by Uzbekistan; (b) training on strengthening project environmental 
management capacity for sub-projects environmental assessment; (c) training and information dissemination for sub-
project beneficiaries and farmers on several important horticulture sector development issues, identified during the 
initial project implementation which are related to Integrated Pest Management, soil and water conservation, 



 

The World Bank  
Additional Financing - Horticulture Development Project (P164226) 

 

 

  
Oct 09, 2017 Page 12 of 15  

 

including field demonstrations; and (d) training EA practitioners in the country that are working on preparing EA 
documents as well as familiarizing representatives from State Ecological Expertise on WB EA rules and procedures and 
proposing relevant recommendations on harmonizing the National EA requirements with the WB ones. 
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
As part of the initial project preparation RRA disclosed and consulted the ESMF with all interested stakeholders. This 
process involved submission of the draft summary of the ESMF to the Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources 
and other relevant ministries for their review and comments. The Executive Summary of the original document in 
Russian was posted on websites of MAWR for its access to the public on January 17th, 2014. On February 13, 2014, 
the RRA organized a consultation on the draft document. After the consultation, the draft ESMF was revised to 
consider inputs from consulted parties. The final version for the parent project was posted on the website of the 
Ministry of Agriculture on February 14, 2014 and submitted to the World Bank's external website on March 10, 2014. 
For the HDP AF the updated ESMF was posted by RRA on its website for further virtual public consultation in the 
provinces which have been already included in the parent project. Face to face public consultations with the 
participation of main stakeholders and farmers were organized in the new project provinces by RRA in October 2017. 
For that purpose RRA has provided to key stakeholders (oblast agriculture, environmental and sanitary authorities and 
environmental NGOs) hard copies of the draft ESMF.  During the consultations overall the draft ESMF was supported 
by the participants, the few received comments were related to clarifying the EA roles and responsibilities and  
simplifying the EA rules and procedures and providing awareness activities for the potential subprojects beneficiaries 
in this regard. The minutes of consultations have been shared with the Bank. 
 
  OPS_SAFEGUARD_DISCLOSURE_TBL 

B. Disclosure Requirements (N.B. The sections below appear only if corresponding safeguard policy is triggered) 

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 
For category A projects, date of 
distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 

02-Nov-2017 01-Dec-2017 
 

   

"In country" Disclosure   

   Uzbekistan 
  03-Oct-2017 

Comments 

Initial updated version disclosed in October, final updated version disclosed in country in December following 
updates based on Bank comments. 

       
OPS_ PM_D ISCL OSURE_TA BLE  

 

Pest Management Plan 
 
Was the document disclosed prior to 
appraisal? Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission for disclosure 



 

The World Bank  
Additional Financing - Horticulture Development Project (P164226) 

 

 

  
Oct 09, 2017 Page 13 of 15  

 

NA   

   
"In country" Disclosure   
 

 
OPS_PM_ PC R_TAB LE  

 

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to 
be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.  

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 

 
  
 OPS_COMPLIANCE_INDICATOR_TBL 

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project 
decision meeting) (N.B. The sections below appear only if corresponding safeguard policy is triggered) 
 
OPS_EA_COMP_TABLE OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
  
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes   
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report? 
Yes   
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes    

OPS_ PM_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
  
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes   
Is a separate PMP required? 
No   
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included in 
project design?  If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
NA          

OPS_ PDI_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 

 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for disclosure? 
Yes   
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are understandable 



 

The World Bank  
Additional Financing - Horticulture Development Project (P164226) 

 

 

  
Oct 09, 2017 Page 14 of 15  

 

and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
Yes  

 
 OPS_ALL_COMP_TABLE 
All Safeguard Policies 

 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes   
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? 
Yes   
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies? 
Yes   
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes  

 

CONTACT POINT 

 

  World Bank 
 

Dilshod Khidirov 
Sr Agricultural Spec.  

 

Melissa Brown 
Senior Economist 

  

 

  Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Republic of Uzbekistan 

Mr. Jamshid Kuchkarov 

Deputy Minister 

 
 

  Implementing Agencies 

 

Rural Restructuring Agency 

Nasriddin Najimov 

General Director 

 
 

 



 

The World Bank  
Additional Financing - Horticulture Development Project (P164226) 

 

 

  
Oct 09, 2017 Page 15 of 15  

 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

 

Task Team Leader(s): 
Dilshod Khidirov 
Melissa Brown 

 

 

Approved By 

Safeguards Advisor: Nina Chee 05-Dec-2017 

Practice Manager/Manager: Julian A. Lampietti 05-Dec-2017 

Country Director: Serdar Jepbarov 06-Dec-2017 
 

    
 
 
 
 
 
 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects


