













































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 
 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 1 of 21  

     

 

 
 
      

 

Combined Project Information Documents /  
Integrated Safeguards Datasheet (PID/ISDS) 

 

 

Appraisal Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 25-Apr-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSA21211 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 

 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 2 of 21  

 

BASIC INFORMATION 

 
OPS_TABLE_BASIC_DATA 
  A. Basic Project Data 

Country Project ID Project Name Parent Project ID (if any) 

Afghanistan P160606 Afghanistan Strategic 
Grain Reserve ( SGR 
Project ) 

 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

SOUTH ASIA 10-Apr-2017 13-Jun-2017 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Islamic Republic of 
Afghanistan - Ministry of 
Finance 

MAIL  

 
Proposed Development Objective(s) 
 
The development objective of the project is “To establish a wheat strategic reserve to be available to Afghan 
households to meet their needs following emergency situations and improve the efficiency of the grain storage 
management.” 
 
Components 

Component A: Institutional Infrastructure and Capacity Building 
Component B: Physical Infrastructure 
Component C: Project Management: 

 
 

Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

IDA Grant   18.00  

Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund   11.45  

Total Project Cost   29.45  

 

Environmental Assessment Category 

B - Partial Assessment 
   
Decision 

The review did authorize the preparation to continue     
 
 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 3 of 21  

 

 
 
Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 
 

Afghanistan is a landlocked country, surrounded by Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, and Turkmenistan in the north, 
Iran in the west, Pakistan in the south and southwest, and China in the northeast. The country is divided 
into thirty four provinces, each province consists of a number of districts. Within these districts, most 
families live in villages. Rural households make up around 80 percent of the population, which is estimated 
to be 32.5 million (World Bank, 2015), with one of the highest growth rates of population worldwide (3 
percent / year). The Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of Afghanistan is around $ 19.2 billion (World Bank, 
2015).  

 
Over the last several decades, the country went through wars, and internal conflicts, resulting in weak 
economy, and absence of some of the basic services in parts of the country. All economic activities, and the 
potential for economic growth in Afghanistan have been badly affected by the deteriorating security 
situation, and the uncertainty about its political future, with around 39 percent of the Afghans falling under 
the poverty line (World Bank, 2013). Recently, Statistics showed negative levels of consumers’ prices index 
reflecting the high unemployment rates, and the weak economic conditions. The security situation remains 
a serious challenge, it has even deteriorated recently in some areas of the country, with limited presence or 
control from the government. 
 
Agriculture is the main pillar of the Afghan economy, being the second contributor to the GDP, following 
the services sector, which primarily depends on the presence of the international community in 
Afghanistan. The agriculture sector employs around 40 percent of the working force of the country

1
, and 

provides support to approximately 80 percent of the population in their livelihood. Direct agriculture 
activities contribute 25 percent to the GDP of the country. The number would be much higher if other 
related activities such as food processing, logistic, and trade of food items, are included. Wheat and its 
related activities such as logistics, and milling represents around 6.5 percent of the national GDP on the 
country.  

 
Agriculture productivity per unit of land in Afghanistan is low compared to world standards and some of its 
neighboring countries for most of the crops. Arable land in Afghanistan is around 12 percent of its total 
area, with less than half of the cultivated land is irrigated, while the larger portion of crops is rain-fed. 
Along with the high annual growth rate of population, this makes the country import-dependent for a large 
number of major food products, including wheat.  
 
Malnutrition is another chronic challenge in Afghanistan. It is estimated that 33 percent of Afghans are 
food insecure. Access to basic food items is limited for many Afghans, with around 34.7 percent of rural 

                                                           
1
 Agricultural Sector Review, World Bank, 2014 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 4 of 21  

 

households suffering from caloric deficiency in normal condition. This become even worse during times of 
shortages of supply. 
 
Given the fact that the agriculture sector in Afghanistan is not yet developed, in terms of adopting modern 
technologies, especially those related to climate resilient seeds, water management, and improved farming 
practices, this makes its agriculture production highly volatile, and vulnerable to sudden shocks, resulting 
from any unforeseen situation. 
 
Agricultural production in Afghanistan consists mainly of wheat, horticulture, nuts, and poppy

2
. Due to the 

very high level of consumption per capita, and being major part of the Afghan diet, wheat accounts for 
more than 60 percent of total areas cultivated, with a total area of around 2.4 million hectares

3
, almost 

equally split between irrigated and rain-fed cultivation, which creates high level of volatility in production 
every year. This has resulted in a fluctuating supply of wheat for households’ consumption on annual basis. 
This deficit of supply is mainly addressed by imports.  
 
Additionally, the political relations between Afghanistan and its neighbors, affects to a large extent the flow 
of goods to the country, bearing in mind its position as a landlocked country, with limited access to 
international trade and supply routes.  
 
By nature, Afghanistan is also prone to other natural disasters such as earthquakes, which adds to the 
already weak situation in the country. When such incidents occur, supply of wheat through the regular 
channels become more challenging, and many Afghans especially the poor lack access to wheat for their 
daily diet.   
 
Altogether, these factors puts Afghanistan in a very fragile situation with regard to its ability to secure basic 
food requirements specially wheat, for the need of its citizens especially at times of shortages of supply due 
to unforeseen situations, and emphasizes the need to establish a strategic reserve of wheat to be utilized 
during possible deficits of supply.     

 
Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 

Wheat is the largest crop grown in Afghanistan, covering nearly 60 percent of all cultivated lands. 

Production of wheat in Afghanistan comes mainly from the northern regions, which is mostly rain-fed 

cultivations, this increases the risk of volatility of production on annual basis. Over the last ten years (2005 

– 2015), annual production of wheat fluctuated between 2.1 million tons in 2008, to slightly above 5 million 

tons in 2014. There are several factors resulting in this large variability, mainly adverse climate conditions- 

specifically drought. Afghanistan is affected by global climate change, which is resulting in less rains, and 

increase in temperature, which accordingly have negative impact on its agricultural production in terms of 

areas cultivated and productivity per unit of land, bearing in mind that more than half of its cultivated lands 

are rain-fed. Additionally, the poor quality of seeds, and the limited adoption of modern farming practices 

adds to the situation.  

The recent significant shortages of local production were observed in 2004, 2006, 2008, and 2011, with 

                                                           
2
 Agricultural Sector Review, World Bank, 2014 

3
 Agricultural Sector Review, World Bank, 2014 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 5 of 21  

 

the unfavorable weather conditions being
4
 the main reason.  During these years, supply of wheat for 

household consumption dropped sharply, it was also accompanied with ban on exports of wheat from 
some of the neighboring supplying countries facing the same unfavorable climate conditions. This 
resulted in limiting the access of many Afghans to wheat for their daily consumption.  
 
In Afghanistan, bread constitutes around 70 percent of the daily caloric intake

5
. Globally, the country 

has the highest annual rate of wheat consumption per capita (160kg)
6
. This makes the availability of the 

crop a significantly important factor for the social stability of Afghanistan. Each year large quantities of 

wheat are imported primarily by the private sector, which mainly serve the urban community, along 

with donations from other countries.  With the limited availability of data in Afghanistan, different 

sources have different estimates for the annual imports of wheat ranging between one to two million 

tons every year, which roughly represents 20 – 40 percent of the overall consumption of the country, 

depending on the size of domestic production. For the 2016 / 2017 crop season, MAIL estimates that 

import requirements will be around 1.25 million tons.  

Regularly, the government of Afghanistan receives grain donations from other countries (mainly India), 

over the period 2011 – 2014 the government received 250,000 tons from India, and in 2016 – 2017 

season only, India is planning to provide around 100,000 tons to Afghanistan. All these quantities are 

stored and distributed to the poorest in Afghanistan. Irregularly, the government purchases much 

smaller quantities from farmers for the same purpose, in 2015 MAIL purchased only 900 tons from 

Afghan farmers. 

 Imports of wheats by the private sector usually offsets the deficit of domestic production, however in 

some years, and due to various reasons including market forces, political issues, and the impact of 

climate conditions, the availability of wheat in neighboring exporting countries becomes quite limited. 

Coupled with the shortfalls of local production of wheat in the country, this results in strong shocks to 

the supply for Afghan households’ consumption, especially the poorest in the country. In 2008 with the 

global hike in price of commodities, along with the decline in production is many countries, Pakistan 

which is the main supplier of wheat and wheat flour to Afghanistan banned exports of wheat, although 

some quantities of wheat were illegally exported, Afghanistan witnessed a serious situation in this 

regard.  

In 2008, and as per the historical data from MAIL, price of one ton of wheat reached around $750 in 

Afghanistan, compared to around $250 in 2007, and around $350 in 2009, the situation was similar 

earlier in 2004, 2006, and then later again in 2011, however it was not as severe as it was in 2008. These 

hikes in wheat prices make it very hard for average households in Afghanistan to secure their needs of 

bread, considering the poverty rates in the country, and the high level of wheat consumption per capita. 

During all these circumstances the government of Afghanistan was not able to respond to these 

unforeseen situations, by providing support to its people, especially poor households, which were 

already struggling to earn their living. 

                                                           
4
 FAO, 2013  

5
 FAO, 2013 

6
Agricultural Sector Review, World Bank, 2014 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 6 of 21  

 

Productivity levels per unit of land for both irrigated and rain-fed wheat in Afghanistan remains low, 

compared to neighboring countries. Additionally, the weak post-harvest practices, and value addition 

activities, such as threshing, handling, and milling, and also the poor condition of the storage facilities, 

results in losses in the harvested crop, and deterioration of quality.  

 The World Bank through other agriculture projects in Afghanistan, specifically the ARTF funded project; 

Afghanistan Agriculture Inputs Project (AAIP) is already providing support in areas of wheat productivity 

enhancement, through introducing high quality seeds, and providing support to farmers on the adoption 

of improved agricultural practices. The government of Afghanistan have an ambitious goal to be self-

sufficient of wheat by 2020 through increased productivity, and expansion of irrigated wheat 

cultivations. This represents a real challenge at least on the medium term, considering the limited 

resources of water, arable land, and the need to 

expand beyond the high growth rate of the 

population. However, the challenge is even 

higher with the supporting activities such as 

storage and handling, which are currently weak, 

and have large impact on the quality of wheat, 

and is a direct result for high post-harvest 

losses.  

 

The government owns five large silos located in 

the provinces of Kabul, Kandahar, Heart, 

Baghlan, and Balkh as spotted on the map of Afghanistan. These silos operate as State Owned 

Enterprises (SOEs), operating under supervision of MAIL, and they charge the government for the 

quanities of wheat stored. The five silos are concrete constructions, and were built during the Soviet 

presence in Afghanistan during the 1970’s. Combined together, the silos have a total theoretical storage 

capacity of 170,000 tons. There are a number of warehouses owned by the Ministry of Agriculture, 

Irrigation, and Livestock (MAIL), adjacent to the silos with a total storage capacity of approximately 

65,000 tons, additionally, fifty two small scale warehouses are owned and operated by MAIL, and are 

distributed over 17 provinces, and all facilities are used for the storage and distribution of wheat. 

However, none of five large silos are operating at capacity, it is estimated that the utilization of the silos 

storage capacities is around 25 percent of its original capacity. This is mainly due to the lack of 

maintenance, human skills, and spare parts, accordingly the actual available storage capacity is much 

less. More importantly, the poor condition of these storage facilities, and its outdated operating 

procedures negatively affects the quality of the wheat stored. Generally, skills of the technical team 

operating these facilities are weak, and their knowledge on modern practices in managing grain stocks 

are quite limited. Although there is no specific assessment, some officials and donors estimates storage 

losses to be around 20 percent.  

Although, there is a directorate under MAIL responsible for the management of the grain reserve of the 

country. However, this directorate has limited capacities, and lacks the required set of skills to engage in 

managing such program, and due to the implementation of the standard governmental procedures and 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 7 of 21  

 

regulations, their ability to directly engage in the wheat market is limited. While operating in such a 

dynamic market requires certain level of flexibility, to make decisions and engage in the procurement 

process when there is a good market opportunity.  

 

These factors altogether, from the importance that wheat represents in the afghan diet, and the fact 

that the country is wheat import-dependency, along with the volatile ties with its main suppliers, make 

it significantly important to build up wheat reserve, that can be used in responding to any unforeseen 

situations that may occur similar to those which the country witnessed several times, over the last 

twelve years. This wheat reserve can also be utilized in addressing the malnutrition situation in 

Afghanistan, through including a fortification program to the wheat stored.  

However, building up such a reserve requires solid storage structures, by which wheat can be stored in 

compliance with international standards in storing, handling, and quality control of wheat. More 

importantly, there is a need to establish an entity to be responsible for managing this reserve, with the 

required highly skilled human capital. 

The government of Afghanistan represented by MAIL, have been prioritizing the establishment of a 

Strategic Grain Reserve, and have been engaged in discussion with the World Bank seeking support in 

this regard. Initially, the government was interested in developing the grain reserve to serve two 

purposes, firstly, responding to emergency situations, and secondly to be utilized in stabilizing the wheat 

market in Afghanistan for the benefit of the farmers, through setting up minimum guaranteed price. The 

Bank advice on this regard was that such a practice would result in crowding out the private sector from 

the market, and eventually harm the farmers themselves, as this would limit the market opportunities 

for them, especially that it would require the allocation of significantly large financial resources from the 

government side, which is not available. 

Recently, and following extensive discussions between the World Bank and the Government of 

Afghanistan (GoA), an agreement was reached that the objective of establishing a strategic grain reserve 

should only be to efficiently respond to emergency situations, enabling the government to be able to 

secure basic food supplies of wheat for at least two million people for one year.  

In preparation for the proposed engagement in building a grain reserve, the World Bank conducted an 
engineering assessment for the five silos and the warehouses adjacent to it. The findings of the 
assessment covered the condition of building, machinery, other equipment and supportive activities on 
site. All five facilities were found in need for extensive rehabilitation, with different level of work 
required according to the condition on each site, and accordingly different cost estimate for each 
location. The study also provided a brief cost estimate for establishing Greenfield silos using modern 
storage technologies. In parallel, MAIL, reached out to a number of international suppliers, and obtained 
tentative cost estimations for Greenfield silos.  

 

Also, during the preparation for this project, a vulnerability assessment was conducted to study the 
current status of the food security in Afghanistan, and access to basic food supplies, based on trends in 
wheat production and to identify the areas within the country that are highly vulnerable in case an 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 8 of 21  

 

emergency situation occurs, based on previous incidents, and the current storage capacities. The 
objective of the assessment was to advise on the suitability of the locations of the existing storage 
facilities, and provide recommendation on other locations (if any), to ensure efficient coverage, and 
ability to respond to sudden shocks.  

 

The vulnerability assessment reviewed a range of food insecurity assessments undertaken by the Bank, 
the government of Afghanistan, World Food Program, and others.  The assessment used to the most in 
depth degree was the 2013/14 Afghanistan Living Conditions Survey (ALCS) as this data resource had the 
most in depth data set on food insecurity which could be effectively used to evaluate the spatial 
distribution of vulnerability in the country.   Two of the main findings of the vulnerability assessment 
were; a) food insecurity in the country is generally widely distributed around the country, and b) the 
existing placement of the silos infrastructure, in most cases, if improved can be relatively well placed to 
address problems of food insecurity for most of the population, with one exception for a specific region 
that showed a deficit on food security in relation to the available storage capacity. 
 
The table below uses data on populations of severely and moderately food insecure populations from 
the 2013/14 ALCS survey disaggregated by region to develop an estimate of potential grain storage 
needs to respond to problems of food insecurity.  The evaluation makes the assumption that severely 
food insecure populations would be provided a 100 percent ration of wheat though the three month 
winter lean season.  On a per capita consumption rate of 170kg/annum, this would be a ration of 42kg 
of wheat grain for the period per person.  For moderately food insecure populations, a ratio of 50 
percent of consumption would be provided for the same three month lean season.  This would be 
equivalent to 21kg of wheat grain per person

7
.   

The analysis revealed that those regions near already planned large storage facilities; Kabul, Mazar-e-
Sharif, and Herat, do not have wheat requirements larger than the scale of the existing storage facilities 
if improved.  Similarly, a centralized facility in Kandahar would be able to serve the southwest of the 

                                                           
7
 Equivalent to 170kg/capita/annum x 0.25 years (3 months) x 50% 

Region 

Severe Food 
Insecurity 
Wheat 
Requirement 
(MT) 

Moderate 
Food 
Insecurity 
Wheat 
Requirement 
(MT) 

Total Est. 
Req. (MT) 

Service Point and Comments 

Central 27,058 18,920 45,977    Area effectively serviced from Kabul 

Central Region 12,168 17,950 30,118 
   Decentralized facility or met from Kabul or Herat  
(jointly) 

Eastern 4,191 4,757 8,948 Area could be serviced from Kabul 

North 17,488 21,736 39,224 Area effectively serviced from Mazar Sharif 

North-east 28,970 24,334 53,304 
Capacity in Mazar Sharif not sufficient for need.  
Would also need decentralized facility 

South-east 10,045 5,523 15,568 Serviced from Kandahar or from Kabul 

South-west 21,204 16,034 37,238 Kandahar or serviced from Heart 

West 21,490 16,046 37,536 Area effectively serviced from Herat 

     

National 142,613 125,301 267,914 
 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 9 of 21  

 

country, or feasibly this region could also potentially be served from Herat.  The ALCS data show 
relatively low rates of food insecurity in the east of the country (estimated food requirement in this 
region is less than 10,000MT), this region could very likely be served out of Kabul.  In the Southeast 
region total estimated food requirements are also relatively modest, estimated at roughly 15,000MT.  
This region might also be served out of Kabul or if need be, the facility in Kandahar could also contribute 
to address needs in this area.      
 
The areas that present the most substantial challenges are the Central region and the Northeast regions 
of the country.  The Northeast, according to this analysis, has a wheat requirement of 53,000MT.  At this 
requirement level it is not likely that it would be feasible to service this area from the facility in Mazar-e-
Sharif.  In addition, the facility in Pul-e-Khumri is potentially too distant to be able to effectively address 
needs in this area.  As such it seems that it would be a reasonable approach to develop smaller 
decentralized facilities in this region able to address food insecurity problems in this area.  Government 
data show that there is an estimated storage capacity of 6,000MT in Badakhshan province.  This 
infrastructure could be built on and further developed.  ALCS data by province show that in the 
northeast the large bulk of food insecure populations are in Badakhshan more so than Kunduz or 
Takhar.  As such, infrastructure would need to be developed to respond to the structure of current 
needs.   

 
The Central region are also an area where the quantity needed is relatively substantial (30,118 MT).  
According to government data, there are 5,000MT facilities in each of Central region provinces of 
Bamyan, Ghor, and Daykundi that were built in the last 10 years.  This total storage level of 15,000 MT 
for this region would be a very good start in terms of having available local storage capacity in these 
provinces.  For needs over and above this, it is likely that the balance of required foods could be 
supplied from Mazar-e Sharif and Herat.   

 

Ultimately, the assessment confirmed that the enhancement of the current storage facilities or the 

consideration of a greenfield silos at the same locations, along with the sufficient stock of wheat 

available, can help the Government of Afghanistan be in a good position to respond to emergency 

situations, and be able to supply Afghans with wheat as the basic and main food item consumed, of 

course with the presence of other factors such as solid logistics, and distribution mechanism. However, 

the study also revealed that a need exists for an additional large storage facility in the northeast region 

of the country, where productivity rates of wheat are very low since wheat cultivations in this area are 

mainly rain-fed, in addition to the absence of large storage facilities for wheat, and the fact that this 

region is generally prone to natural disasters such as earthquakes, plus the difficulty in reaching out to 

some of the areas of the region especially during winter time. 

 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

 
 

Note to Task Teams: The PDO has been pre-populated from the datasheet for the first time for your 

convenience. Please keep it up to date whenever it is changed in the datasheet. 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 10 of 21  

 

Development Objective(s) (From PAD)  
The development objective of the project is “To establish a wheat strategic reserve to be available to Afghan 
households to meet their post-disaster needs and improve the efficiency of the grain storage management”.  

Key Results 
The achievement of the PDO would be measured by the following PDO results indicators:  
 
Increased availability of wheat stocks.  

Increased number of households whose wheat needs can be met immediately after the occurrence of 

an emergency situation affecting their access to wheat, and  

Reduced losses in wheat stored, as a result of the upgrade of the storage facilities, relative to pre-

project intervention.  

 
D. Project Description  
 

The project aims to support the Government of Afghanistan, in building up a reserve of wheat that can 

be utilized in responding to any emergency situation the country may face, which usually leads to 

shortages of supply of wheat, which is considered the most important food item for household 

consumption in the country.    

Emergency situations occurring in Afghanistan are generally due to unforeseen weather conditions such 

as severe drought resulting in share decline in the local wheat crop, natural disaster such as 

earthquakes, which is frequent in the country, and usually results in limiting people’s access to wheat.  

Declaration of an emergency situation is assigned to a ministerial committee. The entity that will be 

established by the project to manage the reserve will coordinate with this committee as part of its tasks 

in working closely with relevant stakeholders.  In this regard, the entity will be prepared to act on up the 

declaration of an emergency situation in the country, to do so, the new entity will have its own 

operational procedures for actions to be taken to respond accordingly.    

The objective of the project will be achieved through the establishment of an autonomous entity to 

manage the grain reserve. This entity will be responsible for obtaining and receiving wheat 

internationally and locally, from aid provided by other countries, and also the purchase of wheat from 

local and international markets, and managing the handling, storage, and distribution operations of 

wheat, while ensuring that quality is maintained through the adoption of global best practices in this 

regard. In order to enable the new entity in becoming well-positioned to help in responding to 

emergency situations, the project will work on building existing capacities under MAIL, and benefit from 

those have gained the required knowledge in the activities of the new entity, in addition to adding 

additional calibers as needed.  

The objective of the project will also be achieved through the improvement of the existing storage 

capacities through rehabilitation process, and also the establishment of Greenfield facilities. On this 

regard, the project will decide on the selection between different options of silos rehabilitation versus 

the establishment of Greenfield facilities. Currently, the proposed activities includes the rehabilitation of 

the two silos located in Mazar-e-Sharif, and Pul-e-Khumri, considering that both are in relatively good 

condition, while establishing three greenfield silos in Kabul, Kandahar, and Herat considering the level of 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 11 of 21  

 

work required for rehabilitation is significant, and also the fact that one of these silos (Kabul), is now 

being in the center of the city, which may have negative impact on the surroundings if rehabilitated.   

The objective of establishing the grain reserve will remain only to respond to emergency situations in 

the country. However, in order to maintain the quality of the wheat stored, and as a common practices 

in managing grain stocks, a portion of the wheat will be offered for sale annually on basis of stock 

replenishment. The sale of wheat will be at the prevailing market prices, and will be in a manner that 

has no impact on market dynamics, and will not engage in price setting.  

The project will utilize new technologies in developing a wheat crop estimation tool, which will provide 

accurate forecasts for the locally grown wheat in Afghanistan, to assess the needs for imports based on 

local supply, and annual consumptions rates.  

The project will also seek to partially address the malnutrition situation in Afghanistan through the 

introduction of a fortification program for the wheat / wheat flour distributed under the project.  The 

fortification of wheat flour will be achieved in collaboration with the World Food Program, which enjoys 

solid on ground presence in Afghanistan, and have already established large network with hundreds of 

local wheat millers to ensure implementation of the fortification program during wheat milling.  

Both activities of the development of the crop estimation, and the nutrition support, will be 

subcomponents under the first component, which covers the establishment of the grain reserve 

management entity, and the related intuitional infrastructure development.  

Implementation will of project activities will be carried out by a transit Project Implementation Unit 
(PIU), until the entity that will be in charge of managing the grain reserve is established, then it will take 
over from the transit PIU.   

 
The project will be implemented over five years, and will consist of the following three main 

components: 

Component A: Institutional Infrastructure and Capacity Building: (US$ 3.9 million) 

This component will be focused on the establishment, and support the start-up activities of the 

proposed entity to be in charge of managing the grain reserve. Activities of the component will also 

include the development of the crop estimation system, and also include activities related to the 

nutrition, and wheat fortification.  

Component B: Physical Infrastructure: (US$ 23.1 million) 

The silos are located mostly in urban centers, except Kandahar. Kabul silo is located in a growing urban 

center, surrounded mostly by residential and commercial development. Pul-e-Khumri silo is also 

surrounded by residential areas on the north and south side of the facility and lies directly on the main 

road running through the town. Mazar Sharif silo is approximately 4 km from the city center, surrounded 

by residential and commercial development. Herat silo is also located in an urban area on a valuable 

land site. Kandahar silo is located on the outskirts of the city, but this silo is in a very poor condition.   



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 12 of 21  

 

This component will finance the required physical engineering work including the rehabilitation of the 

existing 2 silos, and also the establishment of 3 Greenfield Silos and a new warehouse facility in the 

northeast region of the country considering its high vulnerability.  Activities of the component are based 

on the outcome of the field assessment conducted during the project preparation process.  

Activities under this component will be implemented through a gradual work approach, so that the 

timeframe for the rehabilitation of the existing facilities, and the construction of new facilities allows the 

utilization of each of the storage facilities once completed, while maintaining sufficient storage capacity 

available at other facilities prior undergoing an upgrading process. The work schedule will be designed 

to ensure that by end of the fourth year of the project all five silos are fully operational, and the new 

warehouse facility in the north east region is fully functioning.  

Both the physical assessment of the silos which was undertaken recently as part of project preparation, 

and also the vulnerability assessment will guide the work under this component. From the results of the 

assessment and the cost effectiveness analysis, three new Greenfield silos will be constructed in Kabul, 

Kandahar and Herat as the cost of rehabilitating these facilities is more than new Greenfield 

construction.  The facilities on Mazar Sharif and Pul-e-Khumri will be rehabilitated as this is the most 

economical way to restore these facilities to full operational capacity, and considering that both are in 

relatively good condition.  For rehabilitation, substantial repairs will need to be made to the actual 

concrete silos as these have deteriorated over time.  In most cases the grounds around the facilities also 

need to be upgraded and rehabilitated to facilitate the movement of trucks into and around the facility.  

Truck weigh scales will also have to be replaced.  The mechanical equipment such as elevators, conveyor 

belts, cleaning and drying equipment, scales, and other machinery will need to be replaced in full as it 

has deteriorated from a long period of disuse.  In most instances, replacement of this mechanical 

equipment comprises roughly 50 percent or more of the total rehabilitation expenses.  In the cases of 

new Greenfield construction, new steel silos will be constructed on the grounds of the existing storage 

facilities.  The location of the existing facilities are sufficiently large that there should be more than 

sufficient room for this new construction.  .  Finally, a new laboratory along with testing equipment will 

be installed in all storage facilities.   

In addition, as recommended a new flat warehouse will be built in Badakhshan province to address food 

insecurity problems in this region of the country as was identified by the vulnerability assessment.  The 

activities of this subcomponent will commence by assessing different plots of land owned by MAIL in 

Badakhshan province, preferably close to the capital city of Faizabad. Criteria for land selection will 

include the topography of the land being flat, with no signs of elevation or slopes, with an area of 

around 5 - 6 hectares, and are connected to main roads for ease of access.  

Design and preparation work will be carried out to establish a modern warehouse, with steel 

construction, suitable for the storage of bagged and bulk wheat. The site should include a weight bridge 

scale, ventilation system, quality control laboratory, and pest and dust control systems. The site will 

include area for trucks’ movement and maneuvering.  

Component C: Project Management: (US$ 2.46 million) 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 13 of 21  

 

This component will finance activities related to the establishment and operations of a Project 

Implementation Unit (PIU), to be in charge of managing all project activities. The PIU will be located at 

MAIL in Kabul, and will be responsible for all implementation activities including the finalization and 

development of the required institutional structure which will eventually be responsible for managing 

the grain reserve.  

The PIU will be transitional, so that once the new entity in charge of managing the strategic grain 

reserve is established and fully functioning, the PIU will be handing over all of its assignments and 

activities to it. It is anticipated that this step will take place by the end of the third year of the lifetime of 

the project. However, prior to the establishment of the grain reserve managing entity, the PIU will be in 

charge, and will coordinate all its activities with the SGR directorate and other units under MAIL.   

The PIU will be responsible from the start of the project for the rehabilitation of the 2 silos, and 
establishment of 3 Greenfield Silos, in addition to construction of a warehouse in the north east region, 
and in hiring of consultants, advisors, and carrying our all related procurement work. The PIU will be also 
responsible for coordination with other governmental agencies, and carrying our all related 
procurement work. The PIU will be also responsible for coordination with other governmental agencies.  
The PIU will include managerial, technical, and fiduciary staff, and will be also responsible identifying the 

areas where it will require international expertise, and will carry out all their hiring process in line with 

the World Bank guidelines.    

 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 14 of 21  

 

E. Implementation 
 

Institutional and Implementation Arrangements 
 

The implementing agency for this project will be the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation, and Livestock (MAIL). 
Implementation of all project activities will be carried out by the Project Implementation Unit (PIU), which will 
be established under MAIL, and will be located at the ministry’s premises in Kabul.    
 
The PIU will be responsible for the managerial, financial, operational, and technical aspects related to the 
implementation of all components, and will be reporting regularly on progress of project activities to MAIL and 
the World Bank in relation to all project activities. The PIU will develop the project procurement plans, identify 
requirements for international expertise, and obtain the required resources accordingly.  
 

The PIU will coordinate its activities with relevant partners, and stakeholders including donors, governmental 
agencies, consultants, and private sector.  
 

With the establishment of the proposed entity that will be dedicated to manage the grain reserve, this new 
entity will take over the full responsibility of activities, and will seek to coordinate the work with the relevant 
stakeholders. The entity will be overseen by an inter-ministerial committee chaired by MAIL.  
 
 A Project Steering Committee (PSC) chaired by H.E. Minister of MAIL (or his delegates), will oversee project 
activities, and the implementation process carried out by the PIU, the committee will provide guidance and 
support, and will facilitate the interaction with other stakeholders. 

 
 
 

 
 
 .    
F. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 
 

The project is rehabilitating two silos in the cities of Mazar-e-Sharif, and Pul-e-Khumri, in addition to the 
construction of three new Silos in the cities of Kabul, Kandahar, and Herat, and also constructing an 
additional Greenfield warehouse in the northeast region of the country. This may have minor potential 
environmental, health and safety issues/impacts during construction and operation on site. Therefore, the 
World Bank OP 4.01 is triggered and MAIL has prepared an ESMF to be applied during the whole project 
cycle. Site specific ESMPs were prepared for the current two sites of rehabilitation operation, similar site 
specific ESMPs will be prepared based on guidelines and check lists provided by the project ESMF. The site 
specific ESMPs will be properly implemented by the Ministry and the relevant contractors. An 
implementation level Pest Management Plan (PMP) will also be prepared to for any environment health and 
safety issues that may raise from the fumigation process for preserving the quality of the wheat stored in 
the silos. 

 

Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal. 

 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 15 of 21  

 

 
G. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 
 

Mohammad Arif Rasuli,Qais Agah 

 
 
 

SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The WB OP/BP 4.01 is triggered because the project 
will rehabilitate two silos, and construct three new 
silos, and also a new storage facility at the northeast 
region. The rehabilitation and operation of the old 
facilities as well as selection, construction and 
operation of three new storage facilities may have 
minor potential environmental, health and safety 
issues and impacts on the operators and the labors 
as well as on the local environment.  Therefore, in 
order to mitigate such potential impacts an ESMF 
was prepared by MAIL and found acceptable by the 
Bank. Based on the direction and guidelines as well 
as check lists of the ESMF, two site specific ESMPs 
were also prepared for the existing silos that will 
undergo rehabilitation and will be implemented to 
avoid, minimize, and mitigate any potential impact. 
Once the location of the three new sites are 
identified, site specific ESMPs will also be prepared 
during implementation stage and will be applied on 
the new sites of the remaining three new silos. 
 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 No 
 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 
 

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The WB Pest Management Policy (OP/BP 4.09) is 
triggered as the silos will be using fumigation for 
maintaining the quality of wheat stored as a general 
practice in managing grain reserves. Use of 
fumigants should be according to the USEPA and 
WHO guidelines . Health and Safety measures should 
strictly be followed for Operation and Maintenance 
of silos to ensure the safety of the workers at the 
site of the silos . MAIL and the project with the help 
of WB safeguards team will prepare a Pest 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 16 of 21  

 

Management Plan during the project 
implementation much in advance before the 
facilities are used for storing wheat which is not 
expected to be before the second year of the 
project. The plan will consider the current practices 
and knowledge about the issue, e.g., what 
technology is used for preservation of wheat and 
availability of fumigants in the market. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No 
 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 No 
 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

OP/BP 4.12 is applicable since the project will 
support the construction of new three Silos, which 
may require land acquisition and involuntary 
resettlement. 
Since the scope and other details of all proposed 
activities, including the exact locations of the new 
silos are not yet determined, an ESMF and a 
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been 
prepared by the client and the executive summary 
was disclosed both in-country and at the Bank’s 
external website prior to project appraisal on 
4/11/2017. 
The ESMF and RPF will guide preparation of the 
social safeguards studies, such as limited Social 
Impact Assessment (SIA), ESMPs and RAPs (where 
needed). The RPF includes the requisite Terms of 
Reference (TORs) for the RAP.  
ESMF and RPF consultations with stakeholders have 
been conducted and minutes from public 
consultation have been included. 
 
 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 No 
 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

No 
 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No 
 

 
 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 17 of 21  

 

KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT 

 
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues 
 
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe any potential 
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts: 
The project will not have significant and/or irreversible impacts and might only have minor reversible impacts as the 
civil works would only be either rehabilitation of two existing silos, and construction of three new silos. When the 
ESMF tools and the ESMPs for the two locations under rehabilitation are properly applied during the implementation, 
this potential impact will be mitigated. ESMPs will carefully chalk out the sanitation and drinking water needs and their 
interaction and will give specific mitigation measures, and will also provide directions in sites of labor camps if any, 
selection and rehabilitation of specific areas, transportation routes, and the occupational health and safety measures 
for the labors and the local relevant communities. 
 
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area: 
The sub-projects will include rehabilitation of two silos in Mazar-e-Sharif, and Pul-e-Khumri and construction of three 
new silos in Kabul, Herat, and Kandahar in addition to the establishment of a new warehouse facility in Badakhsan. 
The project ESMF, the subprojects site specific ESMPs have been prepared, and an outline for the  Pest Management 
Plan (PMP) is also included in the project ESMF, and during project implementation, a full PMP will be developed. With 
these instruments, the project will be positioned to reduce and mitigate any potential impact. However, due to the 
nature of the Project compoentnts there will be no indirect and /or long term impacts due to anticipated future 
activities 
The project triggers OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, because the physical infrastructure activities under 
component B may  involve implications that could impact individuals and/or communities in different ways. Therefore, 
the preparation of the ESMF and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will guide the preparation of any Social 
Impact Assessments (SIA) or Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) that may be needed. However, it is expected that all 
new constructions will be all on lands owned by MAIL, and free from any settlers.  
 
 
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts. 
The project aimed to use government owned land and environmental friendly technologies for establishing and/or 
renovating the Silos, and also for the construction of the new warehouse in the northeast region. 
 
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower 
capacity to plan and implement the measures described. 
The borrower will address all safeguards related issues under a framework approach. A project Environmental and 
Social Management Framework(ESMF) has been developed by the borrower and a safeguards specialist will be hired 
by the project in order to implement the ESMF and to comply with the world bank safeguard policies. The borrower, 
the implementing agency, MAIL has experience with the WB safeguards implementation and will hopefully implement 
the relevant project safeguards at a satisfactory level.  
For each of the subprojects a site specific Environmental and Social Safeguards Action Plan (ESMP) would be prepared 
based on the project ESMF. Already two ESMPs for the two locations that will undergo rehabilitation have been 
developed. The borrower will mainstream relevant clauses in the relevant contract documents and will follow the 
Occupational Health and Safety as well as sanitation issues in project sites as well as in the project labor camps. During 
the implementation stage a PMP would be prepared and the outline of the proposed PMP is included as an Annex to 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 18 of 21  

 

the project ESMF.  
 
 
 
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, 
with an emphasis on potentially affected people. 
The main stakeholders are government agencies, local populations residing close to the silos facilities, donors, 
consultants, and private sector. Relevant citizen engagement tools  were used during preparation of the ESMF, and 
the ESMPs for the two already identified sites (the two silos which will be rehabilitated), once the other four locations 
have been identified during project implementation, site specific ESMPs will be developed. The ESMF and the site 
specific ESMPs as well as the PMP will all be disclosed on the Ministry Website as well as in the Bank Intranet system. 
Consultation and disclosure procedure is also illustrated in the ESMF. Already the executive summary of the ESMF 
have been translated to local language, and published. 
 
 
B. Disclosure Requirements  

 
OPS_EA_DISCLOSURE_TABLE Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other 

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop 
For category A projects, date of 
distributing the Executive Summary of 
the EA to the Executive Directors 

17-Apr-2017 22-Apr-2017 
 

   

"In country" Disclosure   

   Afghanistan 
  22-Apr-2017 

Comments 

 
   

OPS_RA_D ISCL OSURE_T ABLE  

 

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process 

   

Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop  

17-Apr-2017 22-Apr-2017  

   

"In country" Disclosure   
   Afghanistan 
  22-Apr-2017 

Comments 

 
     



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 19 of 21  

 

OPS_ PM_D ISCL OSURE_TA BLE  

 

Pest Management Plan 
 
Was the document disclosed prior to 
appraisal? Date of receipt by the Bank Date of submission to InfoShop 

No   

   
"In country" Disclosure   
 

 
OPS_PM_ PC R_TAB LE  

 

If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective issues are to 
be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.  

If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why: 

The executive summary of the ESMF & RPF, have been translated to local language and have been disclosed in the 
MAIL website on 4/11/2017. 
 
 
 
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level (to be filled in when the ISDS is finalized by the project 
decision meeting)  
 
OPS_EA_COMP_TABLE OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment 
  
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report? 
Yes   
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report? 
Yes   
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan? 
Yes    

OPS_ PM_C OM P_TA BLE  

 

OP 4.09 - Pest Management 
  
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? 
Yes   
Is a separate PMP required? 
Yes   
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included in 
project design?  If yes, does the project team include a Pest Management Specialist? 
No     

OPS_IR_ CO MP_TA BLE  



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 20 of 21  

 

 

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement 

 
 

Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as appropriate) been prepared? 
Yes  
 

 

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan? 
Yes  
 

 

 

 

      
OPS_ PDI_ CO MP_TA BLE  

 

The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information 

 
 
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop? 
Yes   
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and language that are understandable 
and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs? 
Yes  

 
 
All Safeguard Policies 

 
 
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost? 
Yes 

  
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies? 
Yes 

  
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately 
reflected in the project legal documents? 
Yes 

 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

  World Bank 
 

Hazem Ibrahim Hanbal 
Sr Agricultural Spec. 

  

 

  Borrower/Client/Recipient 



 

The World Bank  
Afghanistan Strategic Grain Reserve ( SGR Project ) (P160606) 

 

 

  
Feb 13, 2017 Page 21 of 21  

 

 

Islamic Republic of Afghanistan - Ministry of Finance 

Moheb  Jabarkhail 

Aid Management Specialist 

moheb.jabarkhail@mof.gov.af 
 

  Implementing Agencies 

 

MAIL 

Abdul Qadir  Jawad 

Deputy Minister 

ajawad.mail@gmail.com 
 

 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

 

Task Team Leader(s): Hazem Ibrahim Hanbal 
 

  Approved By 

Safeguards Advisor:   

Practice Manager/Manager: Martien Van Nieuwkoop 24-Apr-2017 

Country Director: Stephen N. Ndegwa 25-Apr-2017 
 

    
 
 

 
 
 
 

Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here. 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects


