














































World Bank Document


Page 1 of 14

COMBINED PROJECT INFORMATION DOCUMENTS / INTEGRATED 
SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET (PID/ISDS)  

ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: PIDISDSA20672

Date Prepared/Updated: 31-Jan-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION

  A.  Basic Project Data

Country: Kosovo Project ID: P158710
Parent 
Project ID 
(if any):

P112526

Project Name: Kosovo Agriculture and Rural Development Project - Third Additional 
Financing (P158710)

Parent Project 
Name:

Agriculture and Rural Development (P112526)

Region: EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Estimated 
Appraisal Date:

16-Jan-2017 Estimated 
Board Date:

28-Apr-2017

Practice Area
(Lead):

Agriculture Lending 
Instrument:

Investment Project Financing

Borrower(s): Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development
Implementing 
Agency:

Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development

Financing (in USD Million)
Financing Source Amount
International Development Association (IDA) 22.00
LOCAL  BENEFICIARIES 5.84
Total Project Cost 27.84

Environmental 
Category:

B - Partial Assessment

Appraisal 
Review 
Decision (from 
Decision Note):

The review did authorize the team to appraise and negotiate

Other Decision:
Is this a 
Repeater 
project?

No

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



Page 2 of 14

B.   Introduction and Context

Country Context
Over the past decade, Kosovo➢❨ s overall economic growth has been generally positive, 
averaging about 4-5 percent annually, driven mostly by massive donor-funded reconstruction 
efforts as well as remittances from its diaspora. The economy has demonstrated a considerable 
degree of resilience, with principal macro fiscal and financial indicators reflecting that the country 
has performed considerably better than any of its neighbors in the Western Balkans over the past 
decade. Kosovo is a potential EU candidate country and economic reforms are largely driven by 
the prospect of eventual EU accession. 
 
Despite the positive trend in growth and relatively stable and resilient economy, Kosovo remains 
one of the poorest countries in Europe. As of 2011, approximately 30 percent of its population of 
1.8 million lived below the national poverty line of ➢❪¬1.72 a day and about 10.2 percent were 
living in extreme poverty on less than ➢❪¬1.20 day. Unemployment is widespread, estimated at 
about 30 percent in 2013, the highest in South Eastern Europe. Unemployment among women is 
higher, estimated at 38.8 percent. Demographically, Kosovo is Europe➢❨ s youngest country, 
where the average age is estimated at 26 years.  Unemployment among the youth is especially 
high, estimated at 61.0 percent in 2014. 
 
The main driver of Kosovo➢❨ s economic growth has been consumption, fueled by remittances 
rather than income earned domestically. The steady consumption demand has been met mainly by 
imports given the country➢❨ s narrow, undiversified, and uncompetitive production base.  There 
is little export-orientation and imports remain large.  The current growth model based on large 
financial inflows is unsustainable and the main challenge for the country remains the 
establishment of conditions conducive to promoting self-sustained growth founded on increased 
domestic productivity and export competitiveness, within the framework of reducing high 
unemployment, improving human capital and building physical infrastructure. 
 
Kosovo➢❨ s location, EU membership prospects and free market access to the EU and Central 
European Free Trade Agreement (CEFTA) countries offer strong opportunities for sustained and 
rapid overall development. The government is committed to instituting reforms to promote 
sustainable economic development and is working to put in place the policies, institutions and 
investments that will help unleash the country➢❨ s growth and export potential. In this context, 
the National Development Strategy 2015-2020, adopted in January 2016, emphasizes four priority 
pillars: (a) human capital and employment; (b) good governance and rule of law; (c) competitive 
industries; and (d) infrastructure development.
Sectoral and institutional Context
Agriculture plays a significant role in Kosovo➢❨ s economy.  It is an important contributor to 
GDP, accounting for about 11.4 percent of GDP in 2014 (second only after wholesale and retail 
trade). Over 62 percent of the country➢❨ s population lives in rural areas and depends, directly or 
indirectly, on agriculture for its livelihood. The sector is the largest private employer, accounting 
for about 35 percent of total employment, although primarily on an informal basis.  Poverty in 
rural areas is especially high and over 40 percent of the rural population is unemployed. The lack 
of job perspective, especially among the rural young population is putting a strain on social 
cohesion and encouraging out-migration. Often, agriculture serves as a safety net for much of the 
population. 



Page 3 of 14

 
Despite a steady growth in the sector since independence, Kosovo is the largest importer of food 
per capita in Europe. The country is highly dependent on imports to meet its food demands and 
the export/import ratio has been steadily increasing over the past decade.  In 2011, the value of 
imports of agricultural products was approximately ➢❪¬561.4 million while the value of exports 
was ➢❪¬26.2 million. Exports of agricultural products thus generated revenues to pay for only 4.6 
per cent of the cost of importing such products. Agricultural products account for about 10 
percent of all imports; of this, 30 percent comprises food products. 
 
This is primarily because the sector faces several diverse and inter-related challenges that prevent 
it from meeting its productive potential and hinder commercialization. Before the 1990s, Kosovo 
was largely food self-sufficient with large quantities of agricultural products exported to the 
region. However, after the war, this trend was reversed so that today, agriculture is largely 
subsistent/semi-subsistent in nature. The sector is characterized by small, fragmented land 
holdings, with average land holding size ranging between 1.5 and 2.0 ha, often spread across an 
average of seven smaller plots. Lack of and/or limited access to, inter alia, modern technologies, 
good quality inputs, irrigation, post-harvest management and processing infrastructure, credit, and 
markets pose serious challenges to the development of the sector.  In its current state, agriculture 
attracts limited private investments which effectively inhibit commercialization of the sector and 
the realization of socio-economic gains thereof. 
 
Two areas that offer good opportunities for the development of Kosovo➢❨ s agricultural sector 
include the horticulture and livestock subsectors. Horticulture and livestock farming are 
traditional economic activities in Kosovo, representing a rural cultural identity and there is a 
strong preference among the farming communities to remain engaged in these subsectors for their 
livelihood. Over the past decade, demand for high value horticulture products has surged more 
than any other food category and there is a strong consumer preference for locally grown fruits 
and vegetables, both for fresh consumption and processing. Livestock farming is predominant in 
the mountainous and remote areas of Kosovo where it often serves as the primary source of rural 
livelihood. With increased productivity and production  there is good potential for: (i) promoting 
import substitution; (ii) boosting exports, especially to EU and CEFTA countries; (iii) generating 
employment in rural areas; (iv) creating economic opportunities for women in agriculture 
production and especially value-added processing activities; and (v) providing opportunities for 
young farmers to be gainfully employed in these remunerative value chains. 
 
To harness the potential of these subsectors, especially the horticulture subsector, there is a 
critical need for improving irrigation delivery and services. Rainfall patterns show high variability 
in Kosovo and there is a crucial need for supplementary irrigation, especially during drier spells. 
For fruits and vegetables, irrigation is essential for increasing yields and ensuring quality and 
timely production. It is expected that with irrigation small farmers would move to more high-
value crops and specialized markets, and away from near-subsistence agriculture. 
 
Ageing irrigation infrastructure and lack of maintenance are reducing the level of irrigation use 
and impacting development of agriculture.  Most of the irrigation schemes were built in the 1970s 
and are showing signs of ageing. Moreover, the war of the 1990s damaged or destroyed large 
sections of country➢❨ s irrigation infrastructure. This coupled with expansion of urban and 
industrial areas in recent years has sharply reduced actual irrigable area and jeopardized existing 
irrigation investments. The area equipped for irrigation fell from approximately 71,000 ha before 



Page 4 of 14

the war to approximately 43,900 ha in 2014.  The area of irrigation use is also far lower than in 
the past. Between 2006 and 2012, the average area irrigated was only about 12,000 ha - 4,000 ha 
in small schemes and 8,000 ha within the areas serviced by the country➢❨ s three regional 
irrigation companies in Kosovo: Iber-Lepenc, Radoniqi-Dukagjini and Drini i Bardhe. 
 
Recognizing the significant role of agriculture in Kosovo➢❨ s overall economic development, the 
government is undertaking critical measures to re-vitalize the sector. The objectives of the 
National Agricultural and Rural Development Plan (NARDP 2014-2020 are to undertake actions 
to overcome bottlenecks holding back sustainable rural development in the country and align 
Kosovo➢❨ s rural sector with the axes of the EU Instrument for Pre-accession for Rural 
Development (IPARD). The NARDP lays out several measures for implementation support over 
the next five years, including inter alia, investments in the physical assets of agricultural holdings 
as well as processing and marketing of agricultural and fishery products; agri-environmental 
measures and organic farming; farm diversification and business development; improvements in 
training, advisory services and vocational training; land consolidation; and  irrigation.  On the 
institutional front, the government is building the capacity of important institutional structures, 
such as the Managing Authority and Paying Agency, for improved performance of the agriculture 
sector as well as to approximate their functioning with EU requirements. These efforts are being 
carried out with assistance from several donors, including EU, DANIDA, Suisse Interco-
operation, USAID, Austrian Development Agency, GIZ and the World Bank (through the 
ongoing IDA-financed Agriculture and Rural Development Project).

C.  Proposed Development Objective(s)

Original Project Development Objective(s) - Parent
The development objective of the project is to assist the Recipient to promote competitiveness 
and growth in the livestock and horticulture sub-sectors over the next decade through 
implementation of selected measures of its agricultural strategy and institutionaldevelopment.

Proposed Project Development Objective(s) - Additional Financing
The development objective of the project is to improve productivity of and access to markets by 
project beneficiaries in the horticulture and livestock subsectors of Kosovo and strengthen 
institutional capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development.

Key Results 
The PDO-level Results Indicators comprise the following: (i) increased yields of key crops 
supported by the project ➢❨  tons/ha; (ii) increased yields of milk production per animal on 
livestock farms supported by the project ➢❨  liters/cow; (iiiu) increased sale of milk to processing 
companies; (iv) increased sales of horticultural products from farmers supported by aggregators; 
(v) increased number of farmers adopting improved agricultural technologies; (vi) preparation of 
Rural Development Grant Program (RDGP) sub-measures for investment support in line with 
EU-IPARD Guidelines

D.  Project Description

The Additional Financing, a US$22.0 million IDA credit, to be implemented over four years, 
would support the following activities: 
 
Component 1: Transferring Knowledge to the Rural Sector.  The AF will continue support for the 



Page 5 of 14

following sub-components: (a) Rural Advisory Service (RAS) Contracts under which training 
would be provided to potential applicants for the Rural Development Grant Program (RDGP) as 
well as to municipal advisors to assist the farming community in the preparation of such grant 
proposals as well as to national extension staff on technical topics; (b) Regional Knowledge 
Exchange under which the project will support the organization of study tours/visits to countries 
in the region to enable farmers and processors in the horticulture and livestock subsectors to learn 
and benefit from the knowledge and experiences of other agri-food producers and processors in 
the region; and (c) Institutional Strengthening of Rural Advisory Services. The AF will continue 
to support the municipal advisory service centers in delivering effective services to the rural 
community through the provision of training, equipment and select operating costs. 
 
Component 2: Enhancing Investments to Promote Sustainable Rural Development. The AF will 
support the following activities: 
(a) Rural Development Grant Program (RDGP). RDGP support will be provided to farmers and 
processors in the livestock subsector.  As under KARDP, the RDGP will be implemented at the 
national level ➢❨  for potential beneficiaries in all municipalities of Kosovo.  The Call for 
Proposals would be open to all farmers and processors residing on the territory of Kosovo. 
Implementation of RDGP would follow the same processes and procedures as under the ongoing 
project, including extra points for women applicants and additional co-financing for beneficiaries 
(both men and women) under the age of 40 as well as for climate friendly agricultural practices.    
 
(b) Promoting Development of the Horticulture Subsector. The objective of this component is to 
promote the development of the horticulture subsector by strengthening backward and forward 
linkages in the value chain of the subsector. The aim is to improve productivity, quality, value 
addition, and ma rket linkages within the subsector to enhance its competitiveness towards 
increased exports and import substitution as well as job creation, improved beneficiary incomes 
and increased economic opportunities for women and youth in the rural sector.  It will target 
support to small holder farmers that dominate the rural landscape and provide them opportunities 
for assured markets and  improved livelihoods while assisting the commercial and semi-
commercial agro-enterprises to reach both domestic and export markets, create jobs and improve 
incomes.  
 
The entry point for project support will be the Aggregators, i.e. private Collection Centers (CCs) 
and Agro-processors, handling or procuring horticultural produce.  The project will provide 
matching grants to qualifying Aggregators, who will: (i) promote and strengthen backward 
integration strategies through the provision of supply contracts and extension services to small-
holder farmers, thereby guaranteeing farmers markets for their produce as well as enabling them 
to enhance their productivity while improving quality (including meeting Global GAP 
certification requirements); and (ii) exploit the value addition potential of the sector through 
improved postharvest management by increasing their capacity for handling and processing.  
Thus the project will enable Aggregators to increase the intake of fresh produce from farmers 
(upstream) and increase their supply of fresh produce and processed products to domestic and 
export markets (downstream).  By introducing upgrades in the value chain - quality checks, 
packaging, labeling, etc, the project will reorient firms towards more lucrative export markets. 
 
Potential aggregators will be invited to prepare business plans and submit applications to enhance 
and expand their operations.  Funding for selected subprojects would be allocated through a 
competitive bidding process. The maximum size of the grant would be Ã¢➢❨ Â¬200,000.  The 



Page 6 of 14

submitted business plans will be reviewed, evaluated and scored against clearly defined criteria 
by an independent Evaluation Committee. Eligibility criteria and detailed arrangements for 
implementation of the matching grants will be elaborated in the Horticulture Development Grant 
Manual. 
 
(s) Institutional Capacity Building. The AF will continue to support capacity building of the 
Managing Authority and Paying Agency through the provision of training, personnel and 
equipment as needed. Project support will assist in approximating their functioning to EU 
requirements and contribute to their efforts towards EU accreditation.   The project will also 
support capacity building within the Kosovo Institute of Agriculture (KIA) to enhance its ability 
to promote food safety and quality standards in the livestock and horticulture subsectors of 
Kosovo through the provision of select equipment to strengthen capacity of the food testing 
laboratory. 
 
Component 3: Support for Irrigation. The AF would support rehabilitation works in the Radoniqi-
Dukagjini Irrigation Scheme, located in an area of high agricultural productivity.  Horticulture is 
the dominant economic activity in the region and with improved irrigation delivery and services 
there is a high likelihood of improved productivity of high value crops. Specific rehabilitation 
investments in the scheme will focus on, inter alia, lining and repair of main canal sections, 
replacement of moving parts; pipes, where necessary, aqueduct crossing on the Drini river, and 
the restoration of irrigation delivery in two blocks, namely the Janosh scheme in the upstream part 
of the system; as well as the Doblibare scheme which is currently dysfunctional. Minor dam 
safety actions (non-structural), as identified by the dam safety assessments, will be supported as 
well. Modernization will include selective automation of scheme monitoring to increase water and 
energy use efficiency. A technical study is underway to further specify the technical requirements 
and prepare bidding documents for scheme construction works as well as identify equipment and 
spare part requirements. 
 
In providing rehabilitation support to the scheme, the project will take a broader modernization 
approach and integrate managerial upgrading with the technical rehabilitation to improve both 
resource utilization and water delivery service to users, optimizing resource utilization and 
ensuring institutional and financial sustainability. This includes the support for a Management 
Information System, SCADA for improved operations, support for maintaining a strategic supply 
of spare parts and maintenance equipment; harmonization of planning and budgeting with 
municipal plans as well as water users➢❨  demands. 
 
Component 4: Project Management, Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation. The existing 
Project Implementation Unit (PIU) within MAFRD will be responsible for the daily management, 
administration and coordination of the project's activities in accordance with Bank requirements, 
including procurement, financial management, monitoring and evaluation, and audits.  Its 
capacity would be enhanced through the hiring of an irrigation specialist who will be responsible 
for the implementation of the irrigation activity as well as additional short-term technical 
specialists as needed.

Component Name
Component 1: Transferring Knowledge to the Rural Sector.
Comments (optional)



Page 7 of 14

Component Name
Component 2: Enhancing Investments to Promote Sustainable Rural Development
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Component 3: Support for Irrigation
Comments (optional)

Component Name
Component 4: Project Management, Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation
Comments (optional)

E.  Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard 
analysis (if known)

The project will be undertaken throughout Kosovo.

F.  Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists

Bekim Imeri (GSU03)
Esma Kreso (GEN03)

II. Implementation
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development 
(MAFRD).  A dedicated Project Implementation Unit, headed by the General Secretary, has been 
established under the ongoing KARDP for overall management of the project, including the fiduciary 
(procurement, financial management), monitoring, evaluation, training and administration 
requirements as well as coordination with donors and other government units.  The Rural 
Development Grant Program (RDGP) will be implemented by the Managing Authority (MA) and 
Paying Agency (PA). The  MA is responsible for identifying the measures for support under the 
RDGP and prepares the procedures for implementation of the selected RDGP sub-measures.  
Towards this, it establishes Working Groups with representation from the private sector and civil 
society.  The PA is in charge of administering the RDGP, including the selection, awarding, 
monitoring and disbursement processes for the sub-projects.

III. Safeguard Policies that might apply

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental 
Assessment OP/BP 
4.01

Yes Potential environmental impacts are anticipated under 
Component 2: Enhancing Investments to Promote Sustainable 
Rural Development and Component 3: Support for Irrigation. 
The major portion of Component 2 remains the provision of 



Page 8 of 14

grants which were also administered under the original project. 
The grants were awarded based on a screening criteria set forth 
in the ESMF prepared for the project in October 2010 and 
subsequently revised in 2015. This revision solely dealt with 
changes in the Kosovo environmental legislation and did not in 
any form alter the overall screening procedure within the 
ESMF. The screening criteria as set forth in the ESMF helps to 
screen out project activities corresponding to a category A, and 
to provide adequate due diligence on a case-by-case basis for 
the rural grants. The ESMF had undergone a slight revision in 
January 2017, where the irrigation activities have also been 
added in the project description and small changes were made 
to ensure that all activities even beyond grants are covered 
through the process in the ESMF. The screening and due 
diligence mechanisms remain the same as within the original 
ESMF from 2010.  
The approach outlined in the ESMF from January 2017 will 
apply to the rural grants, matching grants, irrigation rehab and 
any activity that would be proposed to be financed within the 
project or the subsequent AFs. Furthermore, any strategic and 
planning documents to be produced under Component 3(b) 
will also incorporate adequate safeguards requirements within 
the Terms of Reference for any proposed study or plan.  
The environmental impacts associated with the grants program 
and irrigation rehab should be readily mitigated through sound 
construction practices (dust and noise, waste management, 
material sourcing) while the operational impacts can be 
mitigated through environmentally friendly farming 
approaches (manure management, waste disposal, emissions 
from food processing facilities, improved water resource use).  
Under Component 3, rehabilitation of the Radoniqi irrigation 
scheme is foreseen which would lead to better management of 
water resources. This activity will potentially cause minor 
construction related impacts (noise, dust, waste generation).   
A full and robust ESMP will be prepared to address risks and 
impacts of implementation of this scheme, including assessing 
impacts to other water users. 
➢❨❫

Natural Habitats OP/
BP 4.04

No There are no implications on natural habitats foreseen.

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No There are no implications on forested areas foreseen.
Pest Management OP 
4.09

Yes Due to the fact that the project would more than likely lead to 
increased agricultural production, it is safe to assume that there 
would be an increased need for pest management. As such, an 
Integrated Pest Management Plan was part of the original 
ESMF (2010) andalso the revised ESMF (2015 and 2017).



Page 9 of 14

Physical Cultural 
Resources OP/BP 
4.11

No There are no activities involving physical / cultural resources 
foreseen.

Indigenous Peoples 
OP/BP 4.10

No There are no implications for indigenous people.

Involuntary 
Resettlement OP/BP 
4.12

No This safeguards will not be triggered because the potential 
works proposed for the scheme rehabilitation are as follows: 
 
(i) Lining and repair of main canal sections, replacement 
of parts such as valves, etc.   
(ii) rehabilitation of of irrigation delivery in two secondary 
sub-schemes  
(iii) minor works related to dam safety and the Drini river 
aqueduct 
 
Given the nature of rehabilitation works, there will be no need 
for land take although there might be some crop damages for a 
temporary period of time while the works are ongoing. The 
protocol defined in the ESMF addresses the crop damage 
compensation which will be operationalized with concrete 
ESMPs .

Safety of Dams OP/
BP 4.37

Yes Although the project will not build any dams, the Radoniqi 
Irrigation scheme depends upon the existing Radoniqi Dam for 
its effective functioning as the scheme draws its raw water 
directly from the Radoniqi reservoir controlled by a 61 meter 
high clay-core embankment dam. Several  Dam Safety 
Assessments have been carried out in the recent past for 
Radoniqi Dam, including in 2000, 2002, and 2006 under the 
WB supported Pilot Water Supply Project, and most recently 
in 2012 by the Water Task Force as part of a countrywide Dam 
Safety Review. While none of these reviews raise any concerns 
on imminent dam safety they make recommendations for 
operation and maintenance procedures and safety-related 
measures that are required to ensure an acceptable standard of 
safety. More precisely, this includes the need for critical 
documentation and information on dam safety, including 
geotechnical information, an update on and improvement of 
status of control instruments (inclinometers and piezometers 
are reported as largely dysfunctional) and electrical 
installations. Also, it is observed that there is no dam safety 
(monitoring) plan, although a letter from the dam operator 
states that geodetic measurements have been carried out to 
some extent over the past years. Most of the recommendations 
have not been fully implemented since. The project proposes to 
adopt a composite of the 2005 and 2012 recommendations, to 
be confirmed by a dam safety panel to be established, and to 



Page 10 of 14

finance those under the project. The following activities are 
envisaged to be included under the program: updated safety 
analysis, including full geodetic survey, rehabilitation of dam 
safety instrumentation and an emergency preparedness plan.

Projects on 
International 
Waterways OP/BP 
7.50

Yes Component 3 includes works on rehabilitation of the Radoniqi 
irrigation scheme, which is part of the trans-boundary Drini 
river basin. However, considering that the works will focus on 
better use and management of the existing irrigation scheme 
the team does not foresee any issues on water quality or 
quantity to downstream users. As such, an Exception to 
Notification was granted on December 16, 2016 by ECA VP.

Projects in Disputed 
Areas OP/BP 7.60

No The project will not be implemented in any disputed areas.

IV. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify 

and describe any potential large scale,  significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Potential environmental impacts are anticipated under Component 2: Enhancing Investments to 
Promote Sustainable Rural Development and Component 3: Support for Irrigation. The major 
portion of Component 2 remains the provision of grants which were also administered under the 
original project.  The grants were awarded based on a screening criteria set forth in the ESMF 
prepared for the project in October 2010 and subsequently revised in 2015. This revision solely 
dealt with changes in the Kosovo environmental legislation and did not in any form alter the 
overall screening procedure within the ESMF. The screening criteria as set forth in the ESMF 
helps to screen out project activities corresponding to a category A, and to provide adequate due 
diligence on a case-by-case basis for the rural grants. The ESMF had undergone a slight revision 
in January 2017, where the irrigation activities have also been added in the project description and 
small changes were made to ensure that all activities even beyond grants are covered through the 
process in the ESMF. The screening and due diligence mechanisms remain the same as within the 
original ESMF from 2010.  
The approach outlined in the ESMF from January 2017 will apply to the rural grants, matching 
grants, irrigation rehab and any activity that would be proposed to be financed within the project 
or the subsequent AFs. Furthermore, any strategic and planning documents to be produced under 
Component 3(b) will also incorporate adequate safeguards requirements within the Terms of 
Reference for any proposed study or plan.  
The environmental impacts associated with the grants program and irrigation rehab should be 
readily mitigated through sound construction practices (dust and noise, waste management, 
material sourcing) while the operational impacts can be mitigated through environmentally 
friendly farming approaches (manure management, waste disposal, emissions from food 
processing facilities, improved water resource use).  
Under Component 3 rehabilitation of the Radoniqi irrigation scheme is foreseen which would lead 
to better management of water resources. This activity will potentially cause minor construction 
related impacts already described above that can be mitigated through a site-specific ESMP, while 
additional concerns include dam safety issues and also the potential for impacts on international 
waterways as the reservoir and the scheme are located within the Drini river basin. 
The overall project would lead to an increase in agricultural practices therefore having 



Page 11 of 14

implications on pest management, which should apply and follow the Integrated Pest Management 
Plan as prepared under the original ESMF.  There are no social safeguard related issues. The 
works proposed are rehabilitation of existing schemes. Rehabilitation of lining of open main canal 
and secondary pressurized (piped) schemes where necessary in two sections. There will be no need 
for neither land take nor establishment of right of way. Crop damages because of the rehabilitation 
works will be addressed in ESMFS and related ESMPS 
The Terms of Reference for Component 3(b): Strategy and Investment Framework for the 
Irrigation Sector, will incorporate safeguards requirements to ensure that there is due diligence of 
all potential safeguards aspects under the propsoed Strategy/Investment Framework.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities 
in the project area:
There are no long term or indirect impacts associated with the project, beyond the potential 
increase in agricultural production and therefore implications on pest management, where the  
Integrated Pest Management Plan as prepared under the original ESMF should apply.

3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse 
impacts.
There are no project alternatives considered. The screening mechanism for the grants would allow 
to either accept or deny a sub-project based on their associated impacts.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an 
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower has applied the ESMF screening in the later grant calls, while some issues remained 
in the first call and the due diligence was carried out by an independent consultant retroactively. 
The borrower has also provided educational trainings and seminars on ESMF compliance and 
sound environmental practices in 2014. The Borrower has a dedicated M&E staff that also 
provides support to the implementation of the ESMF, and as required can hire an external 
consultant to be engaged in the implementation of the ESMF policies. The site-specific ESMP for 
the Radoniqi irrigation scheme will more than likely be carried out by a company or consultant 
outside the Borrower's team and will try to streamline the WB requirements and those of the 
Kosovo environmental legislation into one process. As for the grants, one of the requirements is 
that no grant is awarded without the environmental and social due diligence in place. This 
requirement is strictly supervised by all of the PIU and also by the World Bank team.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure 
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders include representatives of the Project Implementation Unit and the MAFRD, 
as well as the members of the local communities where projects will take place. As such, the 
ESMF was subject to public consultations and disclosure in 2010 (as documented in the original 
ESMF) while each of the subsequent ESMPs prepared for each specific project was subject to 
disclosure and public consultations. For small scale projects public consultations were replaced by 
consent forms signed by all of the neighbors. The revised ESMF (as of January 2017) will be 
disclosed through the MAFRD website and Bank's Infoshop prior to the Appraisal of the AF.

B. Disclosure Requirements

Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank 15-Oct-2010

Date of submission to InfoShop 02-Dec-2010



Page 12 of 14

For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive 
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

"In country" Disclosure
Kosovo 18-Jan-2017
Comments: The revised ESMF that would make it applicable also to the Irrigation scheme was 

disclosed on January 18, 2017.  
This revised version was also disclosed in Infoshop on January 19, 2017.

Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal? Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank 15-Oct-2010

Date of submission to InfoShop 09-Jan-2017
"In country" Disclosure

Kosovo 18-Jan-2017
Comments: The PMP is an integrated part of the ESMF that was revised and re-disclosed on 

January 18. This revised version was also disclosed in Infoshop on January 19, 2017.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the 
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level

OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) 
report?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice 
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated 
in the credit/loan?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Is a separate PMP required? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a 
safeguards specialist or PM?  Are PMP requirements included 
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest 
Management Specialist?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent 
Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the 
Bank?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]



Page 13 of 14

Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and 
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the 
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal 
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Has the RVP approved such an exception? Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information

Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the 
World Bank's Infoshop?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public 
place in a form and language that are understandable and 
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional 
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of 
measures related to safeguard policies?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included 
in the project cost?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project 
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures 
related to safeguard policies?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed 
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in 
the project legal documents?

Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]

V. Contact point
World Bank
Contact: Meeta Sehgal
Title: Sr Agricultural Spec.

Borrower/Client/Recipient
Name: Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development
Contact: Memli Krasniqi
Title: Minister
Email: memli.krasniqi@rks-gov.net

Implementing Agencies
Name: Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Development
Contact: Kapllan Halimi
Title: General Secretary
Email: kapllan.halimi@rks-gov.net



Page 14 of 14

VI. For more information contact:
The World Bank 
1818 H Street, NW 
Washington, D.C. 20433 
Telephone: (202) 473-1000 
Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects

VII. Approval
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Meeta Sehgal
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nina Chee (SA) Date: 19-Jan-2017
Practice Manager/
Manager:

Name: Julian A. Lampietti (PMGR) Date: 20-Jan-2017

Country Director: Name: Marco Mantovanelli (CD) Date: 02-Feb-2017



