













































World Bank Document


 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 1 of 12  

     

 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Project Information Document/  
Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (PID/ISDS) 

 
 

Concept Stage | Date Prepared/Updated: 10-Mar-2017 | Report No: PIDISDSC21901 

P
u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d
P

u
b
lic

 D
is

cl
o
su

re
 A

u
th

o
ri
ze

d



 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 2 of 12  

     

BASIC INFORMATION 

 

  A. Basic Project Data OPS TABLE 

Country Project ID Parent Project ID (if any) Project Name 

Lao People's Democratic 
Republic 

P161473  Lao Agriculture 
Commercialization 
Project (P161473) 

Region Estimated Appraisal Date Estimated Board Date Practice Area (Lead) 

EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC Nov 06, 2017 Mar 30, 2018 Agriculture 

Lending Instrument Borrower(s) Implementing Agency  

Investment Project Financing Lao People's Democratic 
Republic 

Department of Planning and 
Cooperation 

 

 

Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase commercialization of selected value chains in the project areas. 

 

 Financing (in USD Million) 

 

Financing Source Amount  

Borrowing Agency    2.00  

International Development Association (IDA)   35.00  

Total Project Cost   37.00  

Environmental Assessment Category Concept Review Decision 

B-Partial Assessment  Track II-The review did authorize the preparation to 
continue 

 

    
 
 
 
 

Other Decision (as needed) 
 
 
 



 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 3 of 12  

     

B. Introduction and Context 
 
Country Context 

 
1. Lao PDR has achieved good progress in economic growth and poverty reduction over the past decade. Average 
growth of the gross domestic product (GDP) in the past decade was around 8 percent per annum. Poverty declined from 
41.4 percent in 2002/03 to 28.8 percent in 2012/13. With a GDP per capita of around US$1,600 in 2014, Lao PDR has 
become a lower-middle income country.  
 
2. Despite impressive macroeconomic achievements, poverty still remains high, especially in rural areas and 
among ethnic groups. Over 80 percent of the poor are concentrated in rural areas. About 40 percent of Mon Khmer and 
Hmong ethnic groups are poor, compared to 15 percent of Lao-Tai people, and ethnic groups account for about two thirds 
of people having no access to formal education. Stunting is also pronounced among ethnic groups.   
 
3. In many rural areas of the country, a high prevalence of food insecurity and malnutrition is still a major problem. 
Rice shortage often takes place for about 3-4 months per year. Prevalent farming systems are largely subsistent and 
generally lack diversification. Although the country is able to achieve self-sufficiency in rice at the national level in the 
normal year, there are still challenges in addressing food security due to the instability of annual production resulted from 
poor farming practices, ineffective water management, and frequent natural disasters (i.e. floods and droughts). 
 

Sectoral and Institutional Context 
 
4. Agriculture is an important sector in Lao PDR, but it is currently underperforming. The sector employs two-thirds 
of the country’s labor force, but generates only 22 percent of the GDP. In the last decade, agricultural growth averaged 
3.7 percent, which is less than half of the overall GDP growth. Agricultural farming is largely subsistent, producing one 
crop a year, mainly paddy with low productivity. Currently, irrigated agricultural land accounts for less than 15 percent of 
cultivated land and the remaining 85 percent is rain-fed. Recently, there have been emerging signs of agricultural 
commercialization and diversification (i.e. crop rotation or aquaculture with rice cultivation in low land areas; commercial 
production of maize in Xayabury province, and vegetables in Vientiane province). In the bigger context, however, these 
developments are still relatively scattered and small. 
 
5. Lao PDR’s agriculture sector is constrained by subsistent farming and small scale production with low level of 
commercialization, limited processing capacity, underdeveloped supporting infrastructure, and weak public services. 
Value chains of rice, maize, and vegetables are currently underdeveloped. There are good opportunities and potentials 
for improving their performance substantially through improving farm productivity and enhancing value chains. While the 
former could be realized by adopting quality seed/ farm inputs, improved farming technologies, upgrades of irrigation and 
improved water management, improved extension services/applied research, enhanced farming mechanization, 
improved harvest/postharvest facilities, and better farming diversification/crop rotation, the latter could be achieved by 
improved regulatory framework to facilitate trade and monitor quality standards, market analysis/research, 
transportation/ logistics, strategic support to agribusinesses, contract farming, and product branding and marketing. The 
recently completed project “Engaging the Private Sector to Develop the Lao Rice Industry” (EMRIP) demonstrated the 
readiness of the growing number of rice mills to modernize their facilities, engage in contract farming and develop 
marketing strategies.  

 
6. There are concerns related to the quality and sustainability of agricultural growth. Rice is the most important 
crop in the agriculture sector of Lao PDR. Rice production dominates agricultural land use, occupying nearly 56 percent of 



 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 4 of 12  

     

the total harvested area of all crops. More than 80 percent of the Lao rice crop consists of various types of glutinous rice. 
Maize, which constitutes about 12 percent of the harvested area, is the next most important crop. No other single crop or 
category of crops takes up more than around 5 percent of the cultivated land. In terms of the tonnage of crops produced 
at the national level, rice represents 81 percent of total weight of crops produced. Lack of diversification and heavily 
reliance on rice while there is an increasingly fierce competition in global rice markets are the key challenges to 
competiveness and sustainability of the agricultural growth of Lao PDR in the future. 
 
7. Addressing the risks and shortcomings of the sector will require re-organization of agricultural production and 
greater commercialization to support strategic value chains. According to the findings of the Project Identification 
Mission jointly carried out by Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) and the World Bank in November 2016, three 
strategic value chains were identified, which include: (i) rice value chains in the selected low land provinces; (ii) maize 
value chains in Xayabury province; and (iii) vegetables value chains in Vientiane province and possibly Vientiane Capital. 
These value chains are currently operating far below their potentials due to: (1) weak agriculture knowledge and 
information system (i.e. weak research and extension and private sector linkages, inadequate/weak delivery of extension 
and training services, use of poor quality seeds, lack of agricultural diversification); (2) poor production infrastructure (i.e. 
lack/degraded irrigation canals, poor maintenance of irrigation infrastructure, poor feeder roads to facilitate in-scheme 
mechanization); (3) inadequate mechanization facilities and equipment (i.e. lack of mechanization for harvesting and post-
harvest drying and processing, lack of  equipment and facilities for quality testing and storage); (4) lack of access to finance 
(i.e. underdeveloped banking sector, low capacity of rice mills to prepare business plans and secure loans); (5) inadequate 
enabling environment (i.e. constraints to new business entry/ business licensing, quality control and certification, public 
services to promote trade); and (6) insecure agricultural land tenure (i.e. risks of conversion of agricultural land to other 
uses, reduced incentives to invest and manage land by farmers). These constraints not only result in low farm productivity 
but also are generic causes for the poor performance of the agriculture sector and slow process of agricultural 
commercialization. 

 
8. The Government has recognized the need to promote a substantial shift in the agriculture sector from 
subsistent farming to sustainable commercial agriculture following cluster development and value chain approaches. 
On November 18, 2016, the Government through Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI) sent an Official Letter to the 
World Bank requesting the support on agricultural commercialization in order to improve the sector’s performance 
especially along the rice value chains. Yet, there is also an increasing attention of the Government to other crops such a 
maize, horticulture, beans and pulses, and aquaculture, to increase diversification and farm incomes, as well as to improve 
food security and reduce malnutrition. 
 

Relationship to CPF 
 

9. The proposed project is aligned with the National Agriculture Sector Plan to 2020 and Strategy to 2025, in which 
improving the commercialization and competiveness of the agriculture sector are the top priorities. The proposed 
project also supports several objectives of the Eighth National Socio-Economic Development Plan (NSEDP), namely 
Outcome 2.2 “Food security ensured and incidence of malnutrition reduced” and Outcome 3.3 “Reducing the instability 
of agricultural production caused by impacts of natural disasters.”  
 
10. The proposed project is consistent with the Systematic Country Diagnostic (2016), which placed an increase in 
agricultural productivity to support incomes among the top priorities to reduce poverty and boost shared prosperity in 
Lao PDR, and with the Country Partnership Framework (CPF) 2017-2021. It contributes to achieving its Objective 1.2 
“Making it easier to do business and create jobs” under the Focus Area 1 “Supporting Inclusive Growth” and Objective 2.1 
“Reducing the prevalence of malnutrition” under the Focus Area 2 “Investing in People.”     



 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 5 of 12  

     

 
11. The proposed project is closely aligned with the twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared 
prosperity and with the global Sustainable Development Goals, including Zero Hunger (Goal 2) and Climate Action (Goal 
13).   The project would directly provide benefits to local farmers in four provinces, namely Xayabury (those associated 
with maize value chains), Vientiane Province (vegetables value chains), and Bolykhamxay and Khammouane Provinces and 
Vientiane Capital (rice value chains). Most farmers in these provinces are practicing subsistent agriculture with low/ 
unstable productivity and low incomes. Generally speaking, rural farmers among poor groups in Lao PDR and some of 
them are living under extreme poverty. 
 
C. Proposed Development Objective(s)  
 

12. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase commercialization of selected value chains in the project 
areas. 
 
Key Results (From PCN) 

 
13. The proposed PDO-level results indicators are:  
 

(i) Number of project beneficiaries (men and women; core indicator);  

(ii) An increase in productivity from those farmers adopting new technologies; 

(iii) An increase in the sale volumes (percentage) from those farmers adopting new technologies; 

(iv) An increase in the quality of the produce sold to agribusinesses through production alliances. 
 
D. Concept Description 

 
14. The proposed Agriculture Commercialization Project (ACP) seeks to enhance the competitiveness and 
sustainability of Lao PDR’s agriculture sector through technical and financial support to increase in agricultural productivity 
and commercialization in selected strategic value chains. The project would focus on: (i) the geographical areas with high 
agricultural development potentials; (ii) the farming systems with high potentials for commercialization (i.e. paddy, maize, 
vegetables); (iii) promotion of good agricultural practices and climate smart agricultural technologies and farming system 
diversification to enhance food and nutritional security; (iv) building capacity for farmers’ organisations, agribusinesses, 
public and private service providers; and (v) building on and developing synergies with other government/donor programs.  
 
15. Proposed project areas: In line with the above strategy, the project would select Provinces and Districts with: (i) 
high potentials for agricultural production (farm land and production volume); (ii) high potentials for commercialization 
and value chain development; (iii) availability of basic public infrastructure (i.e. irrigation, roads,  etc.); (iv) public services 
in place to support commercialization and diversification; and (v) availability of agribusinesses interested in inclusive value 
chain development. The list of target provinces is provisionally set as Vientiane capital, Vientiane province, Bolikhamxay, 
Khammouane, and Xayabury. The Provinces will be confirmed and districts will be identified before pre-appraisal mission. 
Three selected value chains could be initially selected for project preparation purposes – namely high value commercial 
rice (not subsistence), maize, and vegetables -- while allowing flexibility to add other, high-value crops during the life of 
the project. 

 
16. It is envisage that the Project would have three components: (A) Enhancing Productivity of Farming Systems; (B) 
Support for Improved Value Chains; and (C) Project Management. 



 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 6 of 12  

     

 
17. Component A: Enhancing Productivity of Farming Systems: This component would aim at enhancing productivity 
of farming systems and it would include the following activities:  

 
(i) Production organization and promotion of the use of good quality seeds;  
(ii) Research and extension to improve farming practices and farm machinery to promote good and 

sustainable agricultural production, diversification and commercialization;  

(iii) Upgrades of existing irrigation infrastructure and improvement of water management practices; 

(iv) Establishment and capacity building for farmer groups and their members; and  

(v) Mapping, demarcation, and registration of irrigation land/systems in the project area on a block basis (not 
for individual plots).  

 
18. Component B: Strengthening Agricultural Value Chains. This component would aim at strengthening and 
leveraging private sector investments in selected food value chains, and it would include the following activities:  
 

(i) Provision of matching grants to farmer groups and their members to promote investments in harvesting 
machines, drying and storage facilities to reduce pre/postharvest losses; 

(ii) Provision of matching grants and capacity building assistance to agribusinesses to strengthen their role in 
driving the value chain development; 

(iii) Upgrades of feeder access to production areas and farms;  

(iv) Training and consulting support to farmer groups and their members to build their management skills, 
business development and marketing of farm produce through adopting contract farming, value addition 
and product branding;  

(v) Support MAF, Ministry of Industry and Commerce (MOIC), their research institutes and technical agencies 
in conducting relevant market research, agricultural policy analyses, and improving intelligence and 
management skills; and  

(vi) Improving the enabling environment through strengthening capacity for quality control and standards 
certification (i.e. seeds, produce, mills, etc.) including improved inspection services, test kits and 
laboratory capacity to certify for clean and safe foods. 

 
19. Component C: Project Management. This component would provide equipment and incremental operating costs 
for project monitoring, financial management, and procurement activities, ensure compliance with the safeguards, 
support the short and long-term technical assistance to the project management team in selected areas, and support 
analysis and dissemination of findings related to the effectiveness and challenges associated with the different 
institutional and technical models being applied or piloted under the project.  
 
20. The project would establish and support linkages with ongoing and future interventions by other donors including 
ADB, IFC, NGOs, and government projects/programs. For instance, farmer groups and agribusinesses which received 
previous supports from the Netherlands Development Organization SNV’s Enhancing Milled Rice Production in Lao PDR 
(EMRIP) will be eligible for further support from this project in order to be more effective and efficient. The farmer groups 
and agribusinesses participating in this project would be well positioned to graduate and become potential clients of IFC 
in the future. This proposed project would seek to create complementary and enhance synergy of existing 
projects/programs in the areas. 



 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 7 of 12  

     

 
 
    

  SAFEGUARDS 

 
A. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known) 

 
The list of target provinces is provisionally set as Vientiane capital, Vientiane province, Bolikhamxay, Khammouane, and 

Xayabury. The Provinces will be confirmed and districts within identified before pre-appraisal mission.   
 
Component A (Enhancing Productivity of Farming Systems) would include production promotion of the use of good 

quality seeds, research and extension to improve farming practices and farm machinery to promote sustainable 
agricultural production, diversification and commercialization, upgrades of existing irrigation infrastructure and 
improvement of water management practices. Component B (Support for Improved Value Chains) would strengthen and 
leverage private sector investments in selected food chains. Component (Project Management) would support project 
management including monitoring and evaluation, financial management and procurement to ensure compliance with 
the fiduciary safeguards requirements. 
 
The project’s overall impacts are expected to be positive. Some negative impacts are envisaged to be limited, localized, 

manageable and reversible. It is anticipated that the following World Bank safeguard policies will be triggered: 
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Pest Management (OP 4.09), Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), Involuntary 
Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37), and International Water Ways (for irrigation rehabilitation). At 
present, there is insufficient information to determined if Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) and Physical Culture Resources 
(OP/BP 4.11) are triggered, hence it is classed as TBD. Mapping, demarcation, and registration of irrigation land/systems 
are not expected to cause changes in land use types and land ownership as they will be carried out a block basis (not for 
individual plots). Forced child labor and labor influx are not anticipated from the project. The project would comply with 
the three gender tags proposed by the World Bank Standards. This is to ensure that the project will address gender in 
terms of (i) analysis; (ii) action; and (iii) monitoring and evaluation framework. During project preparation, the project will 
develop specific/tailored measures to enhance equal access/opportunities for women to benefit from the matching 
grants and other project activities. 
 

 
B. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies 

 
The project will be executed though the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry (MAF) with its provincial and district offices 

(PAFOS and DAFOs) in collaboration with Provincial Industry and Commerce Offices (PICOs) to be responsible for actual 
implementation of day-to-day activities. The capacity of MAF is assessed to be adequate as they had extensive experience 
in managing and implementing donor-funding projects, including those from the WBG namely Agriculture Development 
Project (ADP), 2004-2008, Rice Productivity Improvement Project (RPIP), 2009-2012 and Lao Upland Food Security 
Improvement Project (LUFSIP), 2010-2014. Some of PAFOs and DAFO staff had have previous experience with the World 
Bank-financed projects but some are new especially to safeguard policies. To mitigate residual risks, technical assistance 
will be recruited and in place to provide specific technical capacity for the implementing agencies involved in safeguard 
preparation and implementation. A staff from MAF and each of PAFOs and DAFOs will be appointed as focal points for 
safeguards. These safeguard focal staff will be responsible for impact assessment, consultation, and preparation of 
safeguard instruments, implementation and compliance monitoring and reporting with technical support from the 
consultants. Safeguard training and assistance will be also provided by the Bank safeguard specialists and the National 



 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 8 of 12  

     

University of Laos which delivers a safeguard training program supported through the ongoing Bank-financed Lao 
Environmental and Social Project II (LENSII). 
 
C. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team 

 
 

 
D. Policies that might apply 

 

Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional) 

Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes 

The project will finance irrigation and drainage 
refurbishment and upgrades and water management 
practices. Investments in harvested machines and 
storage and training, and equipment provision.  
 
The envisaged investments are typical to similar 
agriculture development projects and are not 
expected to have adverse and unprecedented 
environmental and social impacts. Implementation of 
irrigation and drainage infrastructure and land 
improvements investments on farmer fields under 
Component 1 are mainly rehabilitation by their nature 
and not expected to have significant negative 
environment and social impacts.  
 
Given that the scope and targets of the project are still 
to be determined during the project preparation, an 
Environmental and Social Management Framework 
(ESMF) will be developed and applied by the project. 
ESMF will provide policy provisions, principles and 
process to address the environmental and social 
impacts. The policy framework will describe 
procedures for impact assessment, consultation, 
preparation of subsequent safeguard instruments and 
implementation arrangement. 

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 TBD 

It is expected that the project is only limited to areas 
of land already utilized for agriculture. NH will not 
likely be triggered as it is not anticipated at this stage. 
The project will have a ‘chance finds’ mechanism built 
into the ESMF to address the potential issues on NH. 

Forests OP/BP 4.36 No 

Forestry is not triggered as it is envisage that no 
project activities will take place on forest areas. The 
project would apply a screening process to eliminate 
subprojects which will impact on forests or involve 
forests in the early planning stage. 



 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 9 of 12  

     

Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes 

The project will develop a Pest Management Plan in 
line with Lao legal regulations and World Bank Policies 
on pesticide uses. A negative list of chemicals will form 
be included. The Pest Management Plan will be the 
part of the ESMF. 

Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 TBD 

The project may impact on physical cultural resources 
although it is expected to be limited to areas of land 
already utilized for agriculture. The project will have a 
‘chance finds’ mechanism built into the ESMF to 
address the potential issues on PCR. 

Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 Yes 

Target beneficiaries and project areas will be identified 
during project preparation. It is likely that the project 
will operate in areas where there is a presence of 
ethnic groups, belonging to Mon-Khmer and Hmong- 
Hmong – lu Mien ethno-linguistic families, that meet 
the four characteristics specified as defining criteria 
for indigenous people in the World Bank Policy on 
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP4.10). The project would 
conduct a Social Assessment to inform the preparation 
of the Ethnic Group Policy Framework (EGPF) to 
ensure that free, prior and informed consultations 
would be conducted with affected ethnic groups 
leading to their broad community support, and that 
they receive project benefits in a culturally 
appropriate manner. The EGPF will be prepared as a 
standalone document in line with OP 4.10 
requirements, and will be finalized before the project 
appraisal. 
 
Due attention will be given to ensure that ethnic 
groups do not suffer adverse impacts and that they 
receive culturally compatible social and economic 
benefits. Necessary steps and procedures will be 
included to ensure that the cultures of the multi-
ethnic society are respected and that gender 
dimension are integrated at all levels and cycles of 
project implementation. A feedback and grievance 
resolution mechanism will be developed and applied 
under the project to provide affected ethnic groups a 
legitimate platform for monitoring and reporting on 
the safeguard policy compliance as well as on project 
implementation. 
 
The project will provide training to its staff, 
consultants and their partners on the EGPF to ensure 
that they are aware of and able to comply the policy 



 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 10 of 12  

     

requirements. Details of due diligence procedures will 
be described in the EGPF. 

Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 Yes 

Under Component A of the project: Enhancing 
Productivity of Farming Systems aiming at enhancing 
productivity of farming systems, minor land 
acquisition are envisaged from the rehabilitation of 
existing irrigation schemes. The civil works may 
involve expansion of intake, local reservoirs and 
irrigation canals.  These potential impacts can be 
avoided or minimized through proper design, impact 
assessment, consultation and application of mitigation 
measures. Given that the irrigation subprojects and 
areas to be covered are still unknown and to be 
identified during the project preparation, a 
Compensation and Resettlement Policy Framework 
(CRPF) will be developed and applied by the project 
which is in compliance with OP/BP 4.12 requirements.  
The CRPF will complement the EGPF and ESMF, 
especially in terms of implementation arrangements.  
If land or asset loss are unavoidable, the principles and 
procedures described in the RPF will be applied to 
address negative impacts.  Project staff, consultants 
and its partners will be provided with training and 
support to enable them to comply the policy 
requirements. 

Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37 Yes 

Although the project does not plan to include 
construction/rehabilitation of dams, it may include 
small scale irrigations which use or rely on dams. The 
project will prepare safeguard documents to comply 
with OP/BP 4.37 requirements. 

Projects on International Waterways 
OP/BP 7.50 

Yes 

The policy is triggered as the proposed project 
investments are located in areas that are part of the 
Mekong River Basin. However, the project targets 
rehabilitation and improvements of existing irrigation 
systems and the rehabilitation works will not involve 
any adverse impacts on the quality and quantity of 
waters in the Mekong River. The team will prepare for 
a notification process for downstream riparian nation 
states. 

Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60 No The project will not be active in disputed areas. 

 
E. Safeguard Preparation Plan  
 
Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
Oct 31, 2017 



 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 11 of 12  

     

 
Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed. The specific studies and 
their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage PID/ISDS 
 
The safeguard consultants will be recruited in April 2017. Draft safeguard documents will be available for review in June 

2017. Final safeguard documents will be available for disclosure in August 2017. 
 
 

CONTACT POINT 

 

World Bank 

Binh Thang Cao 

Sr Agricultural Spec. 
 

 

Borrower/Client/Recipient 
 

Lao People's Democratic Republic 

Phouang Parisak Pravongviengkham 

Vice Minister - Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry 

pppravongviengkham@yahoo.com 
 

 

Implementing Agencies 
 

Department of Planning and Cooperation 

Xaypladeth Choulamany 

Director - Department of Planning and Cooperation 

Xaypladethchoulamany@yahoo.com 
 
 

FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT 

The World Bank 

1818 H Street, NW 

Washington, D.C. 20433 

Telephone: (202) 473-1000 

Web: http://www.worldbank.org/projects  

 

 

APPROVAL 

Task Team Leader(s): Binh Thang Cao 
 

http://www.worldbank.org/projects


 
The World Bank  
Lao Agriculture Commercialization Project (P161473) 

 
 

  
Apr 13, 2017 Page 12 of 12  

     

  Approved By 
APPROVALTBL 

Safeguards Advisor: Peter Leonard 20-Apr-2017 

Practice Manager/Manager: William R. Sutton 21-Apr-2017 

Country Director: Ulrich Zachau 24-Apr-2017 
    
 
 
 
 
 



